The Koran, Commonly Called the Alcoran of Mohammed (George Sale, 1734)
======================================================================
The first English translation of the Quran made directly from Arabic, with Sale's Preliminary Discourse. Period typography (long s) preserved; scan OCR rough in places. Public domain. Internet Archive scan of the 1734 first edition.

THE

KORAN,

Commonly called

The Alcoran of MOHAMMED,

Tranilated into Englijh immediately from the Original
Arabic \ with Explanatory NOTES, taken from the
moft approved COMMENTATORS.

To which is prefixed

A Preliminary Difcourfe.

By GEORGE SALE, Gent

Nulla falja doElrtna ejl t qu<e non aliquid vert permifceat,

Auguftin. Quaeft. Evang. i. 2. c. 40.

L 0 N D O N:

Printed by C. Atkin in St. fabAs-Street, for J W 1 1 c o x at Fip-
gil's Head overagainft the New Church in the Strand
MDIXXXXIV.

.

.

?; h

T

H3**

f/

1 .f'-U' 1* m V: ; ;

: - ti Ftl i( v : ; j\ ' , -j. y « o *

-i-iv' si ir: I ; / n

, » . - . ‘ .. I 1 ,

TO THE

RIGHT HONOURABLE

JOHN Lord CARTERET,

One of the Lords of his Majefty's

moft Honourable Privy Council.

My LORD ,

N otwithstanding the great

honour and refpedl generally, and
defer »edly, paid to the memories of
thofe who have founded Hates, or obliged a
people bv the inlHtution of laws which have
made them profperous and conliderable in
the world, vet the legiflator of the Arabs has
been treated in fo very different a manner bv
all who acknowledge lothis claim to a divine
million, and by Cbrijiiaus efpecially, that were

A not

DEDICATION.

not your Lordlhip’s juft difcernment fuffici-
ently known, I fliould think myfelf under a
neceffity of making an apology for prefent-
ing the following tranflation.

The remembrance of the calamities
brought on fo many nations by the conquefts
of the Arabians^ may poffibly raife fome
indignation againft him who formed them
to empire; but this being equally appli-
cable to all conquerors, could not, of it-
felf occalion all the deteftation with which
the name of Mohammed is loaded. He has
given a new fyftem of religion, which has
had ftill greater fuccefs than the arms of his
followers, and to eftablilh this religion made
ufe of an impofture ; and on this account it
is fuppofed that he muft of neceffity have been
a moft abandoned villain, and his memory is
become infamous. But as Mohammed gave
his Arabs the beft religion he could, as well
as the beft laws, preferable, atleaft, tothefeof
the ancient pagan lawgivers, I corifefs I cannot
fee why he deferves not equal refped, tho’
not with Mofes or JeJus Chrifi ? whofe laws came
really from heaven, yet with Minos or Numa,

not-

DEDICATION.

notwithflanding the diftlnction of a learned
writer, i\ho feems to think it a greater crime
to make ufe of an impofture to fet up a nenju
religion, founded on the acknowledgment of
one true God, and to deftroy idolatry, than
to nfe the lame means to gain reception to
rules and regulations for the more orderly
practice of hcathenifm already eilabliihed.

To be acquainted with the various laws
and cnnftitutions of civilised nations, efpeci-
ally of thofe who fiourilh in our own time,
is, perhaps, the moll ufefui part of knowledge:
wherein tho* your Lordlhip, w ho fhines with
fo much diftmftiqn in the nobteft aflembly
in the world, peculiarly excels ; yet as
the law of Mohammed, by reafon of the
odium it lies under, and the ftrangenefs
of the language in which it is written, has
been fo much neglected, 1 flatter myfelf fomc
things in the following fheets may be new even
to a perfon of your Lord 1 hip’s extenJive learn-
ing: and it iv hat I ha v e written may he anv

y entertaining or acceptable to your Lord-
lhip, I Jhall not regret the pains it has
iv'k me.

I

D E D IC AT I O N.

I join with the general voice in wilhing
your Lordlhip all the honour and happineft
your known virtues and merit defervp, and
am with perfect refpe£l,

My LORD,

Tour Lordjhijfs Mojl Humble

%

j$nd Mojl Obedient Servant*

George Sale.

[iii]

TO THE

READER.

1 IMAGINE it almoji needhjs either to make an apology for pub-
i lifting the J hi lowing Tran flat ion , or toga about to p> 'o w it a •work of ufe
as veil as curh/ity. They muji have a mean opinion of the Chri-
ftian Religion, or be hut HI grounded therein, who can apprehend
any danger front Jo manijejl a forgery : and if the religious and civil
Injtiiutions of foreign nations are worth our knowledge, tbofe of Mo-
hammed) the lawgiver of the Arabians, and founder of an empire
which in leji than a century for end iff elf over a greater part of the
world than the Romans were ever wafers of i muji needs be jh ; •whe-
ther we cw/iJer their extenffoe obtaining, or our frequent intercourje
with, tbofe who are governed thereby. I foall mi here enquire into the
renfins u by the law of Mohammed has met with Jo unexampled a re-
ception in the world, i/or they are greatly deceived who imagine it to
have ban propagated by the (word alone,) or by what means it came to
be emb< aced by nations which never felt the force of the Mohamme-
dan an»s, and even by tbofe which ft ripped tlx Arabians of their coni-
quijh, and put an end to the firth ignty and very being of their Kha-
li fs : yet it fans as if there was jmetfmg more than what is vulgarly
imagined, in a religion which has made Jo fury rising a progrejs. But
whatever ufe an impartial verjhn if the Korin may be of in other re-
JpcJls, it is abfajutny mcejfary to undeceive tbofe who, jrotn the ignorant
or unfair tr inflations wi t appeared, lave entertained too favour*
able an opinion of the original, and ai/h to enable us effectually to ex-
foje the tmpofiure ; mm of tbofe who have hitherto undertaken that pro-
vl.xe, not excepting Dr. Prideaux him f if, having fucceeded to tl-ejd-
sltkn of tie judicious, for want of being com pleat mafiers of the
rttttnverjy. The writers of the Romiih communion, in particular , are
Jo for from ng doth' any fir vice in their refutations of Mohamme-
diJhu that by endeavouring to def end their idolatry and other jhperfi-

A 2 " tionSi

iv To the READER.

tions, they have, rather contributed to the encreafe of that ayerfton which
the Mohammedans in general have to the “Chriftian Religion , and given
them great advantages in the difpute. 'The Proteftants alone are able
to attack the Koran with fuccefs ; and for them, I truft , Providence has
referved the glory of its overthrow. In the mean time, if I might
prefume to lay down rules to be obferved by tbofe who attempt the con -
verfm of the Mohammedans, they Jhould be the fame which the learn -
ed and worthy biftoop Kidder * has preferibed for the converfion of the
Jews, and which may , mutatis mutandis, be equally applied to the
former , notwithjlanding the defpicable opinion that writer , for want of
being better acquainted with them, entertained of tbofe people, judging
them fear eg fit to be argued with. The firjl of tbefe tales is. To
avoid compulfion ; which though it be not in our power to employ at
prefent, I hope will not he made ufe of when it is. 'the fecond is, To
avoid teaching dodtrines againft common fenfe ; the Mohammedans
not being fuch fools ( whatever we may think of them) as to be gained
over in this cafe . The worfhipping of images, and the do&rine of tran-
Jubfiantidtioti are great fumbling blocks to the Mohammedans, and the
church which teacheth them is very urfit to bring thofe people over. The
third is. To avoid weak arguments : for the Mohammedans are not
to be converted with tbefe, or hard words. We mufi ufe them with hu-
manity, and difpute againfi them with arguments that are proper and
cogent. It is certain that many Chriftians, who have written againfi
them, have been very defective this way : many have ufed arguments
that have no force, ana advanced fropofitions that are void of truth.
This method is fo far from convincing that it rather ferves to harden
them. The Mohammedans will be apt to conclude we have little to
fay, when we urge them with arguments that are trifling or untrue.
We do but lofe ground when we do this ; and infiead of gaining them,
we expofe ourfetves and our cauje aljb. We muft not give them ill
words neither \ but muft avoid all reproachful language, all that is
fate afti cal and biting .* this never did good from pulpit or prefs. The
foftefi words will make the deepeft imprejfion j and if we think it a
fault in them to give ill language, we cannot be excufed when we imi-
tate them. The fourth rule is. Not to quit any article of the Cbrifti-
an faith to gain the Mohammedans. It is a fond conceit of the Soci-
nians, that we fall upon their principles be moft like to prevail upon
the Mohammedans : it is not4rue in matter of faSt. We muft not
give up any article to gain tpem • . but then the church of Rome

* la his Demonftr. of the MtJ/ias, part III. chap. z.

ought

To the READER. v

to part with many pra&ices and feme doSltines. We are not to

to Rain the Mohammedans over to a fyfiem of dogmi, but to the
'ancient and primitive faith. I believe no body will deny but that the
rules here laid down air jufi : the latter part of the third , which alone
my defi-n has given me occajhm to praaife , I think Jo reafonable , that I
have not , in jfeaking of Mohammed or bis Korin, allowed myfelf to
ufe thofe opprobrious appellations, and unmannerly exprejfems, which feem
to be the Jlrcngcji arguments of fever al who have written agatnjl them.
On the contrary , 1 have thought myfelf obliged to treat both with com -
mon decency . end even to approve fuch particulars as feemed tome to de-
ferve approbation : for hr* criminal foever Mohammed may have been
in impo/mg a falfe religion on mankind , the praifes due to bis real vir-
tues ought not to be denied him ; nor can I do othtrwife than applaud
the candour of the pirns end learned Spanhetnius, who, thd be owned
him to have ken a wicked impofhr , yet acknowledged him to have been
richly furnilhed with natural endowments, beautiful, in his perfon,
of a fubtle wit, agreeable behaviour, (hewing liberality to the poor,
courtefy to every one, fortitude again ft his enemies, and above all a
high reverence for the name of God ; fevere againft the peijured,
adulterers, murrherers, (tenderers, prodigals, covetous, falfe witneffes,
GV*. a great preacher of patience,^ charity, mercy, bencncence, gra-
titude, honouring of parents and fupenors, and a frequent celcbrator

of the divine praites *. .

Of ipg federal tranfeatiorts of the Korin now ext ant, thet e ts out one

which tolerably reprefents the Jenfe of the original-, and that being in
Latin, a new verjhn became mieffary, at leaf to an Englifh reader,
li't'ir Bibliander piMjhcd for a Latin tr an flat ion of that book de-
ferves not the name of a trdnjlation *, the unaccountable liberties therein
'taken, and the mmbcrkfs faults, both of omiffeon and commiffem , leaving
farce any refemblame of the original It was made near fx hundred
'years ago , , being femJhcJ m 1143, by Robertus Retenenfis, an Engiifti-
man, with the affefeance of Hermannus Dalmata, at the requejl of
Peter abbot of Clugny, who paid them well for their fains .

From this Latin verjion was taken the Italian of Andrea Arriva-
bene, notwitbftanding the pretences in his dedication of its being done

* L art m t «*w*M*i '■***■• n-rrus frffUyt, lygmtatM-

fah fixrtis, at frm Uktratimtm inigrmi. txwattn i ***** fwfet*ii*m

tobtSm atirmtomu mrnmiM dhini —Stum fuh in ferpm, aenktrm, kmutaai,

i fedfit rrfitt, Ac. Magma am

ittnfrtnii*, gnttiiHdlnlt, t>wh in ? oral" « pfrrwt, frtch at & ittviaarem laaiam. Hilt

E " k immUM)

To the READER.

immediately from the Arabic * ; wherefore it is no wonder if the tran -
fcript be yet more faulty and abfurd than, the copy *f*.

About the end of the fifteenth century , Johannes Andreas, a native
of Xativa in the kingdom of Valencia,, who from a Mohammedan
doftor became a Chriftian prieft, tranjlated not only the Koran, but alfo
its glojfes , and the feven books of the Sonna, out of Arabic into the Ar-
ragonian tongue, at the command of Martin Garcia £, bijhop of Barce-
lona, and inyuifitor of Arragon, Whether this tranfiation were ever
publijhed or not I am wholly ignorant : but it may be prefumed to have
been the better done for being the work of one bred up in the Moham-
medan religion and learning ; though bis refutation of that religion,
which has bad feveral editions, gives no great idea of his abilities.

Some years within the laft century, Andrew du Ryer, who had been
conful of the French nation in Egypt, and was tolerably skilled in the
Turkifh and Arabic languages, took the pains to tranjlate the Koran
into bis own tongue : but bis performance , tkd it be beyond comparifon
preferable to that of Retenenfis, is far from being a juft tranfiation^
there being miftakes in every page, befides frequent tranjpofttiom, omif-
fiorn, and additions % faults unpardonable in a work of this nature. And
what renders it ftill more incomplete is, the want of Notes to explain a
vaft number of pajj'agesi, fome of which are difficult , and others impojfiblt
to be underftood , without proper explication r, were they tranjlated ever
fo exaBly ; which the author is Jo fenfible of that he. often refers bis
reader to the Arabic commentators

‘the Englifh verfion is no other than a tranfiation of Du Ryer’r, and
that a very bad one -, for Alexander Rofs, who did it, being utterly, un-
acquainted with the Arabic, and no great mafter of the French, has
added a number of frefh miftakes of bis own to thofe of Du Ryer } not
to mention the meannefs oj his language, which would make a better
book ridiculous.

In 1698, a Larin tranfiation. of the Kor^n, made by fat far Lewis
Marracci, who had been confeffor to. pope Innocent XI. was pubftjked
at Padua, together with the original, text, accompanied by explanatory
notes and a refutation. This tranfiation of MarracciV, generally fpiak-
ing, is very exaB-, but adheres to the Arabic idiom too literally pufa
eq/i/y underftood, unlefs lam much deceived, by thofe who are not verfed

* Hi; word* are: — Qytfi 1 libra, cbegia hawvo a cam mum uiiltta di qiohi fatto dal firoprii tiff a
Arah tradmre tulU mftra tnlgar lingua Italians &c. And afterwards; ®*eAo i I'/Utordw di
Mttt mrtto* U ffri I'i cmtbcgii % d&tty'bo fattfdal idiom a tf&du¥re % &c- •+ V ipf Sfiaiio’

EpiLl. 36 -i. & 36 ii * Wfcn.dc WflUdJeges Ebraor. p. 9. f J. Andes', in Pn c£ fd
fuum dc Confnfione Mahometans, $ V. Winded de vita fufo&prajn (htu> fedl.9.

m

To the READER. vii

in the Mohammedan learning. The notes be has added are indeed of
great u/ii hut bis refutations, which jwell the work to a large volume, are
of little or none at all, being often unfat hfaShsry, and Jbmetimes imperti-
nent. The work, however, with all its faults, is very valuable, and I

jhould be guilty of ingratitude, did I not acknowledge myfelf much oblig-
ed thereto ; but fill, being in Larin, it can be of no uje to tbofe who
under ft and not that tongue.

Ha ving therefore undertaken a New Transition, I have endeavoured
to do the Original impartial jufiice-, not having, to the bejl ef my know-
ledge, reprefented it, in any one in fiance, either better or worje than it
really is. I have thought myfelf obliged, indeed, in a piece which pre-
tends to be the Word of God, to keep jlmewhat fcrupulotijly doji to the
text ; by which means the language may, in feme places, feem to exprefs
the Arabic a little too literally to be elegant English : but this, I hope ,
has not happened often -, and I fatter myfelf that the file I have made
ufe of will not only give a more genuine idea of the original than if I
bad taken more liberty (which would have been much more for my eafe)
but will foon become familiar : for we mufl not expeB to read a verjion
of fo extraordinary a book with the fame cafe and pleajitre as a modern
mnpofiion.

In the Notes my view has been brief y to explain ike Text , and ejpeci-
athf the difficult and obfeure patfhges, from the mofi approved commenta-
tors, and that generally in their own words, for whofe opinions or ex-
ptrfiom, where liable to ccnfure, I am not anjwerab/e ; my province be-
ing only fairly to reprtfeni their expo/if ions, and the little I have added
of my own, or from Europaean -writer*, being eafily difcernable. Where
1 met with any circum fiance which I imagined might be curious or en-
tertaining, I kerce not failed to produce it.

The Preliminary Difcourfe will acquaint the reader with the mofi ma-
teria! particulars proper to be known frevioufis to the. entring on the
Koran afeif, and which could not fo conveniently have been thrown into
the Notes. And I have taken care, both in the Preliminary Difcourfe and
the Notts, cmfantly o quote my authorities and the writers to whom I
have been beholden ; but to none have I been more jh, than to the learn-
ed Dr. Pocock, whqfe Specimen Hiftoriae Arabum is the mofi ufcftil
and accurate work that has been hitherto publifhed concerning the anti-
quities of that nation, and ought to be read by every curious enquirer
into them.

As I have had no opportunity of confuting public libraries, the ma -
tsujcriptt of which I have made ufe throughout the whole work have been

fucb

viii To the READER.

Juch as I bad in my own Jludy, except only the Commentary of al Beida-
wi, and the Gojpel of S. Barnabas, The firfi belongs to the library of
the Dutch church in Auftin Fryars, and for the uje of it I have been
chief y indebted to the reverend Dr. Bolten, one of the minifers of that
church : the other was very obligingly lent me by the reverend Dr. Holme,
reSlor of Hedley in Hampftiire ; and I take this opportunity of re-
turning both thofe gentlemen my thanks for their favours. 'The merit of
al Beidawi’r commentary will appear from the frequent quotations I have
made thence-, but of the gofpel of S. Barnabas, (which I bad not fien
when the little 1 have faid of it in the Preliminary Difcourfe *, and the
extrahl I had borrowed from Mr. de la Monnoye and Mr. Toland *f*,
were printed off) l mufi beg leave to give fome further account.

The book is a moderate Quarto, in Spanish, written in a very legi-
ble hand , but a tittle damaged towards the latter end. It contains two
hundred and twenty two chapters of unequal length , and four hundred
and twenty pages ; and is faid, in the front , to be tranfated from the
Italian, by an Arragonian Moilem, named Moftafa de Aranda. There
is a preface prefixed to it, wherein the difiaverer of the original MS *
who was a Chriftian monk, called Fra Marino, tells us, that having
accidentally met with a writing of Irenaeus, (among others ,) wherein be
fpeaks qgainf S. Paul, alledging, for his authority , the gofpel of S. Bar-
nabas, he became exceeding defir ous to find this gofpel-, and that God, of
bis mercy, having made him very intimate with pope Sixtus V. one day,
as they were together in that pope's library, his holinefs foil afleep , and
he, to employ himfelf, reaching down a book to read, the firfi be laid bis
bond on proved to be the very gofpel be wanted: overjoyed at the difco-
very f be J'crupled not to bide his prize in bis fieeve, and on the pope's
awaking, took leave of him, carrying with him that celeftial treafure,
by reading of which he became a convert to Mohammedifm.

This gojpel of Barnabas contains a complete hifiory of Jefus Chrift
from bis birth to bis afcenfion-, and mofi of the circumfiances in the four
real go/pels are to be found therein, but many of them turned, and fame
artfully enough, to favour Mohammedan fyftem. From the defign
of the whole, and the frequent interpolations of fiories and pajfages where-
in Mohammed is jpoken <f and foretold by name, as the mejfenger of
God, and the great prophet who was to perjett the difpenfation of Jefus,
tf appears to be a mofi barefaced forgery. One particular I obferve
therein induces me to believe it to have been drejfed up by a renegade
Chriftian, Jtigbtly infirutted in bis new religion, and not educated a

* $• IV. P 74- + not. ad cap. p, 43 .

Mohammedan,

IX

To t he READER.

Mohammedan, ft tnlcfs the fault be imputed to the Span! Ill, or perhaps
the Italian tratlfiator, and not to the original compiler-,) I mean the giv-
ing to Mohammed the title of MelBah, and that net ona or twice on-
ly , but in federal places ; whereas the title of the MdVuh, or, m the

Arabs write it, al Mafih, i. e. Chrift, is appropriated to Jtfus in the
Koran, and is constantly applied by the Mohammedans to him, and
never to their own prophet . 'The p a ft. ages produced from the Italian MS.
by Mr. de la Monnoye are to be feen in this Spanifh verjion almojl
tam'd for word.

But to return to the folk-wing work. I’hd I have freely cenjhreJ
the former tranjlations of the Kor in, / would not therefore be jufpedltd
of a dijign 10 make my own pa/s as free from faults : 1 am very JenJi-
ble it is not t and I make no doubt but the few who are able to difeern
them, and knows the difficulty of the undertaking, will give me fair
quarter. I lik (wife fatter my f elf that they , and all cunjiderate perfons,
will excuft the delay which has happened hi the publication of this
work ; when they are infort/ted, that tt was carried on at ieijnrc times
only, and amidfl the neceffarv avocations of a troubltjbme l r ofrffkn.

CORRIGENDA * ADDEND i

I N tl — y < l^fe f. liar J., (W red Air* f\ in q L -r- f- 1$, r, t;. t\ 11, ftriU

gut [Iif ftrlff f" .-jitifflir, l"i ii. 1 4$-* ft A /WAfiAte frjf ffrr fMm t r, «h A Ay M p, ^

1 . ffL I A 4 r. Ai Aht+fki* l 1 , £f» ft J. £ flmL f- Qrtttflf* i\ rn eps. 4 , 4* ftrlfcf mu

drSi m fc". ? I'. in i 1. 4 - ■- I 4 ‘ P- $6| t< tj. ft Tj-'.-f, r. /- R 11-. 1. a. ft I" •./ f 3 r ,

pjmfJ j,‘ r, T- WxjuM £i- V. I -.7- •• f- afaf id«ft J--./ fV- vj.

In the if-' in *ed Kl-t-i. P, 10 , ,n tht n ■ tt.l- 1 . Jin* i-.. *14, ApdficmtU fcyv* *■ f «• «/-

trflTvf #w**ivuh rar/ -, S*s Dteu«> t*i I— ft P. 5I- fr the W. I. J. 14^ f. *mlSfr AaagUtr t j f 1 ffkr, R
51. W the not*, i 4 . I- »- if*! P * • lA Ike &*« 1- 'Jm- Urt !m*tatsne t r* P. 7 j. Intheinirj*

tui, i L 3,4 ft iFbat if t >.'■ rsi j/ 1.1A #i | Jr r . he n-jJJi *a« P t6, -ex% & 1 f ih. f r

mr'l^ ibetd: its m.r.U / ****&rr . .r attest r . W'jfk/ i« ^/jc j > r^rtuf At, .

P. 94- MU. L 10. Aeike du| ihd P.ff in the pgj. a. Lf, S, f. ijll frjjn 1." j.'

Efr Ant, p. Ill EfiP, L ia f. by w/try m -f, r, y «r#ry, P la?. r^r T L 14, ft «rnJ rj-

f BMrf enfi ri#f AAmg, ^ ejJW/'f W St. P, 154^ i n flnce c. t' J- VIU. r. ■§. VII,

P. l68. text, 1 . — - f, jl • I, r. aad i. - ■ I, r. ' Live. P. ]Sr. i-xt, K11. ftrike out #£’. P. iSg,” Itt the
nnffr, col. a. J. ft * 71 r. P. ai?. in the notes, coL t. 1 . 5, ftrike out the -‘furnds, they & £ tirg of th<

tnhr± j*uL A4.i f i* »> fo^4r AwJt VaAiSr, anJ f/-jf % went ef rk j*r'£y* wri Si-

j!, no. P- 146. in the notes, coL I. 1 . 5. add* in Ori^b; See P 4 e» Stec- p- 42. P. i,-r,

text, S, the lift, ft hefvjr , r. A.ylm mf, P. 299. m the nitts, cuL a. 9. ftrike the wmsIs, tht pr^hnt, chip
36. P 341 In the quo 1 ■ ft V- J. VI P. 371, in the quot, ft 55- n 32. P. in the nnen e^L t, i -
F-

a

A

A TABLE of the Sfotions of the PRELIMI-
NARY E1SCOURSE.

SECT. i. F the Arabs before ohatnmed ; or, as they exfrefs it, in
the Time of Ignora ^ ; their Hiftory , Religion, Learning,
and Cujloms p- i

a. Of the State vj Chrift'ianity, drtimlarly of the Eaftern Churches,
and if Judaifi.i, at the 91 *,of Mohammed*.! appcarwicc : and
of the methods taken- by hit, "or the efiabljtjhing his Religion , and
the circumft antes which con - ed thereto S 3

3. Of the Korin itfelf, the Pea nties of that Bo k ; the Manner

<f its being wr it ten andpubl^ ed, and the gent ral Deftgn of it 5 6

4. Of the Dotlrines and pifitlve ref efts <f the Koran, which relate

to Faith and religious Duties 70

4. Of certain negative Precepts in use Koran 12a

iu Of the Infiitdms of the Koran n Civil Affairs 131

7. Of the Months commanded by the Koran to be kept fared ■ and of the

fitting apart of Friday for the efpecial Service <?/ God 147

8. Of the principal Sells among the Mohammedans ; and oj hofe who

have pretended to Prophecy among the Arabs, in or fence the
Time of Mohammed. *5*

A TABLE of the Chapters of the KORAN.

CHAP. 1. TNT If L ED,
X 7 ver fis

The Preface, or Introduction ;

2. Intit led. The Cow •, cont. 286 verfes

3. Infilled, The Family of Imran ; cont. 200 verfes

4. Intitled, , Women; cont. 1 7 .5 verfes

5. Intitled , The Table ; cont. 120 verfes

6. Intitled, Cattle ; cont. 1 65 verfes

7. Intitled, A l Araf ; cont. 20 6 verfes

8. Intitled, The Spoils ; cont., 76 vfrfgL

9. Intitled, The Declaration of Immunity ; cont. 1 $9 verfes

10. Intitled, Jonas; cont. 109 verfes

11. Intitled, Hud; cont. 123 verfes-

1 2. Intitled, Joseph; cont. 111 verfes

13. Intitled, Thunder; coht. 43 verfes

14. Intitled , Abraham; cont. 52 verfis

15. Intitled, At He jr ; cont. yqvjerfis
1 < 5 . Intitled, The Bee; cont. 128 verfes

17. Intitled, The Night- Journey ; t cont. no verfes

18. Intitled, The Cave; cont. 111 verfes

19. Intitled, Mary ; cont. 80 verfes
jo- Intitled, T. H ; cont. 13 4 verfes

21. Intitled, The Prophets; cont. 112 verfes

22. Intitled, The Pilgrimage; cont. 78 verfis

containing

p. 1

2

35

6 Q

82

99
117

139
148
166

i 75

287

200

205

210

214

227

238

249

256

265

274

CHAP.

23-
2 4 .
2 5 -
26.

2 7*

A TABLE of the CHAPTERS.

CHAP. 23. fitted, The True Bi'liewfn ; nS v. ?_■- - j-
Imitkd, Light ; csxt. ‘•-r verfts
IutUh-d, Al Fos.kan j coat. 7 f verft'S
Itttiifrd , The Poets ; rewr. 2 lyverfes
Imhlfdv The Ant ; cant. 03 : irfes
28, hutted. The Story ; rent. Bf i-trfes

2 /ff/r/i'V./, The Stiller; cent. Ccj verjh
30 htitledy The Greeks ; am- 60 verjl-s

31. htitted » Lokwan ; C 6 Nt- 34 vgr/fj

32. Inthkd, Adoration ; cant. 29 WTjSf

3 IniitltiU The Conlsderatts ; 1 at. 73 w
3+. Inlifled, S*ba; rt»f. 54wrf!'J

35. Infilled, The Creator ; iont. 45 vtrfei

36. Infilled, Y, S ; e enl. tf 3 cut

37. Indited, Tliofc who rank ttiumlUvcs in-Ortler ; cant,

38. lutitled, S; tout 86 t zrfei

39. hfifted, The Troops; unit. 75 verges

40. htiikd, The True Believer ; cant. 85 vtrfit

41. L. titled. Are diltmeUy explained ; cant. 54 vsr}s

42. Intit! L <L ' Miiuluuon ; cent. 54 tv rfes

43. Inlith-J, The Ornaments of Gold ; cent. 89 ver/es

44. Infilled, Sruoke ; cent. 57 verjh

45. httitled. The Kneeling; cant. 36 Verfts

46. Inf;.::.!. AlAhrlaf; c.ni 5 - Verfet

47. htiikd, MonA«wtu ; c,nt. 38 verfts

48. hiifted, T.ic Victory ; tent- invents
49 InuthiL The inner Apartments; cent. rS verjh
jo. hutted, Ki cant. 4; v<rj
4 i, hulled, TV DilpiTlmg-, tent Coverts
32. 1 util fed. Tin Mo.iiitain ; cent, 4S t nrj-.s
5f . Infill. d, The Star ; cent, 6t verfts

54. f mitied- The Moon ; tout. 5; verfts

55. I mil led. The hduAtul; ttrnt. 7k vet fa

56. latitu-ds The IrtCViMnlc 1 c-nt. >>9 tvi;,h

57. Infilled, Iron i a>v( -•( V.rfts
5;;. h titled, She who dlfpukd ; caul. 22 verjh
59- I nulled. The Emigration ; .on l. 24 verfts
bo hutted, She who tried ; ami. 13 verj s
61. Infilled Battle Array; tent, 14 vet fit
61. A; .let!. The Afitm&Iy ; :oM tt vtrfts
63. Ids'. , The Hypocrites ; cant 1 1 vet Jet
64 I ‘nl, M ntuaf Deceit ; cant 1 * verfts
6 '. h.titkd. Divorce; cant. 12 verjh
60. Infill- d, Piu..ihiti-.|1 ; cent. I tver.es
Cy. httilul, The Kingdom ; (c;.t, 30 verfts
6ti. htiiiid, Tlv Pen; . ;«f. 52 verfts

. 2S1
2S7
296

302
3 t")
a 16

325

;no

m

33 s

*

352

357

361

182 «, 366

37*

S ?7

3«3

3%

m

39°

40 1
403
406

409

4*2

417
4X9
4^1
41+
416

418
43 1
414
437
440
443

446

449

450

45 1
1 ' 4 .P

' 1 454

* 45 ^

458
1 1 460

CHAP,

A TABLE of the CHAPTERS.

CHAP. 69.
70.

7 1 *

72.

73*

74-

75-
76.

7 7-
78.

79-

80.

81.

82.
S3-

84.

85.

86.

87.

88 .

89.

90.

91.

92.

93-

94-

95-
96.

97-

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.
*07.

108,

109.

(IO.

111.

1 12 ,
113-

1 14.

IntUled,
In tilled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled*
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,
Intitled,

The Infallible •, cont. 52 verfes

The Steps ; cont. 44 verfes

Noah ; cont. 28 verfes

The Genii •, cont. 28 verfes

The Wrapped up ; cont. 19 verfes

The Covered ; cont. 55 verfes

The Refurred ion ; cont. 40 verfes

Man ; cont. 3 1 verfes

Thofe which are fent ; cont. 50 verfes

The News ; cont. 40 verfes

Thofe who tear forth •, cont. 4 6 verfes

He frowned ; cont. 42 verfet

The Folding up ; cont. 29 verfes

The Cleaving in funder ; cont. 19 verfes

Thofe who give lhortMeafure or Weight;

The Rending in funder ; cont. 23 verfes

The Celeftial Signs ; cont. 22 verfes

The Star which appeareth by Night ; cont.

The moft High ; cont. 19 verfes

The Overwhelming ; cont. 26 verfes

The Day -Break ; cont. 30 verfes

The Territory ; cont. 20 verfes

The Sun ; cont. x 5 verfes

The Night ; cont. 21 verfes

TheBrightnefs ; cont. 1 1 verfes

Have we not opened ; cont. 8 verfes

The Fig ; cont. 8 verfes

Congealed Blood ; cont. 19 verfes

Al Kadr ; cont. 5 verfes

The Evidence ; cont. 8 verfes

The Earthquake ; cont. 8 verfes

The W ar-Horfes which run fwiftly ; cont.

*1 he Striking ; cont. 10 verfes

The emulous DeGre of multiplying; cont.

The Afternoon ; cont. 3 verfes

The Slanderer ; cont. 9 verfes

The Elephant ; cont. 5 verfes

Koreish ; cont. 4 verfes

Neceflaries ; cont. 7 verfes

Al Cawthar ; cont. 3 verfes

The Unbelievers ; cont. 6 verfes

Afliftance ; cont. 3 verfes

Abu Laheb ; cont. 5 verfes

The Declaration of God's Unity * cont.

rhe Day-Break ; cont. 5 verfes

Men i containing 6 verfes

P- 4 63
464

466

467
469
47 »
473
475

477

478

479

481

482

483

cont. 36 v. ib.

485

486

17 verfes 487

488
ibid.

489

491

492

.m

ibid.

494

495

496

497
ibid.

498

ix verfes 499
ibid.

S verfes 500
ibid.
501
ibid.

503

504
ibid.

505

506
ibid.

4 verfes 507
ibid.
508
THE

o PART or

_ 'yl'ifouuu
* k J} a attef

u SYRIA I

j in Shaun ^r
» PamafcuB

K t^i/Arvu 1

p STINE Of

Jfi J'MuU Jyrvz,

UOAOtUlL S4tM

Mediterranean

ARAB I A

,i&Waf e t

a/ At? ra 1 ?trv

JilaA

f.iJ kriurah
/vz/^. fairo 1

Kofair

1 c/iar

ii AfVaji

Malkat^

^ « Kamii V , _ , V.

I Al &'>» 2}ar *< 1 Y _T'

V 5 ^ *«»£« i Tlyran

% f7Btu/h<i Yak tin v ,

3 ;V ••-• &$*&**
r&

\ v At. alMatyl" 1 * V * t/

J V* q \° la iJSt^a } &**"<£ *{

ft >W* 4«5

, IS ? 4

jfaJA r : LA^

* Thr TEMVLE of MEC CAA

■**.» it nw+t t ?i't7nrrlj/. /hrm*a. Drau g ht

i7i mt. Bodleian Library.

£ aZKAcrnd

2 &g

MokVl:

Socotral

Preliminary Difcourfe.

Section I.

■

Of the Arabs before Mohammed ; or, as they exprefs it,
in the Time of Ignorance their Hiftory, Religion,
Learning , and Cuftoms.

T H E Arahs t and the country they inhabit, which them- .fc;.:.
fives call Jeztrat al Arab , or the Pemnfula nf the Ara-
bums, but we Arabia , were fo named from Araba T a fmalT
territory in the province of Tehama 1 } to which Tarab the
fon of Kabtdn, the father of the ancient Arabs gave his name, and
where, iome ages after , dwelt Ijmad the fon of Abraham by Hagan
The Cbrijlian writers for feveral centuries fpeak of them under the
appellation of Saracens j the mod certain derivation of which word
is from jhark, the eafi , where the defendants of Jo&m, the Kabtdn
of the Arafat are placed by Mojes x , and in which quarter they
dwelt in refpedfc to the Jen's J.

The name of Arabia (ufed in a more extenfive fenfe) fbmetimes Its extent,
comprehends all that large tradt of land bounded by the river Eu-
phrates, the Perjian gulph, the Sindian, Indian , and Red leas, and
part of the Mediterranean : above two thirds of which country, that
is, Arabia properly fo called, the Arabs have pofleffed almoft from
the flood , and have made themfelves matters of the reft, either by
fetdements, or continual incurfions ; for which reafon the “Turks and
Pcrfiens at this day call the whole Arabiftdn , or the country oi' the
Arabs.

But the limits of Arabia , in its more ufual and proper fenfe, are
much narrower, as reaching no farther northward than the Tphmus,
which runs from Asia to the head of the PerJian gulph, and the bor-

Pocock. Specim. HiiL Arab. 33; » Gencf. x. 30* 3 ScePocock Specim. 33. 34.

b ders

2

And divi-
fiou.

The pro-
viso <? of

1m man*

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. I.

ders of the territory of Cufa-, which tradt of land the Greeks nearly
comprehended under the name of Arabia the Happy. The eaftern
geographers make Arabia Petraa to belong partly to Egypt, and partly to
Sham or Syria, and the defart Arabia they call the defarts of Syria \

Proper Arabia is by the oriental writers generally divided into five
provinces 1 * * * * , viz. Taman, Hejdz , ‘Tehama, Najd, and Tamdma ; to
which fome add. Bahrein, as a fixth, but this province the more ex-
aft make part of Irak*: others reduce them all to two, Taman and 1 He-
jdz, the laft including the three other provinces of Tehama, Najd ,
and Tamdma.

The province of Taman, fo called either from its fituation to the
right hand, or fouth of the temple of Mecca, dr elfe from the bappi-
nefs and verdure of its foil, extends itfelf along the Indian ocean
from Aden to cape Rafalgaf-, part of the Red fea bounds it on the
weft and fouth fides, and the province of Hejdz on the north *. It
is fubdivided into feveral leffer provinces, as Hadramaut , Shihr, Oman ,
Najrdn, &c. of which Shihr alone produces the frankincenfe K
The metropolis of Taman is Sanaa, a very ancient city, in former
times called Ozal, and much celebrated for its delightful fituation;
but the prince at prefent refides about five leagues northward from
thence, at a place no lefs pleafant, called Hifn almawdheb, or the
Cajile of delights 6 .

This country has been famous from all antiquity for the hap-
pinefi; of its climate, its fertility and riches t, which induced Alexan-
der the Great , after his return from his Indian expedition, to form
a defign of conquering k, and fixing there has royal feat; but his
death, which happened foon after, prevented the execution of this
projeft 8 . Yet in reality, great part of the riches "Which the ancients
imagined were the produce of Arabia, came really from the Indies >
and the coafts of Africa ; for the Egyptians, who had engrofled that
trade, which was then carried on by way of the Red ilea, to them-
felves, induftrioufly concealed the truth of the matter, and kept their
ports fhut to prevent foreigners penetrating into thofe countries, or
receiving any information thence: and this precaution of theirs on
the one fide, and the defarts, unpaflable to ftrangers, on the other, were
the reafon why Arabia was fo little known to the Greeks and Romans.
The delightfuktefs and plenty of Tainan are owing to its mountains ;

i Golias ad Alfragan, 78. 79, * Strabo feys Arabia Felix was In his time divided info

ive kingdoms, i, 1 6 . p. 1 1 29. 3 GoL ad Atfragan. 79s 4 La Roque, Ybyagc de r Amb, beu/.

i2i. / Gol. ad Alfragan. 79. 87. * Voyage de TArab' hear, 2$z. 7 V. Dionyf. Peric-

gef. v. 927, dec. g Strabo. i 16. p. 1 \yz* Awian. i 6 u

for

3

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difcottrfi .

for all that part which lies along the Red fea, is a dry, barren defart;
in fome places io or 12 leagues over, but in return bounded by thofe
mountains, which being well watered, enjoy an almoft continual
fpring, and befides coffee, the peculiar produce of this country, yield
great plenty and variety of fruits, and in particular excellent corn,
grapes, and fpices. There are no rivers of note in this country, for
the ftreams which at certain times of the year defcend from the
mountains, feldom reach the fea, being for the moil part drunk up
and loft in the burning fands of that coaft \

The foil of the other provinces is much more barren than that of
Taman j the greater part of their territories being covered with dry
fands, or riling into rocks, interfperfed here and there with lome fruit-
ful fpots, which receive their greateft advantages from their water
and palm trees.

The province of Hejdz, fo named becaufe it divides Najd from
Tehama, is bounded on the fouth by Taman and Tehama , on the weft
by the Red fea, on the north by the defarts of Syria, and on the eaft
by the province of Najd \ This province is famous for its two
chief cities Mecca and Medina , one of which is celebrated for its
temple, and having given birth to Mohammed j and the other for being
the place of his refidence, for the laft ten years of his life, and of his
interment.

Mecca , fometimes alfo called BeCea , which words are fy nonytn 011 s, ^ r : 7 f, de *
and fignify a place of great contour f, is certainly one of the moft fcn
ancient cities in the world : it is by fome * [bought to be the Mefa
of the feripture \ a name not unknown to the Arabiam, and fup-
pofed to be taken from one of JfmaeY s fons f . It is feated in a ftony
anti barren valley, furrounded on all fides with mountains 4 . The
length of Mecca from fouth to north is about two miles, and its
breadth from the foot of the mountain Ajyad, ro the top of another
called Koaikadn, about a mile". In the midft of this fpace Hands the
city, built of flone cut from the neighbouring mountains *. There
being no fprings at Mecca 9 , at leaft none but what are bitter and
unfit to drink IO , except only the well Zemzem, the water of which,
tho’ far the beft, yet cannot be drink for any continuance, being
hrackifh, and caufing eruptions in thofe who drink plentifully of
it ", the inhabitants ate obliged to trie rain water which they catch

1 Voy de I’ Arab. hear. ill. 123 153. 1 V. Got. ad Alfrag. 98. Abulfeda Defer. Arab. p. j.

1 R. Saadias in verfion. Arab* Pentat. Sefcr Tachafin. 135. b. 4 Gen x 30. j Gol. ad Ai-
frag. 82. Sec Gen. xxv. 15. * Gol. ib. 98. See Pfr/z’s Account of the religion and manners of the
Mibmmedans. p. 96. 7 Sharif uJ Ednfiapud Foe. Spocim. 122. 8 Ibid. 9 Gol. ad Alfragan.

99. 10 Sharif al Edrih ubi fupra, 124. ** Ibid. 6 c Pitts ubi fupra. p. 107.

b 2 in

4

The Preliminary Dtfchurfe. $e&. I.

in citterns'. But this not being fufficient, feveral attempts were made
to bring water thither from other places by aquedufts ; and particu-
larly about Mohammed'S time, Zobair one of the principal men of the
tribe of Koreijh, endeavoured at a great expence to fupply the city
with water from mount Arafat, but without fuccefs ; yet this was ef-
fedted not many years ago, being begun at the charge of - a wife of
Solimdn the Turkifi .Emperor 1 ,, But long before this, another aque-,
dudt had been made from a fpring at a conliderable diftance,
which was, after feveral years labour, finifhed by the Kbalif al Mok -
tader

The foil about Mecca is fo very barren as to produce no fruits but
what are common in the defarts, tho’ the prince or Sharif has a
garden well planted at his cattle of Marbaa , about three miles weft-
ward from the city, where he ufually refides. Having therefore no
corn or grain of their own growth, they are obliged to fetch it from
other places 4 ; and Hajhem, Mohammed’s great-grandfather, then prince
of his tribe, the more effectually to fupply them with provifions, ap-
pointed two caravans to fet out yearly for that purpofe, the one in
fummer, and the other in winter 1 : thefe caravans of purveyoyi? are
mentioned in the Koran. The provifions brought by them were di-
ftributed alfo twice a year, viz. in the month of Rajeb , and at the
arrival of the pilgrims. They are fupply’d with dates in great plen-
ty from the adjacent country, and with grapes from ‘Tayef about fixty
miles diftant, very few growing at Mecca. The inhabitants of this
city are generally very rich, being conliderable gainers by the prodL
gious concourfe of people of almoft all nations at the yearly pilgri-
mage, at which time there is a great fair or mart for all kinds of
merchandize. They have alfo great numbers of cattle, and partimi*
larly of camels : however the poorer fort cannot but live very indif-
ferently, in a place where almoft every neceflgry of life muft be pur-
chafed with money. Notwithftanding this great fterility near Mecca,
yet you are no fooner out of it$..territory, than you meet on all fides
with plenty of good fpringS; and ftreams of running water, with a
great many gardens and cultivated lands 6 .

The temple .of Mecca-, and the reputed holinefs of this territory,
will be treated of in a more proper place.

Medina , which till Mohammed’s retreat thither was called Tathreb
is a walled city about half as big as Mecca 7 , built in a plain, fait in

’ Gol. ad Alftag. 99. * lb. S Sharif al Edrifi ubi fupr- . , 4 Idem ib. i Poc. Spec c 1

* Sharif al Edrifi ubi fupra 125 7 Id VulgoGeogr, Nobicnfia, 5, *

maay

5

Sect. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

many places, yet tolerably fruitful, particularly in dates, but more
especially near the mountains, two of which, Ohod on the north* and
Tbabir on the fouth, are about two leagues diftant. Here lies Mo-
hammed interred* in a magnificent building, covered with a cupola ,
and adjoining to the eaft fide of che great temple, which is built in
the midft of the city 1 .

The province of Tebdma was fo named from the vehement beat of The pip-
its fandy foil, and is alfo called Gaur from its low fituation ; it is bound-
ed on the weft by the Red fea, and on the other fides by HejJz and
Taman , extending almoft from Mecca to Aden

The province of Najd, which word fignifies a rijing country , lies The pro
between thofc of Tamdma, Taman and I-Ijaz, and is bouaded on
the eaft by Irak f

The province of Tamama , alfo called Arud from its oblique fitua- The pro-
tion, in refpedt of Taman, is furrounded by the provinces of Najd, ™ c *, of
Tehama, Bahrein , Oman , Shi hr, Hadramaut , and Saba. The chief
city is Tamdma, which gives name to the province: it was anciently
called yaw , and is particularly famous for being the refidence of
Mohammed's competitor, the falfe prophet Mofeilama s .

The Arabians , the inhabitants of this fpacious country, which they The a-
have poflefled from the moft remote antiquity, are diftinguhhed by their
own writers into two dalles, viz. the old lofl Arabians , and tbeprefent. two eur
The former were very numerous, and divided into Icveral tribes,
which are now all deftroyed, or elfe loft and l'wai lowed up among the
other tribes, nor are any certain memoirs or records extant concern-
ing them 6 ; tho’ the memory of fome very remarkable events, and the
cataftrophe of fome tribes have been preierved by tradition, and fince
confirmed by the authority of the Koran.

1 Tho' the not:* nuf Mdwmmeft * being buricii at AL'cia has been fo Ictsg eaploded, yet fever?!
modem wrirtfs, v* -etheT thro’ ignorance or negligence I wllk not determine, have iJlhn into it- I
ihall here cakt notice ot iu o ; one is Dr. Smi*£ f who having \v-od kifiic rime in Tv -h r, Irens
to be inexcuiablb ; that fientlcsnun in his Epiflles Jr m riiw ac iEjUfUtis no lcfs ib-in

thrice mentions the fitting the tomb of theJr prophet ar bl fnt, and once hits bong

bom at Medina, the reverie of which is true (See Ep i pag. 22. Ep* 2. pag. 65 and #4.) The father
is the publifher of the laft edition of Sir J . Maftjfri/t's trivets* who on his .uirhop's faying very
truly (p 50.) that the faid tomb was at Mtibone (i. e. MfJim)* undertakes to correft the name of
the town, which is for ething corrupted, fey putting at the bottom of the page, Mut*. The Abbot
di Verm m his hi (lor ; of the order of MaUa {yoU 1 p. 41a ed. 8 yb.) feems alfo to have confounded
thefe two cities together, tho’ he had before mentioned MahassmdiTs fepiikhre sc Meupsr However
he is certaihly mill j ten, when he lays thit one point of the religion, both ot the Obrifitanj ijul.
Mobammednv , was to Vifit, at leaft once in their lives, the tomb of the author of their refpeftive
faith. Whatever may be the opinion of fome CbrtjHan, r, I am well flared the likbimmJam think
them fe Ives under no manner of obligation in thatrefpe&. a Gol. ati AbV-igjn. 97, Abutisda
Defor, Arab, p 40, * GoLubifup. 95, 4 Ib 94. 5 lb. 05, * Abutting. p. 159*

The

6

The tribe
of Ad.

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Seft. I.

The moft famous tribes amongft thefe ancient Arabian* were Ad,

' fbamud , ’Tdjrn, Jadts, the former J or bam, and Amalek,

The tribe of Ad were defeended from Ad, the fon of Amt ’, the
fon of Aram *, the fon of Sent, the fon of Noah, who after the con-
fufion of tongues fetded in al Ahkdf, or the winding fandt in the pro-
vince of Hadramaut , where his pofterity greatly multiply ed. Their
fir ft king was Shedad the fon of Ad, of whom the eaftern writers
deliver many fabulous things, particularly that he finifhed the magni-
ficent city his father had begun, wherein he built a fine palace,
adorned with delicious gardens, to embellish which he fpared neither
coft nor labour, propofing thereby to create in his fubjedts a fuper-
ftitious veneration of himfelf as a God This garden or paradife
was called the garden of Item, and is mentioned in the Koran*, and
often alluded to by the oriental writers. The city, they tell us, is ftill
ftanding in the defarts of Aden, being preferved by providence as a
monument of divine juftice, tho’ it be invifible, unlefs very rarely,
when God permits it to be feen, a favour one Colabah pretended to have
received in the reign of the Khaltf Modwiyab, who fending for him to
know the truth of the matter, Colabah related his whole adventure;
that as he was feeking a camel he had loft, he found himfelf on a
fudden at the gates of this city, and entering it faw not one inha-
bitant, at which being terrified, he ftayed no longer than to take
with him fome fine ftones which he fhewed the Khalif *;

The defeendants of Ad in procefs of time falling from the worfhip
of the true God into idolatry, God fent the prophet Hud (who is
generally agreed to be Heber 3 J to preach to and reclaim them. But
they refufing to acknowledge his million, or to obey him, God fent
a hot and fuffocating wind, which blew feven nights and eight days
together, and entring at their noftrils paft thro’ their bodies 7, and
deftroved them aft, a very few only excepted, who had believed in
Htid, and retired with him to another place 8 . That prophet after-
wards returned into Hadramaut, and was buried near Hafec, where
there is a fmall town now ftanding called Kabr Hud, or the fepukhre
of H&d. Before the Adites were thus feverely punilhed, God to
humble them, and incline them to hearken to the preaching of his
prophet, afflitted them with a drought for four years, fo that all
their cattle perilhed, and themfelves were very near it ; upon which

; ssssrf- ■ mi,r "

they

7

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

they fent Lckman (different from one of the fame name who lived in
David’s time) with 60 others to Mecca to beg rain, which they not
obtaining, Lokman with fome of his company ftaid at Mecca , and there-
by efcaped deftru&ion, giving rife to a tribe called the latter AJ, who
were afterward changed into monkeys.

Some commentators on the Koran * tell us thefe old Aditei were
of prodigious feature, the largeft being 100 cubits high, and the lead
60 j which extraordinary fizc they pretend to prove by the tcftimony
of the Koran K

The tribe of Thamud were the pofterity of Thamud the fon of Ga~ The tribe
tber* the Ion of Aram, who felling into idolatry, the prophet Sdleb 0 *™*”
was fent to bring them back to the worihip of the true God. This
prophet lived between the time of Hud and of Abraham , and there-
fore cannot be the feme with the patriarch Selab, as Mr. dHerbelot
imagines K The learned Bochart with more probability takes him to
be Pbaleg 6 . A fmall number of the people of Thamud hearkened to
the remonftrances of Sdlch, but the reft requiring, as a proof of his
million, that he fhould caufe a flic-camel big with young to come
out of a rock in their prefence, he accordingly obtained it of God,
and the camel was immediately delivered of a young one ready wean-
ed; but they inftead of believing, cut the.hamftrings of the camel
and killed her; at which ad of impiety God being highly difplealcd,
three days after ftruck them dead in their houfes by an earthquake
and a terribe noife from heaven, which, fome 7 fay, was the voice of
Gabriel the archangel crying aloud, Die ad of you. Saleh with thofe
who were reformed by him, were feved from this deftru&ion ; the
prophet going into Pafejltnc, and from thence to Mecca % where he
ended his days.

This tribe firft dwelt in Taman , but being expelled thence by Ham-
yar the fon of Saba*, they fettled m the territory of Hejr in the
province of Hejdz, where their habitations cut out of the rocks,
mentioned in the Koran % are ftill to be feen, and alio the crack of
the rock whence the camel iffued, which as an eye wicnefs 11 hath
declared, is 60 cubits wide. Thefe houfes of the Tbamudites being
of the ordinary proportion, are ufed as an argument to convince thofe
of a miftake who make this people to have been of a gigantic
llature

1 Poc. Spec. 36. 2 JaUcUo’cldm & Zamahhibari. } K*r* c 7. 4 Or Get her. V. Gen. x. *3;

* ETHerbel. Bibl. Orient 740. 6 Bochart Gaogf. Sie* 7 See D'Herbcl. 366. 8 Ebn

Shohaah, 9 Poc. Spec. 57. lc Xor. cap. Aba Muia al Aibaru x * V. Poc. Spec.

The

B

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. I.

The tragical deftro&ions of thefe two potent tribes are often in-
lifted on in the Koran, as inftances of G o d’s judgment on obftinate
unbelievers.

Tkembwi The tribe of < I‘afm were the pofterity of Lud the fon of Sem, and
«ad Jadii. J^dis of the defendants of y ether \ Thefe two tribes dwelt pro-
mifcuoufly together under the government of ‘fafm, till a certain ty-
rant made a law, that no maid of the tribe of Jadisi hould marry, unlefs
firft defloured by him * j which the Jadtjiam not enduring, formed a
confpiracy, and inviting the king and chiefs of < Tafm to an entertain-
ment, privately hid their fwords in the fand, and in the midft of
their mirth fell on them and flew them all, and extirpated the great-
eft part of that tribe j however the few who efcaped obtaining aid of
the king of Taman, then (as is faid) Dbu Habjhan Eon Akrdn i, aftaulted
Jadls and utterly deftroyed them, there being fcarce any mention made
from that time of either of thofe tribes 4 .

The tribe* The former tribe of Jorham (whofe anceftor fome pretend was one
•n l C Ama- P cr f° ns faved -in- the ark with Noah, according to a Mo-

hammedan tradition J ) was contemporary with Ad, and utterly perifh-
ed*. The tribe of Amalek were defended from Amalek the fon of
Eli pi a z the fon of Efau' 7 , tho’ fome of the oriental authors fay Ama-
lek was the fon of Ham the fon of Noab 8 , and others the fon of
Azd the fon of Sem ?. The pofterity of this perfon rendered thera-
felves very powerful 10 , and before the time of Jofeph conquered the
lower Egypt under their king Waltd, the firft who took the name of
Pharaoh; as the eaftern writers tell us " j feeming by thefe Amalekitts
to mean the fame people which the Egyptian hiftories call Phcenician
ftiepherds But after they had poflefled the throne of Egypt for
fome defcents, they were expelled by the natives, and at length to-
tally deftroyed by the Ifraelites

The pre-t The prefent Arabians, according to their own hiftorians, are fprung
fra»f. ra ’ from tWo ftocks > Nxihtdn, the fame with Jodi an the fon of Eber

and Adndn defcended in a diredt line from Ifmael the fon of Abra-
ham and Hagar-, the pofterity of the former they call al Arab al A-
riba i. e. the genuine or pure Arabs, and thofe of the latter al Ar

1 Abulfeda. % A like cuftom is faid to have been
Scotland f where it was called CuJJiage or Qullage, having
by Malcolm III. See Boyle ' i Dift. Art. Sixte IV. Rfcra. H
* lb. p. 38. 6 Ebn Shohnah. 7 Gen. xxxvi. 12.

Shohnah. 10 V. Numb. xxiv. 20. 11 Mirat Cainat.

Exod. xvii. 18, See. 1 Sam. xv. x. &c. Ib. x*vii. 8 f 9
Arab. Pentat Gen x. 25. Some writers make Kabtan
current of oriental hiftorians, See Poc. Spec. 39. 3

i*4ul who rails himfelf an Hebrew if the Hebrew. Philipp,

in fome mannors in EngUntdy and alfo in
been eftablifhed by K. Etoen andabolilhed
, 3 Poc. Spec. 60. * Ib. 37. 8 c c.

• 8 V. D'Herbelot. p. iro. 9 Ebn

1 *V. Jofeph. cont. Apion. 1. i. n V.
x Chron. iv. 43. R. Saad, in verf.

a defeendant of ljmael % but againft the
1 An expreffion fomething like that of St.
iii. j.

rab

i. 1 fJa/rh' srf ///r //&??;//;?& ^yfotz&f

^ipTud,/*t 2TEXAZ

JL'MjMtt wv

E zZ.Dmc * jb . g . ? T.

L. i u

€ fema/cytm£7a/r7s cfyTTrtTw ofy flra/v, /tt7yy y&ejcem&mA of. Om/dyJbr? of.y///ro/mm Ay o&a*/yA/?^cf77Iot/asJ y. fflrAatnifc

Site D^eenfir/r&m IfhiaeL ta Alin an are caryrfed/r/ rru&t~

aprpf'&wd fsrt&f enumerates etyAt Gencrati^ms *Affe tnro

Perfans in tAe fidiart/inp order i]SxxxsdL , *Saiam?m, al

Tlmneiff* , al ^ r a*a, Odad, 0<Jd r-Adnan .^IBeikaki nMone 4rrte _ N

Generation (s/s, differing attc in dte^Vames, in this manner,* Ifmael ,
Xabet^dtliab/T&iaKl^ah^hiii^Ai >fok<rv\n^arivOd|W AHuAn.Jfut
M oh ame d /usnf&f if ajfi'adifion of his Mfe Omm ma is to lnz

depended <rrv, countedna nurre dum MreePnfntJ , ■• v,-j ; J3era,
2«4><zrz^ Oda dL,6etnreerv Ifmael and Adnmx;3era &einjr Me
jatne rvitA Jfojbef, and Zerd nntA al Homeifa .

4/^A

\l

9

Sett. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

tab al mojlareba , i. e. naturalized or inftitious Arabs, tho* feme
reckon the ancient loft tribes to have been the only pure Arabian r,
and therefore call the pofterity of Kabtan alfo Motareba , which
word likewife fignifies inftitious Arabs, tho' in a nearer degree than
Mojlareba j the defendants of Ifmael being the more diftant graft.

The pofterity of Ifmael have no claim to be admitted as pure A-
rabs‘, their anceftor being by origin and language an Hebrew , but
having made an alliance with the Jorhamites , by marrying a daughter
of Modad , and accuftomed himfelf to their manner of living and lan-
guage, his defendants became blended with them into one nation.

The uncertainty of the defcents between Ifmael and Adndn, is the
reafon why they feldom trace their genealogies higher than the latter,
whom they acknowledge as father of their tribes; the defcents from
him downwards being pretty certain and uncontroverted \

The genealogy of theft tribes being of great ufe to illuftrate the
Arabian hiftory, I have taken the pains to form a genealogical table
from their moil approved authors, to which I refer the curious.

Befides theft tribes of Arabs , mentioned by their own authors,
who were all defended from the race of Bern, others of them were
the pofterity of Ham by his ion Cujb, which name is in fcripture
conftantly given to the Arabs and their country, tho’ our verfion
renders it Ethiopia ; but ftridtly fpeaking, the Cujbites did not inhabit
Arabia properly fo called, but the banks of the' Euphrates and the
P erf an gulph, whither they came from Cbuzefdn or Sufana , the
original ftttlement of their father \ They might probably mix them-
felves in procefs of time with the Arabs of the other race, but the
eaftern writers take little or no notice of them.

The Arabians were for fome centuries under the government of Their
the defendants of Kabtan ; Tdrab , one of his ions, founding the king- vernment *
dom of Taman , and for bam, another of them, that of Hejaz.

The province of Taman , or the better part of it, particularly the The king-
provinces of Saba and Hadramaut, was governed by princes of the
tribe of Hamyar, tho' at length the kingdom was tranflated to the rites m ft
defendants of Cabldn his brother, who yet retained the title of king JWB **
of Hamyar, and had all of them the general title of Tobba, which
fignifies fuccejfor, and was affedted to this race of princes, as
that of CaJ'ar was to the Roman emperors, and Kbalif to the fuccef-
fors of Mohammed. There were feveral leffer princes who reigned
in other parts of Taman, and were moftly, if not altogether, fubjedt

1 Poc. Spec. p. 40. * V. Hyde Hill. Rel. veter. Per&r. p. 37.

c to

/

IO

The inun-
dation of
Arm .

The Preliminary Difcourfe . Sed. I.

to the king of Hamyar whom they called the great king, but of thefe
hiftory has recorded nothing remarkable or that may be depended
upon *.

The firft great calamity that befell the tribes fettled in Taman was
the inundation of Aram, which happened foon after the time of
Alexander the great, and is famous in the Arabian hiftory. No lefs
than eight tribes were forced to abandon their dwellings upon this
occafton, tome of which gave rife to the two kingdoms of Gbaffan
and Hira. And this was probably the time of the migration of thofe
tribes or colonies which were led into Mefopotamia by three chiefs.
Beer, Modar, and Rabia, from whom the three provinces of that
country are ftill named Diyar Beer, Diyar Modar, and Diyar Rabia \
Abdjhems, furnamed Saba, having built the city from him called Sa-
ba, and afterwards Mareb , made a vaft mound or dam’ to ferve as a
bafon or refervoir to receive the water which came down from the
mountains, not only for the ufe of the inhabitants, and watering their
lands, but alfo to keep the country they had fubje&ed in greater awe
by being mafters of the water. Thia building ftood like a mountain
above their city, and was by them efteemed fo ftrong, that they were
in no apprehenfion of its ever failing. The water rofe to the height
of aimoft 20 fathom, and was kept in on every fide by a work fo
folid, that many of the inhabitants had their houfes built upon it.
Every family had a certain portion of this water diftributed by aque-
ducts. But at length God being highly dilpleafed at their great
pride and infolence, and refolving to humhle and difperfe them, fent
a mighty flood which broke down the mound by night while the
inhabitants were afleep, and carried away the whole city with the
neighbouring towns and people ♦.

The tribes which remained in Taman after this terrible devastation,
ftill continued under the obedience of the former princes, till about
70 years before Mohammed, when the king of Ethiopia lent over for-
ces to aflift the CbrijUam of Taman agairtfl: the cruel perfection
of their king Dhu Nowds, a bigotted Jew, whom they drove to that
extremity, that he forced his horfc into the fea, and fo loft his life
and crown s ; after which the country was governed by four Ethio-
pian princes fuccelfively, till Seif the fbn of Dhu Tazan of the tribe
of Hamyar obtaining luccours from Kbofru Anujhirwdn king of Per-
Jia, which had been denied him by the emperor Heraciius, recovered

1 Poc. Sptc. p. 65, 66. 2 V. Gol. ad Alfrag. p. 23 2. 3 Poc. Spec.p. 57. * Geogr.

Nubienj. p. 52. 1 See Priitaux'l life of Mabomtt, p. (n,

the

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe . 1 1

the throne and drove out the Ethiopians , but was himfelf flairt by
fome of them who were left behind. The Perjians appointed the
fucceeding princes till Taman fell into the hands of Mohammed , to
whom Bazan , or rather Badhdn, the laft of them, fubmitted, and
embraced his new religion*.

This kingdom of the Hamyarites is faid to have lafted 2020 years %
or as others fay above 3000 * j the length of the reign of each prince
being very uncertain.

It has been already obferved that two kingdoms were founded by The ki*g-
thofe who left their country on occafion of the inundation of Aram :
they were both out of the proper limits of Arabia. One of them » n d W/m.
was the kingdom of Gbajfan. The founders of this kingdom were
of the tribe of Azd, who fettling in Syria Damafeena near a water
called Gbajfan , thence took their name, and drove out the Dajaatnian
Arabs of the tribe of Salih, who before poffdfed the country 4 ;
where they maintained their kingdom 400 years, as others fay 600,
or as Abulfeda more exa&ly computes 616. Five of thefe princes
were named Hdreth, which the Greeks write Aretas : and one of
them it was whofe governour ordered the gates of Damajcus to be
watched to take St. Paul*. This tribe were Cbrijliani, their laft
king being Jabalab the fon of al Ayham , who on the Arabs fucceffes
in Syria profefled Mohammedifm under the Kbaltf Omar ; but receiv-
ing a difguft from him, returned to his former faith, and retired to
Confiantinople 6 .

The other kingdom was that of Hira which was founded by Ma-
ke of the defeendants of Cabldn 7 in Chaldea or Iraki but after three
defeents the throne came by marriage to the Lakbmiuns , called alfo
the Mondars (the general name of thofe princes) who preferved their
dominion, nqtwithftanding fome fmall interruption by the Perjians,
till the Khalifat of Abubecr , when al Mondar al Maghrur the laft of
them loft his life and crown by the arms of Kbaled Ebn al JValid.

This kingdom lafted 622 years eight months 8 . Its princes were un-
der the protection of the kings of Pcrjia, whofe lieutenants they
were over the Arabs of Irak, as the kings of Gbajfan were for the
Roman emperors over thofe of Syria. 9 .

Jorbam the fon of Kabtdn reigned in Hejdz, where his pofterity Kingdom
kept the throne till the time of Ifinaed, buc on his marrying the
daughter of M<?dad» by whom he had twelve fons, Kidar , one of them, n*j£z.

1 Poc. Spec. p. 6$, 64. * Abulfeda. 3 Al Jannabi & Ahmed Ebn Yufcf. *■ Poc. Spec.

P. 7$. 1 z Cor. iL $2. A&i is. 24, 6 Y. Ocklefs Hilt of the Senutns. Vol. 1. p. 174. 7 Poc.

Spec. p. 66. 3 lb. p. 74. 9 lb. & Procop, in Perf. *pi*d PhptMHn. p. 71. fcc,

c 2 bad

12

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. 1.

had the crown refigned to him by his uncles the Jorh'aflttjtef', tho*
others fay the defendants of Ifmael expelled that tribe, who^fetiring
to yobainah , were, after various fortune, at laft all deftroyed by a»
inundation 1 .

Of the kings of Hamyar , Hira, Ghaffdn , and y or ham. Dr. P ocock
has given us catalogues tolerably exa£t, to which I refer the curious } .
The fub- After the expulfion of the Jorhamites, the government of Hejast
fecms not to have continued for many centuries in the hands of one
ihent prince, but to have been divided among the heads of tribes ; almoft in
therime r he fame manner as the Arabs of the defart are governed at this day» At
of Mt>- Mecca an ariftocracy prevailed, where the chief management of affairs till
bammed, the time of Mohammed was in the tribe of Koraijh •, efpeeially after
they had gotten the cuftody of the Caaba from the tribe of Khozaah 4 .

Befides the kingdoms which have been taken notice of, there were
fome other tribes, which in latter times had princes of their own»
and formed ftates of leffer note j particularly the tribe of Kenda * :
but as I am not writing a juft hiftory of the Arabs, and an account
of them would be of no great ufe to my prelent purpofe, I fhall
wave any further mention of them.

Of the After the time of Mohammed , Arabia was for about three centu-
me^of r ‘ es under the Khalifs his fucceffors. But in the year 325 of the Hejra y
Arabia in great part of that country was in the hands of the Karmatiam 6 , a
facceed- new f e & who had committed great outrages and diforders even in
1 1 tune, ‘ Mecca, and to whom the Khalifs were obliged to pay tribute, that
the pilgrimage thither might be performed : of this fe£t I may have
occafion to Ipeak in another place. Afterwards Taman was governed
by the houfe of Thabateba , defeended from Alt the fon-in-law of
Mohammed, whofe fovercignty in Arabia fome place lb high as the
time of Charlemagne . However it was the pofterity of Ali, or pre-
tenders to be fuch, who reigned in Taman and Egypt fo early as the
tenth century. The prefent reigning family in Taman is probably
that of Ayub ; a branch of which reigned there in the 13th centu-
ry, and took the title of Kbalif and Imam, which they ftill retain 7 .
They are not poflefled of the whole province of Taman ®, there be-
ing feveral other independent kingdoms there, particularly that of
Fartach. The crown of Taman defeends not regularly from father
to fon, but the prince of the blood royal who is moft in favour with
the great ones, or has the ftrongeft intereft, generally fucceeds. 8

1 Poc. Spec. p. 45. * lb. p. 79. 3 lb. p. 55. fcq. 4 V. Ib. p. 41. and PriJeasx's life

*f Mabmet. p. * 1 V. Poc. Spec. p. 79, See. * V. Elmsrin, in vita alRadi. 7 \ oyage de

1‘Arjib. heur. p. 255. 8 Ib. 153. 273. 8 Ib. 154.

The

13

8e£t. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

The governors of Mecca and Medina , who have always been of
the race of Mohammed , alfo threw off their fubjedtion to the Kha-
lifs, fince which time four principal families, all defcended from Ha-
fan the fon of Ali , have reigned there under the tide of Sharif,
which fignifies noble, as they reckon themfelves to be on account of
their defcent. Thefe are Banu Kader , Banu Mufa Tbani, Banu Ha-
Jhem, and Banu Kitada 1 ; which laft family now is, or lately was in
the throne of Mecca , where they have reigned above 500 years.

The reigning family at Medina are the Banu Hajhem, who alfo
reigned at Mecca before thofe of Kitada \

The kings of Taman, as well as the princes of Mecca and Medina ,
are abfolutely independent J and not at all fubjedt to the Turk, as
fome late authors have imagined 4 . Thefe princes often making cruel
wars among themfelves, gave an opportunity to Selim I. and his fon
Solimdn, to make themfelves mailers of the coafls of Arabia on the
Red lea, and of part of Taman, by means of a fleet built at Sues: but
their fucceflbrs nave not been able to maintain their conquefts ; for*
except the port of Jodda , where they have a Bajha whofe authority
is very fmall, they poflefs nothing confiderable in Arabia *.

Thus have the Arabs preferved their liberty, of which few na- Tie fac-
tions can produce fo ancient monuments, with very little interruption domoftfce
from the very deluge; for tho’ very great armies have been font Arabs ‘
againft them, all attempts to fubdue them were unfuccefsful. The
AJfyrian or Median empires never got footing among them 6 . The
P erf an monarchs, tho’ they were their friends, and fo far refpedted
by them as to have an annual prefent of frankincenfe 7 , yet could
never make them tributary 8 ; and were fo far from being their ma-
ilers, that Cambyfes, on his expedition againft Egypt, was obliged to
alk their leave to pals thro” tneir territories 9 ; and when Alexander
had fubdued that mighty empire, yet the Arabians had fo little ap-
prehenlion of him, that they alone, of all the neighbouring nations,
lent no embafladors to him, either firft or laft ; which, with a defire
of poffeflihg fo rich a country, made him form a defign againft it^
and had he not died before he could put it in execution lo , this people
might poffibly have convinced him that he was not invincible : and I
do not find that any of his fbcceffors either in Afia or Egypt, ever

1 lb. 14J, 2 lb. 145. * lb. 143, 148. * V. D’Hcrbel. BibL orient. p„47 7. * Vby,

de TArab. hear. p. 148. 6 Diodor. Sic. 1 . 2. p. 131. * Herodot 1. 3, c. 97. 8 Idem ib»

e. 91. Dio or. ubi lup, 9 Herodot. 1 . 3. c. 8. Sc 98. 10 Strabo. I 16. p 1076. 1 132.

made

(

[ 4 The Preliminary Difcourfi. Se&. I.

made any attempt againft them*. The Romans never conquered any
part of Arabia properly fo called ; the molt they did was to make
tome tribes in Syria tributary to them, as P ompey did one commanded
by Sampjiceramus or Shams' alkeram who reigned at Hems or Emefdji
but none of the Romans , or any other nations that we know of,
ever penetrated fo far into Arabia as Alius Gallus under Augujlus
Cafar 3 } yet he was fo far from fubduing it, as fome authors pretend 4 »
that he was foon obliged to return without effecting any thing conii-
derable, having loft the beft part of his army by ucknefs and other
accidents K This ill fuccefs probably difeouraged the Romans from
attacking them any more j for Trajan notwithftanding the flatteries
of the hiftotians, and orators of his time, and the medals ftruck by
him, did not fubdue the Arabs ; the province of Arabia , which it is
faid he added to the Roman empire, fcarce reaching farther than
Arabia Petraa> or the very fkirts of the country. And we are told
by one author «, that this prince marching againft the Agarens l who
had revolted, met with fuch a reception that he was obliged to return
without doing any thing.

inon'oT* The religion of the Arabs before Mohammed , which they call the
the an- Jlafe of ignorance , in oppofitiop to the knowledge of God's true
eient A- worfhip revealed to them by their prophet, was chiefly grofs idolatry j
the Sabian religion having almoft overrun the whole nation, tho’ there
were alfo great numbers of Chrijlians, Jews, and Magians, among them.

I {hall not here tranferibe what Dr. Prideaux 7 has written of the
original of the Sabian religion; but inftead thereof infert a brief ac-
count of the tenets and worship of that fe£t. They do not only
believe one God, but produce many ftrong arguments for his unityj
tho’ they alfo pay an adoration to the ftars, or the angels and intelli-
gences which they fuppofe refide in them, and govern the world
under the fuprerne deity. They endeavour to perfect themfelves in
the four intelledual virtues, and believe the fouls of wicked men
will be punilhed for 9900 ages, but will afterwards be received to
mercy. They are obliged to pray three times 8 a day; the firft,
half an hour or lefs before fun-rife, ordering it fo that they may, juft
as the fun rife?, finilh eight adorations, each containing three proftra-
tions 9 : the fecond prayer they end at noon, when the fun begins

* V. Diodor. Sic. ubi fupra; * Strabo. 1. 16. p. 1092. 3 Dion Caffius. 1 . 53. p. m. 516.

* Huet Hill, du commerce & de la Twvigatiyn des andens, c. 50. 1 See the whole expedition de-
scribed at large by Strabo. 1 16. p. 1126, ($c. « Xiphilin. epit. 7 Conneft. of the bift. of

the Old and New Teft, p. b.' 3. « Some fcyfeven. See tPHerbelot. p. 726. and Hyde de ref.

vet. Pcrf. p. 128. 9 Others lay they ufe no incurvations or proftradons at afl. V. Hyde ib.

to

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe, i$

to decline, in faying which they perform five fuch adorations as the
former : and the fame they do the third time, ending juft as the fun fets.

They faft three times a year, the firft time 30 days, the next nine

dap, and the laft feven. They offer many fecrifices, but eat

no part of them, burning them all. They abftain from beans, gar-
lick, and fome other pulfe and vegetables As to the Sabian Kebla ,
or part to which they turn their faces in praying, authors greatly

differ ; one will have it to be the north *, another the fouth, a third

Mecca , and a fourth the ftar to which they pay their devotions 3 :
and perhaps there may be fome variety in their praftiie in this
refpeft. They go on pilgrknage to a place near the city of Harran
in Mefopotamia, where great numbers of them dwell, and they have
aho a great refpeft for the temple of Mecca , and the pyramids of
Egypt 1 ; fancying thefe laft to be the fepulchres of Svtb, and of Enoch
and Sabi his two fons, whom they look on as the firft propagators of
their religion ; at thefe ft ruptures they facrifice a cock and a black
calf, and offer up incenfe f . Befides the book of Pfalms , the only
true feripture they read, they have other books which they efteem
equally facred, particularly one in the Chaldee tongue which they call the
book of Seth , and is full of moral difeourfes. This feft fay, they took
the name of Sabians frem the above mentioned Sabi , tho’ it feems
rather to be derived from Saba 6 or the bojl of heaven, which

they worlhip f. Travellers commonly call them Gbrijliam of St
John the Baptiji, whofe dift iples alfo they pretend to be, ufing a kind
of bap chin, which is the greateft mark they bear of Chrijiiamty.

This is one of the religions, the p raft ice of which Mohammed to-
lerated (on paying tribute,) and the profeflors of it are often included
in that expreffion of the Koran, tbofe to whom the feriptures have-
been given , or literally, people of the book.

The idolatry of the Arabs then, as Sabiam, chiefly confifted in.
worlhipping the fixed ftars and planets, and the angels and their
images, which they honoured as inferior deities, and. whole intercef-
fion they begged, as their mediators with God. For the Arabs ac-
knowledged one fupreme God, the Creator, and Lord of the univerfe,
whom they called Allah < Tadla, the moil high God, and their

1 Abuifarag. Hift. DynafL p, 281. 2 Idem ib. 3 Hyde ubifupr. p. 124. &c.

* D’Hertiel. ubi fapr* 1 See s Pywnidogr. p. 6, 7. 6 V. Poc. Spec* p. 138.

7 Ybabct Ebn K)?rab, a famous aftronointr, arid Mmfelf a Stiii/to, wrote a treatife in dyriar T con-
cerning thedo&rines, rite*, and ceremonies of this fett; from which, if it could be recovered,
we might expert much better information than any taken from, the Arabian writers. V. Abuifarag.
ubi tup,

other

¥

(

The Prelimifiary Difcourfe . Seft. I.

-other deities, who were fubordinate to him, they called limply al I-
lahat, i*e. the goddeftes ; which words the Grecians not underftanding,
and it being their conftant cuftom to refolve the religion of every
other nation into their own, and find oufrgods of theirs to match
■the other’s, they pretend the Arabs worfhipped only two deities, Oro-
talt and Alilat , as thofe names are corruptly written, whom they
will have to be the fame with Bacchus and Urania ; pitching on the
former as one of the greateft of their own gods, and educated in
Arabia , and on the other, becaufe of the veneration fliewn by the
Arabs to the ftars

That they acknowledged one fupreme God, appears, to omit
other proof, from their ufual form of addrefling themfelves to him,
which was this, I dedicate my [elf to thy Jet-vice, O God! I dedicate
myfelf to thy fervice, OGod! Thou haft no companion , except thy com-
panion of whom thou art abfolute Mafter, and of whatever is bis 1 . So
that they fuppofed the idols not to be fui juris , tho’ they offered fa-
orifices and other offerings to them, as well as to G o d, who was alfo
often put off with the leaft portion, as Mohammed upbraids them.
Thus when they planted fruit trees, or fowed a field, they divided
it by a line into two parts, fetting one apart for their idols, and the
other for G o d ; if any of the fruits happened to fall from the idol’s
part into G o d’s, they made reftitution ; but if from G o d’s part in-
to the idol’s, they made no reftitution. So when they watered the
idol’s grounds, if the water broke over the channels made for that
purpofe, and ran on G o d’s part, they dammed it up again ; but if
the contrary, they let it run on, faying, they wanted what was God’s,
but he wanted nothing h In the fame manner, if the offering de-
figned for God happened to be better than that defigned for the
idol, they made an exchange, but not otherwife 4 .

It was from this grofs idolatry, or the worfhip of inferior deifies,
or companions of Got>, as the Arabs continue to call them, that Mo-
hammed reclaimed his countrymen, eftablifhing the foie worfhip of the
true God among them; fo that how muchfoever the Mohammedans
are to blame in other points, they are far from being idolaters, as
fome ignorant writers have pretended.

The worfhip of the ftars the Arabs might eafily be led into, from
their obferving the changes of weather to happen at the riling or fet-
ting of certain of them*, which after a long courfe of experience in-

1 V. Herodot 1. 3. c. 8. Arrian, p. 161, 162. & Stab. 1. 16. * AJ Shahreftani. * Nodhm

•al dorr. * Al Beidawi. * V. Poll.

duced

Se&. I. *?he Preliminary Difc&urfe.

duced them to afcribe a divine power to thofe ftars, and to think
themfelves indebted to them for their rains, a very great benefit and
refreshment to their parched country: this fuperftition the Koran
particularly takes notice of*.

The ancient Arabians and Indians , between which two nations
was a great conformity of religions, had feven celebrated temples,
dedicated to the leven planets j one of which in particular, called
Beit Gbomddn , was built in Sanaa the metropolis of Taman, by Dahac ,
to the honour of al Zobarab or the planet Venus, and was demolished
by the Khali f Othman * ; by whofe murder was fulfilled the prophe-
tical infcription fet, as is reported, over this temple, viz. Gbomddn,
he who dejlroyetb tbee, Jhall be Jlain 1 * 3 . The temple of Mecca is alfo
faid to have been confecrated to Zobal, or Saturn \

Tho’ thefe deities were generally reverenced by the whole nation,
yet each tribe chofe fome one as the more peculiar objedt of their
worfhip.

Thus as to the ftars and planets, the tribe of Hamyar chiefly wor-
shipped the fun; Mifam s , al Debar an or the bull’s eye-, Lakbrn and
Joddm, al Mojhtari or Jupiter ; Toy, Sohail or Canopus Kais, Sirius
or the dog-Jlar ; and Afaa, Ofdred or Mercury 6 . Among the wor-
Shippers of Sirius, one AbuCabJha was very famous; fome will have
him to be the fame with Waheb, Mohammed’s grandfather by the
mother, but others fay he was of the tribe of Kbozdab. This man
ufed his utmoft endeavours to perfuade the Koretjl ; to leave their
images and worship this ftar; for which reafon Mohammed, who en-
deavoured alfo to make them leave their images, was by them nick-
named thefon of Abu Cabjha 7 . The worfhip of this ftar is particu-
larly hinted at in the Koran * .

Of the angels or intelligences which they worfhipped, the Koran 9,
makes mention only of three, which were worfhipped under female
names 10 ; Allot, al Uzza, and Manab. Thefe were by them called
goddejfes, and the daughters of G ov; an appellation they gave not
only to the angels, but alfo to their images, which they either be-
lieved to be infpired with life by God, or elfe to become the taber-
nacles of the angels, and to be animated by them ; and they gave
them divine worfhip, becaufe they imagined they interceded for them
with God.

1 V. Poc. Spec. p. 163: * Shahreftafli * Al Jafthabi. 4 Shahrcftadx. 1 This name Icons to be

corrupted, there being no fuch among the Arab tribes. Poc. Spec. p 13 a. 6 Abulforag p. 160.

7 Poc. Spec. p. 1 32. 8 Cap. 53. 9 Ibid: 10 Ibid.

i 8

The Preliminary Diftoarfi. Se&. I.

Allat was the idol of the tribe of ’Tbakif who dwelt at 'Payef, and
had a temple confecrated to her in a place called Nakhlab This idol
al Mogheirah deftroyed by Mohammed ’ s order, who fent him and Abu
Sofian on that commiffion in the ninth year of the Hejra \ The in-
habitants of “Tayef, efpecially the women, bitterly lamented the lofs
of this their deity, which they were fo fond of, that they begged
of Mohammed as a condition of peace, that it might not be deftroyed
for three years, and not obtaining that, alked only a month’s refpitc ;
but he abfolutely denied it 3. There are feveral derivations of this
word which the curious may learn from Dr. Pocock*: it feems moft
probably to be derived from the fame root with AUafe to which it
may be a feminine, and will then fignify the goddejs.

Al TJzza, as fome affirm, was the idol of toe tribes of Koreijh and
Kenanah * and part of the tribe of Salim 6 : others? tell us rt was a
tree called the Egyptian thorn, or Acacia, worfhjpped by the tribe of
Ghatfdn, firft confecra'ted by one Dhdlem, who built a chappel over
it, called Bofsy fo contrived as to give a found when any perfon entred.
KbdkdEbn WaUd being, fenp By Mohammed in the eighth year of the
Hejra to deftroy 'this idol, demojiffied the chappel, and cutting down this
tree or image, burnt it : he alfo flew the prieftefs, who ran out with her
hair difhevelled, and her hands on her head as a fuppliant, Yet the au-
thor who relates this, in another place fays, the Rappel was pulled
down, and Dhdlem himfelf killed by one Zabair., bqcaufe he confe-
crated this chappel with defiga to draw the pilgrims thither from
Mecca ■, and leflen the reputation of the Caaba. The name of this deity
is derived from the root azzfc and fignifles the mojl mighty,

Manah was the object of worship of the tribes of Hadbnil and
Khozadh 8 , who dwelt between Mecca and Me$na t apd, as fome fey »,
of the tribes of and Thatyf alfo. This idol was a

ferge ft one ,0 , demoijffied by one Saad in the eighth year »f the Hejra,

■ year, fo fatal to the jdcis of Arabia. The 1 name feems derived
from mana to /p®, from thc.Jtmipg ,of the Wood of the victims
iaenfleed to the deity; whence the valley of Mina 11 near Mecca bad

wm Or. JEW! tantl^n 3. p^ffag? of- Jfc&r.i-itu,

y>hlch metjttqns this temple, thte j Thajuf worjbipptd a chalet on. the M ef a pdtxlim, ed*U<l Al-
u. Artit ie pnffibly Wle ‘ V.Su fjuLgg i6 l * Dr. PtUtMta nUtCL

but , " am< ; s _ on5 y Abu Sofian, and miftakmg the name of the idol f w w a&pelli&v#,
C f P ^JLiro*° y [ 3° ^ turnon* of roar. LlSe

of A labomet, p. 98.

p, 91. *

reikni, Aiiutfcd-,

a « , \ Htjuumcm* dj war . oee XUS me

■ rr ai J&StZ-

let. 10 Al ,1 .. u * . on *

10 AT BeidJwi* al 2S»makhfhari. u Fo^ gpqg. 9 ,. Ik.

alfo

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

alfo its name, where the pilgrims at this day flay their facrifices *.

Before we proceed to the other idols, let us take notice of five more,
which with die former three areall xhcKoran mentions by name, and they
are iVadd, Saw /, Tagbikb, Tank , and Najh Thefe are {aid to have been
antediluvian idols, which Noah preached againft, and were afterwards
taken by the Arabs for gods, having been men of great merit aiid piety in
their time, whole flatties they reverenced at firft w ith a civ il honour on-
ly, which in proctri- of time became heightened to a divine woribip \
Wadd was fuppofed to be the heaven, and was worfhipped under the
form of a man by the tribe of Calb in Daumat hi Jatidal

Saw.i was adored under the fhape of a woman by the tribe of Ha->
madan , or, as others » write, of HsdLvl in Rohat. This idol lying
under water for fome time after the deluge, was at length, it is laid,
difeovered by the devil, and was worfhipped by thofe of Htkibaii, who
inftituted pilgrimages to it'.

Taghvtb was an idol in the fhape of a lion, and was the deity of
the tribe of Madbaj and others who dwelt in Taman 6 . Its name
feems to be derived from gbatbx, which fignifies to help.

T'duk was worfhipped by the tribe of Mordd, or according to
others, by that of Hamadan 7 under the figure of a horfe. It
is faid he was a man of great piety, and his death much regretted ;
whereupon the devil appeared to his friends in a human form, and
undertaking to represent him to the life, perfuaded them, by way of
comfort, to place his effigies in their temples, that they might have
it in view when at their devotions. This was done, and feven others
of extraordinary merit had the fame honours fhewn them, till at
length their poficrity made idols of them in earneft *. The name
Tduk probably comes from the verb Ska to prevent or avert K

Najr was a Deity adored by the tribe of Hangar, or at Dhu'lKhalaab
in their territories, under the image of an eagle, which the name fignifies.

There are, or were, two ftatues at Batniydn , a city of Cabal in the
Indies, 50 cubits high, which fome writers fuppofe to be the lathe
with Thgbutb and Tafik, or elfe' with Mhnab and AUSt-, and they alfo
foeak of a third ftanding near the others, but Something lefs, in the
fhape of an old woman, called Nejrem or Tsfefr. Thefd ftatues were

hollow within for the fecret giving of orades ,a } but they feem to have
been different from the Arabian idols. There was alfo an idol at Su~
menat in the fa dies, called Ldt or al Ldt , whofe ftacue was 50 fathoms

1 Poc. Spec. 91. Sec. * Koi j:i.c,7i.C(mincnt. Periic. V.Hvdt detel. vet. Pcrf. p 133. ? Al
I mhsri. al Sh^hreftani. 4 Idem, al Fiuuswbadi, Sc S^fio'ddijB. Al Firauzab. 6
? Al Jauhari * Al Firiuzabad. 9 Poc. Spec. 94. 10 See Hyde de nr! vtt Perf,

d 2 high.

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sc<ft. I.

high, of a finglfe ftohe, and placed in the midft of a temple fupported
by 56 pillars of mafly gold : this idol Mabmud Ebn Sebetfegbin, who
conquered that part of India, broke to pieces with his own hands

Befides the idols We have mentioned, the Arabs worshipped alfo
great numbers of others, which would take up too much time to
have diftindt accounts given of them, and not being named in the
Koran , are not fo much to our prefent purpofe : for befides that every
houfe-keeper had his houfe-hold god, or gods, which he laft took
leave of, and firft faluted at his going abroad and returning home %
there were no lefs than 360 idols 3 , equalling in number the days of
their year, in and about the Caaba of Mecca-, the chief of whom was
Hobal +, brought from Belka in Syria into Arabia by Atnru Ebn Lohai,
pretending it would procure them rain when they wanted it K It was
the ftatue of a man made of red agate, which having by fome acci-
dent loft a hand, the Koreijh repaired it with one of gold : he held
in his hand feven arrows without heads or feathers, fuch as the Arabs
ufed in divination 6 . This idol is fuppofed to have been the fame
with the image of Abraham t, found and deftroyed by Mohammed in
the Caaba , on his entring it, in the eighth year of the Hejra , when
he took Mecca 8 , and furrounded with a great number of arigejs and
prophets, as inferiour deities ; among whom, as fome fay, was lfmad
With divining arrows in his hand alfo

Ajdf and Nayelab , the former the image of a man, the latter of
a woman, were alfo two idols brought with Hobal from Syri and
placed the one on mount Safa, and the other on mount Merwa,
They tell us Afdf was the fon of Amf'u, arid Nayelab the daughter
of Saba l, both of the tribe of Jorbam , who committing whoredom
together in the Caaba, were by G o d converted into ftone ,0 , and af-
terwards worfhipped by the Koreijh , and fo much reverenced by
them, that tho' this fuperftition was condemned by Mohammed, yet
he was forced to allow them to vifit thofe mountains as monuments
of divine juftice”.

I lhall mention but one idol more of this nation, and that was a
lump of dough worfhipped by the tribe of Hantfa 5 who ufed it with
more refpedt thin the Papijls do theirs, prefuming not to eat it till
they were compelled to it by famine •».

-Several of their idols, as Man'ah in particular, were no more than
large rude ftones, the worflaip of which the pofterity of Ifmael firft

’ b P lent< P ‘ ¥l‘c Al 3 * 4 Abulfed. Shah.

» 1 1 L, Sp ^ C ' ? 5 - 6 Safio’ddin. 7 Poc. Spec. 97. « Abulfeda. » Ebn al

Atiur. al Jannab. &c. » « Poc. Spec. 98. 11 Koran, cap. 2. » * Al Moftatraf. al Jauhaii

21

Se<£t. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

introduced ; for as they multiplied, and the territory of Mecca grew
too ftrait for them, great numbers were obliged to feek new abodes ;
and on fuch migrations it was ufual for them to take with them
fome of the ftones of that reputed holy land, and fet them up in the
places where they fixed ; and thefe ftones they at firft only compaffed
out of devotion, as they had. accuftomed to do the Caaba. But this
at laft ended in rank idolatry, the Ifmaelites forgetting the religion
left them by their father fo far, as to pay divine worfhip to any
fine ftone they met with *.

Some of the pagan drabs believed neither a creation paft, nor a Their n»-
refurre&ion to come, attributing the origin of things to nature, and *
their diflolution to age. Others believed both; among whom were fate,
thofe who when they died, had their camel tied by their fepulchre,
and fo left without meat or drink to perifli, and accompany them to
the other world, left they fhould be obliged, at the refurredtion, to
go on foot, which was reckoned very fcandalous \ Some believed a
metempfyehofis, and that of the blood near the dead perfon’s brain, was
formed a bird named Hdmab, which once in a hundred years vifited
the fepulchre ; tho’ others fay, this bird is animated by the foul of
him that is unjuftly flain, and continually cries Of cum, Ofcuni, i. e.
give me to drink , meaning of the murthercr’s blood, till his death be
revenged ; and then it flies away. This is exprcily forbidden by the
Koran to be believed

I might here mention feveral fuperftitious, rites and cuftoms of the
ancient drabs, fome of which were abolifhed, and others retained by
Mohammed ; but I apprehend it will be more convenient to take no-
tice of them hereafter, occafionally, as the negative or pofitive precepts
of the Koran, forbidding or allowing fuch practices, (hall be confidered.

Let us now turn our view from the idolatrous drabs , to thofe
among them, who had embraced more rational religious.

The Perjians had, by their vicinity and frequent intercourfe with The Mf
the drabians, introduced the Magian religion among fome of their reU '
tribes, particularly that of *Tamim ♦, a long time before Mohammed, fj£ced%
who was fo far from being unacquainted with that religion, that he fome of
borrowed many of his own inftitutions from it, as will be obferved
in the progrefs of this work. I refer thofe who are defirous to have *
fome notion of Magifm, to Dr. Hyde’s curious account of it*; a fuc-
cindt abridgement of which may be read with much pleafure, in ano-
ther learned performance 4 .

1 A1 Moftatarf. al Jannabl. * p 160. * V. Poc. Spec. p. 135* 4 A\ Moftatraf.

* In his Hilt, relig vet. Pcrfar 6 Dr. F fid wax'* Conntft. of the hill, of the Old and New
Teft. Part I. Book 4

The

n 'The Preliminary Difcourje * Se&. J.

And alfo The Jews, who fled in great numbers into Arabia from the fear-
_ m- £ u j deftrudtion of their country by the Romans, made profelytd
of feveral tribes, thofe of Kendnah, al Hareth Ebn Caaba , and Ken-*
dab 1 in particular, and in time became very powerful, and pot
fefled of feveral towns and fortrefles there. But the Jewijh religion
was not unknown to the Arabs, at leaft above a century before ;
Abu Garb Afad, taken notice of in the Koran \ who was king of
Taman, about yoo years before Mohammed, is faid to have introduced
Judaiftn among the idolatrous Hamyarites. Some of his fuccefibr#
alfo embraced the fame religion, one of whom, Tufef, furnamed Dbu
Nowds\ was remarkable for his zeal, and terrible perfecution of all
who would nos turn Jews , putting them to death by various tor-
tures, the moft common of which was throwing them into a glow-
ing pit of fire, whence he had the opprobrious appellation of the
Lord of the fit. This perfecution is alfo mentioned in the Kordn \
And CM- Cbrijlianity had likewife made a very great progrefs among this na-
tion, before Mohammed. Whether St. Paul preached in any part of Ara-
bia, properly fo called f , is uncertain ; but the perfections, and dif*
orders, which happened in the eaftern church foon after the begin-i
ning of the third century, obliged great numbers of Cbrijlians to
feek for fhelter in that county of liberty ; who being for the moft
part of the Jacobite communion, that feft generally prevailed among
the Arabs 6 . The principal tribes that embraced Cbrijlianity , were
Mamyar , Gbajfan, Rabid, Pagblab, Bahra, Ponuch i, part of the tribes
of Pay and Kodda. , the inhabitants of Najran, and the Arabs of
Hira ®. As to the two laft, it may be obferved, that thofe of Najr&n
became Cbrijlians in the time of Dbu Nowds9-, and very probably,
if the ftory be true, were fome of thofe who were converted on the
following occafion, which happened about that time, or not long be-
fore. The Jews of Hamyar , challenged fome neighbouring Chri-
fixans, to a publick difputation, which was held fub dio for three days,
before the king and his nobility, and all the people; the difputants
being Gregentius , bifliop of Pefbra (which I take to be Dhafdr) for
the Cbrijlians, and Herbanus for the Jews. On the third day, Her*
bonus, to end the difpute, demanded that Jejus of Nazareth, if he
were really living; and in heavCn, and could hear the prayers of his
worfoippers, Ihould appear from heaven in their fight, and they would

o AlMoflatraf. * Chap. $ 0 / 3 See before p. io. & Baronii annal. ad fee. VI, 4 Chap. 8c.

u aV 7: c A k uJS W*P*» 49 - 7 AI Mollatraf. • V. Foe. Spec. p. 137. » Al

.Ian nab. apod Poc. Spec. p. 63. r 31

then

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

then believe on him ; the Jew. s crying out with one voice, Shew us
your Chrift, alas, and we will become Chriftians. Whereupon, after a
terrible Itorm of thunder and lightning, Jefus Chrift appeared in the
air, furrounded with rays of glory, walking on a purple cloud, hav-
ing a fword in his hand, and an ineftimable diadem on his head, and
fpake thefe words over the heads of the afifembly ; Behold I appear to
you m your fight, I, who was crucified by your fathers. After which the
cloud received him from their fight. The Chriftiam cried out Kyrie
ckefon, i ,e. Lord, have mercy upon us j but thejfmr were ftricken blind,
and recovered not, till they were all baptized

The Chriftiam at Hi/ a, received a great accelfion by feveral tribes,
who fled thither for refuge from the perfection of Dhu Noaads t Al
Nooman, furnamed Abu Kabus, king of Hira, who was flain a few
months before Mohammed's birth, profefled himfelf a Chriftian on
the following occalion. This prince, in a drunken fit, ordered two of
his intimate companions, who overcome with liquor had fallen
afleep, to be buried alive. When he came to himfelf, he was ex-
treamly concerned at what he had done, and to expiate his crime,
not only raifed a monument to the memory of his friends, but fee a-
part two days, one of which he called the unfortunate , and the other
the fortunate day j making it a perpetual rule to himfelf, that who-
ever met him on the former day, Ihouid be fin in, and his blood
fprinkled on the monument, but he that met him on the other day,
fiiould be difmified in lafety, with magnificent gifts. On one of thole
unfortunate days, there came before him accidentally an Arab, of
the tribe of l" ay, who had once entertained this king, when fatigued
with hunting, and feparated from his attendants. The king, who
could neither diilharge him, contrary to the order of the day, nor
put him to death, again# the laws of hofpitality, which the A-
rahiam rdigjoufly oblerve, propokd, as an expedient, to give the un-
happy man a year s refpite, and to fend him home with rich gifts,
for the fupport of his family, on condition, that he found a lurety
for his returning at the years end, to fuller death. One of the
prince’s court, out of compaffion, offered himfelf as his lijrety, and
the Arak was difebargsd, When the laft flay of the term came,
and no news of the Arab, the king, not at all difpleafed to lave
his hoft’s life, ordered the furety to prepare himfelf to die. Thofe
who were by reprefented to the king, that the day was not yet ex-
pired, and therefore he ought to have patience till the evening: bur

- V Gregentii difput. cam Herbano JwUqfe.

ia

25

%

24

*fhe Preliminary Difcoutfe. Sad. I.

'in the middle of their difcourfe, the Arab appeared. The king, ad-
miring the man’s generality, in offering himfelf to certain death,
which he might have avoided by letting his furety fufier, afked him,
•what was his motive for his fo doing ? to which he anfwered, that
he had been taught to ad in that manner, by the religion he profef-
fed; and al Nootnan demanding what religion that was, he replied
the Chrifian. Whereupon the king defiring to have the dodrineS of
Chrijiianity explained to him, was baptized, he and his fubjeds j and
not only pardoned the man and his furety, butabolifhed his barbarous
cuftom This prince, however, was not the firft king of Hira who
embraced Chrijiianity j al Mondar , his grandfather, having alfb pro-
feffed the fame faith, and built large churches in his capital \

Since Chrijiianity had made fo great a progrefs in Arabia , we may
confequently fuppofe they had bifhops in feveral parts, for the more
orderly governing of the churches. A bifhop of Dhafdr has been
already named, and we are told that Najrdn was alfo a bifhop ’s fee *.
The Jacobites (of which fed we have obferved the Arabs generally
were) had two bifhops of the Arabs fubjed: to their Mafridn, or me-
tropolitan of the eajl\ one was called the bijhop of the Arabs abfolute-
ly, whofe feat was for the moft part at Akula , which fome authors
make the fame with Cufa+, others a different town near Baghdad T .
The other had the title of bijhop of the Scenite Arabs, of the tribe of
Hbaalab in Hira, or Hirta , as the Syrians call it, whofe feat was in
that city. The Nejioriam had but one bifhop, who prefided over both
thefe dioceffes, of Hira and Akula , and was immediately fubjed to
their patriarch 6 .

Thefe were the principal religions which obtained among the an-
cient Arabs', but as freedom of thought was the natural confequettCe
of their political liberty and independance, fome of them fell into
other different opinions. The Koreijh , in particular, were infeded
with Zendicifm ?, an error fuppofed to have very near affinity with
that of the Sadducees among the Jews , and, perhaps, not greatly dif-
ferent from DeiJ’m-, for there were feveral of that tribe, even before
the time of Mohammed, who worfhipped one god, and were free
from idolatry *, and yet embraced none of the other religions of the
country.

J lf A1 -j^ eidanl ’ J & T 1 Ahm n d Ebn Yufef > a P ud Poc - S P ec - p- 7*‘ 2 AbulfHi ap. ennd. p. 74.

jfc“£ 0*: ffittsssassja, .

The

Sed. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe. 25

The Arabians before Mohammed were, as they yet are, divided into The J-
two forts, thofe who dwell in cities, and towns, and thofe who dwell
in tents. The former lived by tillage, the cultivation of palm trees, of life,
breeding and feeding of cattle, and the exercife of all forts of trades *,
particularly merchandizing*, wherein they were very eminent, even
in the time of Jacob. The tribe of Koreijh were much addidled to
commerce, and Mohammed, in his younger years, was brought up to
the lame bufinefs ; it being cuflomary for the Arabians to exercife the
fame trade that their parents did ’. The Arabs who dwelt in tents,
employed themfelves in pafturage, and fometimes in pillaging of paf-
fengers ; they lived chiefly on the milk and flelh of camels •, they of-
ten changed their habitations, as the convenience of water and of
pafture for their cattle invited them, flaying in a place no longer
than that lolled, and then removing in fearch of other 4 . They
generally wintered in Irak , and the confines of Syria. This way of
life, is what the greater part of Ifmael'% pofterity have ufed, as more
agreeable to the temper and way of life of their father ; and is fo well
defcribed by a late author *, that I cannot do better than refer the
reader to his account of them.

The Arabic language is undoubtedly one of the moll ancient in Theirlan
the world, and arofe foon after, if not at, the confufion of Babel.

There were foveral dialects of it, very different from each other : the accom-
moft remarkable were that fpoken by the tribe of Hamyar and the P ,i<h '
other genuine Arabs , and that of the Koreijh. The Hamyar itic yTbe-
feems to have approached nearer to the purity of the Syriac , than fo*®
the dialed of any other tribe ; for the Arabs acknowledge their fa- bmmti '
ther Yarab to have been the firft, whofe tongue deviated from the Syriac
(which was his mother tongue, and is almoft generally acknowledged
by the Asiatics to be the moll ancient) to the Arabic. The dialedt
of the Koreijh is ufually termed the pure Arabic, or, as rhe Koran,
which is written in this dialect, calls it, the perjpicuous and clear A-
rabic ; perhaps, lays Dr. Pocock, becaufe Ifmael, their father, brought
the Arabic he had learned of the Jorbamites nearer to the original
Hebrew. But the politenefs and elegance of the dialeit of the Ko-
reijh, is rather to be attributed to their having the cullody of the
Caaba, and dwelling in Mecca , the centre of Arabia , as well more
remote from intercourfe with foreigners, who might corrupt their

* Thefe feem to be the fame whom Mr. La Roque calls Moors. Voy. dans la PaleHine, p. no.
a See Prideaux'% life of Mahomet , p. 6 , 3 Strabo. 1 . 1 6. p. 1 1 29. 4 Idem , ibid,

p. 1084. * La Roque, Voyage dana la Paleftine , p. 109* &c.

e

lan-

26

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. I.

language, as frequented by the Arabs from the country all around,
not only on a religious account, but alfo for the compofing of their
differences, from whofe difcourfe and verfes, they took whatever
words or phrafes they judged more pure and elegant ; by which means,
the beauties of the whole tongue became cransfufed into this dialed:.
The Arabians are full of the commendations of their language, and
not altogether without reafon; for it claims the preference of moil
others in many refpe&s, as being very harmonious and expreffive, and
withal fo copious, that they fay, no man, without infpiration, can be
perfect mailer of it, in its utmoft extent ; and yet they tell us, at the
lame time, that the greatell part of it has been loft} which will
not be thought ftrange, if we confider, how late the art of writing
was pra&ifed among them. For tho’ it was known to Job ‘, their
countryman, and alfo to the Hamyarites (who ufed a perplexed cha-
racter called al Mofnad, , wherein the letters were not diftinCtly fe-
parate, and which was neither publickly taught, nor fuffered to be ufed
without permiffion firft obtained) many centuries before Mohammed^
as appears from lbme ancient monuments, faid to be remaining in
their character j yet the other Arabs , and thofe of Mecca in particu-
lar, were, for many ages, perfectly ignorant of it, unlefs fuch of
them as were Jews, or Chrijlians 1 .* Mordmer Ebn Morra of Anbat>
a city of Irdk, who lived not many years before Mohammed, was the
inventor of the Arabic character, which Bnjhar the Kendian is faid
to have learned from thofe of Anbar , and to have introduced at
Mecca , but a little while before the inftitution of Mdhammcdijm.
Thefe letters of Mordmer were different from the Hamyarific •, and
tho’ they were very rude, being either the feme with, or very much
like the Cufic which character is ftill found in inferiptions, and
fome ancient books, yet they were thofe which the Arabs ufed for
many years, the Koran icfelf being at firft written therein; for the
beautiful character they now ufe, was firft formed from the Cufic by
EbnMoklab, Wazir (or Vifir) to the Khali fs al Moktader, al Kdher, and
al Radi, who lived about 300 years after Mohammed, and was brought
to great perfection, by Ali Ebn Bowdb \ who flourilhed in the follow-
ing century, and whofe name is yet famous among them, on that ac-
count ; yet, it is faid, the per fen who compleatcd it, and reduced it

‘ Jobxw. 23,24. * See Pndeatx s life of Mahomet, p. 29, 30. 3 A fpecimen- of the Cufic

«hnafler may tb* feen jn Sr. 7. Chardin s travels, vol III. p. j ,0. 4 £bn Khalican. Vet others at-
tribute the honour of the invention of this character to Eln Moklab's brother, Abdallah al Hafani

to

Se&. I. The Preliminary Difiourfe .

to its prefent form, was Yakut al Mojldfemi, fecretary to al Mojldfem ,
the laft of the Kbattfs of the family of Abbas y for which reafon,
he was furnamed al Kbattat y or the jcribe.

The accompliftiments the Arabs valued themfelves chiefly on,
were, i. Eloquence, and a perfect Ikill in their own tongue ; 2. Ex-
pertnefs in the ufe of arms, and horfemanfhip ; and, 3. Hoipitality *.
The hr ft they exercifed themfelves in, by composing of orations, and
poems. Their orations were of two forts, metrical, or profaic, the
one being compared to pearls ftrung, and the other to loofe ones.
They endeavour’d to excel in both, and whoever was able, in an a f-
fembly, to perfuade the people to a great enterprize, or difluade them
from a dangerous one, or gave them other wholefome advice, was
honoured with the title of Kbateb, or orator y which is now given to
the Mohammedan preachers. They purfued a method very different
from that of the Greek and Roman orators; their fentences being
like loofe gems, without conneftion, fo that this fort of compofition
ftruck the audience chiefly by the fulnefs of the periods, the elegance
of the expreffion, and the acutenefs of the proverbial fayings; and
fo perfuaded were they of their excelling in this way, that they would
not allow any nation to underftand the art of fpeaking in public, ex-
cept themfelves, and the Perfiam ; which laft were reckoned much
inferiour in that refpeft to the Arabians \ Poetry was in fo great
efteem among them, that it was a great accompl ifhmen t, and a proof
of ingenuous extraction, to be able to exprefs one’s felf in verfe
with eafo and elegance, on any extraordinary occurrence, and
even in their common difcourfe, they made frequent applications of
celebrated paifages of their famous poets. In their poems were pre-
ferved the diftinCtion of defeents, the rights of tribes, the memory
of great actions, and the propriety of their language ; for which rea-
fons an excellent poet reflected an honour on his tribe, fo that as
foon as any one began to be admired for his performances of this
kind in a tribe, the other tribes fern publickly to congratulate them
on the occation, and themfelves made entertainments, at which the
women affifted, dreft in their nuptial ornaments, tinging to the found
of timbrels the happinefs of their tribe, who had now one to protect
their honour, to preferve their genealogies and the purity of their
language, and to tranfmit their actions to pofterity ? ; for this was all
performed by their poems, to which they were folely obliged for
their knowledge and i aft ruCtions, moral and (Economical, and to which

* Poc. Oral, ante Carmen Togralp. 10. a> ?oc. Spec. 16*. 3 £bn RaJhik, apod Poc.

■Spec. 160.

they

e 2

28

! The Preliminary Difcourfe. Seft. I.

they had recourfe, as to an oracle, in all doubts and differences No
wonder then, that a public congratulation was made on this account,
which honour they yet were fo far from making cheap, that they
never did it but on one of thefe three occafions, which were reckoned
great points of felicity ; viz. on the birth of a boy, the rife of a
poet, and the fall of a foal of generous breed. To keep up an emu-
lation among their poets, the tribes had, once a year, a general aflem-
bly at Ocadh % a place famous on this account, and where they kept
a weekly mart or fair, which was held on our funday >. This annual
meeting lafted a whole month, during which time they employed thetn-
felves, not only in trading, but in repeating their poetical compofi-
tions, contending and vying with each other for the prize; whence
the place, it is faid, took its name +. The poems that were judged
to excel, were laid up in their king’s treafuries, as were the feven
celebrated poems, thence called al Moallakat , rather than from their
being hung up on the Caaba , which honour they alfo had by pub-
lic order, being written on Egyptian filk, and in letters of gold ;
for which reafon they had alfo the name of al Modbahabat, or the
golden verfes f .

The fair and aflembly at Ocadh were fupprefled by Mohammed, in
whofe time, and for fome years after, poetry feems to have been in
fome degree negle&ed by the Arabs, who were then employed in
their conquefts; which being compleated, and rhemfelves at peace,
not only this ftudy was revived s , but almoft all forts of learning
were encouraged and greatly improved hy them. This interruption
however occafioned the lofs of moft of their ancient pieces of poetry,
which were then chiefly preferved by memory; the ufe of writing
being rare among them, in their time of ignorance \ Tho’ the Arabs
were fo early acquainted with poetry, they did not at firft ufe to write
poems of a juft length, but only exprefled themfelves in verfe occa-
fionally ; nor was their profody digefted into rules, till fome time af-
ter Mohammed for this Was done, as it is faid, by al Kfjalit Ah-
med alFardhUi , who lived in the reign of the KhalifHarunal Rajhtd 9 .

confirms this by a JJory .of a Grammarian, named Abu Jarfar, who fitting by the* Jfijfar or j SHE*
near m > year when the Nilt did not rife to its uM Jjejght, fo That a famine wa » appro-

hended and d.Vidmg a piece of poetry into its pats or feet, to famine them bythe rule* of at
fome who paffed by, not underftandmg him, imagined he was uttering a charm to hinder the rife of
the river, and pulhed him info the water, where he loft his life. » V. Clcricum de Profod

The

Se£t. I. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

The exercife of arms and horfemanfhip they were in a manner
obliged to prattife and encourage, by reafon of the independance
of their tribes, whofe frequent jarrings made wars almoft continual j
and they chiefly ended their difputes in field battles ; it being an ufual
faying among them, that God had bellowed four peculiar things on
the Arabs, that their turbands ftiould be to them inftead of diadems,
their tents inftead of walls and houfes, their fwords inftead of in-
trenchments, and their poems inftead of written laws

Hofpitality was fo habitual to them, and fo much efteemed, that
the examples of this kind among them exceed whatever can be pro-
duced from other nations. Hatem of the tribe of Tay % and Hafn of
that of Fezdrab ?, were particularly famous on this account ; and
the contrary vice was fo much in contempt, that a certain poet up-
braids the inhabitants of Wafet, as with the greateft reproach, that
none of their men had the heart to give, nor their women to deny \

Nor were the Arabs lefs propenfe to liberality after the coming of
Mohammed , than their anceftors had been. I could produce many
remarkable inftances of this commendable quality among them T , but
fhall content myfelf with the following. Three men were difputing
in the court of the Caaba, which was the moil liberal perfbn among the
Arabs. One gave the preference to Abdallah , the fon of Jaafar
the uncle of Mohammed ; another to Kais Ebn Saad Ebn Obddah ; and
the third gave it to Ardbab of the tribe of Aws. After much debate,
one that was prefent, to end the difpute, propofed that each of them
fhould go to his friend, and afk his affiftance; that they might fee
what every one gave, and form a judgment accordingly. This was
agreed to ; and Abdallah’s friend going to him, found him with his
foot in the flirrup, juft mounting his camel for a journey, and thus
accofted him j Son of the uncle of the apojlle of God, 1 am tra-
velling and in necejfify. Upon which Abdallah alighted, and bid
him take the camel with all that was upon her, but defired him not
to part with a fword which happened to be fixed to the faddle, be-
caufe it had belonged to Alt , the fon of Abutdleb . So he took the
camel, and found on her feme vefts of filk, and 4000 pieces of gold ;
but the thing of greateft value was the fword. The fecond went to
Kais Ebn Saad, whofe fervant told him that his maftef was alleepj
and defired to know his bufinefs. The friend anfwered that he came

1 Pocockj in calce Notar. ad Carmen Tograi. % V. Gentii Notas in Gnliftan Sheikh Sadi,
p. 486, &c. 1 * 3 Poc. Spec. p. 48. 4 Ebn al Hobcirah, apud Poc. in Not. ad Carmen Tograi* p<

107 < Several may be Found in D' Herb clot's Bibl. Orient, particularly in the aiticlea.of Hafi*

the fon of Aliy Maan, FadbcJ , and Ebn Thlqa*

3 °

The Preliminary Dljcourje. Se£t. I.

to a Ik Kati s afiidance; being in want on the road. Whereupon the
fervant faid, that he had rather fupply his necefiity, than wake his
mafter ; and gave him a purfe of 7000 pieces of gold, alluring him
that it was all the money then in the houfe. He alfo directed him
to go to thofe who had the charge of the camels, with a certain
token, and take a camel, and a Have, and return home with them.
When Kais awoke, and his fervant informed him of what he had
done, he gave him his freedom, and afked him why he did not call him,
for, fays he, I would have given him more. The third man went
to Arabah, and met him coming out of his houfe, in order to go to
prayers, and leaning on two Haves, becaufe his eye-fight failed him.
The friend no fooner made known his cafe, but Arabah let go the
(laves, and clapping his hands together, loudly lamented his misfor-
tune, in having no money, but defired him to take the two Haves ;
which the man refufed to do, till Arabah proteded that if he would
not accept of them, he gave them their liberty ; and leaving the
Haves, groped his way along by the walk On the return of the ad-
venturers, judgment was unanimoufly, and with great juflicc, given
by all who were prefenc, that Arabah was the mod generous of the three.

Nor were thefe the only good qualities of the Arabs ; they are
-commended by the ancients for being mod exadfc to their words *,
and refpedful to their kindred \ And they have always been cefo,
brated for their quicknefs of apprehenfion and penetration, and the
vivacity of their wit ; efpecially thofe of the defart

As the Arabs had their excellencies, fo have they, like other na-
tions, their defeats and vices. Their own writers acknowledge rhg t
they have a natural difpofition to war, bloodfhed, cruelty, and rapine;
being fo much addi&ed to bear malice, that they fcarce ever forget
an old grudge : which vindi&ive temper, fome phyficians fay, is oc-
cafioned by their frequent feeding on camels flefh (the ordinary
diet of the Arabs of the defart, who are therefore obferved to be
mod inclined to thefe vices) that creature being mod malicious and
tenacious of anger which account fuggeds a good reafon for a di-
dindtion of meats.

The frequent robberies committed by thefe people on merchants
and travellers, have rendred the name of an Arab zXmoft infamous
in Europe } this they are fenfible of, and endeavour to excufe them-
felves by alledging the hard ufage of their father Ifmael, who being

1 Herodot. 1 . 3. c. S. * Strabo, L 1 6 . p. 1 120,
flroc. Spec. p. 87, Boduit, Hkrowjic. 1 . a. c, *.

3 V. D’Herbel, Cibl. Orient, p. iziZ

V.

turned

Se<5l. I. The "Preliminary Difcourfe,

turned out of doors by Abraham , had the open plains and defarts
given him by G o d for his patrimony, with permiffion to take what-
ever he could find there. And on this account, they think they may,
with a fafe confidence, indemnify themfelves, as well as they can,
not only on the poflerity of Ifaac, but alfo on every body elfe ; al-
ways fuppofing a fort of kindred between themfelves and thofe they
plunder. And in relating their adventures of this kind, they think it
fufficient to change the expreffion, and inftead of I robbed a man of
Jueh or fucb a thing, to fay, 1 gained it \ We mull not however imagine
that they are the lefs honeft For this among themfelves, or towards
thofe whom they receive as friends ; on the contrary, the ftrittefl
probity is obferved in their camp, where every thing is open, and!
nothing ever known to be floln *.

The fciences the Arabians chiefly cultivated before Mohammedifm ,,
were three j that of their genealogies and hiftory, fuch a knowledge
of the liars as to foretel the changes of weather, and the interpre-
tation of dreams *. They ufed to value themfelves exceffively on ac-
count of the nobility of their families, and fo many difputes hap-
pened on that occafion, that it is no wonder if they took great pains
in fettling their defeents. What knowledge they had of the liars,
was gathered from long experience, and not from any regular lludy,
or allronomical rules 4 . The Arabians , as the Indians alfo did, chief-
ly applied themfelves to obferve the fixed liars, contrary to other na-
tions, whofe obfervations were almoll confined to the planets ; and
they foretold their effedts from their influences, not their nature j and
hence, as has been faid, arofe the difference of the idolatry of the
Greeks and Chaldeans , who chiefly worfhipped the planets, and that
©f the Indians , who worfhipped the fixed liars. The liars or aflerilms
they moll ufually foretold the weather by, were thofe they call An-*
ivd, or the houfes of the moon. Thefe are 28 in number, and di-
vide the zodiac into as many parts, thro’ one of which the moon
pafles every night j as fome of them fet in the morning, others rife
©ppofite to them, which happens every 13th night, and from their
rijfing and fetting, the Arabs r by long experience, obferved what
changes happened in the air* and at length, as has been laid, came
to aferibe divine poweF to them ; faying, that their rain was from
fuch or fuch a liar: which expreffion Mohammed condemned, and

1 Voyage dans la Paleft. p. 220* 8 cc. 2 Ibid. p. 213. See. 3 A 1 ShahreJhmi, apud Pocock
Orat. ubi fop. p. 9. 8 c Spec. 164. 4 Abulfarag. p. 161. * V. Hyde* in not, ad Tabulas ftellar.

filar. Ulugh Bcigh, p. 5*

ais*

32

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. I.

-abfolutely forbad them to ufc it in the old fenfe ; unlefs they meant
no more by it, than that God had fo ordered the feafons, that when
the moon was in fuch or fuch a manfion or houfe, or at the riling
or fetting of fuch and fuch a liar, it Ihould rain or be windy, hot
or cold

The old Arabians therefore feem to have made no farther progrefs in a-
ftronomy, which fcience they afterwards cultivated with lo much fuccels
and applaufe, than to obferve the influence of the liars on the wea-
ther, and to give them names; and this it was obvious for them to
do, by reafon of their paftoral way of life, lying night and day in
the open plains. The names they impofed on the liars, generally
alluded to cattle and flocks, and they were fo nice in dillinguilhing
them, that no language has fo many names of liars and allerifms as
the Arabic i for tho‘ they have fince borrowed the names of feveral
conllellations from the Greeks , yet the far greater part are of their
own growth, and much more ancient, particularly thofe of the more
confpicuous liars, difperfed in feveral conllellations, and thofe of the
•Jefler conllellations which are contained within the greater, and were
not obferved or named by the Greeks \

Thus have I given the moll fuccindt account I have been able, of
the Hate of the ancient Arabians before Mohammed^ or, to ufe their
expreffion, in the time of ignorance. I lhall now proceed briefly to
confider the Hate of religion in the eall, and of the two great em-
pires which divided that part of the world between them, at the
time of Mohammed s fetting up for a prophet, and what were the
(Conducive circumllances and accidents that favoured his luccefs.

I

* y. Poc. Spec. p. 163, &c. » V. Hyde ubi fop. p. 4.

Sec-

Sea. II.

The Preliminary Difceurfe „

33

Section II.

Of the State of Chriftianity, particularly of the Eaflern.
Churches , and of Judaifm, at the Time of Mohammed j
appearance : and of the methods taken by him for the

ejiablijhing his Religion , and the circumjlances which
concurred thereto.

I F we look into the ecclefiaftical hiftorians even from the third Ti«eor-
century, we fhall find the Chrijiian world to have then had a ^cbrifti-
very different afpedt from what fome authors have reprefented ; **ity »ft«r
and fo far from being indued with adtive graces, zeal, and devotion,
and eftablifhed within itfelf with purity of dodtrine, union, and firm
profeffion of the faith ', that on the contrary, what by the ambition
of the clergy, and what by drawing the abftrufeft niceties into con-
troverfy, and dividing and fubdividing about them into endlefs fchifms
and contentions, they had fo deftroyed that peace, love, and charity
from among them, which the Gofpel was given to promote; and in-
ftead thereof continually provoked each other to that malice, ran-
cour, and every evil work; that they had loft the whole fubftance
of their religion, while they thus eagerly contended for their own
imaginations concerning it ; and in a manner, quite drove Chrijlianity
out of the world, by thofe very controverfies in which they difputed
with each other about it \ In thefe dark ages it was, that moft of
thofe fuperftitions and corruptions we now juftly abhor in the church
of Rme, were not only broached, but eftablifhed ; which gave great
advantages to the propagation of Mohammedifm. The worfhip of
faints and images, in particular, was then arrived at fuch a fcandalous
pitch, that it even furpafled whatever is now pra&ifed among the
Rmanijis

After the Nicenc council, the eaftern church was engaged in per-
petual controverfies, and torn to pieces by the difputes of the j/iriam y
Sabetlians , Nejloriam , and Eutycbians: the herefies, of the t ^ laft
of which have been fhewn to have confifted more in the words and
form of expreffion, than in the doctrines themfelves +; and were ra-

1 Ricaut's State of the Ottoman empire, pa 87. * Prideaux's pref. to his fife ©f Mabcmet. 3 V.

La vie de Mahomed, par Boulainvillicri, p. 219, &c. 4 V. Simon, Hiil. Crit. dc la creance, &c.

des nations du Levant.

f ther

34

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Scd. II V

ther the pretences, than real motives, of thofe frequent councils, to
and from which the contentious prelates were continually riding poft,
that they might bring every thing to their own will and pleafure «.
And to fupport themfelves by dependants and bribery, the clergy in
any credit at court undertook the protection of fome officer in the
army, under the colour of which juftice was publickly fold, and all
corruption encouraged.

In the weftern church Damafus and Urficinm carried their contefts at
Rome for theepifcopal feat fo high, that they came to open violence and
murder, which Viventius the governour not being able to fupprefe, he
retired into the country, and left them to themfelves, till Damafus pre-
vailed. It isfaidthatonthisoccafion, in the church of Sicintntif, tnere
were no lefs than 137 found killed in one day. And no wonder they
were fo fond of thefe feats, when they became by that means enrich-
ed by the prefents of matrons, and went abroad in their chariots and
fedans in great ftate, feafting fumptuoufly even beyond the luxury of
princes, quite contrary to the way of living of the country prelaw*,
who alone feemed to have fome temperance and tnodefty left*..

Thefe diffenfions were greatly owing to the emperors, and parti-
cularly to Conjiantius, who confounding the pure and fimple Chrijiim
religion with anile fuperftitions, and perplexing it with intricate ques-
tions, inftead of reconciling different opinions, excited many difputss,
which he fomented as they proceeded, with infinite altercations* I,
This grew worfe in the time of JuJlinian, who not to be behind
the bifhops of the fifth and fixth centuries in zeal, thought it no crime
to condemn to death a man of a different perfuafion from his own \
This corruption of dodtrine and morals in the princes and clergy,
was neceffarily followed by a general depravity of the people thofe
of all conditions making it their foie bufinefs to gtet money by any
means, and then to fquander it away when they had got it, in luxury
and debauchery 6 .

N The he- But, to be more particular as to the nation we are now writing
mon'/the of > ^ abia was of old-famous for herefies 7 j which might be in fome
Arabian meafure attributed to the liberty and independency of the tribes.
ChriHuni. Some of the Cbrifiiam of that nation believed the foul died with the

> »n Marcellia. 1 . 2 1- V. etura Eufeb. Hilt. Ecclef. 1. 8. c. i. Sozom. 1. 1. c. 14, &c. Hi-
kr. tUpic. Sever, in Hift. Sacr. p. 112, &c. * Ammiaa Marcellin. lib: 27. * Idem 1‘ 21

* Procop. in Aneed. p. fo: 1 Sec an inftance of the wickcdbcfs of the >

when they were under the terror of the Saracens^ in Ockleya Hill of the Same.

Boulainvill. Vic deMahoxn, ubi fup. 7 V. Sozomcn. Hill. Ecdef. 1 . i. c. 16
Mbifupra. * * J

body,

’ Cbrijlisn army, even
V, I. p. * V.
i 17. fiulpic. Sever.

35

Sedl. II. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

body, and was to be raifed again with it at the laft day * : thefe Ori-
gin is faid to have convinced \ Among the Arabs it was that the
herefies of Ebion , Beryllus, and the Nazar team 3 , and aifo that of the
Collyridiam were broached, or at leaft propagated j the latter introduced
the Virgin Mary for God, or worfhipped Iter as fuch, offering her a
fort of twilled cake called collyris, whence the fedt had its name \

This notion of the divinity of the Virgin Mary was alfo believed
by fome at the council of Nice, who faid there were two gods befides
the Father, viz. Cbriji and the Virgin Mary , and were thence named
Mariamites *. Others imagined her to be exempt from humanity, and
deified; which goes but little beyond the Popijh fuperftition in cal-
ling her the complement of the Trinity, as if it were imperfedfc without
her. This foolifh imagination is juftly condemned in the Koran 6 as
Idolatrous, and gave a handle to Mohammed to attack the Trinity itfelf.

Other fedts there were of many denominations within the borders
of Arabia , which took refuge there from the profcriptions of the im-
perial edidts; feveral of whofe notions Mohammed incorporated with
his religion, as may be obferved hereafter.

Tho' the Jews were an inconfiderable and defpifed people in other The
parts of the world, yet in Arabia , whither many of them fled from
the deflrudtion of Jerufaletn , they grew very powerful, feveral tribes
and princes embracing their religion ; which made Mohammed at firfl
fhew great regard to them, adopting many of their opinions, doc-
trines, and cilftoms ; thereby to draw them, if ppffible, into his in-
tereft. But that people, agreeably to their wonted obflinacy, were
fo far from being his profelytes, that they were fome of the bittereft
enemies he had, waging continual war with him, fo that their reduc-
tion coll him infinite trouble and danger, and at laft his life. This
averfion of theirs created at length as great a one in him to them,
fo that he ufed them for the latter part of his life, much worfe than
he did the Chrijlians, and frequently exclaims againfl them in his Koran ;
his followers to this day obferve the fame difference between them and
the Chrijlians , treating the former as the moll abjedt and contempti-
ble people on earth.

It has been obferved by a great politician 7 , that it is impoffible a he weak
perfon fhould make himfelf a prince, and found a ftate w ut op-
portunities. If the diftradted flate of Religion favoured the u ms of ^ in d
Mohammed on that fide, the weaknefs of the Roman and Perjian mo-

1 Eufcb. Hift. Ecclef. 1 . 6. c. 33. a Idem, ibid. c. 37. 3 E pipkin, de Haerefi. I. j. Her. era P ,re *

4b. * Idem, ibid. 1. 3. Haeref. 75, 79. 1 Elmacin. Eutycb. 6 Cap. y. 7 Machi-

avelli, Princ. c.6. p. 19.

f 2 narchies

3 &

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. II.

narchies might flatter him with no lefs hopes in any attempt on thofe
once formidable empires, either of which, had they been in their full
vigour, rauft have cruflied Mobammedifm in its birth $ whereas nothing
nourifhed it more than the fuccefs the Arabiam met with in their en-
terprizes againft thofe powers, which fuccefs they failed not to attri-
bute to their new religion and the divine affiftance thereof.

The Roman empire declined apace after Gmjiantine, whole fuccef-
fors were for the generality remarkable for their ill qualities; efpe-
cially cowardice and cruelty. By Mohammed's time, the weftcrn half
of the empire was overrun by the Goths-, and the eaftem fo reduced
by the Hum on the one fide, and the Persians on the other, that it
was not in a capacity of Hemming the violence of a powerful inva-
fion. The emperor Maurice paid tribute to the Khagdn or king of the
Huns ; and after Phocas had murdered his mafter, fuch lamentable ha-
vock there was among the foldiers, that when Heradius came, not
above feven years after, to muftcr the array there were only two fol-
diers left alive, of all thofe who had born arms when Pbocas firft
ufurped the empire. And tho’ Heraclius was a prince of admirable
courage and conduit, and had done what poffibly could be done to
reftore the difeipline of the army, and had had great fuccefs againll
the Perjtans, fo as to drive them not only out of his own dominical
but even out of part of their own j yet ftill the very vitals of the empire
feemed to be mortally wounded ; that there could no time have hap-
pened, more fatal to the empire, or more favourable to the enter-
prizes of the Arabs-, who feem to have been raifed up on purpole
by God, to be a Icourge to the Chriftian church, for not living an-
f^erably to that moft holy religion which they had received

The general luxury and degeneraay of manners into which the
Grecians were funk, alfo contributed not a little to the enervating their
forces, which were ftill further drained by thofe two great deftroyers,
monachifm and perfecutjon.

The PerfianS had alfo been in a declining condition for fome time
before Mohammed , occafioned chiefly by their inteftine broils and dif-
en fions ; great part of which arofe from the devililh dodtrines of
Man, d Mazditk. The opinions of the former are tolerably well
kno he latter lived in the reign of Khofru Kobdd , and pretended
him If a , rophet fent from God to preach a community of women
and poflemons, fince all men were brothers and defeended from the
fame common parents. This he imagined would put an end to all

1 Otkleys Hill, of the fanuttu, Vol. I. p. 19, £jV.

feuds

37

Sedt II. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

feuds and quarrels among men, which generally arofe on account of
one of the two. Kobdd himfelf embraced the opinions of this im-
poftor, to whom he gave leave, according to his new dottrine, to lie
with the queen his wife j which permiffion AnuJIrirwdn, his fon, with
much difficulty prevailed -on Mazdak not to make ufe of. Thefe
feCts had certainly been the immediate ruin of the Perjtan empire,
had not Anujbirwdn, as foon as he fucceeded his father, put Mazdak
to death with all his followers, and the Manicbeans alfo, reftoring the
• ancient Magian religion ».

In the reign of this prince, defervedly furnamedthe "Juft, Mohammed
was born. He was the laft king of Perjia who deferved the throne,
which after him was almoft perpetually contended for, till fub verted
by the Arabs. His fon Hormuz loft the love of his fubjedfcs by his ex-
ceffive cruelty ; having had his eyes put out by his wife’s brothers,
he was obliged to refign the crown to his fon Kbofrd Par viz, who at
the inftigation of Bahram Chubln had rebelled againft him, and was
afterwards ftrangled. Parviz was foon obliged to quit the throne to
Bahram ; but obtaining fuccours of the Greek emperor Maurice, he re-
covered the crown : yet towards the latter end of a long reign he
grew fb tyrannical and hateful to his fubje&s, that they held private
correfpondcnce with the Arabs ; and he was at length depofed, im-
prifoned, and flain by his fbn Shir&veh \ After Parviz no lefs than
fix princes poffefied the throne in lefs than fix years. Thefe domeftic
broils efle&ually brought ruin upon the Pcrfuim ; for tho’ they did
rather by the weaknels of the Greeks , than their own force, ravage
Syria and fack Jerusalem and Damafcus under Kbofru Parviz and,
while the Arabs were divided and independent, had fome power in
the province of Taman, where they fet up the four laft kings before
Mohammed ; yet when attacked by the Greeks under Heracms, they
not only loft their new conquefts, but part Of their own dominions,
and no fooner were the Arabs united by Mohammcdifm, than they beat
them in every battle, and in a few years totally fubdued them.

As thefe empires were weak and declining, fo Arabia , at Moham- The flou-
med’s fitting up, was ftrong and flourilhing ; having been peopled a
the expence of the Grecian empire, whence the violent proc dings ox a.
the domineering fedts forced many to fiek tefuge in a free c ttv , as
Arabia then war, where they who could not enjoy tranquil! ; / and
their confcience at home, found a fecure retreat. The Arabians were
not only a populous nation, but unacquainted with the luxury and

1 V. Poc. Spec p. 70. 2 V- Teixdrj, HcIjcmbcs delos Reyes de Perfia, p in-

deli-

0

3 8 The Preliminary Dtfcourfe. Sect. II.

•delicacies of the Greeks and Perfians, and inured to hardfhips of all
forts j living in a moft parfimonious manner, feldom eating any flefli,
drinking no wine, and fitting on the ground. Their political govern-
ment was alfo fuch as favoured the defigns of Mohammed ; for the
divifion and independency of their tribes was fo neceflary to the firft
propagation of his religion, and the foundation of his power, that it
would have been fcarce poffible for him to have effected either, had
the Arabs been united in one fociety. But when they had embraced
his religion, the confequent union of their tribes was no lefs necefia-
ry and conducive to their future conquefts and grandeur.

This pofture of public affairs in the eaftern world, both as to its
religious and political ftate, it is more than probable Mohammed was
well acquainted with ; he having had fufficient opportunities of in-
forming himfelf in thofe particulars, in his travels as a merchant in
his younger years : and tho’ it is not to be fuppofed his views at firft'
were fo extenfive as afterwards, when they were enlarged by his good
fortune, yet he might reafonably promife himfelf fuccefs in his firft at-
tempts from thence. As he was a man of extraordinary parts and ad-
drefs, he knew how to make the bell of every incident, and turn
what might feem dangerous to another, to his own advantage.

Mobam- Mohammed came into the world under fome difadvantages, which
^-he foon furmounted. His father Abdallah was a younger fon ' of
for^Ke fet Abd almotalleb, and dying very young and in his father’s life time,
up for a left his widow and infant fon in very mean circumftances, his whole
?nd P hU 5 fiance confifting but of five camels and one Ethiopian fhe-flave a .
motives Abd' almotalleb was therefore obliged to take care of his grandchild
for fo do- Mohammed, which he not only did during his life, but at his death
injoined his eldeft fon Abu 'Taleb , who was brother to Abdallah by the
fame mother, to provide for him for the future ; which he very af-
fectionately did, and inftrudted him in the bufinefs of a merchant
which he followed ; and to rhat end he took him with him into Syria
when he was but thirteen, and afterward recommended him to Kha-
dtjah a noble and rich widow for her fadtor, in whofe fervice he be-
haved himfelf fo well, that by making him her hufband the foon raifed
him to an equality with the richeft in Mecca.

Afte; he began by this advantageous match to live at his eafe, it
was that he formed the fcheme of eftablilhing a new religion, or, as

He was not lus eldeft fon, as Dr. Pride tux tells us; whofe reflexions built on that foundation
®V# “"W fi«» ! (fee his life of Mabemet, p. 9.) nor yet his youngeft fon. as M. de Boulain-
< Vl ' d L ' Mihomtned p iga. &c.) fuppofes ; for Hamza and al Abbas were bothyounget
than Aba auajb, 2 Abuifeda, Vit. Moham, p, z. jo

he

%

39

Se&. II. The Preliminary Difcourfe .

he exprefied it, of replanting the only true and ancient one, profefled
by Adam, Noah, Abraham, Mofes, Jefus, and all the prophets by
deftroying the grofs idolatry into which the generality of his coun-
trymen had fallen, and weeding out the corruptions and fuperftitions
which the latter Jews and Cbrtfiians had, as he thought, introduced
into their religion, and reducing it to its original purity, which con-
lifted chiefly in the worfliip of one only God.

Whether this was the effedt of enthufiaim, or only a defign to raife
himfelf to the fupreme government of his country, I will not pretend
to determine. The latter is the general opinion of Cbrijiian writers,
who agree that ambition, and the delire of fatisfying his fenfuality
were the motives of his undertaking. It may be fo; yet his firft
views perhaps were not fo interefted. His original defign of bringing
the pagan Arabs to the knowledge of the true God, was certainly
noble, and highly to be commended ; for I cannot poflibly fubferibe to
the aftertion of a late learned writer % that he made that nation ex-
change their idolatry for another religion altogether as bad. Moham-
med. was no doubt fully fatisfied in his confcience of the truth of his
grand point, the unity of God, which was what he chiefly attended
to ; all his other dodtrines and inftitutions being rather accidental, and
unavoidable, than premeditated and defigned.

Since then Mohammed was certainly himfelf perfuaded of his grand
article of faith, which in his opinion was violated by all the reft of
the world j not only by the idolaters, but by the Chrijtians, as well
thofe who rightly worfhipped Jefus as God, as thofe who fu-
perftitioufly adored die Virgin Mary, faints, and images ; and alfo
by the Jews, who are accufed in the Koran of taking Ezra for
the fon of G o d 3 } it is eafy to conceive that he might think it
a meritorious work to refeue the world from fuch ignorance and fu-
perftition ; and by degrees, with the help of a warm imagination,
which an Arab feldom wants +, to fuppofe himfelf deftined by pro-
vidence for the effecting that great reformation. And this fancy of
his might take ftill deeper root in his mind, during the folltude he
thereupon affedted, ufually retiring for a month in the year to a cave
in mount Hara near Meed a. One thing which may be probably urg-
ed againft the enthufiafm of this prophet of the Arabs, is the wife
condudt and great prudence he all along {hewed in purfuing his de-
fign, which feem inconfiftent with the wild notions of a hot brained
rdigionift. But tho’ all enthufiafts or madmen do not behave with

1 See Koran, c. 2 . * Pridtaux'i life of Mabcmt, p. 76. 3 Koran, c. o. * See Caftub.

ef Eathufttfin, p. 148*

the

*

"The Preliminary Difcoutfe. Se&, II.

the fame gravity and circumfpeftion that he did, yet he will not be
the firft inftance, by feveral, of a perfon who has been out of the
way only quoad 'hoc, and in all other refpedts adled with the greateft
decency and precaution.

The terrible deftrudtion of the eaftern churches, once fo gloriotr*
and flourifliing, by the fudden fpreading of Mohammedifm, and the
great fucceffes of its profeffors againft the Ghrijlians, neceffarily in-
fpire a horror of that religion in thofe to whom it has been fo fatal ;
ahd no wonder if they endeavour to fet the charader of its founder,
and its dodrines, in the moft infamous light. But the damage done
by Mohammed to Chrijlianity feems to have been rather owing to his
ignorance than malice ; for his great misfortune was, his not having
a competent knowledge of the real and pure dodrines of the Cbrijlian
religion, which was in his time fo abominably corrupted, that it is
hot furprizirtg if he went too far, and refolved to abolifh what he
might think incapable of reformation.

It is fcarce to be doubted but that Mohammed had a violent defire
of being reckoned an extraordinary perfon, which he could attain to
by no means more effedually, than by pretending to be a meflengef
fent from God, to inform mankind of his will. This might be at
firft his utmoft ambition, and had his fellow citizens treated him
lefs injorioufly, and not obliged him by their perfections to feek
refuge Jelfewhere, and to take up arms againft them in his own de-
fence, he had perhaps continued a private perfon, and contented
himfelf with the veneration and refped due to his prophetical office ;
but being once got at the head of a little army, and encouraged; by
fuccefs, it is no wonder if he raifed his thoughts to attempt what
had never before entred into his imagination.

That Mohammed was, as the Arabs are by complexion *, a great
lover of women, we are affined by his own confeffion ; and he is
eonftantly upbraided with it by the controverfial writers, who fail
not to urge the number of women with whom he had to do, as a de-
monftrative argument of his fenfuality, which they think fufficiently
prove him to have been a wicked man, and confequently an impoftof.
But it mull be confidered, that polygamy, tho’ it be forbidden by
the Chrijiian religion, was in Mohammed's time frequently pra&ifed in
Arabia and other parrs of the eaft, and was not counted an immora-
lity, nor was a man the \Vorfe efteemed on that account; for which rea-
son Mohammed permitted the plurality of wives, with certain limita-
tions, among bus own followers, who argue for the lawfulnefs of it

1 Ammian. Marcell, 1 . 14, c. 4,

from

Se&. II. The Preliminary Difccurfe. 41

from feveral reafons, and particularly from the examples of perfon*
allowed on all hands to have been good men ; fome of whom have
been honoured with the divine correipondence. The feveral laws re-
lating to marriages and divorces, and the peculiar priviledges granted
to Mohammed in his Koran, were almoft all taken by him from the
JewiJh decifions, as will appear hereafter ; and therefore he might
think thofe inftitutions the more juft and reafonable, as he found them
pra&ifed or approved by the profeffors of a religion, which was con-
fefledly of divine original.

But whatever were his motives, Mohammed had certainly the per- Of
fonal qualifications which were neceffary to accomplifli his undertak-
ing. The Mohammedan authors are exceffive in their commendations tion
of him, and fpeak much of his religious and moral virtues ; as his
piety, veracity, juftice, liberality, clemency, humility, and abftinence.

His charity, in particular, they fay, was 10 confpicuous, that he had
feldom any money in his houfe, keeping no more for his own ule
than was juft fufficient to maintain his family ; and he frequently fpared
even fome part of his own provifions to fupply the neceffities of the poor ;
fo that before the year’s end he had generally little or nothing left 1 :

God, fays al Bokhari, offered him the keys of the trea/uret of the earth,
but he would not accept them. Tho’ the elogies of thefe writers are
juftly to be fufpedted of partiality, yet thus much, I think, may be
inferred from thence, that for an Arab who had been educated in
Paganifm , and had but a very imperfect knowledge of his duty, he
was a man of at leaft tolerable morals, and not l'uch a monfter of
wickednefs as he is ufually reprefented. And indeed, it is fcarce poffi-
ble to conceive, that a wretch of fo profligate a character fhould ever
have fucceeded in an enterprize of this nature; a little hypocrify and
faving of appearances, at leaft, muft have been abfolutely neceffary ;
and the fincericy of his intentions is what I pretend not to inquire
into. *

He had indifputably a very piercing and fagacious wit, and was
thoroughly verfed in all the arts of infinuation \ The eaftern hifto-
rians defcribe him to have been a man of an excellent judgment, and
a happy memory; and thefe natural parts were improved bra great
experience and knowledge of men, and the obfervations he had made
in his travels. They fay he was a perfon of few words, c n equal
chearful temper, pleafant and familiar in convention, of inoffen-

1 V Abo’lfeda Vit. Moham. p. 144, See. a V. Prid. life of Mebtmtt, p. ioj

g

five

42

The Preliminary Difeourfe. Sedl. II.

five behaviour towards his friends, and of great condefcenfion towards
his inferiors To all which were joined a comely agreeable perfoft*
and a polite addrefs; accomplishments of no fmall Service in prevent-
ing thofe in his favour, whom he attempted to perfuade.

As to acquired learning, it is confefled he had none at all ; having
had no other education than what was cuftomary in his tribe* who
negledted, and perhaps defpifed, what we call literature} efteeqijng
no language in comparifon with their own, their fk.il! in which they
gained by life and not by books, and contenting tbemfelves with im-
proving their private experience by committing to memory fuch paf-
fages of their poets as they judged might be of ufe to them in life.
This defeat was fo far from being prejudicial or putting a flop to his
defign, that he made the greateft ufe of it} infilling that the writ-
ings which he produced as revelations from God, could not poflibly
be a forgery of his own } becaufe it was not conceivable that a per*
fon who could neither write nor read fhould be able to compofe a
book of fuch excellent doctrine, and in fo elegant a fide } and ther©-
by obviating an obje&ion that might have carried a great deal of
weight \ And for this reafon his followers, inftead of being a foamed
of their mailer’s ignorance, glory in it, as an evident proof of his
divine million, and fcruple not to call him (as he is indeed called in
the Koran itfelf 3) the illiterate prophet.

The firft The fcheme of religion which Mohammed framed, and the defign
anc * art f u l contrivance of thofe written revelations (as he pretended
to- them to be) which compofe his Koran , (hall be the fubjedk of the
Mooting following fe&ions : I fhall therefore in the remainder of this relate,
of Wspro- as briefly as poflible, the Heps he took towards the effecting of his
enterprize, and the accidents which concurred to his fuecefs therein.

Before he made any attempt abroad, he rightly judged that it was
neceflary for him to begin by the converfion of his own houfehoMi
Having therefore retired with his family, asb he had done feveral times
before, to the above-mentioned cave in mount Hara, he there opened
the fecret of his million to his wife Kbadijdh ; and acquainted her
that die angel Gabriel had juft before appeared to him, and told him
that he was appointed the apoftle of God: he alfo repeated to her
a pailkge 4 which he pretended had been revealed to him by the mi-
niftry of the angel, with thofe other circumftances of this firft ap-
pearance, which are related by the Mohammedan writer?. Khadijdh

A ’ Y- Abolfcd. ubi fop. » See Rordn chap. zg. Prid. life of Mab. pjTtg, *<r.
Thia paflage is generally agreed to be the firft five verfes of the 96th chapter.

3 Chap. 7

re-

43

Se£t. II. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

received the news with, great joy 1 ; fwearing by him in whofe hands
her foul was, that fhe trufted he would be the prophet of his nation:
and immediately communicated what fhe had heard to her coulin
Warakab Ebn Natofal, who being a Cbriflian could write in the He-
brew character, and was tolerably well verfed in the fcriptures * ;
and he as readily came into her opinion, alluring her that the fame
angel who had formerly appeared unto Mc/es, was now font to Mo-
bammed K This firft overture the prophet made in the month of
Ramadan , in the fortieth year of his age, which is therefore ufually
called the year of his mimon.

Encouraged by fo good a beginning, he refolved to proceed, and
try for fome time what he could do by private perfuafion, not daring
to hazard the whole affair by expofing it too fuddenly to the publick.
He foon made profelytes of thofe under his own roof, viz. his wife
Khadtjah , his fervant Zeid Ebn Hdretha {tp whom he gave his free-
dom 4 on that occafion, which afterwards became a rule to his fol-
lowers,) and his coulin and pupil AJi. , the fon of Abu ‘Tdleb, tho’
then very young: but this lalt, making no account of the other two,
ufed to ftile himfelf the jirji of believers. The next perfon Moham-
med applied to was Abdallah Ebn Abi Kobdfa, furnamed Abu Beer ,
a man of great authority among the Koreijh , and one whole intereft
he well knew would be of great fervice to him; as it foon appeared:
for Abu Beer being gained over, prevailed alfo on Othm. in Eon Affdn,
Abd alrahmdn Ebn Amf, Saad Ebti Abi Wakkds, al Zobeir Ebn al
Aw dm, and Telba Ebn Obeid ailab, all principal men in Mecca, to
follow his example. Thefe men were the fix chief companions, who,
with a few more, were converted in the fpace of three years ; at the
end of which Mohammed having, as he hoped, a fufficient intereft to
fupport him, made his million no longer a fecret, but gave out that
Goo had commanded him to admonifh his near relations s , and in
order to do it with more convenience and profpeCt of fuccefs, he di-
rected Alt to prepare an entertainment, and invite the Ions and def-
cendants of Abd almotalleb, intending then to open his mind to them ;
this was done, and about forty of them came, but AbuLaheb , one of
his uncles, making the company break up before Mohammed had an
opportunity of fpeaking. Obliged him to give them a fecond invita-

1 I do not remember to have read in any eaftem author, that Kbadtjab ever reje&ed her husband's
pretences as delufions, or fhfpe&ed him of any import urc. Yet fee Priitattx's life of Mi p
n, &c. a V. Poc. Spec. p. 157. J V. Abulfed. Vit. Moham. p. 1 6. Where the learned
tranflator has mirtaken the meaning of thispaflage. 4 For he was his purchafed flave, as Abut'
feda exprefly tells us; and not his coufw german, as Mr. de Boulainvill . aflerts (Vie de Mah. p. 273.)

Koran c . 74. See the notes thereon.

g 2 tion

44

The Ko-
reijb op-
pofe him.

And per-
icr ntc his
i Flowers.

! The Preliminary Difcourfi. Sed. II.

tion the next day; and when they were come, he made them the following
fpeech ; “ / know no man in all Arabia who can offer bis kindred a
“ more excellent thing than I now do you : I offer you happinefs doth in
“ this life, and in that which is to corner God Almighty hath com-
“ manded me to call you unto him ; IVho therefore among you will be
“ affijling to me herein, and become my brother , and my vice-germ t ?'
All of them hefitating, and declining the matter, Alt at length iwfe
up, and declared that he would be his aflKftant ; and vehemendy
tnreatned thofe who fhould oppofe him. Mohammed upon this em-
braced Ali with great demonftrations of affeCtion, and defired all who
were prefent to hearken to and obey him, as his deputy ; at which
the company broke out into great laughter, telling Abu Haleb, that
he mull now pay obedience to his fon.

This repulfe however was fo far from difeouraging Mohammed , that
he began to preach in public to the people, who heard him with
fome patience, till he came to upbraid them with the idolatry, obfti-
nacy, and perverfenefs of themfelves and their fathers; which fo
highly provoked them, that they declared themfeLves his enemies,
and would foon have procured his ruin, had he not been protedte^
by Abu Haleb. The chief of the Koreijh warmly follicited this per-
fon to defert his nephew, making frequent remonftrances againft the
innovations he was attempting \ which proving ineffectual, they at
length threatned him with an open rupture, if he did not prevail on
Mohammed to defift. At this Abu Haleb was fo far moved that he
earneftly diffuaded his nephew from purfuing the affair any far then,
reprefen ting the great danger he and his friends muft otherwife run.
But Mohammed was not to be intimidated, telling his uncle plainly,
that if they fet the fun againjl him on his right hand, and the . moon on
his left, he would not leave his enterprise : and Abu Haleb feeing him
fo firmly refolved to proceed, ufed no further arguments, but pro^
mifed to ftand by him againft all his enemies

The Koreijh finding they could prevail neither by fair word* nor
menaces, tried what they could do by force, and ill treatment ; ufing
Mohammed ’ s followers fo very injurioufly that it was not fafe for them
to continue at Mecca any longer; whereupon Mohammed gave 1 ■ e
to fuch of them as had not friends to pioteCl them, to feek for re-
fuge elfewhere. And accordingly in the fifth year of the prophet’s
miffion, fixceen of them, four of whom were women, fled iota <8-
tbiopia ; and among them Othman Ebn Affdn and his wife Raktab, Mo -

1 Abulfeda ubi fupra*

kamme&H

4-5

SeCt. II. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

bammed ’s daughter. This was the firft flight? but afterwards feveral

others followed them, retiring one after another, to the number of
eighty three men and eighteen women, befides children *. Thefe
refugees were kindly received by the Najdjht % or king of Ethiopia ,
who refufed to deliver them up to thole whom the Koreijh fent to
demand them, and as the Arab writers unanimoufly atceft, even pro-
fefled the Mohammedan religion.

In the fixth year of his million 5 Mohammed had the plealure of
feeing his party ftrengthened by the convcrlion of his uncle Hamza , a
man of great valour and merit, and of Omar Ebn al Kbattab , a per-
fon highly efteemed, and once a violent oppofer of the prophet.
As persecution generally advances rather than obftruCfcs the fpreading
of a religion, Jjlamifm made fo great a progrefs among the Arab
tribes, that the Koreijh, to fupprefs it effectually, if poflible, in the
feventh year of Mohammed s million *, made a folemn league or co-
venant againft the Hajhemites and the family of Abdalmotalleb , en-
gaging themfelves to contract no marriages with any of them, and
to have no communication with them ? and to give it the greater
fanCtion, reduced it into writing, and laid it up in the Caaba. Up-
on this the tribe became divided into two factions ? and the family
of Hajhem all repaired to Abu Taleb, as their head? except only
Abd'al Uzza, furnamed Abu Labeb , who out of his inveterate
hatred to his nephew and his doCtrine, went over to the oppofite
party, whole chief was Abu Sofdn Ebn Harb, of the family of
Ommeya.

Thie families continued thus at variance for three years? but in
the tenth year of his miflioo, Mohammed told his uncle Abu Taleb ,
that God had manifeftly Ihewed his difapprobation of the league
which the Koreijh had made againft them, by fending a worm to eat
out every word of the inftrument, except the name of God. Of this ac-
cident Mohammed had probably fome private notice ? for Abu Taieb went
immediate!) to the Koreijh and acquainted them with it ? offering, if it
proved falfe, to deliver his nephew up to them ? but in cafe it were
true, he infilled that they ought to lay afide their animofity, and an-
nuli tfte league they had made againft the Hajhemttes. To this they
acquiefced, and going to inl'peCt the writing, to their great aftonifh-
ment found it to be as Abu Taleb had faid ? and the league was
thereupon declared void.

1 Idem* Ebn Shohnah. 2 Dr. Pridtaux feems to teke this word for a proper name, but it h
t.nly the tUk the Arah gfae to *very king of this country. See his life of Mab . p. 55. * Ebn

BhohmL 4 AI Janinbi

Iii

ir

46 The Preliminary Difcourfe. Seft. II,

Moham- J n the fame year Abu Taleb died, at the age of above fourfcorej
wfunde and 11 * s tbe general opinion that he died an infidel, tho’ others fay
Abu Tale by that when he was at the point of death he embraced Mohammcdifm t
wife* 1 ** and P roduoe fo me paflages out of his poetical compofitions, to con-
firm their affertion. About a month, or as fome write, three days after
the death of this great benefa&or and patron, Mohammed had the
additional mortification to lofe his wife Kbadtjah, who had fo ge~
neroufly made his fortune. For which reafon this year is called the
year of mourning

The Ke- On the death of thefe two perfons the Koreijh began to be more
»oretrou- trou blefome than ever to their prophet, and efpecially fome who had
ilefome. formerly been his intimate friends j infomuch that he found himfelf
obliged to feek for Ihelter elfewhere, and firft pitched upon Ta) v/,
about fixty miles eaft from Mecca , for the place of his retreat.
Thither therefore he went, accompanied by his fervant Zeid, and ap-
plied himfelf to two of the chief of the tribe of ‘Tbaktf who were
the inhabitants of that place ; but they received him very coldly.
However he ftaied there a month; and fome of the more confiderae
and better fort of men, treated him with a little refped: but the
flaves and inferior people at length rofe againft him, and bringing
him to the wall of the city, obliged him to depart, and return to
Mecca ; where he put himfelf under the protection of al Motdam
Ebn Adi 1 .

Sixinha- This repulfe greatly difcouraged his followers: however Mohan*
bitant* of med was not wanting to himfelf, but boldly continued to preach to
rontened. P ublic afiemblies at the pilgrimage, and gained feveral profe-
lytes, and among them fix of the inhabitants of Tathreb of the Jew-
tjh tribe of Khazraj, Who on their return home failed not to fpeak
much in commendation of their new religion, and exhorted their
fellow-citizens to embrace the fame.

Moham- In the twelfth year of his million it was that Mohammed gave out
-IT 3 that he had made his ni g ht journey from Mecca to Jo ufalem and
made a thence to heaven \ fo much fpoken of by all that write of him.
dvcrn 10 Dr ’ Prt<itaux 4 thinks he invented it either to anfwer the expectation*
of thofe who demanded fome miracle as a proof of his mifiioi , or
elfe, by pretenditig to have converted with God, to eftablilh the
authority of whatever he Ihould think fit to leave behind by way of
oral tradition, and make his fayings to ferve the fame purpofe as the

1 Abulfed. p. 28. Ebn Shohnah* 2 Ebn Shohnah,
Koran. 3 4 Life of Mahomet, p. 41, 51, &c.

3 See the notes on the 17th chap, of the

oral

47

Se&. II. The Prelimmary Difcourfe.

oral law of the Jews. But I do not find that Mohammed himfelf ever expedf-
ed fo great a regard fliould be paid to his fayings, as his followers have
fince done ; and feeing he all along difclaimed any power of perform-
ing miracles, it fee ms rather to have been a fetch of policy to raife
his reputation, by pretending to have actually converfed with God
in heaven, as Mojes had heretofore done in the mount, and to have
received feveral inftitutions immediately from him, whereas before he
contented himfelf with perfuading them that he had all by the mi-
niftry of Gabriel.

However this ftory feemed fo abfurd and incredible, that feveral
of his followers left him upon it, and it had probably ruined the
whole defign, had not Abu Beer vouched for his veracity, and de-
clared that if Mohammed affirmed it to be true, he verily believed the
whole. Which happy incident not only retrieved the prophet’s cre-
dit, but increafed it to fuch a degree, that he was fecure of being a-
ble to make his difciples fwallow whatever he pleafed to impofe on
them for the future. And I am apt to think this fidtion, notwith-
ftandxng its extravagance, was one of the molt artful contrivances
Mohammed ever put in pradtile, and what chiefly contributed to the
railing of his reputation to that great height to which it afterwards
arrived.

In this year, called by the Moloammedans the accepted year, twelve Twelve
men of Tathreb or Medina , of whom ten were of the tribe of Khaz- ^ nof
raj , and the other two of that of Aws, came to Mecca, and took take an
an oath of fidelity to Mohammed at al Akaba, a hill on the north of °“£ to
that city. This oath was called the womens oath ; not that any wo- 'mL*
men were prefent at this time, but becaufe a man was not thereby
obliged to take up arms in defence of Mohammed or his religion ; it
being the lame oath that was afterwards exadted of the women, the
form of which we have in the Karan ', and is to this effedt; viz.

That they fhould renounce all idolatry ; that they fliould not fleal,
nor commit fornication^ nor kill their children (as the pagan Arabs
ufed to do when they apprehended they fliould not be able to main-
tain them *) nor forge calumnies ; and that they fliould obey the pro-
phet in all things that were reafonable. When they had folemnly
engaged to do all this, Mohammed fent one of his dhciples, named
Mqfab Ebn Omair home with them, to inftrudt them more fully in
the grounds and ceremonies of his new religion.

s Op. 6o 1 V Kor-n, c* (\

/

48 The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&\ II.

The pro- Mafab, being arrived at Medina, by the afliftance of thofe who
A&wjw-had been formerly converted, gained levcral profelytes, particulafly
di/m at Ofaid Ebn Hodeira, a chief man of the city, and Saad Ebn Moddv,
Medina. p r j nce 0 f t he tribe of Aws-, Mohammedijm fpreading fo faft, that
there was fcarce a houfe wherein there were not fome who had em-
braced it.

Several of The next year, being the thirteenth of Mohammed’s million, Maf-
that city returned to Mecca, accompanied by feventy three men and two women

dehtyto of Medina who had profeffed JJlamifm, befides fome others who were, as
Mobam- yet unbelievers. On their arrival, they immediately fent to Moham-
med ’ med, and offered him their afliftance, of which he was now in great
need, for his adverfaries were by this time grown fo powerful in
Mecca , that he could not ftay there much longer without imminent
danger. Wherefore he accepted their propofal, and met them one
night, by appointment, at al Akaba above mentioned, attended by
his uncle al Abbas, who, tho’ he was not then a believer, wiftied his
nephew well, and made a fpeech to thofe of Medina , wherein he
told them, that as Mohammed was obliged to quit his native city, and
feek an afylum elfewhere, and they had offered him their protection,
they would do well not to deceive him; and that if they were not
firmly refolved to defend and not betray him, they had better declare
their minds, and let him provide for his fafety in fome other manner.
Upon their protefting their fincerity, Mohammed fwore to be faithful
to them ; on condition that they fhould protert him againft all in-
fults, as heartily as they would their own wives and families. They
then afked him what recompenfe they were to expert if they fhould
happen to be killed in his quarrel} he anfwered, paradife. Where-
upon they pledged their faith to him, and fo returned home after
Mohammed had chofen twelve out of their number, who were to have
the fame authority among them as the twelve apoftles of Chrijt had
among his difciples \

SndTto Hitherto Mohammed had propagated his religion by fair means, fo
have leave that the whole fuccefs of his enterprize before his flight to Medina,
himfdf nd muft be attributed to perfuafion only, and not to compulfion. For
,m e * before this fecond oath of fealty or inauguration at al Akaba , tie had
no permiffion to ufe any force at all , and in feveral place® of the
Koran, which he pretended were revealed during his ftay at Mecca,
he declares his bufinefs was only to preach and admonifh, that he
had no authority to compel any perfon to embrace his religion} and

1 .Abulfeda. Vit Moham. p. 40, &c. a Ebn Hhak.

that

49

Se6l. II. 7 ‘he Preliminary Difcourfe.

that whether people believed, or not, was none of his concern, but
belonged folely unto God. And he was fo far from allowing his
followers to ufe force, that he exhorted them to bear patiently thofe
injuries which were offered them on account of their faith; and
when perfecuted himfelf, chofe rather to quit the place of his birth
and retire to Medina , than to make any refiftance. But this great
paflivenefs and moderation feems entirely owing to his want of pow-
er, and the great fuperiority of his oppofers for the firft twelve years
of his miffion ; for no foofier was he enabled, by the afliftance of thofe
of Medina , to make head againfl his enemies, than he gave out, that
God had allowed him and his followers to defend themfelves againif
the infidels ; and at length as his forces increafed, he pretended to
have the divine leave even to attack them ; and to deftroy idolatry,
and fet up the true faith by the fword ; finding, by experience, that
his defigns would otherwife proceed very flowly, if they were not
utterly overthrown; and knowing on the other hand that innovators*
when they depend folely on their own ftrength, and can compel,
feldom run any rifque ; from whence, the politician obfeeves, it fol-
lows, that all the armed prophets have fucceeded, and the unarmed
ones have failed. Mofes] Cyrus, Tbqfeus, and Romulus would not have
been able to eftabli£h the obfervance of their inftitutions for any length
of time, had they not been armed The firft paffage of the Koran
which gave Mohammed the permiffion of defending himfelf by arms,
is faid to have been that in the twenty fecond chapter ; after which
a great number to the fame purpofe were revealed.

That Mohammed had a right to take up arms for his own defence
againft his unjuft perfecutors, may perhaps be allowed ; but whether
he ought afterwards to Have made ufe of that means for the efta-
blilhing of his religion is a queftion I will not here determine. How
far the fecular power may or ought to interpofe in affairs of this na-
ture, mankind are not agreed. The method of converting by the
fword, g es no very favourable idea of the faith which is fo pro-
pagated, and is d hallowed by every body in thofe of another reli-
gion, tho’ the fame perfons are willing to admit of it for the ad-
vancement of their own ; fuppofing that tho’ a falfe religion ought
not to be eftablilhed by authority, yet a true one may; and accord-
ingly force is almoft aa conftantly employed in thefe cafes by thofe
who have the power in their hands, as it is conftantly complained of
by thofe who fuffer the violence. It is certainly one of the moft

\

*

1 Machiavelli, Princ. c»6.

h

con-

50 "The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. II.

convincing proofs that Mohammedifm was no other than a human in-
vention, that it owed -its progrefs and eftablilhment almoft entirely
to the fword ; and it is one of the ftrongeft demonftrations of the
divine original of ChriJUanity , that it prevailed againft all the force
and powers of the world by the meer dint of its own truth, after
having ftood the affaults of all manner of persecutions, as well as o-
ther oppofitions, for three hundred years together, and at length made
the Roman emperors themfelves Submit thereto 1 j after whicn time
indeed this proof feems to fail, Cbriftianity £>eing then eftablifllcd
and Paganifm aboliflied by public authority, which has had great
influence in the propagation of the one and deftrudtion of the other
ever fince \ But to return.

Mobam- Mohammed having provided for the Security of his companions as
Mytes&y we ^ as h‘ s own > by the league offenfive and defenfive which he had
to Medi- now concluded with thofe of Medina , directed them to repair thither,
TV nd /.which they accordingly did} but himfelf with Abu Beer and Alt
confpLrc ftaid behind, having not yet received the divine permiffion, as he
to kill pretended, to leave Mecca. The Koreijh fearing the confequence of
him> this new alliance, began to think it abfolutely neceflary to prevent
. Mohammed’s efcape to Medina, and having held a council thereon, af-
ter Several milder expedients had been rejected, they came to a refip
lution that he Should be killed ; and agreed that a man Ihould be
chofen out of every tribe for the execution of this defign, and that
each man ftiould have a blow at him with his fword, that the guilt
of his blood might fall equally on all the tribes, to whofe united
power the Hajhemites were much inferior, and therefore durft not at-
tempt to revenge their kinfman’s death.

But he e- This confpiracy was fcarce formed when by fbme means or other

tea pcs, ] t came t 0 Mohammed’s knowledge, and h.e gave out that it was re-
vealed to him by the ajigel Gabriel, who had now ordered him to
retire to Medina. Whereupon} to amufe his enemies, he directed Alt
to lye down in his place and wrap himfelf- up in his green cloak,
which he did, and Mohammed efcaped mjraeukmfly, as they pretend ?,
to Abu Beer’s houfe, unperceiv’d by the confpirators, who had already
aflembled at the prophet’s door. They in the mean time, looking
thro’ the crevice and feeing AH, whom rhey took to be Mobam mat
himfelf, afleep, continued watching there till morning, when AH
arofe and they found themfelves deceived.

1 See Pridtaux'a Letter to the Dtlftt, p. zzo, Sec. » See Boyle' s Di£t Hilt. Art. Mahomet.
Rem. O, 3 See the notes to chap, 8, and 36.

From

<

1

Seel. II. The Preliminary Dijbmrfe. 51

From Abu Beer's houfe Mohammed and he went to a cave in mount And re-
c fhur, to the fouth eaft of Mecca , accompanied only by Amer Elm
Fobeirabf Abu Beer’s iervant, and Abdt allab Ebn Oreitah , an idolater,
whom they had hired for a guide. In this cave they lay hid three
days to avoid the fearch of their enemies, which they very narrowly
efcaped, and nor without the affiftance of more miracles than one ;
for fome fay that the Koreijh were ftruck with blindnefs, fo that they
could not find the cave ; others, that after Mohammed and his compa-
nions were got in, two pidgeons laid their eggs at the entrance, and
a fpider covered the mouth of the cave with her web % which made
them look no farther \ Abu Beer feeing the prophet in fuch immi-
nent danger became very forrowful, whereupon Mohammed comforted
him with thefe words, recorded in the Koran J, Be not grieved, for
God is with us. Their enemies being retired, they left the cave and
fet out for Medina , by a by-road, and having fortunately, or as the
Mohammedans tell us, miraculoufly, efcaped fome who were fent to
purfue them, arrived iafely at that city ; whither AH followed them
in three days, after he had fettled fome affairs at Mecca 4 .

The firft thing Mohammed did after his arrival at Medina , was to B “>| 1s 1
build a temple for his religious worfhip; and a houfe for himfelf,
which he did on a parcel of ground which had before fcrved to put there,
camels in, or as others tell us, for a burying ground, and belonged
to Saba/ and Soheil the fons of Amru , who were orphans f . This
adtion Dr. Prideaux exclaims againfl, re pre fen ting it as a flagrant in-
ftance of injuftice, for that, fays he, he violently difpoflelted thefe
poor orphans, the fons of an inferior artificer (whom the author he
quotes 6 calls a carpenter) of this ground, and fo founded the firft fa-
bric of his worfhip with the like wickednefs as he did his religion 7 .

But to fay nothing of the improbability that Mohammed fhould adt
in fo impolitic a manner at his firft coming, the Mohammedan writers
fet this affair in a quite different light ; one tells us that he treated
with the lads about the price of the ground, but they defired he
would accept it as a prefent 8 ; however, as hiftorians of good credit
aflure us, he adkually bought it and the money was paid by Abu

1 It is obfervable that the Jews have a like tradition concerning David, when he fled from Saul
into the cave; and the Targum paj^phrafes thefe words of the fecoitd verfe of Pfaltn Nil, (which
was compofed on occafion of that deliverance) I toil} pray before the moft high God thatterforfnetb
all things for me , in this manner ; J mill pray before the moft high God, who called a Jpiier to weave
a web far my fake in the mouth of the cave. * A 1 Beidawi in Kor. c. 9. V. lyHerbel. Bibl. Orient,
p. 445. 3 Cap. 9. 4 Abulfeda Vit Moh. p. 50, &c. Ebn Shohnah. 1 Abulfeda, ib. p.

5Z, 53. 6 Difputatio Chriftiani contra Saracen, c. 4. 7 frideasix'% life of Mabmet , p. cS.

8 Al pokhari in Sonna. 9 A 1 JannSbi.

h 2 Beer

52

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. II.

Beer \ Befides, had Mohammed accepted it as a prefent, the orphans
were in circumftances fufficient to have afforded it; for they were of
a very good family, of the tribe of Najjdr , one of the moll illuftrious
among the Arabs, and not the fons of a carpenter, as Dr. Prideaux’s
author writes, who took the word Najjdr, which fignifies a carpenter ,
for an appellative, whereas it is a proper name \

He makes Mohammed being fecurdy fettled at Medina , and able not only xo
on the * defend himfelf againft the infults of his enemies, but to attack them,
Kcreijb. began to fend out fmall parties to make reprifals on the Koreijh ; the
firft party confifting of no more than nine men, who intercepted and
plundered a caravan belonging to that tribe, and in the adtion took
two prifoners. But what eftablifhed his affairs very much, and was
the foundation on which he built all his fucceeding greatnefs, was the
gaining of the battle of Bedr, which was fought in the fecond year
of the Hejra, and is fo famous in the Mohammedan hiftory 3 . As my
defign is not to write the life of Mohammed, but only to deferibe the
manner in which he carried on his enterprizc, I fhall not enter into
any detail of his fubfequent battles and expeditions, which amounted
to a confiderable number. Some reckon no lefs than twenty feven
expeditions wherein Mohammed was perfonally prefent, in nine of
which he gave battle, belides feveral other expeditions. in which he
was not prefent 4 : fome of them however will be neceffarily taken
notice of in explaining feveral paffages of the Koran. His force# he
maintained partly by the contributions of his followers for this pur-
pofe, which he called by the name of Zacdt or alms, and the paying
of which he very artfully made one main article of his religion ; and
partly by ordering a fifth part of the plunder to be brought into the
public treafury for that purpofe, in which matter he ltkewife pretend-
ed to a£t by the divine direction.

And at In a few years by the fuccefs of his arms (notwithftanding he
colfclSdM fome times came off by the worft) he confiderably raifed his credit and
a truce power. In the fixth year of the Hejra he fet out with 1400 men to
with them vif lt the temple of Mecca , not with any intent of committing hoftilities,
years' 11 but in a peaceable manner. However when he came to al Hodeibiya,
which is fituate partly within and partly without the iaered territory]
the Koreijh fent to let him know that theyi would nut oermit him to
enter Mecca, unlefs he forced his way- whereupon he called his
troops about him, and they all took a folemn oath of fealty or ho-

1 Ahmed Ebn Yufef. » V. Gagnier, Not. in Abulfed. de Vito Moh. p e 2 c« 3 See
the notes on the Korop, chap. 3. p. 36. * V. Abulfed. Vit. Moh. p. 138.

(

«

mage

53

Seft. II. Th Preliminary Difcourfe.

mage to him, and he refolved to attack the city; but thofe of Mecca
fending Arwa F.bn S-Ltfud prince of the tribe of Thakff as their era-
baffador to defire eace, a truce was concluded between them for ten
years, by which any perfon was allowed to enter into league either
with Mohammed or with the Koreijh as he thought fit.

It may not be improper, to (hew th : inconceivable veneration and T ^*J reat
refpedl the Mohammedans by this time had for their prophet, to men- a e wn
tion the account which t le above-mentioned embaffador gave the him by
Ko'Vfjh, at his return, of their behaviour. He laid he had been at thej^£"
courts both of the Roman emperor and of the king of Perjia , and ne-
ver law any prince fo highly refpe&ed by his fubjedts as Mohammed
was by his companions; for whenever he made the ablution, in or-
der to fay his prayers, they ran and catched the water that he had
ufed ; and whenever he fpit, they immediately licked it up, and ga-
thered up every hair that fell from him with great fuperflition \

In the feventh year of the Hejra , Mohammed began to think of Mab«m-
propagating his religion beyond the bounds of Arabia, and fent
meffengers to the neighbouring princes with letters to invite them reign prin-
to Mohammediftn. Nor was this projedt without fome fuccefs. Kbofru
Parviz then king of Perjia received his letter with great difdain, and r ^jon^
tore it in a paflion, fending away the meffenger very abruptly ; which
when Mohammed heard, he faid, God Jhall tear his kingdom . And
foon after a meflenger came to Mohammed from Badban king of Ta-
man, who was a dependant on the Perjians % to acquaint him that
he had received orders to fend him to Kbofru. Mohammed put off
his anfwer till the next morning, and then told the meffenger it had
been revealed to him that night that Kbofru was flain by his fon Sbi-
ruyeb ; adding that he was well affured his new religion and empire
fhould rife to as great a height as that of Kbofru ; and therefore bid
him advife his mafter to embrace MobammediJ'm. The meffenger be-
ing returned, Badban in a few days received a letter from Shiruyeb
informing him of his father’s death, and ordering him to give the pro-
phet no further difturbance. Whereupon Badban and the Perjians with
him turned Mohammedans 3 .

The emperor Heraclius , as the Arabian hiftorians affure us, receiv-
ed Mohammed $ it . ter with great refpedt, laying it on his pillow, and
difmifled the bearer honourably. And fome pretend that he would
have profeffed this new faith, had he not been afraid of lofing his
crown +.

1 AbolfedaVit. Mob. p. 85. * See before p. 11. 3 Aulfeda Vit. Moh. p. 92, {sfc. 4 A1 Jannabi.

Mobam -

54

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&\ II.

Mohammed wrote to the fame effedt to the king of Ethiopia, tho’
he had been converted before, according to the Arab writers; and
to Mokawkas, governor of Egypt, who gave the meflenger a very
favourable reception, and fent feveral valuable prefents to Mohammed,
and among the reft two girls, one of which, named Mary *, became a
great favourite with him. He alfo fent letters of the like purport to
feveral Arab princes, particularly one to al HaretbEbnAbi Shamer x king
of Ghaffdn, who returning for anfwer that he would go to Moham-
tnedhimtelf, the prophet faid, May his kingdom per ip -, another to Hawdba
Ebn Ali, king of Tamama , who was a Chrijiian, and having fome time be-
fore profeft ljlamijm , had lately returned to his former faith ; this prince
fent back a very rough anfwer, upon which Mohammed curling him,
he died foon after ; and a third to al Mondar Ebn Sawa, king of Bahrein ,
who embraced Mohammedijm, and all the Arabs of that country fol-
lowed his example h
Mis forces The eighth year of the Hejra was a very fortunate year to Mo~
CwiA* hammed . In the beginning of it Khaled Ebn al Walid and Amru
Ebn al As, both excellent foldiers, the firft of whom afterwards con-
quered Syria and other countries, and the latter, Egypt, became pro-
felytes of Mohammedijm. And foon after the prophet fent 3000 men
againft the Grecian forces, to revenge the death of one of his em-
baffadors, who being fent to the governor of Bofra on the fame errand as
thofe who went to the above-mentioned princes, was flain by an Arab
of the tribe of Ghajfan at Muta, a town in the territory of Balkd in
Syria, about three days journey eaftward from Jerufalem, near which
town they encountred. The Grecians being vaftly (uperiorin number (for,
including the auxiliary Arabs, they had an army of 100000 men) the
Mohammedans were repulfed in the firft attack, and loft fucceffively
three of their generals, viz. Zeid Ebn Hdretba, Mohammed's freed-
man, Jaafar the fon of Abu Taleb, and Abdallah Ebn Rawdba -, but
Khaled Ebn al W alld fucceeding to the command overthrew the Greeks
with a great daughter, and brought away abundance of rich lpoil
on occafion of which action Mohammed gave him the honourable ti-
tle of Seif min foyuf Allah, one of the Jwords of God*.

He take* In this year alfo Mohammed took the cky of Mecca, the inhabitants
mcc *‘ whereof lxad broken the truce concluded on two years before. For
the tribe of Beer, who were confederates of the Koreifh, attacking

* It is however a different name from that of the Virgin Mary, which the Orientals alwav. write
Maryam or Miriam, whereas this is written MAriya. * This prince is omitted in Dr plotk'i M

thofe

*

55

Se£t. II. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

thofe of Khozdab , who were allies of Mohammed, killed feveral of
them, being fupported in the action by a party of the Koreijh them-
felves. The confluence of this violation was foon apprehended;
and Abu Sofian himfelf made a journey to Medina on purpofe to heal
the breach and renew the truce 1 * * * ; but in vain : for Mohammed ', glad
of this opportunity, refufed to fee him; whereupon he applied to
Abu Beer and Alt, but they giving him no anfwer, he was obliged
to return to Mecca as he came.

Mohammed immediately gave orders for preparations to be made,
that he might furprize the Meccans while they were unprovided to
receive him : in 1 little time he began his marcla thithef, and by that
time he came near the city his forces were increafed to 10,000 men.

Thofe of Mecca being not in a condition to defend themfelves againft fo
formidable an army, furrendered at diferetion ; and Abu Sojidn{a.\e.d. his
life, by turning Mohammedan. About twenty eight of the idolaters were
killed by a party under the command of Khaled-, but this happened
contrary to Mohammed s orders, who, when he entred the town, par-
doned all the Koreijh , on their fubmiflion, except only fix men and four
women, who were more obnoxious than ordinary (fome of them hav-
ing apoftatized) and were folemnly proferibed by the prophet himfelf ;
but of thefe no more than three men and one woman were put to
death, the reft obtaining pardon on their embracing Mobammedifm , and
one of the women making her efcape \

The remainder of this year Mohammed employed in deftroying the Mobm-
idols in and round about Mecca, fending feveral of his generals on
expedkions for that purpofe, and to invite the Arabs to IJlatmJ'm ; uaj. * °*
wherein it is no wonder if they now met with fuccefs.

The next year, being the ninth of the Hejra , the Mohammedans T1 > e
call the year of embqffies : for the Arabs had been hitherto expedting
the iffue of the war between Mohammed and the Koreijh ; but fo foon come in
as that tribe, the principal of the whole nation, and the genuine de - t0 hun -
feendants of Ijmael, whofe prerogatives none offered to dilpute, had
fubmitted, they were fatisfied that it was not in their power to op-
pofe Mohammed, and therefore began to come in to him in great
numbers, and to fend embaflies to make their fubmiflions to him, both
to Mecca whik he ftaid there, and alfo to Medina whither he re-
turned this year 5 . Among the reft five kings of the tribe of Ham-
yar pnofefied Mohammedifm, and fent embaffadors to notify the fame +.

1 This circumftance is a plamproof that the Korcijb had a&ually broken the truce, and that it was

not a meer pretence of Mobnmmei^ as Dr .Prukmx infinuates. life of Mab. p. 94. 2 V. A ulfed

ubi fup. c. 51, 52. 5 V. Gagnicr, Not. ad Abulfed. p. 121, * Abulfed. ubi fup t p. 12!?.

In

56 The Preliminary Difcourfe. Setft. Ill,

In the tenth year Ali was fent into Taman to propagate the Mo-
hammedan faith there, and as it is faid, converted the whole tribe of
Hamddn in one day. Their example was quickly followed by all the
inhabitants of that province; except only thofe of Najrdn , who, be-
ing CbrJJlians , chofe rather to pay tribute '.

Thus was Mohammedifm eftabliffied, and idolatry rooted out, eveff
in Mohammed's life time (for he died the next year) throughput all
Arabia, except only Tamama j where Mofeilama , who fet up alfo for
a prophet as Mohammed’s competitor, had a great party, and was not
reduced till the Khalifat of Abu Beer. And the Arabs being then
united in one faith and under one prince, found themfelves in a con-
dition of making thofe conquefts, which extended the Mohammedan
faith over fo great a part of the world.

1 Abulfeda, ib. p. 1 29.

Section hi.

Of the Koran itfelf the Peculiarities of that Booh', the
Manner of its being 'written and publifhed , and the, ge-
neral Defign of it.

The fcve
ral names
ef the Ko"
yin.

T HE word Koran , derived from the verb karaa, to read , fig-
nifies properly in Arabic , the reading , or rather, that zihich
ought to be read ; by which name the Mohammedans denote
not only the entire book or volume of the Koran , but alfo any parti-
cular chapter or fe&ion of it; juft as the Jews call either the whole
feripture, or any part of it, by the name of Kardb , or Mikra *, words
of the fame origin and import. Which obfervation feems to over-
throw the opinion of fome learned Arabians , who would have the
Koran fo named, becaufe it is a collection of the loofr barters or
fheets which compofe it ; the verb karaa fignifying alfo to gather or
coiled 1 : and may alfo, by the way, ferve as an an Aver to thofe who
obje<ft 3 that fhe Koran muft be a book forged at on< e t and could not
poflibly be revealed by parcels, at different times, d ring the courfe
of feveral Years, as the Mohammedans affirm ; becaufe the Koran is
often jnentioned, and called by that name, in the very book it felf.

1 T ^H n , imc " as at firil 3 iven t0 the Ptnutmb only, Nebem. viii. V. Simon. Hi't, Grit da
wcuz Teft 1 . . c. 9. J V. Erpea. Not. ad Hiil. jofeph. p. 3. 3 Marracc. dc Alcot. p, +i-

It

57

Se£t III. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

It may not be amifs to obferve, that the fyllable Al in the word Al-
koran is only the Arabic article, fignifying the ; and therefore ought
to be omitted when the Englijh article is prefixed.

Befide this peculiar name, the Koran is alfo honoured with feveral
appellations, common to other books of fcripture : as, al f'orkdn,
from the verb faraka , to divide or dijlinguijh ; not, as the Mohamme-
dan dodtors fay, becaufe thofe books are divided into chapters or Ac-
tions, or diftinguifti between good and evil; but in the fame notion
that the Jews ufe the word Perek , or Pirka, from the fame root, to
denote a fedtion or portion of fcripture It is alfo called al Mosbdf,
the volume , and al Kitdb, the book, by way of eminence, which an-
fwers to the Biblia of the Greeks ; and al Dhikr , the admonition , which
name is alfo given to the Pentateuch, and Gofpel.

The Koran is divided into 114 larger portions of very unequal Divifioa.
length, which we call chapters , but the Arabians Sowar , in the Angu-
lar Sura , a word rarely ufed on any other occafion, and properly fig-
nifying a row, order, or regular feries; as a courfe of bricks in build-
ing, or a rank of foldiers in an army ; and is the fame in ufe and
import with the Sura, or Tor a of the Jews , who alfo call the fifty
three fedlions of the Pentateuch Seddrim , a word of the fame fignifi-
cation *.

Thefe chapters are not in the manufcript copies diftinguiftied by
their numerical order, tho’ for the reader’s eafe they are numbred in
this edition, but by particular titles, which (except that of the firft,
which is the initial chapter, or introduction to the reft, and by the
old Latin tranflator not numbred among the chapters,) are taken
fometimes from a particular matter treated of, or perfon mentioned
therein ; but ufually from the firft word of note, exadtly in the fame
manner as the Jews have named their Seddrim: tho’ the word from
which fome chapters are denominated, be very far diftant, towards
the middle, or perhaps the end of the chapter; which feems ridicu-
lous. But the occafion of this feems to have been, that the verfe or
pafiage i 'em fuJ; word occurs, was, in point of time, revealed
and committed to writing before the other verfes of the fame chap-
ter which prec de it in order : and the title being given to the chap-
ter before it va* compleated, or the pafiages reduced to their prefent
order, the ve. from whence fuch title was taken, did not always

1 V. Gol. in append, ad Gram. Arab. Eipen. 175. A chapter or fub-divifion of the MaJJifhtb of
the Mijbna is alfo called Perch Maimon. praef. in Seder Zcraim, p. 57. 2 V. Gol. ubi fup. 177

jrach of the fix grand divifious of the Mijbna is alfo called Seder. Maimon. ubi fup, p. 55.

i hap-

58

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t. III.

happen to begin the chapter. Some chapters have two or more ti-
tles, occafioned by the difference of. the copies.

Some of the chapters having been revealed at Mecca , and others
at Medina , the noting this difference makes a part of the title: but
the reader will obferve that feveral of the chapters are faid to have
been revealed partly at Mecca , and partly at Medina , and as to others ;
it is yet a difpute among the commentators to which place of the two
they belong.

Every chapter is fubdivided into fmaller portions, of very unequal
length alfo, which we cuftomarily call verfes j but the Arabic word is
Aydt, the fame with the Hebrew Ototh, and fignifies figns, or wonders-,
fuch as are the fecrets of God, his attributes, works, judgments,
and ordinances, delivered in thofe verfes ; many of which have theif
particular titles alfo, impofed in the fame manner as thofe of the
chapters.

Notwithftanding this fub-divifion is common, and well known, yet
I have never yet feen any manufcript wherein the verfes are actually
numbred ; tho’ in fome copies the number of verfes in each chapter is
fet down after the title, which we have therefore added in the table of the
chapters. And the Mohammedans feem to have fom^ fcruple in making an
adtual diftin&ion in their copies, becaufe the chief difagreemenc be-
tween their feveral editions of the Koran , confifts in the divifion and
number of the verfes: and for this reafon I have not taken upon me
to make any fuch divifion.

Edition*. Having mentioned the different editions of the Koran , it may not
be amifs here to acquaint the reader, that there are feven principal
editions, if I may fo calf them, or ancient copies of that book; two
of which were publiftted and ufed at Medina , a third at Mecca, a
fourth at Cufa, a fifth at Bafra, a fixth in Syria, and a feventh cal-
led the common or vulgar edition. Of thefe editions, the firft of
Medina makes the whole number of the verfts 6000 ; the fecond and
fifth, 6214; the third, 6219-, the fourth, 6236; the fixth, 6226;
and the iaft, 6225. But they are all faid to contain the fame number
of words, namely 77639 1 ; and the fame number of letters* viz.
323015*: for the Mohammedans have in this alfo imitated the Jews, that
they have fuperffitfottfiy numbered the v<y-y words and inters of their
law } nay, they have taken the pains to compute, (how exadly I know not,)

” Of as others reekon thet*, 39464. keland. de rel. Moh. p. t;. * Or jetordimr tn .wnfW

fompotrtion, 3301 1 3. Ibid. V. Gol. ubi fiap. p. 178. D’HeriwIot* Bibl. Orient, p. 87. S

the

(

Se&. III. The Preliminary Difceurfe.

the number of times each particular letter of the alphabet is con-
tained in the Kordn

Befides thefe unequal divifions of chapter and vcrfe, the Moham-
medans have alfo divided their Kordn into fixty equal portions, which
they call Ahzdb, in the Angular Hi zb, each fubdivided into four equal
parts j which is alfo an imitation of the Jews, who have an ancient
divifionof their Mijhna into fixty portions called MaJJffltth x : but the
Kordn is more ufually divided into thirty fedtions only, named Ajzd,
from the lingular Joz, each of twice the length of the former, and
in the like manner fubdivided into four parts. Thefe divifions are
for the ufe of the readers of the Kordn in the royal temples, or in
the adjoining chapels where the emperors and great men are interred.
There are thirty of thefe readers belonging to every chapel, and each
reads his fedtion every day, fo that the whole Kordn is read over once
a day I have feen feveral copies divided in this manner, and bound
up in as many volumes; and have thought it proper to mark thefe
divifions in the margin of this tranflation by numeral letters.

Next after the title, at the head of every chapter, except only the
ninth, is prefixed the following folemn form, by the Mohammedans
called the Bifmillah, In the name of the most merciful God;
which form they conftantly place at the beginning of all their books
and writings in general, as a peculiar mark or diftinguifhing charadte-
riftic of their religion, it being counted a fort of impiety to omit it.
The Jews for the fame purpofe make ufe of the form. In the name
of the Lord, or. In the name of the great God: and the eafkem Cbri-
Jiians that of. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghojl. But I am apt to believe Mohammed really took this form,
as he did many other things, from the Perfian Magi, who ufed to be*,
gin their books in thefe words, Benam Yezddn bakhJheHjhgher daddr ;
that is. In the name of the mojl merciful ', juft God*.

This aufpicatory form, and alfo the titles of the chapters are by the
generality of the dodtors and commentators believed to be of divine
original, no lefs than the text itfelf; but the more moderate are of
opinion they are only human additions, and not the very word pf
God.

There are twenty nine chapters of the Kordn, which have this pe-
culiarity, that they begin with certain letters of the alphabet, fome
with a fingle one, others with more. Thefe letters the Mohammedans

1 V. Reland, de Relig. Moh. p. 25. 2 V. Gol. ubi fup. p. 178. Maimon. pnef. in Seder Ze-

raim, p. 57. 1 * 3 Y. Smith, de moribus & inftit. Turcar. p. 58, 4 Hyde, Hift. rd. vet Perf. p. 14.

i 2 be-

6o

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t. III.

believe to be the peculiar marks of the Koran, and to conceal leveral pro-
found myfteries, the certain underftanding of which, the more intelligent
confefs has not been communicated to any mortal, their prophet only
excepted. Notwithftanding which fome will take the liberty of guef.
ling at their meaning by that fpecies of Cabbala called by the Jews
Notarikon ', andfuppofe the letters to Hand for as many words expref-
ling the names and attributes of God, his works, ordinances, and
decrees j and therefore thefe myfterious letters, as well as the verfes
themfelves, feem in the Koran to be called ftgns. Others explain the
intent of thefe letters from their nature or organ, or elfe from their
value in numbers, according to another fpecies of the JewiJh Cabbala
called Gematria 1 ; the uncertainty of which conjectures fufficicndy
appears from their difagreement. Thus for example, five chapters,
one of which is the fecond, begin with thefe letters, A. L. M. which
fome imagine to ftand for Allah latif magtd ; God is gracious and
to be glorified ; or, Ana li minni, to me and from me , viz. belongs
all perfection, and proceeds all good: or elfe for Ana Allah alam
I am the mofi wife God, taking the firft letter to mark the beginning
of the firft word, the fecond the middle of the fecond word, and the
third the laft of the third word: or for Allah, Gabriel , Mohammed ,
the author, revealer, and preacher of the Koran. Others fay, that
as the letter A belongs to the lower part of the throat, the firft of
the organs of fpeech ; L to the palat, the middle organ j. and M to
the lips, which are the laft organ ; fo thefe letters fignify that God
is the beginning, middle, and end, or ought to be praifed in the be-
ginning, middle, and end, of all our words and actions : or, as the
total value of thofe three letters in numbers, is feventy one, they
fignify that in the fpace of fo many years, the religion preached in
the Koran fhould be fully eftabliftied. The conjecture of a learned
Chrifiian * is at leaft as certain as any of the former, who fuppofes
thofe letters were fet there by the amanuenfis, , for Amar li Mohammed
i. e. At the command of Mohammed , as the five letters prefixed to the
nineteenth chapter feem to be there written by a JewiJh fcribe, for
Coh yaas, i. e. Thus be commanded.

*tyk. The Koran isuniverfally allowed to be written with the utmoft elegance

and purity of language, in the dialed of the tribe of Koreijh, the^moft
noble and police of all the Arabians, but with fome mixture tho*
very rarely, of other dialeCts. It is confefiedly the ftaddard of the
Arabic tongue, and as the more orthodox believe, and are taught by

I Pll -f T.AVMnn D

* V. Buxtorf. Lexicon Rabbin.

*c. 3 Goliua in append, ad Gram, Ei

Se£. III. The Preliminary Difcourfe .

the book icfelf, inimitable by any human pen, (tho* fome fe&aries
have been of another opinion ') and therefore infilled on as a perma-
nent miracle, greater than that of railing the dead % and alone fuffi-
cient to convince the world of its divine original.

And to this miracle did Mohammed himfelf chiefly appeal for the
confirmation of his miflion, publickly challenging the mod eloquent
men in Arabia , which was at that time flocked with thoulands whole
foie ftudy and ambition it was to excel in elegance of ftyle and com-
pofition to produce even a Angle chapter that might be compared
with it 4 . I will mention but one inftance out of feveral, to Ihew that
this book was really admired for the beauty of its compofiire by thofe
who muft be allowed to have been competent judges. A poem of
Labid Ebn Rabia, one of the greatefl wits in Arabia in Mohammed's
time, being fixed up on the gate of the temple of Mecca, an honour
allowed to none but the moft efteemed performances, none of the
other poets durft offer any thing of their own in competition with
it. But the fecond chapter of the Koran being fixed up by it foon
after, Labid himfelf (then an idolater) on reading the firft verfes on-
ly, was ftfuclc with admiration, and immediately profefied the religion
taught thereby, declaring that fuch words could proceed from an
infpired perfon only. This Labid was afterwards of great fervice to
Mohammed , in writing anfwers to the fatires and inveftives that were
made on him and his religion by the infidels, and particularly by
Amri al Kais r , prince of the tribe of Afad 6 , and author of one of
thofe feven famous poems called al Moallakdt 7.

The ftyle of the Koran is generally beautiful and fluent, efpecialfy
where it imitates the prophetic manner, and fcripture phrafes. It is con-
cifc, and often obfcure, adorned with bold figures after the eaftern tafte,
enlivened with florid and fententious expreflions, and in many places,
efpecially where the majefty and attributes of God are defcribed,
fublime and magnificent} of which the reader cannot but obferve
feveral inftances, tho’ he muft not imagine the tranflation comes up
to the original, notwithftanding my endeavours to do it juftice.

Tho’ it be written in profe, yet the fentences generally conclude
in a long continued rime, for the fake of which the fenle is often in*
terrupred, and unneceflary repetitions too frequently made, which ap*

1 See after. 2 Ahmed Abd'alhalim, apod Marracc. dc Ale. p. 43. 3 A noble writer there-

fore miftakes the queftion when he {ay s thefe eaftern religionifts leave their facred writ the foie
ftandaxd of literate performance by extingnifhing all true learning. For tho’ they were deftitute of
what we call learning, yet they were far from being ignorant, or unable to compote elegantly in their
own tongue. See L, ,$ baftesburfs Charafteriftics, Vol. 3. p. 235. * Al Gazali, apqd Poc. Spec.

191. See Koran , c. 17. and alio c. 2. p. 3. and c. II, &c. 1 D’Herbch BibL Orient, p, 512, &c.

6 Poc. Spec. p. So. 7 See before, p. 28.

62

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. III.

pear ftill more ridiculous in a tranflation, where the ornament, fuch
as it is, for whofe fake they were made, cannot be perceived. How-
ever the Arabians are fo mightily delighted with this jingling, that
they employ it in their moft elaborate compofitions, which they alfo
imbellilh with frequent paflages of and allufions to the Koran, fo
that it is next to impoffible to underftand them without being well
verfed in this book.

It is probable the harmony of expreflion which the Arabians find
in the Koran , might contribute not a little to make them reliffi the
doflrine therein taught, and give an efficacy to arguments which had
they been nakedly propofed without this rhetorical drefs, might not
have fo eafily prevailed. Very extraordinary effedts are related
of the power of words well chofen and artfully placed, which are no
lefs powerful either to raviffi or amaze than mufic itfelf; wherefore
as much has been alcribed by the bell orators to this part of rhetoric
as to any other He muft have a very bad ear, who is not uncom-
monly moved with the very cadence of a well-turned fentence; and
Mohammed feems not to have been ignorant of the enthufiaftic opera-
tion of rhetoric on the minds of men ; for which reafon he has not
only employed his utmoft Ikill in thefe his pretended revelations, to
preferve that dignity and fublimity of ftyle, which might feem not
unworthy of the majefty of that Being, whom he gave out to be the
author of them ; and to imitate the prophetic manner of the Old Tf-
Jl ament ; but he has not negledted even the other arts of oratoty;
wherein he fucceeded fo well, and fo ftrangely captivated the minds of
his audience, that feveral of his opponents thought it the effedE of
witchcraft and enchantment, as he fometimes complains 1 .

Defign. ** The general defign of the Koran ” (to ufe the words of a very
learned perfon,) “ feems to be this. To unite the profelfors of the
“ three different religions then followed in the populous country of
“ Arabia , who for the moft part lived promifcuoully, and wandred
“ without guides, the far greater number being idolaters, and the reft
“ JrjjsMvi ChriJUans moftly of erroneous and heterodox belief, in the
“ knowledge and worffiip of one eternal, invifible Goi>, by whole power
<c all things were made, and thofe which are not, may be, the fupream
“ Governor, Judge, and abfolute Lord of the creation; eftablilhed
“* under the fandion of certain laws, and the outward figns of Cer-
** tain ceremonies, partly of ancient and partly of novel inftitutiofl,
** and inforced by fetting before them rewards and puniffiments, both

1 See Cafaubon of Enthufiafm, chjjp. 4. * JG>r£n, chap. 1 j, 21, &c.

“ tern-

/

Se&. III. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

“ temporal and eternal: and to bring them all to the obedience
“ of Mohammed, as the prophet and ambaffador of God, who after
“ the repeated admonitions, promifes, and threats of former ages-,
“ was at laft to eftablilh and propagate G o d’s religion on earth by
« force of arms, and to be acknowledged chief pontif in fpiritual
“ matters, as well as fupream prince in temporal \ ”

The great doCtrine then of the Kordn is the unity of God; to re-
ftore which point Mohammed pretended was the chief end of his
million; it being laid down by him as a fundamental truth, that there
never was nor ever can be more than one true orthodox religion.
For tho’ the particular laws or ceremonies are only temporary, and
fubjeCt to alteration according to the divine direction, yet the lub-
Itance of it being eternal truth, is not liable to change, but continues
immutably the fame. And he taught that whenever this religion became
iiegleCted, or corrupted in effenrials, God had the goodnefs to reinform
and readmonilh mankind thereof, by feveral prophets, of whom Mo-
fa and Jefus were the moft diftingujlhed, till the appearance of Mo-
hammed, who is their feal, no other being to be expeCted after him.
And the more effectually to engage people to hearken to him, great
part of the Koran is employed in relating examples of dreadful
punilhmcnts formerly inflicted by God on thole who rejected and
abufed his mefiengers ; feveral of which Itories or fome circumftances
of them are taken from the Old and New Tejlament, but many more
from the apocryphal books and traditions of the Jews and Chrijlians
of thole ages, fet up in the Kordn as truths in oppofition to the fcrip-
tureS, which the Jews ana Chrijlians are charged with having altered;
and I am apt to believe that few or none of the relations or circum-
ltances in the Kordn were invented by Mohammed, as is generally fup-
pofed, it being eafy to trace the greateft part of them much higher,
as the reft might be, were more of thofe books extant, and it was
worth while to make the inquiry.

The other part of the Kordn is taken up in giving neceffary laws
and diredions, in frequent admonitions to moral and divine vertues,
and above all to the worlhipping and reverencing of the only true
God, and relignation to his will } among which are many excellent
things intermixed not unworthy even a Cbrijlian' s perufaj.

But befideS thefe, there are a great number of paffages which are
occafional, and relate to particular emergencies. For whenever any
thing happened which perplexed and gravelled Mohammed, and which
he could not otherwise get over, he had conllant recourle to, a new

1 Golius, in append, ad Gram* Erp. p. 17&

reve-

64 I the Preliminary Difiourfc. Sett. III.

revelation, as an infallible expedient in all nice cafes j and he found the
fuccefs of this method anfwer his expedition. It was certainly an
admirable and politic contrivance of his to bring down the whole
Koran at once to the lowed: heaven only, and not to the earth, as a
bungling prophet would probably have done; for if the whole had
been publifhed at once, innumerable objedtions might have been
made, which it would have been very hard, if not impoffible, for
him to iblve : but as he pretended to have received it by parcels, as
God faw proper that they fhould be published for the converfion
and inftrudtion of the people, he had a lure way to anfwer all emer-
gencies, and to extricate himfelf with honour from any difficulty
which might occur. If any objedtion be hence made to that eter-
nity of the Koran, which the Mohammedans are taught to believe,
they eafily anfwer it by their dottrine of abfolute predeftination ; ac-
cording to which all the accidents for the fake of which thefo occa-
fional pafiages were revealed, were predetermined by God from all
eternity.

tits author That Mohammed was really the author and chief contriver of the
and man- Xoran, is beyond difpute ; tho’ it be highly probable that he had no
rpublifh- hnall affiftance in his delign from others, as his countrymen failed
vg- not to objedt to him * ; however they differed fo much in their con-
jedtures as to the particular perfons who gave him fuch affiftance 1 ,
that they were not able, it feems, to prove the charge ; Mohammedi it
is to be prefumed, having taken his meafures too well to be difeover-
ed. Dr. Prideaux * has given the moft probable account of this mat-
ter, .tho’ chiefly from Cbrijlian writers, who generally mix fuch ri-
diculous fahles with what they deliver, that they deferve not much
credit.

However it be, the Mohammedans abfolutely deny the Koran was
compofed by their prophet himfelf, or any other for him; it being
their general and orthodox belief that it is of divine original, nay that
it is eternal and uncreated, remaining, as fome exprefs it, in the very
cilence of God; that the firft tranfoript has been from everlafting by
G o d! 6 throne, written on a table of vaft bignefs, called the preferred
table, in which are alfo recorded the divine decrees paft and future:
that a copy from this table, in one volume on paper, was by the
miniftry of the angel Gabriel fent down to the loweft heaven, in the
month of Ramadan , on the night of power*: from whence Gabriel

&c.

V. Kor. c. 1 6. and c. 25. * See the notes on thofe paflages.

4 "V. Kor. c. 97, and not. ibid.

3 Life of Mahomitf p. 31*

/

re-

6 5

Se£t. III. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

revealed it to Mohammed by parcels, fome at Mecca , and Tome at Me-
dina, at different times, during the fpace of twenty three years, as
the exigency of affairs required ; giving him however the confolation to
(hew him the whole (which they tell us was bound in filk, and adorn-
ed with gold and precious ftones of paradife) once a year* but in the
laft year of his life he had the favour to fee it twice. They fay
that few chapters were delivered entire, the moft part being revealed
peace-meal, and written down from time to time by the prophet’s
amanuenfes in fuch or fuch a part of fuch or fuch a chapter till they
were compleated, according to the directions of the angel \ The
firft parcel that was revealed, is generally agreed to have been the
firft five verfes of the ninety fixth chaprer \

After the new revealed paffages had been from the prophet's mouth
taken down in writing by his fcribc, they were published to his fol-
lowers, feveral of whom took copies for their private ufe, but the
far greater number got them by heart. The originals when returned,
were put promifcuoufly into a cheft, obferving no order of time, for
which reafon it is uncertain when many paffages were revealed.

When Mohammed died, he left his revelations in the fame diforder When and
I have mentioned, and not digefted into the method, fuch as it is, df ge '^ m
which we now find them in. This was the work of his fucceffor into the
Abu Beer, who confidering that a great number of paffages were
committed to the memory of Mohammed’s followers, many of whom 1 1
were flain in their wars, ordered the whole to be collected, not only
from the palm leaves and fkins on which they had been writ ten, and which
were kept between two boards or covers, hut alfo from the mouths of
fuch as had gotten them by heart. And this tranfeript when compleated
he committed to the cuftody of Haffa the daughter of Omar, one
of the prophet’s widows *.

From this relation it is generally imagined that Abu Beer was real-
ly the compiler of the Koran ; tho’ for ought appears to the contrary
Mohammed left the chapters compleat as we now have them, except-
ing fuch paffages as his fucceffor might add or correct from thofe who
had gotten them by heart ; what Abu Beer did elfe being perhaps no
more than to range the chapters in their prefent order, which he
feems to have done without any regard to time, having generally
placed the longeft firft.

1 Therefore it is a miftake of Dr. Prideatix to fay it was brought him chapter by chapter. Life of
Mabmeu P- 6. The Jftos alfo fay the Law was given to Mofes by parcels. V. Millium, deMo-
hammedifmo ante Moham. p. 365. 1 2 Not the whole chapter, as Golius lays. Append, ad Gr. Erp.
p. 1 80. 3 Elmacin. in Vita Abu Beer. Abulfeda.

k How-

66

Various

readings.

Paflagfs

abrogated

*The Preliminary Difcourje. SeCt. Ill,

However in the thirtieth year of the Hejra, Othman being then
Khalifa and obferving the great difagreemerit in the copies of the Ko-
ran in the feveral provinces of the empire, thofe of Irak, for exam-
ple, following the reading of Abu Muja al Afhari , and the Syrians
that of Macddd Ebn Afwad, he, by advice of the companions , ordered
a great number of copies to be tranferibed from that of Abu Beer,
in Haffa’s care, under the infpeCtion of Zeid Ebn Thabet, Abdallah
Ebn Zobair, Said Ebn al As, and Abd alrabmdn Ebn al Haretb the
Makhzumite', whom he directed that wherever they difagreed about
any word, they fhould write it in the dialeCt of the Koreijk, in which
it was at firft delivered Thefe copies when made, were difperfed
in the feveral provinces of the empire, and the old ones burnt and
fuppreffed. Tho’ many things in Haffa'% copy were corrected by the
above-mentioned fupervifors, yet fome few various readings ftill oc-
cur; the moft material of which will be taken notice of in their
proper places.

The want of vowels 1 in the Arabic character made Mokrts, or rea-
ders, whofe peculiar ftudy and profefllon it was to read the Koran
with its proper vowels, abfolutely neceffary. But thefe differing in
their manner of reading, occafioned ftill further variations in the co-
pies of the Koran, as they are now written with the vowels j and
herein confift much the greater part of the various readings through-
out the book. The readers whofe authority the commentators chiefly
alledge, in admitting thefe various readings, are feven in number.

There being fome paffages in the Kordn which are contradictory,
the Mohammedan doctors obviate any objection from thence, by the
doCtrine of abrogation ; for chey fay, that God in the Koran com-
manded feveral things which were for good reafons afterwards revok-
ed and abrogated.

Paffages abrogated are diftinguilhed into three kinds: the/ /, w h C re
the letter and the fenfe are both abrogated; the feemd, where the letter
only is abrogated, but the fenfe remains; and the third , where the
fenle is abrogated, tho* the letter remains.

Of the firft kind were feveral verfes, which by the tradition of
Ans Ebn Malec were in the prophet’s life time read in the chapter of
repentance, but are not now extant, one of which, being all he re-

. ^ b j V m ! ltlS At>ubecr & Othman. * The charaftera or marks of th <t Arabic vowels were
not ufed oil feveral years after MabamtfJ Some aferibe the invention of them to Taby* Ebn Tamer ,

» me ?Jk /r f “ rnarted J .' j/ and ° the » *0 Abu'kfwad al Dili j all thrt* of v, horn

were doftors of Bapa, and immediately fucceeded the (ompanms> See D’Herbel. Bibl. Orient, p. 8;.

membeed

N

/

/

Seft. III. The Preliminary Difcourfe. 67,

membred of them, was the following, “ If a fon of Adam had two
« rivers of gold, he would covet yet a third} and if he had three,

“ he would covet yet a fourth (to be added) unto them ; neither {hall
“ the belly of a fon of Adam be filled, but with duft. God will
“ turn unto him who (hall repent.” Another inftance of this kind
we have from the tradition of Abdallah Ebn Majud \ who reported
that the prophet gave him a verfe to read which he wrote down j
but the next morning looking in his book, he found it was vaniflicd,
and the leaf blank: this he acquainted Mohammed with, who affured
him the verfe was revoked the fame night.

Of the fecond kind is a verfe called the verfe of floning , which ac-
cording to the tradition of Omar , afterwards Khali/, was extant
while Mohammed was living, tho’ it be not now to be found. The
words are thefe, “ Abhor not your parents, for this would be ingra-
“ titude in you. If a man and woman of reputation commit adul-
“ tery, ye {hall Hone them both} it is a punifhracnt ordained by God}

“ for God is mighty and wife.”

Of thelaft kind are obferved feveral verfes in fixty three different chap-
ters, to the number of 225. Such as the precepts of turning in prayer to
Jerufalem } falling after the old cuftom } forbearance towards idola-
ters } avoiding the ignorant, and the like '. The pafiages of this fort have
been carefully collected by feveral writers, and arc moll of them re-
marked in their proper placqp.

Tho' it is the belief of the Somites or orthodox that the Koran is Difpntes
uncreated and eternal, fubfifting in the very efience of God, and 5 onc t * r “'
Mohammed himfclf is faid to have pronounced him an infidel who ^cation
aflerted the contrary % yet feveral have been of a different opinion } of the
particularly the fedl of the Motazalites 3 , and the followers of Ifa Ebn 2ir< ***
Sobeih Abu Mu/a, furnamed al Mozddr, who {tuck not to accufe thofe
who held the Koran to be uncreated of infidelity, as afiertors of two
eternal beings 4 .

This point was controverted with fo much heat that it occafioned
many calamities under feme of the Khallfs of the family of Abbas,
al Mamun s making a public edi£t declaring the Koran to be created,
which was confirmed % his fucceffors al Motafem 6 and al JVdthek 7 ,

2 Abu Hafhem Hebatallah, apud Marracc. de Ale. p. 42. 2 Apud Poe. Spec. 220. 3 See after,

in Seft. 8. 4 V. Poc. Spec. p. 219, See. 1 Anno Hej. 218. Abulferag. p. 245. v. etiam Elmacin.

in vita al Mamfin. 6 In the time of al Motafem , a doftor named Abu Harun Ebn al Baca found out
a diitin&ion to fereen himfclf, by affirming that the Karan was ordained, becaufc it is faid in that book.

And I have ordained thee the Koran. He went Hill farther to allow that what was ordained , was
treated , and yet he denied it thence followed that the Koran was created . Abulfarag. p. 253.

7 Ibid. p. 257.

k 2 who

(

68

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. Ill,

who whipt, imprifoned, and put to death thofe of the contrary opi-
nion. But at length al Motawakkel ', who fucceeded al JVatbek, put
an end to thefe perfections, by revoking the former edicts, releafing
thofe that were imprifoned on that account, and leaving every man at
liberty as to his belief in this point \

Al Gbazdli feems to have tolerably reconciled both opinions, faying,
that the Koran is read and pronounced with the tongue, written in
books, and kept in memory j and is yet eternal, fubfifting in G o d’s
effence, and not poffible to be feparated thence by any tranfmiffion
into mens memories or the leaves of books * ; by which he feems to
mean no more than that the original idea of the Koran only is really
in God, and confequently co-eflential and co-eternal with him, but
that the copies are created and the work of man.

The opinion of al Jahedb , chief of a feCt bearing his name, touching
the Koran is too remarkable to be omitted : he ufed to fay it was a
body, which might fometimes be turned into a man ♦, and fometimes
into a beaft ’ j which feems to agree with the notion of thofe who
aflert the Koran to have two faces, one of a man, the other of a
beaft 6 ; thereby, as I conceive, intimating the double interpretation
it will admit of, according to the letter or the fpirit.

As fome have held the Koran to be created, fo there have not been
wanting thofe who have aflerted that there is nothing miraculous in
that book in refpeCt to ftyle or compofiijon, excepting only the pro-
phetical relations of things paft, and predictions of things to come ;
and that had God left men to their natural liberty, and not reftrain-
ed them in that particular, the Arabians could have compofed fome-
thing not only equal, but fuperior to the Koran in eloquence, me-
thod, and purity of language. This was another opinion of the Mota-
zalites , and in particular of al Mozddr above-mentioned and alNodbdm 7 .
Expofi- The Koran being the Mohammedans rule of faith and practice, it is*
»k>n of it. no won( j er i ts expofi tors and commentators are fo very numerous.
And it may not be amifs to take notice of the rules they obferve in ex-
pounding it.

’Anno Hd. 242. * Abulfarag. p 262. * Al GhazaK, in prof. fid. 4 The Kbatif al Wa-

rd Ebn M, who wa. the eleventh of the race of Ommeya, and is looked on by the Mohammedan
as a reprobate, and one of no religion, feems to have treated this book as a rational creatnre. For
d,pp,ng into it one day, thefirft words he met with were thefe; Every rebellion, peruerfe perfme Jball
vmI of"' WiKreUP ° n hC ^ u on a lance and to°t it to pieces with arrotCVe^eadng ihefe

Dofi ,bou rebuke every rebellion perverfe perf on? Mold, lam that rebellion perverje perfon.

When then appeareft before tby Lori on the day of rejurreftion, fay, O Lord, al Walid his torn thu
Ebn Shohnah. v. Poc. Spec. p. 223. 1 Poc. Spec. P . 222. 9 « HeTbdot 0. 87 VaZ&E

Shahreftani, Sec. apud Poc. Spec. p. 222. & Marracc. de Kor. p. 44. * p ' Abulfeda,

)

J

One

6g

Se£t. III. The Preliminary Difcoitrfe,

One of the moft learned commentators 1 diftinguilhes the contents
of the Koran into allegorical and literal. The former comprehends
the more obfeure, parabolical, and aenigmatical paffages, and fuch as
are repealed or abrogated; the latter thofe which are plain, perfpicuous*
liable to no doubt, and in full force.

To explain thefe feverally in a right manner, it is neceflary from
tradition and ftudy to know the time when each paflage was re-
vealed, its circumftances, ftate, and hiftory, and the reafons or par-
ticular emergencies for the fake of which it was revealed \ Or, more
explicitly, whether the paflage was revealed at Mecca , or at Medina - y
whether it be abrogated, or does itfelf abrogate any other paflage;
whether it be anticipated in order of time, or poftponed; whether it
be diflindt from the context, or depends thereon; whether it be par-
ticular or general ; and laftly whether it be implicit by intention,, or
explicit in words 3.

By what has been laid the reader may 1 eafily believe this book is in The ho-
the greateft reverence and efteem among the Mohammedans. They to
dare not fo much as touch it without being firll walhed or legally it.
purified 4 ; which left they Ihould do by inadvertence, they write thele
words on the cover or label, " Let none touch it, hut they who are
“ clean.” They read it with great care and refpedt, never holding
it below their girdles. They fwear by it, confult it in their weighty
occafions T , carry it with them to war, write fentences of it in their
banners, adorn it with gold and precious ftones, and knowingly fuffer
it not to be in the pofieffion of any of a different perfuafion.

The Mohammedans far from thinking the Koran to be profaned by Tranfli-
a tranllation, as fome authors have written s , have taken cart to have tioas ‘
their feriptures tranllated not only into the Perjian tongue, but into
feveral others, particularly the 'Javan and Malayan tho’ out of
refpedt to the original Arabic, thefe verfions are generally (if not al-
ways) interlineary.

1 A 1 Zamakhfhari. V. KorSn, chap. 3. p. 3$. * Ahmed Ebn Moh. alThalebi, in princip. er-

pof. Ale. 3 Yahya Ebn al Salaun al Bafri, in princip. expof. Ale. 4 The Jews have the fame ve-
neration for their law; not daring to touch it with unwarned hands, nor then neither without a co-
ver. V. Millium, de Mohammedifitno ante Moh. p. 366. i This they'do by dipping into it, and
taking an omen front the words which they firll light on: which practice they alfo learned of the
Jews, who do the fame with the feripture. V. Millium, ubi fup. 6 Sionito, dc urb. orient, p. 41*

& Marracc. de Ale. p. 33. 7 Rcland, de Rcl. Moh. p. 265.

(

Sec-

79

Sea IV,

The Preliminary Difcourfe.

Section IV.

X)f the DoElrines and pofitive Precepts of the Koran, which
relate to Faith and religious Duties .

Whereon
the Mo-
hammedan
religion is
built.

I T has been already obferved more than once, that the fundamen-
tal pofition, on which Mohammed eredted the fuperftru&ure of his
religion was, that from the beginning to the end of the world
there has been, and forever will be; but one true orthodox belief; con-
fiding, as to matter of faith, in the acknowledging of the only true
God, and the believing in and obeying fuch meffengers or prophets
as he thould from time to time fend, with proper credentials, to re-
veal his will to mankind; and as to matter of practice, in the obfer-
vance of the immutable and eternal laws of right and wrong, together
with fuch other precepts and ceremonies as G o d fhould think fit to
order for the time being, according to the different difpenfations in dif-
ferent ages of the world : for thefe laft he allowed were things indifferent
in their own nature, and became obligatory by G o d’s pofitive jpre-
■cept only ; and were therefore temporary and fubjedt to alteration ac-
cording to his will and pleafure. And to this religion he gives the
name of IJlam, which word fignifies reJignation y or fubmijjion to the fer-
vice and commands of God 1 ; and is ufed as the proper name of
the Mohammedan religion, which they will alfo have to be the feme
at bottom with that of all the prophets from uidam.

Under pretext that' this eternal religion was in his time corrupted,
and profeffed in its purity by no one fedt of men, Mohammed pre-
tended to be a prophet fent by God, to reform thofe abufes which
had crept into it, and to reduce it to its primitive fimplicity; with
the addition however of peculiar laws and ceremonies, fome of which
had been ufed in former times, and others were now firft inftituted.
And he comprehended the whole fubftance of his dodlrine under thefe
two propofitions, or articles of faith ; viz. that there is but one God,
and that himfelf was the apoftle of God; in confequence of which
latter article, all fuch ordinances and inftitutions as he thought fit to

r The root Salama, from whence IJlam is formed, in the firft and fourth conjugation*, fignifies
alfo to be fdvedy or to enter into a ft ate of falvatiom according to which, IJlam may be tmnflated the
religion or fate of falvation: but the other fenfe is more approved by the Mohammedans, and alluded
:*0 in the Korfa itfelf. See jc. z. p. 16. and c. 3. p. 36.

eftablifli

)

Se&. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe . 71

eftablilh mull be received as obligatory and of divine authority.

The Mohammedans divide their religion, which as I juft now faid The divi-
they call IJldm, into two diftindt parts; Imdn, \. ft. faith, or theory, and^°“ d “ d
Din, i. e. religion, or practice ; and teach that it is built on five fundamen- menu!
tal points, one belonging to faith, and the other four to practice. P° iaU

The firft is that confeffion of faith which I have already mentioned
that there is no god but the true God; and that Mohammed is bis
apojile. Under which they comprehend fix diftindt branches ; viz.

1. Belief in God; 2. In bis angels-, 3. In his fcriptures ; 4. In bis
prophets ; e. In the refurreStim and day of judgment -, and, 6 . In Go d’x
abfolute decree and predetermination both of good and evil.

The four points relating to pradtice are, 1. Prayer, under which
are comprehended thofe waftiings or purifications which are neceffary
preparations required before prayer ; 2. Alms ; 3. Falling ; and,

4. The pilgrimage to Mecca. Of each of thefe I fhall fpeak in their
order.

That both Mohammed and thofe among his followers who are of their,
reckoned orthodox, had and continue to have juft and true notions of j* ith
God and his attributes, (always excepting their obftinate and impious GoD *
rejedtingof the Trinity) appears fo plain frotn the Koran itfelf and alt
the Mohammedan divines, that it would be lofs of time to refute thofe
who fuppofe the God of Mohammed to be different from the true God„
and only a fidlitious deity or idol of his own creation Nor fhall I
here enter into any of the Mohammedan controverfies concerning the
divine nature and attributes, becaufe I fhall have a more proper oppor-
tunity of doing it elfewhere \

The exiftence of angels and their purity are abfolutely required toAndinhir
be believed in the Koran-, and he is reckoned an infidel who denies an 8 d **
there are fuch beings, or hates any of them *, or affercs apy diftindtion
of fexes among them. They believe them to have pure and fubtil
bodies, created of fire * -, that they neither eat nor drink, nor propa-
gate their fpecies ; that they have various forms and offices ; fome a-
doring God in different poftures, others finging praifes to him, or
interceding for mankind. They hold that fome of them are employed
in writing down the adtions of men ; others in carrying the throne of
God and other fervices.

The four angels whom they look on as more eminently in G o d’s
favour, and often mention on account of the offices affigned them,

1 Marracc in Ale. p. 102. 2 Se&. VIII* ’ Koran c. 2. p 13. * lb. c. 7, and 38.

are

(

4

The 'Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. IV.

are Gabriel , to whom they give feveral titles, particularly thofe of the
holy fpirit and the angel of revelations % fuppofing him to be honour-
ed by God with a greater confidence than any other, and to be em-
ployed in writing down the divine decrees 3 ; Michael , the friend and
protedor of the Jews 4 j Azrael, the angel of death , who feparates
mens fouls from their bodies * j and Ifraf.I, wnofe office it will be to
found the trumpet at the refurredion 6 . The Mohammedans alfo be-
lieve that two guardian angels attend on every man, to obferve and
write down his adions 7 , being changed every day, and therefore cal-
led al Moakkibat, or the angels who continually fuccted one another.

This whole dodrine concerning angels Mohammed and his difciples
have borrowed from the Jews, who learned the names and offices of
thofe beings from the Perfums , as themfelves confefs 8 . The ancient
Perfans firmly believed the miniftry of angels, and their fuperinten-
dence over the affairs of this world, (as the Magians ftill do) and
therefore affigned them diftind charges and provinces, giving their
names to their months and the days of their months. Gabriel they
called Sorujh and Revdn bakhjh , or the giver of fouls, in oppofition to
the contrary office of the angel of death, to whom among other names
they gave that of Morddd, or the giver of death ; Michael they called
Ref ter, who according to them provides fuftenance for mankind K
The Jews teach that the angels were created of fire ,a ; that they
have feveral offices 11 j that they intercede for men tl , and attend
them '5. The angel of death they name Duma, and fay he calls dy-
ing perfons by their refpedive names at their laft hour ' 4 .

The devil, whom Mohammed names Eblis from his defpatr, was
once one of thofe angels who are neared to Gob’s prefence, called
Azaztl ,J , and fell, according to the dodrine of the Koran, for re-
fufing to pay homage to Adam at the command of God ,6 .

JBefides angels :and devils, the Mohammedans are taught by the Ko~
ran to believe an intermediate order of creatures, which they call Jin
or Genii , created alfo of fire 17 , but of a groffer fabric than angels;

1 Koran, c. 2. p. 12. * See the notes, ib. p. 13. 3 V. Hyde, Hitt. Rel. vet. Perf. p. 262.

^ V. ib. p. 271. & not. in Kor. p. 13. 1 V. not. ib. p. 4. * Kor. c. 6,13, and 86. The offices

of thefe four angels are deferibed almoft in the fame manner in the apocryphal gofpel of Bamabasi
where it is faid that Gabriel reveals the fecrets of God, Michael combates againft his enemies Ra-
phael receives the fouls of thofe who die, and Uriel is to call every one to judgment on the laft day
6ee the Mtnagiana , Tom. 4. p. 333. 7 Kor. c. 10. ® Talmud Hierof. in Ro/h hafhana!

9 Hyde, ubi fup. c. 19, and 20. 10 Gcmar. in Hagig. & Bereihit rabbah. Sec. V. Pfalm civ.

4. 11 Yalkut hadafh. ia Gemar. in Shebet, Sc Bava Bathra, See. *3 Midrafh Yalkut

Shemdni. 14 Gemar, Berachoth. 1 * Y. Reland, de Rel. Moh. p,i8o. Sec. 1 * Koran c

na. p. 5. See alfo c- j, 38, See. 17 Kor.*. 55. Sfie_the notes there.

73

Sed. IV. *The. Preliminary Difcourfi.

fince they eat and drink, and propagate their fpecics, and are fubjeffc
to death *. Some of thefe are fuppofed to be good, and others bad, and car-
pable of future falvation or damnation, as men are ; whence Mohammed
pretended to be fent for the converfion of Genii as well as men \ The
Orientals pretend that thefe Genii inhabited the world for many ages
before Adam was created, under the government of feveral fticcefiive
princes, who all bore the common name of Solomon ; but falling at
length into an almoft general corruption, Eblts was lent to chive them
into a remote part of the earth there to be confined : that feme of
that generation ftill remaining, were by c fabmuratb , one of the ancienc
kings of Perfa, who waged war againft them, forced to retreat into
the famous mountains of Kdf. Of which fucceffions and wars they
have many fabulous and romantic ftories. They alfo make different
ranks and degrees among thefe being? (if they be not rather fuppofed
to be of a different fpecies) fome being called abfolufely yin, lome
Peri or fairies , fome Div or giants, others c Eacwtm or fates K

The Mohammedan notions concerning thefe Genii, agree almofl ex-
actly with what the Jews write of a fort of daemons, called Sbedlm,
whom fome fancy to have been begotten by two angels named Aza
and Aza'el, on Naamah the daughter of Larnech, before the flood 1 * * 4 .
However the Shedtm, they tell us, agree in three things with the mi-
niftring angels j for that like them, they have wings, and fly from one
end of the world to the other, and have fome knowledge of futuri-
ty ; and in three things they agree with men, like whom they eat and
drink, are propagated, and die *. They alfo fay that fome of them
believe in the law of Mofes, and are confequently good, and that
others of them are infidels and reprobates 6 .

As to the fcriptures, the Mohammedans are taught by the Koran Of the
that God, in divers ages of the world, gave revelations of his will fcri P ture *-
in writing to feveral prophets, the whole arid every word of which it is
abfolutely necefiary for a good Mojlem to believe. The number of thefe fa-
cred books, were, according to them, 104. Of which ten were given to
Adam , fifty to Seth, thirty to Edris or Enoch, ten to Abraham ; and
the other four, being the Pentateuch , the Pfalms , the Go/pel, and the
Koran , were fucceffively delivered to Mofes, David, Jefus, and Moham-
med j which lafl being the feal of the prophets, thofe revelations are
now clofed, and no more are to be expedited. All thefe divine books,

1 Jallalo’ddin, in Kor. c. 2, & 18. * V. Koran, c. 55, 72, & 74* 3 Sec D’ Hcrbelot,

BibL Orient, p. 369, 820, &€• 4 In libro Zohar. 5 Gemara, in Hagfga, 6 Igrat Baale

hayyim. c. 1 5.

1

1

ex-

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se<£t. IV.

except the four laft, they agree to be now entirely loft, and their
contents unknown j tho’ the Sabians have feveral books which they
attribute to fome of the antediluvian prophets. And of thole four, the
Pentateuch, Pfalms, and Gofpel, they fay, have undergone fo many
alterations and corruptions, that tho’ there may poffibly be fome paVt
of the true word of God therein, yet no credit is to be given to the
prefent copies in the hands of the jews and Cbrifiians. The Jews in
particular are frequently refle&ed on in the Koran for falfifying and
corrupting their copies of their law? and fome inftances of fuch pre-
tended corruptions, both in that book and the two others, are pro-
duced by Mohammedan writers $ wherein they merely follow their
own prejudices, and the fabulous accounts of fpurious legends. Whe-
ther they have any copy of the Pentateuch among them different from
that of the Jews or not, I am not entirely fatisfied, fince a perfon
who travelled into the eaft was told, that they had the books of
Mofes , tho’ very much corrupted ' $ but I know no body that has ever
feen them. However they certainly have and privately read a book
which they call the Pfalms of David, in Arabic and Perfmn, to
which are added fome prayers of Mojes, Jonas, and others *. T hi s
Mr. Reland fuppofes to be a tranflation from our copies, (tho* no
doubt falfified in more places than one j) but Mr. D'Herbclot fays it
contains not the lame Pfalms which are in our Pfaiter , being no more
than an extradl from thence mixed with other very different pieces j.
The eafieft way to reconcile thefe two learned gentlemen, is to prefume
that they fpeak of different copies. The Mohammedans have alfo a
Gofpel in Arabic, attributed to St. Barnabas, wherein the hiffory of
Jefus Cbrijl is related in a manner very different from what we find
in the true Gofpcls, and correfpondent to thofe traditions which Mo-
hammed has followed in his Koran. Of this Gofpel the Mmjcots in
Africa have a tranflation in Spanijh* j and there is in the library
of prince Eugene of Savoy, a manufeript of fome antiquity, contain-
ing an Italian tranflation of the fame Gofpel *, made, if is to be
fuppofed, for the ufe of renegades. This book appears to be no ori-
ginal forgery of the Mohammedans , tho’ they have no doubt interpolat-
ed and altered it fince, the better to ferve their purpofe; and in particu-
lar inftead of the Paraclete or Comforter 6 , they have in this apocry-
phal gofpel inferred the word Periclyte, that is the famous or illujlrious.

. - \ f"*?! Vt ^ e t0 the En fi 277- a De Rel. Moham. p. 2 2.

kind be tells ns is in the library of the Duke of Ttfcanu Bibl. Orient, p. oL.

f ° P 'j ^ e " J 8 u ?-T. 4.p. 321, &c. 6 John xiv. 16, 26. xv. z6, and

with Luke jyuv. 4.9. *

3 A copy of this
4 Reland, ubi
xwL 7. com-

75

Se&. IV. The Preliminary Dtfcourfe.

by which they pretend their prophet was foretold by name, that be-
ing the fignification of Mohammed in Arabic 1 : and this they lay to
juftify that paflage of the Koran *, where Jefus Cbriji is formally af-
ferted to have foretold his coming, under his other name of Ahmed ;
which is derived from the fame root as Mohammed , and of the fame
import. From thefe or fome other forgeries of the fame ftamp, it is
that the Mohammedans quote feveral paffages, of which there are not
the teall footfteps in the New Tef ament. But after all we mull not

hence infer that the Mohammedans , much lefs all of them, hold thefe
copies of theirs to be the ancient and genuine fcriptures themfelves.

If any argue, from the corruption which they infift has happened to
the Pentateuch and Gofpel , that the Kordn may poflibly be corrupted
alfo j they anfwer, that God has promifed that he will take care of
the latter, and preferve it from any addition or diminution * ; but
that he left the two other to the care of men. However they con-
fefs there are fome various readings in the Kordn 4 , as has been ob-
ferved.

Befides the books above-mentioned, the Mohammedans alfo take no-
tice of the writings of Daniel and feveral other prophets, and even
make quotations thence; but thefe they do not believe to be divine
fcripture, or of any authority in matters of religion f .

The number of the prophets, which have been from time to time Of the
fent by God into the world, amounts to no left than 224,000, ac-F ro P heo *
cording to one Mohammedan tradition, or to 124,000, according to
another ; among whom 313 were apoftles, fent with fpecial commif-
lions to reclaim mankind from infidelity and fuperftition ; and fix of
them brought new laws or difpenfations, which fucceflively abrogated
the preceding : thefe were Adam, Noah , Abraham, Mofes, Jefus , and
Mohammed. All the prophets in general the Mohammedans believe to
have been free from great fins, and errors of conlequence, and pro-
feflors of one and the fame religion, that is IJldm, notwithftanding
the different laws and inftitutions which they obferved. They allow
of degrees among them, and hold fome of them to be more excellent and
honourable than others 6 . The firft place they give to the revealers
and eftablifhers of new difpenfations, and the next to the apoftles.

In this great number of prophets, they not only reckon divers
patriarchs and perfons named in fcripture, but not recorded to have
been prophets, (wherein the JewiJh and Cbriji tan writers have fome-

1 See ToUtuT a Nazorenus, the firft eight chapters. * Chap. 61. 3 Kor. c. 15. 4 Reland,

ubi fup. p. 24, 27. 4 Idem, ib. p. 41. 4 Kor. c. 2. p. 30, See.

1 2 times

(

76 The Preliminary Difiourfe . $e&, IV.

times led the way ') as Adam, Seth, Lot, Ifmael, Nun, JeJhua, &c.
and introduce fome of the rounder different names, as Enoch, Heber,
and Jethro, who are called in the Koran, Edrts, Hud, and Shoaib-, but
feveral others whofe very names do not appear in fcripture ftho’ they
endeavour to find fome perfons there to fix them on) as, Saleh, Kbedr,
Dhu'lkejl, &c. Several of their fabulous traditions concerning thefc
prophets, we (hall occafiqnally mention in the notes on the Kordn.

As Mohammed acknowledged the divine authority of the Pentateuch,
Pfelms, and Gojpel, he often appeals to the Confonancy of the Koran
with thofc writings, and to the prophecies which he pretended were
therein concerning himfelf, as proofs of his mtffion •> and he frequent-
ly charges the Jews and Cbrijliam with ftifling the p adage* which
bear witnefs to him \ His followers alfo fail not to produce feveral
texts even from our prefent copies of the Old and New ‘Tejlament, to
fupport their mailer’s caufe K

Of the The next article of faith required by the Koran, is the belief of a
S enera l refurredlion and a future judgment. But before we conlider
the Mohammedan tenets in thofe points, it will be proper to men-
tion what they are taught to bdieve concerning the intermediate (late,
both of the body and of the foul, after death,
of thebo- When a corps is laid in the grave, they fay he is received by an
the reft” angel, who gives him notice of the coming of the two Examiners ;
region, which are two black livid angels, of a terrible appearance, named
Monker and Naktr . Thefe order the dead perfon to fit upcighr, and
examine him concerning his faith, as to the unity of God, and the
million of Mohammed: if he anfwer rightly, they fuffer the body to
reft in peace, and it is refrelhed by the air of panadifej but if not,
they beat him on the temples with iron maces, till he roars out for
anguilh fo loud, that he is heard by all from eaft to weft, except
men and genii- Then they prefs the earth on the corps, which is
gnawed and flung till the refurredlion by ninety nine dragons! with
(even heads each ; or, as others fay, their fins will become venemous
heads, the grievous ones Hinging like dragons, the fmaller like fcor-
pions, and the others like ferpents: circumftances which fomie under-
ftarid in a figurative lenle f.

This examination of the fepuichre is not only founded on an ex-
prefs tradition of Mohammed, but is aho plainly hinted at, the’ not

. Thus tfefcr is fal ? t0 h Ve c bee V P ro A et Ae y*"i (Seder Ofcm. p. 2.) And Adam by Epi-
pbamus ; (Adv. H*reC P. 6.) See alfo Jofcph. Ant. I , c. 2. a Korin> c . ^ 6 , c . 3.

ttc. * Some of Ibefe texts are prodt&ed by Dr. Priieaux at the end of bis life of Mahomet, and
mote by Marram in Alcor. p. 26, &c. * A1 GJuzalL V. Poc. not. in Port. Mofis, p. 241 . &c.

diredly

'l

77

Sed. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe :

dire&ly taught, in the Koran ', as the commentators agree. It is
therefore believed by the orthodox Mohammedans in general, who take
care to have their graves made hollow, that they may fit up with
more eafe while they are examined by the angels 1 ; but is utterly re-
jected by the feCt of the Motdzalites, and perhaps by fome others.

Thefe notions Mohammed certainly borrowed from the Jews, among
whom they were very anciently received *. They fay that the angel
of death coming and fitting on the grave, the foul immediately en-
ters the body and raifes it on its feet ; that he then examines the de-
parted perfon, and ftrikes him with a chain half of iron and half of
fire j at the firft bloto all his limbs are loofened, at the fecond his
bones are feat teredo which are gathered together again by angels, and
the third ftroke reduces the body to duft and allies, and it returns
into the grave. This rack or torture they call, Ribbfit hakkeber , or
the beating of the fepulcbre , and pretend that all men in general
mull undergo it, except only thofe who die on the evening of the
fabbath, or have dwelt in the land of Ifraeh.

If it be objected to the Mohammedans that the cry of the perfon?
under fuch examination has been never heard} or if they be afked
hoW thofe can undergo it whofe bodies are burnt or devoured by
beafts or birds, or otherwife confumed without burial } they anfwer,
that it is very pofiible notwithftanding, fince men are not able to per-
ceive what is tranfaded on the other fide the grave} and that it is
fufficient to reftore to life any part of the body which is capable of
underftanding the queftions put by the angels s .

As to the foul, they hold that when it is feparated from the body of the
by the angel of death, who performs his office with eafe and gentle- Soul
nefs towards the good, and with violence towards the wicked 6 , it
enters into that ftate which they call al Berzakb 7 , or the interval
between death and the refur redhon. If the departed perfon was a
believer, they fay two angels meet it, who convey it to heaven, that
its place there may be affigned, according to its merit and degree.

For they diftinguiffi the fouls of the faithful into three clafles, the
firft of prophets, whofe fouls are admitted into paradife immediately }
the fecond of martyrs, whofe fpirits, according to a tradition of Mo-
hammed, reft in the Crops of green birds which eat of the fruits and
drink of the rivers of paradife} and the third of other believers,
concerning the ftate of whofe fouls before the rdbrreCtion, there are

1 Cap 8, and 47, &c. a Sfiiitb, de roorib. & inftit. Tnrear. Ep. 2. p 57. * V. Hyde, Iir

nods ad Bobov, de Vifit. sgrot. p. jp, * R. Elias, in Tilhbi. See alfo Iftmorf. Synag. Judaic;
ic Lexic. Talmud. V. Poc. ubi fup. « Koran, c. 79. The %ews 67 the fame, in Niflmat
hajim, f. 77. t V. Kor, c. 23, and noUib.

various

(

78 The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. IV.

various opinions. For, 1. Some fay they flay near the fepulchreej with
liberty however of going wherever they pleafe; which they con-
firm from Mohammed’s manner of faluting them at their graves, and
his affirming that the dead' heard thofe falutations as well as the liv-
ing, tho’ they could not anfwer. "Whence perhaps proceeded the
cuftom of vificing the tombs of relations, fo common among (he Mo-
hammedans \ 2, Others imagine they arc with Adam, in the loweft

heaven; and alfo fupport their opinion by the authority <3|f their
prophet, who gave out that in his return from the upper heavens in
nis pretended night journey, he faw there the fouls of thofe who were
deftined to paradife on tne right hand of Adam, and of thofe who
were condemned to hell on his left a . 3. Others fancy tjie fouls of
believers remain in the well Zemzem, and thofe of infidels in a cer-
tain well in the province of Hadramaut, called Bor but-, but this opi-
nion is branded as heretical. 4. Others fay they flay near the graves
for feven days; but that whither they go afterwards is uncertain.

Others that they are all in the trumpet, whole found is to raife
the dead. And, 6. Others that the fouls of the good dwell in the
farms of white birds, under the throne of God*. As to the con-
dition of the fouls of the wicked, befides the opinions that have been
already mentioned, the more orthodox hold that they are offered) by
the angels ro heaven, from whence being repulfed as flinking and
filthy, they are offered to the earth, and being alfo refufed a place
there, are carried down to the feventh earth, and thrown into a dun-
geon, which they call Sajin, under a green rock, or according to a
tradition of Mohammed, under the devil’s jaw *, to be there torment-
ed, till they are called up to be joined again to their bodies.

Of the 1 *- Tho’ fome among the Mohammedans have thought that the refur-
i0 ”‘ region will be merely ipiritual, and no more than the returning of
the foul to the place whence it firfl came (an opinion defended by
Ebn Sina and called by fome the opinion of the philofophers 6 ■) and
others, who allow man to confift of body only, that it will be merely
corporeal ; the received opinion is, that both body and foul will be
railed, and their dofrors argue ftrenuoufly for the poffibility of the
Tefurredlion of the body, and difpute with great fubtilty concerning
ihe manner of it . But Mohammed has taken care to prefrrve one
part of the body, whatever becomes of the refr, ro ferve for a bafis

r ^ P- J 1 L Ib ' ?' , C ° nfonai » t heret o are the JetolJb notions of the fouls

°P„' lgh h- U r nder 1 throne 1 °fg lor y- V - lb. p. 1 56. 5 lb. i 250. 4 A1 Beidawi,

.? Lltfy 0rj ** WC C0rrup ^ name ^ Jtvienn ^ 6 Ken* al

of

in

'i

79

Seft. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

of the future edifice, or rather a leaven for the mafs which is to be
joined to it. For he taught, that a man’s body was entirely con-
fumed by the earth, except only the bone called al Ajb, which we
name the os coccygis, or rump-bone ; and that as it was the firft form-
ed in the human body, it will alfo remain uncorrupted till the laft
day, as a feed from whence the whole is to be renewed: and this he
laid would be effected by a forty days rain which God Ihould fend,
and which would cover the earth to the height of twelve cubits, and
caufe the bodies to fprout forth like plants '. Herein alfo is Mo-
hammed beholden to the Jews ; who fay the fame things of the bone
Luz % excepting that what he attributes to a great rain, will be effect-
ed according to them by a dew, impregnating the dull of the earth.

The time of the refurreCtion the Mohammedans allow to be a perfect The figns
fecret to all but God alone; the angel Gabriel himfelf acknowledg- ^
ing his ignorance in this point when Mohammed alked him about it. ’
However they fay the approach of that day may be known from cer-
tain figns which are to precede it. Thefe figns they diftinguilh into
two forts, the lefier, and the greater ; which I (hall briefly enumerate
after Dr. Pocock K

The leffer figns are, i. The decay of faith among men + . 2. The

advancing of the meaneft perfons to eminent dignity. 3. That a
maid-fervant lhall become the mother of her miftrefs (or mafter;) by
which is meant either that towards the end of the world men lhall
be much given to fenfuality, or that the Mohammedans lhall then take
many captives. 4. Tumults and feditions. 5. A war with the "Turks.

6. Great diftrefs in the world, fo that a man when he paffes by ano-
ther’s grave lhall fay, Would to God I were in his place. 7. That
the provinces of Irak and Syria lhall refufe to pay their tribute.

And, 8. That the buildings of Medina lhall reach to Abab t or Tahdb.

The greater figns are,

1. The fun’s riling in the weft. Which fome have imagined it
originally did f .

2. The appearance of the beaft, which lhall rile out of the earth,
in the temple of Mecca , or on mount Safa, or in the territory of
Tayef, or fome other place. This beaft they lay is to be fixty cubits
high ; tho’ others not fatisfied with Fo fmall a fize, will have her reach
to the clouds and to heaven when her head only is out ; and that Ihe
will appear for three days, but Ihew only & third part of her body.

1 Itfem, ib, p. 25 &c. 2 Berelhit. rabbah, ScC. V. Poc. ubi fup. p* 117, &c. 3 Ibid, p. 258,

Ire. 4 Sec Luke , xviii. S. ’ See Wbifton't Theory of the earth. Book 2. p. 98, fc/V,

They

8o The "Preliminary Dijcourfe. Sedt IV.

They defcribe this monfter, as to her form, to be a compound of va-
rious Ipecies } having the head of a bull, the eyes of a hog, the ears
of an elephant, the horns of a flag, - the neck of an oftrich, the breaft
of a lion, the colour of a tiger, the back of a cat, the tail of a ram,
the legs of a camel, and the voice of an afs. Some fay this beaft is
to appear three times in ieveral places, and that {he will bring with
her the rod of Ifofch and the feal of Solomon ; and being fo fwift that
none can overtake or. efcape her, will with the firft ftrike all the be-
lievers on the face, and mark them with the word Mumen, i. e. be-
liever j and with the latter will mark the unbelievers on the face like-
wife, with the word Cafer, i. e. infidel, that every perfon may be
known for what he really is. They add that the fame beaft is to de-
monftrate the vanity pf all religions except Jfidm, and to fpeak Ara-
bic. All this ftuff feems to be the refult of a confiifed idea of the
beaft in the Revelations

3. War with the Greeks, and the taking of Conflantinople by 70,000
of the pollerity of Ifaac , who {hall not win that city by force of
arms, hut the walls ftaall fall down while they cry out. There is no god
but God: God is mofi great ! As they are dividing the fpoil, news
will come to them of the appearance of Antichrift j whereupon they
fhall leave all, and return back.,

4. The coming of Antichrift, whom the Mohammedans call al Ma-
fib al Dajjdh i. e. the falfe or lying Chrifi , and limply al Dajj Jfc He
is to be one-eyed, and marked on the forehead with the letters C. F. R.
fignifyiog Cdfer, or infidel. They fay, that the Jews give him the
name of MeJJiah Ben JDavid, and pretend he is to come in the laft
days, and to be lord both of land and fea, and that he will reftore
the kingdom to them. According to the traditions of Mohammed, he
is to appear firft between Irak and Syria, or according toothers* in the
province of Khorafdn ; they add that he is to ride on an afs; that he will
be followed by 70,000 Jews of IJpafidn, and continue on earth forty
days, of which one will be equal in length to a year, another to a
month, another to a week, and the reft will be common days ; that
he is to lay wafte all places, but will not enter Mecca or Medina , which
are to be guarded by angels ; and that at length he will be {lain by
Jefufi who is to encounter him at the gate of JLud. It is faid that
Mohammed foretold feveral Ancichrifts, to the number of about thirty i
but one of greater note than the reft,

1 Chap. xiiL

'i

5 - The

Sed. IV. The Preliminary Difcoutfe, 8 i

5. The defcent of JeJus on earth. They pretend that he is to
deicend near the white tower to the eaft of Damafcus, when the peo-
ple are returned from the taking of Conjlantinople ; that he is to em-
brace the Mohammedan religion, marry a wife, get children, kill An-
tichrift, and at length dye after forty years, or according to others
twenty four years continuance on earth. Under him they fay there
will be great fecurity, and plenty in the world, all hatred and malice
being laid afide ; when lions and camels, bears and flieep (hall live in
peace, and a child fhall play with ferpents unhurt \

6. War with the yews j of whom the Mohammedans are to make a
prodigious (laughter, the very trees and ftones difcovering fuch of
them as hide themfelves, except only the tree called Gbarkad, which
is the tree of the yews.

7. The eruption of Gog and Magog, or, as they are called in the
eaft, Tajuj and Mdjdj ; of whom many things are related in the Ko-
ran 3 , and the traditions of Mohammed. Thefe barbarians, they tell
us, having pafied the lake of ‘Tiberias , which the vanguard of their
vaft army will drink dry, will come to Jerufalem, and there greatly
diftrefs Jefus and his companions) till at his requeft God will de-
stroy them, and fill the earth with their carcaffes, which after fome
time God will fend birds to carry away, at the prayers of Te-
fus and his followers. Their bows, arrows, and quivers the Mojlems
will burn for feven years together 4 ; and at laft God will fend a rain
to cleanfe the earth, and to make it fertile.

8. A fmoke, which (hall fill the whole earth s .

9. An eclipfe of the moon. Mohammed is reported to have faid,
that there would be three eclipfes before the laft hour ; one to be
feen in the eaft, another in the weft, and the third in Arabia.

10. The returning of the Arabs to the worlhip of Allat and al
Uzza y and the reft of their ancient idols ; after the deceafe of every
one in whofe heart there was faith equal to a grain of muftard feed,
none but the very worft of men being left alive. For God, they lay,
will fend a cold odoriferous wind, blowing from Syria Damafcena,
which fhall fweep away the fouls of all the faithful, and the Koran
itfelf, fo that men will remain in the grofleft ignorance for an hundred
years.

1 1. The difcdvefy of a vaft heap of gold and fiiver by the re-
treating of the Euphrates, which will be the deftru&ion of many.

1 Al Thalabi, in Kor. c. 4. * Sec Ifaiab xi. 6, fcfc. 3 Chap. x8, and 21. 4 See Eztk. xxiix. 9
Revet xx. 8. 1 See Koran, c. 44, and the notes thereon. Compare alfo Joel ii. 30, and Revet ix. 2.

12. The

m

82 T^ke Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. IV,

12. The demolition of the Caaba, or temple of Mecca by the
Ethiopians

13. The fpeaking of beafts and inanimate things.

14. The breaking out of fire in the province of Hejdz ; or, accord-
ing to others, in Taman.

15. The appearance of a man of the defcendants of Kahtdn^ who
fhall drive men before him with his ftaff.

16. The coming of the Mohdi, or director ; concerning whom Mo-
hammed prophefied, that the world fhould not have an end till one
of his own family fhould govern the Arabians , whofe name fhould
be the fame with his own name, and whofe father’s name fhould al-
fo be the fame with his father’s name ; and who fhould fill the earth
with righteoufnefs. This perfon the Shiites believe to be now alive,
and concealed in fome fecret place, till the time of his manifeftation;
for they fuppofe him to be no other than the laft of the twelve
Imams , named Mohammed Abtdjkafem, as their prophet was, and the
fon of Hajfan al Askeri, the eleventh of that fucceflaon. He was
born at Sermanrai in the 855th year of the Hejra \ From this tra-
dition, it is to be prefumed, an opinion pretty current among the Cbri-
Jliam took its rife, that the Mohammedans are in expectation of their
prophet’s return.

if. A wind which fhall fweep away the fouls of all who have but a
grain of faith in their hearts, as has been mentioned under the tenth %n.
The three Thefe are the greater figns, which, according to their dodirinc,
ihehft are to P recet * e the refurredion, but ftitl leave the hour of it uncer-
trumpet, tain : for the immediate fign of its being come, will be the firft blaft
efftsu* trum P et > which they believe will be founded three times. The

firft they call the blajl of csnjlematiofi ; at the hearing of which all
creatures in heaven and earth fhall be ftr-uck with terror, except; thofe
whom Gon fhall pleafe to exempt from it. The effects attributed to this
firft found of the trumpet are very wonderful : for they fay, the earth
will be fhaken and not Only all buildings, but the Very mountains
levelled j that the heavens fhall melt, the fun be darkened, the ftars
fall, on the death of the angels, who, as fbme imagine, hold them
fufpcnded between heaven and earth, and the fea fhall be troubled and
dried up, or, according to others, turned into flames, the fun, moon,
and ftars being thrown into it: the Koran t to exprefs the great-
nefs of the terror of that day, adds that women who give fuck fhall
abandon the care of their infants, and even the fhe camels which

1 See after, ia this ftaion. * V. D'HerbeL; Bib}. Orient p. 531 .

have

l

«3

Se<& IV. The Preliminary Dificourfe.

have gone ten months with young (a moft valuable part of the fub-
ftance of that nation) fhall be utterly negle&ed. A farther effect of
this blaft will be that concourfe of beads mentioned in the Koran
tho’ fome doubt whether it be to precede the refurredtion or not.
They who fuppofe it will precede, think that all kinds of animals
forgetting their refpedtive natural fiercehefs and timidity, will run to-
gether into one place, being terrified by the found of the trumpet
and the fudden lhock of nature.

The Mdbammedam believe that this firft blaft, will be followed by
a fecond, which they call the blaji of exanimation 1 ; when all crea-
tures both in heaven and earth fhall die or be annihilated, except
thofe which God fhall pleafe to exempt from the common fate J ;
and this, they fay, lhall happen in the twinkling of an eye, nay in an
inftant ; nothing furviving except God alone, with paradife and hell,
and the inhabitants of thofe two placed, and the throne of glory *.
The laft who (hall die, will be the angel of death.

Forty years after this will be heard the blaji of refurreElion, when
the trumpet (hall be founded the third time by IJ'rafil , who, together
with Gabriel and Michael, will be previoufly reftored to life, and
ftanding on the rock of the temple of yerufalem *, {hall at G o d’s
command, call together all the dry and rotten bones, and other dif-
perfed parts of the bodies, and the very hairs to judgment. This
angel having, by the divine order, fet the trumpet to his mouth, and
called together all the fouls from all parts, will throw them into his
trumpet, from whence, on his giving the laft found, at the command
of God, they will fly forth like bees, and fill the whole fpace between
heaven and earth, and then repair to their refpe&ive bodies, which
the opening earth will fuffer to arife ; and the firft: who (hall fo arife,
according to a tradition of Mohammed, will be himfelf. For this birth
the earth will be prepared by the rain above-mentioned, which is to
fall continually for forty years 6 , and will refemble the feed of a man,
and be fupplied from the water under the throne of God, which is
called living water ; by the efficacy and virtue of which the dead bo-

1 Chap. 8i. * Several writers however make no diftin&ion beewcen this blaft and the firft,

foppoftng the trumpet will found but twice. See the notes to Kor. chap. $9. 3 Kor. chap. 39.

* To thefe fome add the fpirit who bears the waters on winch the throne is placed, the fr§-
ferved Table, wherein the decrees of God are regiftred, and the pen wherewith they are written;
all which things the Mohammedans imagine were created before the world. 1 In thia circumftance
the Mohammedans follow the Jews, who alfo agree that the trumpet will found more than once. V. R.
Bechai in Biur hattorah, & Otioth fhel R. 'Akiba, 6 Elfewhere. (fee before, p. 79.) this rain is fiucf
to continue on! 7 forty days ; but it rather feems that it is to fall during the whole interval between
the fecond and third blafti.

dies

m 2

84

The

length of
the laft
day.

The cir-
cumltan-
ces of ihe
refurrec-
tion.

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sed. IV.

dies fliall fpring forth from their graves, as they did in their mother’s
womb, or as corn fprouts forth by common rain, till they become
perfedt ; after which, breath will be breathed into them* and they will
deep in their fepulchres till they are raifed to life at the laft tramp.

As to the length of the day of judgment, the Koran in one place
tells us that it will laft 1000 years and in another 50000 \ To re-
concile this apparent contradiction, the commentators ufe feveral fhifts :
fome faying, they know not what meafure of time God intends in
thofe paffages ; others, that thefe forms of fpeaking are figurative and
not to be ftridUy taken, and were defigned only to exprejfc the terri-
blenefs of that day, it being ufual for the Arabs to defcribe what they
diflike, as of long continuance, and what they like, as the contrary;
and others fuppofe them fpoken only in reference to the difficulty of
the bufinefs of the day, which if G o d fhould commit to any of his
creatures, they would not be able to go thro’ it in fo many thoufand
years; to omit fome other opinions which we may take notice of
elfewhere.

Having faid fo much in relation to the time of the reiurreftion, let
us now fee who are to be raifed from the dead, in what manner and
form they fliall be raifed, in what place they (hall be affembled, and
to what end ; according to the dodtrine of tne Mohammedans.

That the refurredtion will be general, and extend to all creatures
both angels, genii, men and animals, is the received opinion, which
they fupport by the authority of the Koran ; tho’ that paffage which
is produced to prove the refurredtion of brutes be otherwife interpre-
ted by fome

The manner of their refurredtion will be very different. Thofe
who are deftined to be partakers of eternal bappinefs will arife in
honour and fecurity ; and thofe who are doomed to mifery, in dif-
gr&ce and under dilmal apprehenftons. As to mankind, they fay, that
they will be raifed perfedt in all their parts and members, and in the
fame ftate as they came out of their mothers womb?, that is, bare-
footed, naked, and uncircumeifed ; which circumftances when Mk
hammed was telling his wife Ayejha, (he, fearing the rules of modefty
might be thereby violated, objedted that it would be very indecent for
men and women to look upon one another in that condition ; but he
anfwcred her, that the bufinefs of the day would be tbo weighty and
ferious to allow them the making ufe of that liberty. Others how-
ever alledge the authority of their prophet for a contrary opinion as

" * ox - ch4 B- 3 2 * * lb. chap. 70. See the notej to Kor. chap. 81. and the preceding page.

to

I

«5

Sed. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

to their nakednefs, and pretend he a limed that the dead Ihould arile
drefied in the fame cloaths in which they died * ; unlefs we interpret
thefe words, as fome do, not lb much of the outward drefs of the
body, as the inward cloaching of the mind ; and underftand thereby
that every perfon will rife again in the fame Hate as to his faith or
infidelity, his knowledge or ignorance, his good or bad works. Mo~
hammed is alfo faid to have farther taught, by another tradition, that
mankind lhall be aflembled at the laft day, diftinguilhed into three
clalfes. The firft, of thofe who go on foot ; the fecond, of thofe who
ride ; and the third, of thofe who creep groveling with their faces on
the ground. The firft clafs is to confift of thofe believers whofe good
works have been few ; the fecond of thofe who are in greater honour
with God, and more acceptable to him ; whence Ait affirmed that
the pious when they came forth from their fepulchres, lhall find rea-
dy prepared for them white winged camels, with faddles of gold;
wherein are to be obferved fome footfteps of the dodtrme of the ancient
Arabians 1 ; and the third clafs, they fay, will be compofed of the
infidels, whom God lhall caufe to make their appearance wich their
faces on the earth, blind, dumb and deaf. But the ungodly will not
be thus only diftinguilhed ; for according to a tradition of the pro-
phet, there will be ten forts of wicked men on whom God lhall on
that day fix certain diferetory marks. The firft will appear in the
form of apes; thefe are the profelfors of Zendicifm: the fecond in
that of fwine ; thefe are they who have been greedy of filthy lucre, and
enriched themfelves by public oppreffion: the third will be brought
with their heads reverted, and their feet diftorted ; thefe are the
ufurers : the fourth will wander about blind ; thefe are unjuft judges :
the fifth will be deaf, dumb and blind, underftanding nothing ; thefe
are they who glory in their own works: the fixth will gnaw their
tongues, which will hang down upon their breafts, corrupted blood
flowing from their mouths like fpittle, fo that every body lhall deteft
them ; thefe are the learned men and dodtors, whofe actions contra-
dict their fayings: the feventh will have their hands and feet cut off;
thefe are they who have injured their neighbours: the eighth will be
fixed to the trunks of palm-trees or (takes of wood; thefe are the
falfe accufers and informers: the ninth will ltink worfe than a cor-
rupted corps; thefe are they who have indulged their paffions and

1 In this alfo they follow their old guides, the Jews; who fay that if the wheat which is fown
naked rife cloathed, it is no wonder the pious who are buried in their cloths Ihould rife with them.
Genur. Saahedr fol. 90. * See before* $e£L I p. 21

VO-

86

"The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t, IV.

voluptuous appetites, but refufed God fuch part of their wealth as
was due to him: the tenth will be cloathed with garments daubed with
pitch; and thefe are the proud, the vain-glorious, and the arrogant.
Where As to the place where they are to be aflembled to judgment* the
wiVbeaf - Koran and the traditions of Mohammed agree that it will be on the
fembied. earth, but in what part of the earth it is not agreed. Some fay their
prophet mentioned Syria for the place j others, a white and even tradt
of land, without inhabitants or any figns of buildings. Al Ghazdli
imagines it will be a. fecond earth, which he fuppofes to be of fil-
ver ; and others an earth which has nothing in common with ours,
but the name j having, it is poffible, heard fomething of the new
heavens and new earth mentioned in feripture: whence the Koran has
this expreffion, on the day wherein the earth Jhall be changed, into another
earth '.

Of the The end of the refurredtion the Mohammedans declare to be, that
jud£ f the X w k° are fo raifed may give an account of their adlions, and re-
mem. ceive the reward thereof. And they believe that not only mankind
but the genii and irrational animals alfo 1 fhall be judged on this great
day; when the unarmed cattle fhall take vengeance on the horned,
till entire fatisfattion (hall be given to the injured J.

The pre- As to mankind, they hold that when they are all aflembled toge-
rendluce ther > th< 7 wili not be immediately brought to judgment, but the an-
of thofe gels will keep them in their ranks and order while they attend for
whojire that purpofe ; and this attendance fome fay is to laft forty years,
judged, others feventy, others 300, nay fome fay no lefs than 50,000 years]
each of them vouching their prophet’s authority. During this fpace
they will ftand looking up to heaven, but without receiving any in-
formation or orders thence, and are to fuflfer grievous torments/both
the juft and the unjuft, though with manifeft difference. For the
limbs of the former, particularly thofe parts which they ufed to walk
in making the ceremonial ablution before prayer, fhall fhine glo-
fioufly, and their fufferings fhall be light in comparifon, and fhall laft
no longer than the time neceflary to lay the appointed prayers; but
the latter will have their faces obfeured with blacknefs, and disfigured

Chap 9. Kor. chap 6. V. Mamjonid. More Nev. part 3. c . 17. 3 This opinion the

learned Greats fuppofed to have taken its rife from the following words of Ezekiel, wrongly on-
derltood.; And as for yt, O my flock, thus faith the Lord God, Behold I judge between tattle and cattle,
hetween the ram and the he-goatt.—yBthold I even I will judge between the fat tattle, and between the lean
cattle , betaufe ye have thrufl with fide and with Jboulder, and pu/hed all the dijeafid with pur horns, till
■ye htfvt featured them abroad-, therefore will T five my flock, and they jbaU no rnore be a trey, and I mitt

J ^flitT ee A T 1 - Catt e ' ™' v - *7. 20, 21, 22. Much might be laid concern-

mg brutes deferving future reward and puuifliment. See Boyle J) ill. Hifl. Art. Rorarius,.Rm, D. tcc.

with

I

Se&. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe. 87

with all the marks of forrow and deformity. What will then occa-
lion not the lead: of their pain, is a wonderful and incredible fweat,
which will even flop their mouths, and in which they will be im-
merfed in various degrees according to their demerits, forae to the an-
cles only, fome to the knees, fomc to the middle, fome fo high as
their mouth, and others as their ears. And this fweat, they fay, will
be provoked not only by that vaft concourfe of all forts of creatures
mutually preflang and treading on one another's feet, but by the near
and unufual approach of the fun, which will be then no farther from
them than the diftance of a mile, or (as fome tranflate the word the
fignification of which is ambiguous) than the length of a bodkin. 80
that their fculls will boil like a pot *, and they will be all bathed in
fweat. From this inconvenience however the good will be protected
by the lhade of G o d’s throne ; but the wicked will be fo miferably
tormented with it, and alfo with hunger, and thirft, and a (tiding
air, that they will cry out, Lord, deliver us from this anguijh , tbo thou
fend us into hell-fire \ What they fable of the extraordinary heat of
the fun on this occafion, the Mohammedans certainly borrowed from
the Jews, who fay that for the punishment of the wicked on the laft
day, that planet (hall be drawn forth from its Jheath, in which it is
now put up, left it (hould deftroy all things by its exceffive heat 3 .

When thofe who have rifen (hall have waited the limited time, The man-
the Mohammedans believe God will at length appear to judge them ;
Mohammed undertaking the office of interceffor, after it (hall haveingjudg-
been declined by Adam, Noah, Abraham, and jefus, who (hall beg ed *
deliverance only for their own fouls. They (ay that on this folemn
occafion God will come in the clouds, lurrounded by angels, and
will produce the books wherein the actions of every perfon are re-
corded by their guardian angels \ and will command the prophets to
bear witnefs againft thofe to whom they have been refpeftively fent.

Then every one will be examined concerning all his words and ac-
tions, uttered and done by him in this life ; not as if God needed
any information in thofe refpedts, but to oblige the perfon to make
public confeflion and acknowledgement of G o d’s juftice. The parti-
culars of which they (hall give an account, as Mohammed himfelf
enumerated them, are ; of their time, how they fpent it ; of their
wealth, by what means they acquired it, and how they employed it;
of their bodies, wherein they exercifed them ; of their knowledge and
learning, what ufe they made of them. It is feid however that Mo-

. 1 A1 Ghazali. * Idem. 3 V. Poco.ic, N.t. in ■Port, Mo£$, p, 277. 4 See Wore, p. ji.

hammed

88

*The Preliminary Difiourfe. Se&. IV.

bammed has affirmed that no 4 efs than 70,000 of his followers ffiould
be permitted to enter paradife without any previous examination •
which feems to be contradictory to what is faid above. To the quef-
•tions we have mentioned each perfon (hall anfwer, and make his de-
.fence in the beft manner he can, endeavouring to excufe himfelf by
carting the blame of his evil deeds on others; fo that a difpute ffiall
arife even between the foul and the body, to which of them their
guilt ought to be imputed: the foul faying, O Lord , my body 1 re-
ceived from thee ; for thou createdjl me without a hand to lay hold with,
■a foot to walk with, an eye to fee with, or an underjlanding to apprehend
with , till I came and entred into this body ; therefore pttmjb it eternally,
•but deliver me. The body on the other fide will make this apology,

0 Lord, thon createdjl me like a Jlock of wood, having neither hand that

1 could lay hold with, nor foot that I could walk with, till this foul, like
- a ray of light, entered into me, and my tongue began to fpe&k, my eye to
fee, and my foot io walk ; therefore punijb it eternally , but deliver me.
JBut God will propound to them the following parable of the blind
man and the lame man, which, as well as the preceding difpute,
-was borrowed by the Mohammedans from the Jews A certain king
having a pleafant garden, in which were ripe fruits, fet two perfons
to keep it, one of whom was blind, and the other lame, the former
not being able to fee the fruit, nor the latter to gather it ; the lame
man however, feeing the fruit, perfuaded the blind man to take him
upon his ffioulders ; and by that means he eafily gathered the fruit,
which they divided between them. The lord of the garden coming
fome time after, and inquiring after his fruit, each began to excufe
himfelf; the blind man faid he had no eyes to fee with; and the lame
man that he had no feet to approach the trees. But the king orderieg
the lame man to be fet on the blind, parted fentence on and punifhed
them both. And in the fame manner will God deal with the body
and the fbuL As thefe apologies will not avail on that day, fo will it
alfo be in vain for any one to deny his evil actions, fince men and
angels and his own members, nay the very earth itfelf will be ready
to L ear witnefs againft him.

Though the Mohammedans affign fo long a fpace for the atten-
dance of the refufeitated before their trial, yet they tell us the trial
itfelf will be over in much lefs time, and, according to an expreffion
of Mohammed, familiar enough to the Arabs, will laft no longer than

* Gem * ra - Sanhedr - c U - R - Jos. Albo, Sera. IV. c. 33. See aifo Epiphan. in Ancoiat. Seft.

while

8 9

Seel. IV. *The Preliminary Difcourfe.

while one may milk an ewe, or than the fpace between the two milk-
ings of a {he camel Some, explaining thofe words fo frequently
ufed in the Koran, God will be fwift in taking an account, fay that
he will judge all creatures in the fpace of half a day, and others that
it will be done in lefs time than the twinkling of an eye *.

At this examination they alfo believe that each perfon will have the
book wherein all the adtions of his life are written, delivered to him ;
which books the righteous will receive in their right hand, and read with
great pleafure and {atisfadtion j but the ungodly will be obliged to
take them againft their wills in their left 3 , which will be bound be-
hind their backs, their right hand being tied up to their necks 4 .

To lhew the exadt juftice which will be obferved on this great day Oftheb*-
of trial, the next tiring they deferibe is the balance, wherein all things ^“ eJn
{hall be weighed. They fay it will be held by Gabriel, and that it is ^Lir
of fo vaft a fize, that its two feales, one of which hangs over para- work* will
dife, and the other over hell, are capacious enough to contain both ^ wog '
heaven and earth. Tho’ fome are willing to underftand what is faid
in the Koran concerning this balance, allegorically, and only as a figu-
rative reprefentation of G o d’s equity, yet the more ancient and or-
thodox opinion is that they are to be taken literally ; and fince words
and adtions, being mere accidents, are not capable of being themfelves
weighed, they fay that the books wherein they are written will be
thrown into the feales, and according as thofe wherein the good or
the evil adtions are recorded, {hall preponderate, fentence will be given ;
thofe whofe balances laden with their good works {hall be heavy, will
be faved, but thofe whofe balances are light, will be condemned T . Nor
will any one have caufe to complain that God fuffers any good ac-
tion to pais unrewarded, becaufe the wicked for the good they do
have their reward in this life, and therefore can expedt no favour in
the next.

The old Jewi/h writers make mention as well of the books to be pro-
duced at the laft day, wherein mens adtions are regiftred 6 , as of the
balance wherein they ihall be weighed 7 j and the feripture itfelf feems
to have given the firft notion of both *. But what the Terjian igi
believe of the balance comes neareft to the Mohammedan opinion.

1 The Arabs ufe, after they have drawn fome milk from the camel, to wait a while, and let her
young one fuck a little, that fhe may give. down her milk more plentifully at the fecond mftkmg.
a Pocock, Not. in Port Mofis, p. 278—282. See alfo Kor. c. 2. p, 23. 3 Kor. c. 17, 18, 69,

and 84. 4 Jallaio’ddin. i Kor. c. 7, See. 6 Midrafh, Yalkut Shemuni, f. 153. c. 3*

7 Gemar. Sanhedr. f. 91, Sc c. 3 Exod> xxxii. 32, 33. Dan. vil 10. Revel, xx. 12, Sc c and
Dan. v. 27.

n

They

jacies.

The Preliminary Dtfcourfe. Se£h IV.

They hold that on the day of judgment two angels, named Mi hr and
Sor&Jh t will (land on the bridge we {hall defcribe by and by, to exa-
mine every perfon as he pafles ; that the former, who reprdfettts the
divine mercy, will hold a balance in his hand, to weigh the adtions
of men; that according to the report he {hall make thereof to God,
fentence will be pronounced, and thofe whofe good Work9 are found
more ponderous, if they turn the fcale but by the weight of a hair, will
be permitted to pafs forward to paradifc; but thofe whofe good works
{hall be found light, will be by the other angel, who represents God’s
juftice, precipitated from the bridge into hell *.

Retail** This examination being paft, and every one’s works Weighed in a
tion ofin- balance, that mutual retaliation will follow, according to which
every creature will take vengeance one of another, or have fatisfac-
tion made them for the injuries which they have fuffered. And fince
there will then be no other way of returning like for like, the man-
ner of giving this fatisfattion will bfe, by taking away a proportionable
part of the good works of him who offered the injury, and adding it
to thofe of him Who fuffered it. Which being ddrife, if the angels
(by whole minHfry this is to be performed) hf. Lord we httvegtve/i to ever?
one bit due ; and their remainetb of this per forts goad works fa much as
equalleth the weight of an ant , God will of his mercy caufe it to be
doubled unto him, that he may be admitted intb paradifc; but if on
the contrary his good works be trxliaufted, and thert remain evil
works only, and there be any Who have not yet received fetisfa&ion
from him, God will order tnit an equal weight Of their flhs bfe add-
ed Unto his, that he may be punifhed for them in their ftead, and he will
Be fent to hell loaden with both. This will be the method Of God’s
dealing with mankind. AS to brutes, after rhev fhall have likewife
taken vengeance of one another, as we have men'ttOried ; abovfc, he will
command them, to be changed into dull 1 ; wicked men being reft* ved to
mote gWeVoiis puniftimfeift r fo that (they {hall cry our, on hearing
this fehtence failed on the brutes, Jf^Ouid to God that we iccrt d’.i Q
dlfo. AS to the genii', many Mohammedans are of opinion that fitch of
tneni as are true believers, will undergo the fame fate as the irratio-
nal ah5mak, and h'av'e no other reward than the favour of being con-
verted into dull ; and for this they quote the authority of their pro-
phet. But this however is judged not fa vfery reafohaBfe, the genii

* defer, vet FeVC P . nx, 401, &c. * Yerthfe* fy Ac dog 'of the feicn flsepii aoa

af j* wfllch waaraifed to fife. Will, ty peetdbr Avtan 5 admrtfiWfnto'pSffc, SteXW.
•. island c. 3, p. r

being

$e£L IV. The Preliminary Etifcourfe. <yi

being capable of putting themfeives in the ftate of believers as well
as men, muft consequently deferve, as it feems, to be rewarded for
their faith, as well as to be punifhed for their infidelity. Wherefore
fome entertain a more favourable opinion, and afiigq the believing
genii a place near the confines of paradife, where they will enjoy fuf-
ficient felicity, tho’ they be not admitted into that delightful flaanfiao.

But the unbelieving genii, it is univedaUy , agreed, will be punifhed c-
ternally, and be thrown into hell with the infidels of mortal race. It
may not be improper to abferve, that under the denomination of un-
believing genii, the Mohammedans comprehend alfb the devil and his
companions

The trials being over and the affemhly diffolvefi, the Mohammedans or the
hold, that thofe who are to be admitted into paradife will take the b «dge «/
right hand way, and thofe who are deffcined to hell fire will take the ' iirat ‘
left, but both of them muft firft pafs the bridge, called in Arabic , al
Sir at, which they fay is laid over the midft of hell, and deferibe to
be finer than a hair, and fharper than the edge of a fword ; fo that it
feems very difficult to conceive how any one fhall be able to ftand
upon it: for which reafon moft of the feCt of the Motdzalites reject
it as a fable, tho’ the orthodox think it a fufficienc proof of the truth
of this article, that it was ferioufly affirmed by him who never aflerted a
falfhood, meaning their prophet j who to add to the difficulty of the pafi-
fage has likewife declared that this bridge is befet on each fide with
briars and hooked thorns; which will however be no impediment to the
good, for they fhall pafs with wonderful eafe and fwiftnefs, like light-
ning, or the wind, Mohammed and his Mojlems leading the way;
whereas the wicked, what with the flipperinefs and extreme narrow-
nefs of the path, the intangling of the thorns, and the extinction of
the light which directed the former to paradife, will foon mifs their
footing, and fall down headlong into hell, which is gaping beneath
them a .

This circumftance Mohammed feems alfo to have borrowed from
the Magians , who teach that on the laft day all mankind will be
obliged to pafs a bridge which they call Pul Chmavad , or Chin var ,
that is, the Jtrait bridge , leading diredtly into the other world ; on the
midft of which they fuppofe the angels, appointed by G o d to per-
form that office, will ftand, who will require of every one a ftridi
account of his actions, and weigh them in the manner we have
already mentioned ?. It is true the Jews fpeak likewife of the bridge

* V. Kotin, c. 18. * Pococi, ubi fup. p. 282-289. 3 Hyde, de rd. vet. Pcrf. p. 245, 402, Sec.

n z of

92

The Preliminary Difcourfe . Sed. IV*

of hell, which they fay is no broader than a thread ; but then they
do not tell us that any fhall be obliged to pais It* except the idola-
ters, who will fall thence into perdition ‘.

TheM>- As to the punifhment of the wicked, the Mohammedans are taught
notions of that hell is divided into fev^n ftories, or apartments, one below ano-
hell, and ther, defigned for the reception of as many diftindt clafles of the
»eiii r " damned *. The firft which they call 'Jehennam, they fay, will be the
receptacle of thofe who acknowledged one God, that is, the wicked
Mohammedans , who after having there been punifhed according to their
demerits, will at length be releafed. The fecond, named Ladbd S, they
affign to the Jews-, the third, named al Hotama , to the Cbriftians ;
the fourth, named al Sdir , to the Sahians; the fifth, named Sakar ,
to the Magians j the fixth, named al Jabim, to the idolaters ; and the
feventh which is the lowed: and worft of all, and is called al Hawiyat,
to the hypocrites, or thofe who outwardly profefied fome religion, but
in their hearts were of none *. Over each of thefe apartments they
believe there will be fet a guard of angels 4 , nineteen in number 1 •
to whom the damned will confefs the juft judgment of God, and
beg them to intercede with him for fome alleviation of their pain, or
that they may be delivered by being annihilated 6 .

Mohammed has, in his Koran and Traditions, been very exadfc in defcribing
the various torments of hell, which, according to him, the wicked
will fuffer both from intenfe heat and exceffive cold. We fhall however
enter into no detail of them here, but only obferve that the degrees
of thefe paiiis will alfo vary, in proportion to the crimes of the fuf-
ferer, and the apartment he is condemned to ; and that he who is punilh-
ed the moft lightly of all will be fhod with (hoes of fire, the fervor
of which will caufe his fkull to boil like a cauldron. The condition
of thefe unhappy wretches, as the fame prophet teaches, cannot be
properly called either life or death; and their milery will be greatly
encreafed by their defpair of being ever delivered from that place, fince,
according to that frequent expreffion in the Koran, they mujl 'remain
therein for ever* It muft be remarked, however, that the infidels alone

1 Midrafli, Yalkut Reobeni, $. Gehinnom. * Kor. c. 15. 3 Othws fill thefe apartment*

with different company. Some place in the Jecond, the idolater* ; in the third, Gap and Mam &c.
in the fourth, the devils ; in the fifth, thofe who negleft alms and prayers ; and crowd the Jem
Cbriftians, an & Mariam together in the fixth. Some again will have the firft to be prepared for tte
Vtboanstor thofe who deny the creation, and believe the eternity of the world; the fecond, for
the Duahfts, or Mwichees, and the idolatrous Arabs', the third, for the Bramtns of the Indies ; the
fourth, for the Jews ; the fifth, for the Cbriftians ; and the fixth, for the Mourns. But all agree

V.Millmm, de MohammcdilWante Moham. p. 4^
D ttabel. Bibh Orient p. j68, ku * Kor. chap, 40, 43, 7+> & c . 1 lb, c , < Ib< c>

will

93

Sedt. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

will be liable to eternity of damnation, for the Mojltim , or thofe
who have embraced the true religion, and have been guilty of heinous
fins, will be delivered thence after they fhall have expiated their
crimes by their fufferings. The contrary of either of thefe opi-
nions is reckoned heretical; for. it is the conflant orthodox doc-
trine of the Mohammedans that no unbeliever or idolater will ever
be releafed, nor any perfon who in his life-time profefied and believed
the unity of G db, be condemned to eternal punifhment. As to the
time and manner of the deliverance of thofe believers whofe wil ac-
tions (hall outweigh their good, there is a tradition of Mohammed
that they fhall be releafed after they fhall have been fcorched and
their fkins burnt black, and fhall afterwards be admitted into para-
dife; and when the inhabitants of that place fhall, in contempt, call
them infernals, God will, on their prayers, take from them that op-
probrious appellation. Others fay he taught that while they con-
tinue in hell, they fhall be deprived of life, or (as his words are o-
therwife interpreted) be call into a raoft profound fleep, that they
may be the lefs fenfible of their torments ; and that they fhall afterwards
be received into paradife, and there revive on their being wafhed
with the water of life ; tho’ fome fuppofe they will be reflored to life
before they come forth from their place of punifhment, that at their
bidding farewell to their pains, they may have fome little tail of them.
The time which thefe believers fhall be detained there, according t?
a tradition handed down from their prophet, will not be lefs than
900 years, nor more than 700a. And as to the manner of their de*
livery, they fay that they fhall be diftinguifhed by the marks of pro-
flration on thofe parts of their bodies with which they ufed to touch
the ground in prayer, and over which the fire will therefore have no

J jower ; and that being known by this chara&eriftic, they will be re-
eafed by the mercy of God, at the interceffion of Mohammed and
the blefied; whereupon thofe who fhall have been dead, will be re-
flored to life, as has been faid; and thofe whofe bodies fhall have
contracted any footinefs or filth from the flames and fmoke of hell,
will be immerfed in one of the rivers of paradife, called the river
<f life, which will wafh them whiter than pearls *.

For mod of thefe circumflances relating to hell and the flate of
the damned, Mohammed was likewife in all probability indebted to the
Jews, and in part to the Magians ; both of whom agree in making
feven diflinCt apartments in hell \ tho’ they vary in other parti-

1 Poc. Not. in Port. Mofis, p. 289 — 291. * Nifhmat hayim, f. 32. Geraar. in Arubin, f. 19.
Zahar, ad £zod. xrvL 2, See, Si Hyde, dc rel. vet. Perf. p. 245^

culars.

94 The Preliminary Difiourfe. Se£. IV (

culars. The former place an angel as a guard over each of thefe Infer-
nal apartments, and fuppofe he will intercede for the miferable wretches
there imprifoned, who will openly acknowledge the juftica of God in
their condemnation \ They alfo teach that the wicked will fuffer a
diverfuy of punishments, and that by intolerable cold 1 as well as
heat, and that their faces (hall become black * j and believe thofe of
their own religion (hall alfo be punilhed in hell hereafter, according to
their crimes, (for they hold that few or none will be found fo exafltly
righteous as to deferve no punijhment at all), but will foon be deli-
vered thence, when they (hall be fufficiently purged from their fins,
by their father Abraham , or at the interceflion of him* or fome other
of the prophets ♦. The Magians allow but one angel to prefide over
all the feven hells, who is named by them V indnd Yezad> and, as
they teach, affigns punifliments proportionate to each perfon’s crimes,
reftraining alfo the tyranny and exceffive cruelty of the devil, who
would, if left to himfelf, torment the damned beyond their fentence r .
Thofe of this religion do alfo mention and deferibe various kinds of
torments, wherewith the wicked will be punifhed in the next life;
among which tho’ they reckon excream cold to be ene, yet they do
not admit fire, out of refpett, as it feems, to that element, which they
take to be the reprefentation of the divine nature ; and therefore they
rather chufe to deferibe the damned fouls as fuffering by other kinds
of punishments : fuch as an intolerable ftink, the flinging and biting
of ferpents and wild beads, the cutting and tearing of the flefh by
the devils, eXcefiive hungerand third, and the like 6 .

♦Of the Before we proceed to a defeription of the Mohammedan paradife, we

tweer^pa- mu ^ not forget to fay fomething of the wall or partition which thev
radife and imagine to be between that place and hell, and feems to be copied
ieU - from the great gulph of reparation mentioned in feripture 7 . ThEv
call it al Orf, and more frequently in the plural, at Ardf, a word derived
from the verb tfSafa, which fignifies to diftinguijh between things, or
tp /tfr/ them; tho* fome commentators give another reafon for the im-
pofition of this narpe, becapfe, fay they, thofe who (land on this parti-
tion, will know and djjllnguijh the MefTed from the damned,, by their re-
fpeflive marks or charaderiflrcs * : and others fay the word proper-
ly intends any thing that- is high raifed, or elevated; as fuch a wall of
feparation mull be fuppofed to be The Mohammedan writers great-

1 Midrafh, Yalkut Shem&tyi, toft J I
£up. f. 86.

* ai * u 1 ptw, J i* *• 1 7 o. ad * Ynlkat bhemujai, ubi

- - -- * Nifraiat hayim, f. 82. Gomar, Arubin, f. 19. V. Kor. c. 2. pw 1 1 and 3. p. 3 7,

tna notes there. * Hyde* de rel. vet. Perf. n. 182. * y. Eandcm. iU p 200. See. 7 Luke

xvi. 26. » JaJLlo’ddm. V. Kor. c. 7. » Al BcidawL P 399

!y

Se£t. IV.- “The Preliminary Difiourfe . 95:

ly differ as to the pftrfons who are to be found on al Ardf. Some
imagine it to be a fort of limbo , for the patriarchs and prophets, or
fbr the martyrs and thofe who have been moil eminent for fandtity,
among whom they fay there will be alfo angels in the form of men.

Others place here foch whofe good and evU works are fo equal that
they exactly eoUttterpoife each other, and therefore deferve neither re-
ward nor punifhment j and thefe they fey, will on the laft day be
admitted into paradife, after they fhall have performed an adt of ado-
ration, which will be imputed to them as a merit, and will make the
fcale of their good works to overbalance Others fuppofe this inter-
mediate fpaee will be a receptacle for thofe who have gone to war,
without their parents leave, dhd therein fuffered martyrdom ; being ex-
cluded paradife for their difobedtence, and eftaping hell becaufe they
are martyrs. The breadth of this partition wall cannot be fuppofed
to be exceeding great, fince not only thofe who fhall ftand thereon
will hold conference with the inhabitants both of paradife and of
hell, but the bleffed and the damned themfelves will alfo be able to
talk to one another '.

If Mohammed did not take Ms notions of the partition we hive
been deferibing, from fcripture, he mu ft at lead have borrowed it at
fecond-hand from the Jews, who mention a thin wall dividing para-
dife from hell \

The righteous, as the Mohammedans are taught to believe, having Of M6-
furmounted the difficulties, and palled the fharp bridge above- mentioned,

Before they enter patadife will be rfcftelhed by drinking at the pond of 11011
their prophet, who deferibes it to be an exadt fquare of a month’s
journey in eothpaft, ks water, which is fupplied by two pipes from al
C another, one of the rivers of paradife, being whiter than milk or fil-
ver, and more odoriferous than mufk, with as many cups let around
it as there are ftars in the firmament; of Which water whoever
drinks will thirft no more for ever \ This is the ftrft tafte which the
bltfled will have of their future and now near approaching felicity.

Tho’ paradife be fo very frequently mentioned in the Koran , yet it Of par*,
is a difpute among the Mohammedans whether it be already created, ^
or be to be created hereafter ; the Motazatites and fome other 1 fedta-
ries afieremg that there is not at prefent any fuch place in nature,
and that the paradife which the righteous will inhabit in the next life,
will be different from that from which Adam was expelled. However
the orthodox profefs the contrary, maintaining that it was created even

1 Koran, ubi fup. V. D’Herbel. BibL Orient, p. 121, 6 tc. * Midralb, Ya&ut Sioni. f. 11.

* Al Ghazali.

before

9 §

The Preliminary D{fcourfe. Se&. IV,

before the world, and defcribe it, from their prophet's traditions, in
the following manner.

They fay it is fituate above the feven heavens (or in the fcventh
heaven) and next under the throne of G o d ; and to exprefs the ame-
nity of the place tell us that the earth of it is of the fineft wheat
flower, or of the pureft mufk, or, as others will have it, of faffron;
that its ftones are pearls and jacinths, the walls of its buildings in-
riched with gold and filver, and that the trunks of all its trees are
of gold ; among which the moft remarkable is the tree called Tuba ,
or the ttzeof .bappinefs. Concerning this tree they fable that it ftands
in the palace of Mohammed , tho’ a branch of it will reach to the
houfe of .every true believer 1 ; that it will be loaden with pomegra-
nates, grapes, dates, and other fruits of furprizing bignefs, and of
taftes unknown to mortals. So that if a man defire to eat of any
particular kind of fruit, it will immediately be prefented him, or if
he chufe flefh, birds ready dreft will be fet before him, according to
his wifh. They add, that the boughs of this tree will fpontaneoufly
bend down to the hand of the perfon who would gather of its fruits,
and that it will fupply the blefled not only- with food, but alfo with
filken garments, and beafts to ride on ready faddled and bridled, and
adorned with rich trappings, which will burft forth from its fruits;
and that this tree is fo large, that a perfon mounted on the fieeteft
horfe, would not be able to gallop from one end of its (hade to the
other in a hundred years *.

As plenty of water is one of the greateft additions to the pleafmt-
nefs of any place, the Koran often fpeaks of the rivers of paradife as
a principal ornament thereof : fome of thefe rivers, they fay, flow
with water, fome with milk, fome with wine, and others with honey;
all taking their rife from the root of the tree Tuba\ two of which
rivers, named al Cawthar and the rive? of life , we have already men-
tioned. And left thefe fhould not be fufficient, we are told this gar-
den is alfo watered by a great number of Leffer fprings and fountains,
whofe pebbles are rubies and emeralds, their earth of camphire, their
beds of mufk, and their fides of faffron ; the moft remarkable among
them being Salfabil and Tanjim.

But all thefe glories will be eclipfed by the refplcndent and ravifh-
ing girls of paradife, called, from their large black eyes, Hur al
tyun, the enjoyment of whofe company will be a principal felicity of
the faithful. Thefe, they fay, are created, not of clay, as mortal

1 Yahya, inKor. c. 43.

2 JaUaToddin. ihu

women

Se& IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

women are, but of pure mufk j being, as their prophet often affirms
in his Koran , free from all natural impurities, defeds, and inconve-
niences incident to the fex, of the ftri&eft modefty, and fecluded
from public view in pavilions of hollow pearls, fo large, that, as
feme traditions have it, one of them will be no lefs than four para-
fangs (or, as others fay, fixty miles) long, and as many broad.

The name which the Mohammedans ulually give to this happy man-
lion, is al Jarniat, or the garden ; and fometimes they call it, with
an addition, Jdnhat al Ferdartos, the garden of paradife , Jannat Aden,
the garden of Eden, (tho’ they generally interpret the word Eden , not
according to its acceptation in Hebrew, but according to its meaning
in their own tongue, wherein it fignifies a fettled or perpetual habita-
tim) Jannat al Maw a, the garden of abode , Jannat al Naim, the gar-
den of pleafure, and the like} by which feveral appellations fome un-
derhand fo many different gardens, or at leaft places of different de-
grees of felicity, (for they reckon no left than an hundred fuch in all) the
very meaneft whereof will afford its inhabitants fo many pleafures and
delights, that one would conclude they mull even fink under them, had
not Mohammed declared, that in order to qualify the bleffed for a full
enjoyment of them, God will give to every one the abilities of
an hundred men.

We have already deferibed Mohammed's pond, whereof the righte-
ous are to drink before their admiffion into this delicious feat} be-
fides which fome authors ' mention two fountains, lpringing from
under a certain tree near the gate of paradife, and lay, that the blef-
fed will alfo drink of one of them, to purge their bodies and carry off
all excrementitious dregs, and will walh themfelves in the other. When
they are arrived at the gate itfelf, each perfon will there be met and
feluted by the beautiful youths appointed to ferve and wait upon him,
one of them running before, to carry the news of his arrival to the
wives dellined for him } and alfo by two angels, bearing the prefents
fent him by God, one of whom will invert him with a garment of
paradife, and the other will put a ring on each of his fingers, with
inferiptions on them alluding to the happinefe of his condition. By
which of the eight gates (for fo many they fuppofe paradife to have)
they are refpedtively to enter, is not worth enquiry } but it mull be
obferved that Mohammed has declared that no perfon 's good works will
gain him admittance, and that even himfclf Ihall be faved, not by
his merits, hut merely by the mercy of God. It is, however the

1 Al Ghazali, Kenz al Afran
O

conftant

9 8

The Preliminary Difcourfe . Se£t IV.

conftant doctrine of the Koran , that the felicity of each perfon will
be proportioned to his defects, and that there will be abodes of different
degrees of happinefs ; the moft eminent degree being referred for the
prophets, the fecond for the dodtors and teachers of Go d’s worihip,
the next for the martyrs, and the lower for the reft of the righteous,
according to their feveral merits. There will alfo feme d ill: i notion be
made in refpeffc to the time of their admiffion ; Mohammed (to whom,
if you will believe him, the gates will firft be opened) having affirmed,*
that'the poor will enter paradife five hundred years before the rich : nor is
this the only privilege which they will enjoy in the next life; fince
the fame prophet has alfo declared, that when he took a view of
paradife, he law the majority of its inhabitants to be the poor, and
when he looked down into hell, he law the greater part of the
wretches confined there, to be women.

For the firft entertainment of the blefled on their admiffioft, they
fable, that the whole earth will then be as one loaf of bread, which
God will reach to them with his hand, holding it like a cake ; and
that for meat they will have the ox Baldm l and the fifh Nun t the
lobes of whofe livers will fuffice feventy thoufand men, being., as fome
imagine, to be fet before the principal guefts, m. thofe who* to that
number, will be admitted into paradife without examination * • tho’
others fuppofe that a definite number is here put for an indefinite
and that nothing more is meant thereby, than to exprefs a great mul-
titude of people.

From this feaft every one will be difmiffed to the manfion defigned
for him* where (as has been laid) he wiH enjpy fuch a flute of feli-
city as will be proportioned to his merits, but vaftly exceed comprfc-
henfion or expectation ; fince the very meaneft in paradife, (as he who
it is pretended, muft knowbeft, has declared) will haveeighty thoufend
fervants, feventy two wives of the girls of paradife, befides the wiy*a he
had in this world, and a tent eredkd for him of pearly jacinths, and
emeralds, of a very largo extent; an& asecotdiag to another tradfeion,
will be waited on by three hundred attendants while he eats, will be ferved
in difoes of gold, whereof three hundred foall be fet before hint at once,
containing each, a different kind of food; thelaft moffelof which will
fee as grateful as the firft ; and wiU alfo be flippy with as many
forts of liquors in veffels of the fame metal; and, to ^mpleterhe en-
tertainment, there will be no want of wine, which tho’ forbidden in
this life, wiU yet be freely allowed to be drank in

1 See before, g. 88,

out

$e&. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe .

out danger, fence the wine of paradife will not inebriate, as that we
■drink here. The flavour of this wine we may conceive to be deli-
cious without a ddcription, fince the water of ‘fanfim and the othet
fountains which will be ufcd to dilute jt, 5s laid to be wonderfully
fweet and fragrant. If any objeft to thefe pleafqres, as an impudent
Jew did to Mohammed, that fo much eating and drinking rauft necef-
ferily require proper evacuations, we anfwer, as the prophet did, that
■the inhabitants or paradife will not need to eafe themfelves, nor even
to blow their nofe, for that all fuperfluities will be difcharged and
carried off by perfpiration, or a fweat as odoriferous as mufk, after
which their appetite (hall return afrefh.

The magnificence of the garments and furniture promifed by the
Koran to the godly in the next life, is anfwerable to the delicacy of
their diet. For they are to be cloatlied in the richeft filks and bro-
cades, chiefly of green, which will burft forth from the fruits of pa-
radife, and will bealfo fuppiiedby the leaves of the tree 'T&ba j they will
he adorned with bracelets of gold and filver, and crowns fet with
pearls of incomparable luftre ; and will make ufe of filken carpet^,
litters of a prodigious lize, coudhes, pillows, and other rich furni-
ture embroidered with gold and precious ftones.

That we may the more readily believe what has been mentioned of
the extraordinary abilities of the inhabitants of paradife to tafte thefe
pleafures in their height, it is laid they will enjoy a perpetual youth ;
that in whatever age they happen to the, they will be raifed in their
prime and vigour, that is, of about thirty years of age, which age they
■will never exceed, (and the fame they fey of the damned) and that
when they enter paradife they will be of the feme feature with Adam,
who, as they fable, was no lefs than fixty cubits high. And to this
age and feature their children, if they fhall defire any, (for otherwife
their wives will not conceive) fhall immediately attain j according to
that laying of their prophet. If any of the faithful in paradife be de-
frous of ijfue, it fhall be conceived , born, and grown up within the J pace
of an hour. And in the feme manner, if any one fhall have a fancy
to employ himfelf in agriculture, (which ruftic pleafure may fuit the
wanton fancy of fome) what he fhall fow will fpring up and come to
maturity in a moment.

Left any of the fenfes ftiould want their proper delight, we are
told the ear will there be entertained, not only with the ravifhing
Tongs of the angel IJrafiL, who has the moft melodious voice of all
God’s creatures, and of the daughters of paradife j but even the
trees themfelves will celebrate the divine praifes with a harmony ex-

o 2 ceeding

100

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. IV.

ceeding whatever mortals have heard j to which will be joined the
found of the bells hanging on the trees, which will be. put in motion
by the wind proceeding from the throne of God, fo often as the
blefied wifli for mufic : nay, the very claftiing of the golden-bo d^
trees, whofe fruits are pearls and emeralds, will furpais humane
gination; fo that the pleafures of this fenfe will not be the leaft of
the enjoyments of paradife.

The delights we have hitherto taken a view of, it is faid, will be
common to all the inhabitants of paradife, even thofe of the loweft
order. What then, think we, muft they enjoy who (hall obtain a
fuperior degree of honour and felicity ? To theie, they fay, there are
prepared, beiides all thi^ fucb things as eye bath not feen t nor bath ear
beardy nor hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive ; an exprefc
fion moil certainly borrowed from leripture That we may know
wherein the felicity of thofe who fliall attain the higheft degree will
confift, Mohammed is reported to have faid, that the meaneft of the
inhabitants of paradife will fee his gardens, wives, lervanta, furniture
and other pofleffions take up the fpace of a choufand years journey (forfo
far and farther will the bleiTed lee in the next life) i but that he will be
in the higheft honour with God, who (hall behold his face morn-
ing and evening: and this favour al Gbazali fuppoiestobe that addi-
tional or fuperahundant mompenfey promifed in the Koran \ which
will give fuch exquifite delight, that in refoed thereof all the other
pleafures of paradife will be forgotten and lightly efteemed ; and not
without reafon, fince, as the fame author fays, every other enjoyment
is equally tafted by the very brute beaft who is turned loofe into
luxuriant pafture J. The reader will obferve, by the way, that this is
a full confutation of thofe who pretend the Mobammedant admit of
no fpirituai pleafure in the next life, but make the happineli of the
bleffed to confift wholly in corporeal enjoyments , 4 .

Whence Mohammed took the greateft part of his paradife it is eafc
to Ihew. The Jews conftantly defcrlbe the future manfion of the

juft as a delicious garden, and make it alfo reach to the feventh hea
ven They alfo fay It has three gates 6 , or, as others will have it,
two r and four nvers, (which laft circundftance they copied to be
fure, from thofe of the garden of Eden *} flowing with milk, wine, balfiun,

1 lfaiah, Ixiv. 4. 1 Corinth, if. a.

4 V. Reland. de Rch Moh. 1. 2 . f. f 7 .
tabboth, f. 37,

IQ»

* JV.P,, in not. id Port. Mofij, p. 30 y.

4 McgilJafe, Amkotft, p. 78. enW 7 r ‘MidS£' YaU^t sSuli. £ 3 VgS’£

and

101

Se&. IV. The Preliminary Difgourfe.

and honey Their Behemoth and Leviathan, which they pretend will be
flain for the entertainment of the bleffed \ are fo apparently the Ba-
ld m and Nun of Mohammed , that his followers themfelves confefs he
is obliged to them for both h The Rabbins likewife mention feven
different degrees of felicity % and fay that the higheft will be of thofe
who perpetually contemplate the face of God’, The Perfian Magi
had alio an idea of the future happy eftate of the good, very little
different from that of Mohammed. Paradife they call Bebijht , and
Mtnu, which fignifies cryjlal t where they believe the righteous ihall
enjoy all manner of delights, and particularly the company of the
Hurdni bebijht , or black-eyed nymphs if paradife 1 * * * * 6 > the care of whom
they fay is committed to the angel Zamiyad 1 ; and hence Mohammed
feems to have taken the firft hint of his paradifiacal ladies.

It is not improbable, however, but that he might have been
obliged, in fome refpedt, to the Chrijlian accounts of the felicity of
the good in the next life. As it is fcarce poflible to convey, efpecial-
ly to the apprehenfions of the generality of mankind, an idea of
fpirituai pleasures without introducing fenlible objects, the fcriptures
have been obliged to reprefent the celeftial enjoyments by corporeal
images ; and to defcribe the manfion of the bleffed as a glorious and
magnificent city, built of gold and precious {tones',' with twelve gates;
through the ftreers of which there runs a river of water of life, and
having on either fide the tree of life, which bears twelve forts of
fruits, and leaves of a healing virtue *. Our Saviour likewife fpeaks
of the future ftate of the bleffed as of a kingdom, where they fhall
eat and drink at his table 9 . But then thefe deferiptions have none
of thofe puerile imaginations 10 which reign throughout that of Mo-
t hammed, much lefs any the moft diftant intimation of fenfual delights,
which he was fo fond of; on the contrary, we are exprefly allured,
that in the refurreblion they will neither marry nor be given in marriage ,
but will be as the angels of God in heaven Mohammed^ however,

1 Midrafh, Yalk. Shem. 2 Gcmar; Bava Bathra. £ 7$. Raihi, in Job k 3 V. Poc. not. in

Port. Moiis, p. * NiiBmat hayim, £ 32. 1 Midraih, Tehilllro, £ n. * Sadder,

porta 5. 7 Hyde, de rel. vet. Per£ p. 2$$: 8 Revel, xxi. ro, and x*H. 1,2. * Luke,

xxii. 29, 30, &c. 10 I would not, however, undertake to defend all the Cbrijlian writers in this

particular; witnefa that one pafiage of Irenaus , wherein he introduces a tradition of St^Jobu, that
our Lord ihould fay. The days Jball come , in which there Jball be vines, which Jball have e&cb ten thou-
find branches, and every of thofe branches (ball have ten tbwfand lejftr branches, and every of pbeje

branches jball have ten thouf and twigs, and every one of thefe twigs jball have ten thoufand c Infers of
grapes, and in every one of thefe clufters there jball be ten thoufand grapes, and every one of Ibeje grapes

being prejfed jball yield two hundred and Jeventy jive gallons of wine ; and when a man Jball take bold of

one of thefe f acred bunches, another bunch Jball cry but , 1 am a better bunch , take me, and blefi the Lord

by me. See. Iren. 1 . 5. c. 33* XI Matth. xxii; 30.

to

10-2

Preliminary Difcourfe. SeA. IV,

to enhance the value of paradife with his Arabians, chofe rather to
imitate the indecency of the Magians , than the modefty of the Cbri~
JHans in this particular, and left his beatified Mojlems ftiould complain
that any thing was wanting, beftows on them wives, as well as the
Other comforts of life ; judging, it is to be prefumed, from his own
inclinations, that like Panurgus’s afs *, they would think all other en-
joyments not worth their acceptance if they were to be debarred from
this.

Had Mohammed , after all, intimated to his ioUowm, that what he
had told them Of paradife was to be taken, not literally, but in a me-
taphorical fenfe, (as it is faid the Magians do the deferi priori of Zoro-
apres *) this rrijght, perhaps, make fome atonement j but the contrary
is fo evident from the whole tenor of t!he Koran, that altho’ fome
Mohammedans , whofe understandings are too refined to admit fuch
graft Conceptions, look on their prophet’s deferipuens as parabolical,
and atle wiflipg/t;6 deceive them m an allegorical or fpiritual accepta-
tion^, yet the general and orthodox dodtrrne is, that the whole is to
-be ftridly believed in the obvious and literal acceptation ; to prove
which I need oply urge Che oath they exadt from Chrijttans (who
they know abhor fuch fancies) when they would bind them, in the
moft ftrong and facred manner ; for in fuch a cafe they make them
fwear thCt if 'they fiilfify their engagement, they will affirm that there
Will be blaCk-eyed. girls in the next world, and corporeal plcafures 1 * * 4 * .
whether Before we ‘tjult this fubjCdl, it may not be improper ro obfcrVt the
women folfehood Of a vulgar Imputation on the Mohammedans, who are by
duded feverai writers s reported to hold that women have no fouls,' or, if
paradife. they have, that they will pcrrfh, like thofe of brute beafts, and will not
be rewarded hi the next life. But whatever may he the opinion of
fome ignorant people among them, it is certain that Mohamnted had
too great a refpedt for the fair fex to teach fuch a dodtrine ; and there
tire fever al paflages in the Kordn which affirm that women, in the
next life, will not only be punched for their evil actions, but will al-
fo receive the<rewards of their good deeds, as well as the men, and
that in this -cafe God will make no diftitvdtion of faces . It is true,

1 V. Rabelais, Pantegr. l $. c. 7. A better authority than ibis might however be ailed ged in fa-
vour of Mohammed* s judgment in this refpe&j Hneaji that of Pfata, who is faid to have propos'd,
in his ideal common-wesdih, as the reward of valiant men and conftnnnute fo-dkrs* the kiffes of

boys and beauteous damfels. V. Gdl. N06L "Att.l. 1$. c. z. * V. Hyde, de rel. vtL Petf. p.

266, 3 V. Eund. in not ad Bobov. Lit. Turcar. p. 21. 4 Poc. ad port. MofI p. 30c. 5 Hom-

het. Sum. Contr. p. 16. Gulp*, Voyage de Conftant. p. 275. TlUaut'% Prefen t Gate of the Ottoman
empire, 1 . 2. c. 2 1 • 6 Sec Kor. c. 3. p. t8. c. 4. p. 76. And alfo c. .13, 16. 40, 48, 57, fcfr. V.

etiam Reland. de.Rel. Mob. 1, 2. J. 18. & Hyde, in not. ad Bobov, dc VHit segr, p. 21,

the

Se6L IV. The Preliminary Difaourfe.

the general nouon iy, that they will not be admitted into the laxne
abode as the men are, becaufe their places will be fupplied by the
paradifiacal females, (tba’ feme allow that a man will there alfo have
the company of thofe who were his wives in this world, or at leaft
fuch of them as he (hall defure 1 * * j) but that good women will go into a
feparate place of happinefs, where they will enjoy all forts of delights * ;
but whether one of thofe delights will be the enjoyment of agreeable
paramours created for them, to compleat the ceconomy of the Mb-
hammedan fyftern, is what I have no where found decided. One circum-
fiance relating to thefe beatified females, conformable to wbac he had
aflerted of the men, he acquainted his followers with in the anfwer
he returned to an old woman ; who defiring him to intercede with
God, that {he might be admitted into paradife, he told her that no
old woman would enter that place; which fetting the poor woman a
crying, he explained himfelf by faying, that God would then make
her young again *.

The fixth great point of faith, which the Mohammedans are taught
by the Koran to believe, is God’s abfolute decree, and predeftination
both of good and evil. For the orthodox dodtrine is, that whatever
hath or {hall come to pafs in this world, whether at be good, or whe-
ther it be bad, proeeedeth entirely from the divine will, and is irre-
vocably fixed and recorded from all eternity in the preferred table*;
God having fecretly predetermined not only the adverfe and prof-
perous fortune of every perfon in this world, in the moft minute par-
ticulars, but alfo his faith or infidelity, his obedience or difobedience,
and eonfequently his everlafting happinefs or mifery after death;
which fate or predeftination it is not poffible, by any forefight or
wifdom, to avoid.

Of this dodtrine Mohammed makes great ufe in his Koran for the
advancement of his defigns; encouraging his followers to fight with-
out feir, and even defperately, for the propagation ©f their faith, by
reprefenting to them that all their caution could not avert their ine-
vitable deftiny, or prolong their lives for a moment s j and deterring
them from difobeying or rejedting him as an impoftor, by fetting be-
fore them the danger they might thereby incur of being, by the juft
judgment of God, abandoned to fedu&fon, hardnefs of heart, and a
reprobate mind, as a punifhment for their obftmacy & .

1 See before, p. 98. a V. Chardin, Voy. Tom. z* p. 3*8. & Bayle, Dift. HiiL Art Maho-

met, Rem. Q. J See Koran, e. 56* and the notes there. 8 c Gagnier. not. in Abulftdse vjt. iloh

p. 145. 4 8ee before, p. 64* * Kor. c. 3. p. 51, 54. and c. 4. p. J 6 , fjc. * lb. c. 4 p

6)% and 79. And c. z. p. 2 , &f/. paffim.

104 The Preliminary Dtfcourfe. Sect:. IV.

As this do&rine of abfolute election and reprobation has been thought
by many of the Mohammedan divines to be derogatory to the good-
liefs and ju face of God, and to make Gob the author of evil ; f e „
veral fubtle difan&ions have been invented, and difputes railed, to ex-
plicate or foften it ; and different feds have been formed, according
to their feveral opinions, or methods of explaining this point: fome
of them going fo far as even to hold the dired contrary pofition, of
abfolute free will in man, as we fhall fee hereafter
Ofprayer, Of the four fundamental points of religious pradice required by
and l . he the Koran , the firft is prayer , under which, as has been faid, are alfo
jwlfici- comprehended thofe legal wafhings or purifications which are necefla-
don«.. ry preparations thereto.

Of thefe purifications there are two degrees, one called Gbojl, be-
ing. a total immerfion or bathing of the body in water ; and the other
called Wo'dCt, (hy the Persons, Abdejl) whichisthewafhingof their faces,
hands, and feet, after a certain manner. The firft is required in
fome extraordinary cafes only, as after having lain with a woman, or
been polluted by emiflion of feed, or by approaching a dead body;
women alfo being obliged to it after their courfes or childbirth. The
latter is the ordinary ablution in common cafes, and before prayer,
.and muft neceffarily be ufed by every perfon before he can enter upon
that duty \ It is performed with certain formal ceremonies, which
have been deferibed by fome writers, but are much eafier appre-
hended by feeing them done, than by the beft defeription.

Thefe purifications were perhaps borrowed by Mohammed of the
Jews, at leaft they agree in a great •meafure with thofe ufed by that
nation \ who in procefs of time burthened the precepts of Mofes in
this point, with fo many traditionary ceremonies, that whole books
have been written about them, and who were fo exa& and fuperfti-
tious therein even in aur Saviour’s time, that they are often reprove^
by him for it 4 . But as it is certain that the pagan Arabs ufed luftra-
tions of this kind long before the time of Mohammed , as moil na-
tions did, and fall do in the eaft, where the warmth of the climate
requires a greater nicety and degree of cleanlinefs than thefe colder
parts; perhaps Mohammed only recalled his countrymen to a more
ftridt obfervance of thofe purifying rites, which iiad been probably
negleded by them, or at leaf! performed in a carekfs and perfun&o-
ry manner. The Mohammedans however will have it that the)- are as

1 Se£L VIII. % Kor. c. p. 66, and c. 3. p. 83. V.
40t. In Port. JViofo, p. 356, ice* 4 Mark vii. 3,

Reland, de rcl Moh. L 1. c. 8. 3 Poc.

** V. HerodotJ. 3. c. 198*

ancient

Sed. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe .

ancient as Abraham *, who, they fay, was enjoined by G o D to ob-
serve them, and was fhewed the manner of making the ablution by
the angel Gabriel, in the form of a beautiful youth *. Nay fome
deduce the matter higher, and imagine that thefe ceremonies were
taught our firft parents by the angels K

That his followers might be the more punctual in this duty, Mo-
hammed is laid to have declared, that the practice of religion is founded
on cleanlinefs, which is the one half of the faith , and the key of prayer,
without which it will not be heard by God 4 , That thefe expref-
fions may be the better underftood, al Gbazali reckons four degrees
of purification ; of which the firft is, the cleanfing of the body from
all pollution, filth, and excrements; the fecond, the cleanfing of the
members of the body from all wickednefs and unjuft adtions; the
third, the cleanfing of the heart from all blameable inclinations, and
odious vices; and the fourth, the purging a man’s fecret thoughts
from all affedtions which may divert their attendance on God: add-
ing, that the body is but as the outward (hell in refped: to the hearr,
which is as the kernel. And for this reafon he highly complains of
thofe who are fuperftitioufly folicitous in exterior purifications, avoid-
ing thofe perfons as unclean who are not fo fcrupuloully nice as them-
felves, ana at the lame time have their minds lying wafte, and over-
run with pride, ignorance, and hypocrify s. Whence it plainly ap-
pears with how little foundation the Mohammedans have been charg-
ed, by fome writers 6 , with teaching or imagining that thefe formal
wafhings alone cleanfe them from their fins 7 .

Left fo neceffary a preparation to their devotions fhould be omit-
ted, either where water cannot be had, or when it may be of pre-
judice to a perfon's health, they are allowed in fuch cafes to make
ufe of fine fand or duft in lieu of it * ; and then they perform this
duty by clapping their open hands on the fand, and pafling them
over the parts, in the fame manner as if they were dipped in water.
But for this expedient Mohammed was not fo much indebted to his

1 A\ Jannabi in vita Abrah. V. Poc- Spec. p» lo}- 9 Herewith agrees the fpuriout Gofpel of
S. Barnabas, the Spanijb tranflation of which (cnap. 29.) has thefe words. Disto Abraham, $)ue
bare yo para fervir til Dit?s it hsfanQ'osy prophttat? JfeJponM d tmgil, Fo a aqtetUa fbtnMj tavato*
pQrque Dios quiero bablar eontigo. Dixo Abraham, Como ttngo it lavarmt? Lit ego tl angel jo It ap -
pared 0 como uno belle manceho, j jt lava 7 la fuente , 7 le Ji*Q> Abraham, baz cmo yo. ^Abraham
ft Uvo, See . 3 Al KeUaT. V. Roland, de Ref. Mofiatmn.P. 81. 4 Al Gbazali, Ebn al Athir.

1 V. Poe. Spec. p. 302, Sec. 6 Barthol. Edeffen. Coftfnt. Hagaren. p. 360. G. Sidnita & J.
Hefronita, in Trad, de urb. & morib. Orient, ad ealeem Geogr, Nubienf. c. 15. Du Ryer, dans
le Sommaire de la Rel. des Turcs, mis a la tete de fa verfidn ae 1’Alcof. St. Okm, Defer, du Roy-
aume de Maroc, c. 2. Hyde, in Not. ad Bobov de Prec. Moh. p. 1. Smith, de morib. & inftit. Tur-
car. Ep. 1. p. 32. 7 y, Reland. de Rel. Moh. 1. 2. c. 11. * Koran, c. 3. p. 66, & 5. p. €34

p own

106 The Preliminary Difcourfe . Se&. IV.

own cunning *, as to the example of the yews, or perhaps that of
the Perfian Magi, almoft as fcrupulous as the Jews themfelves in
their luftrations, v. ho both of them prefcribe the fame method in
cafes of necefiity * ; and there is a famous inftance, in ecclefiaftieal
hiftory, of fand being ufed, for the fame reafon, inftead of water, in
the adminiftration of the Chriflian facrament of baptifm, many years
before Mohammed's time 3 . » _

Neither are the Mohammedans contented with bare wa(hing ? but
think themfelves obliged to feveral other necefiary points of cleanli-
linefs, which they make alfo parts of this duty ; iuch as combing the
hair, cutting the beard, paring the nails, pulling out the hairs of
their arm-pits, (having their private parts, and circumcifion 4 j of
which laft I will add a word or two, left I (hould not find a more
proper place.

of dr- Circumcifion, tho’ it be not fo much as once mention’d in the Ko-

cumciaon. i s y et held by the Mohammedans to be an ancient divine inftitu-
tion, confirmed by the religion of IJlam , and tho’ not fo abfolutely
necefiary but that it may be difpenfed wirti in fome cafes s , yet
highly proper and expedient. The Arabs ufed this rite for many
ages before Mohammed , having probably learned it from lfmae^ tho’
not only his defcendants, but the Hamyarites 6 , and other tribes,
pradtifed the fame. The Ifmaelites, we are told ?, ufed to circumcifc
their children, not on the eighth day, as is the cuftom of the Jews,
but when about twelve or thirteen years old, at which age their fa-
ther underwent that operation 8 : and the Mohammedans imitate them
fo far as not to circumcife children before they be able, at leaft,
diftindtly to pronounce that profeflion of their faith, There is no
God but God, Mohammed is the apojile of God’; but pitch on
what age they pleafe for the purpofe between fix and fixteen, or
thereabouts ,0 . Tho’ the Mojlem doctors are generally of Opinion,
conformably to the fcripture, that this precept was originally given
to Abraham, yet fome have imagined that Adam was taught it by
the angel Gabriel, to fatisfy an oath he had made to cut off that
flelh which, after his fall, had rebelled againft his fpirit •, whence
an odd argument has been drawn for the univerfal obligation of

* V. Smith, ubi fup. * Gemar. Berachoth. c. 2 . V. Poc. not. ad Port. Mofis, p. 389.

Sadder, porta 84. 3 Cedren. p. 250. 4 V. Poc. Spec. p. 303. 1 V. Bobov, de cir-

curacik^-za. 6 Philo ft org. Hift. Eccl. lib. 3. 7 Jofeph. Ant 1. 1. c. 23. 8 Genef. xvil

15. 9 V. Bobov, ubi fup. & Poc. Spec. p. 319. 10 V. Reland, de Rel Moh. 1 . 1. p. 75.

circum-

Sect. IV. The Preliminary Difcottrfe,

circumcifion *. Tho' I cannot fay the Jews led the Mohammedans
the way here, yet they feem fo unwilling to believe any of the prin-
cipal patriarchs or prophets before Abraham were really uncircum-
cifed, that they pretend feveral of them, as well as fome holy men
who lived after his time, were born ready circumcifed, or without a
forefkin, atid that Adam, in particular, was fo created * j whence
the MdammAarts affirm the fame thing of their prophet J .

Prayer was by Mohammed thought fo neceflary a duty, that he ufed
to call it the jiljar of religion, and the key of paradije ; and when the
Tbakiftcs , who dwelt at "Tayef, fending in the ninth year of the
Heira to make their fubmiffion to that prophet, after the keeping of
their favourite idol had been denied them 1 * * 4 , begged, at lean, that
they might be difpenfed with as to their faying of the appointed
prayers, he anfwered, T ‘hat there could be no good in that religion
i wherein was no prayer 5.

That fo important a duty, therefore, might not be neglected. Me-
hammed obliged his followers to pray five times every twenty-four
hours, at certain dated times j viz. i. In the morning, before fun-
rife : 2. When noon is paft, and the fun begins to decline from the
meridian : 3. In the afternoon, before fun-fet : 4, In the evening, af-
ter fun-fet, and before day be fhut in: and 5. After the day is fhut
in, and before the firft watch of the night 6 . For this inftitution he
pretended to have received the divine command from the throne of
God himfelf, when he took his night-journey to heaven: and the
obferving of the dated times of prayer is frequently infilled on in
the Koran, tho’ they be not particularly preferibed therein. Ac-
cordingly,- at the aforefaid times, of which public notice is given by
the Muedhdbins, or Cryers, from the flee pies of their Mofques, (for
they ufe no bells,) every confciencious Mojlern prepares himfelf for
prayer, which he performs either in the Mofque or any other place,
provided it be clean, after a preferibed form, and with a certain
number of praifes or ejaculations (which the more fcrupulous count
by a firing of beads) and ufing certain poflures of worfhip; all which

1 This is the fubftance of the following pafTage of the Gofpel of Barnabas, (chap 23 ) viz.
E hi once i dixo Jefqs; Adam el primer bombre aviendo comido par engano del demonio Id tmida prubiif-
da pr Dios en el pares) fo, fe le r eke ft fit came a fu efpiritu ; per lo qua l pr& diziendo , Ptr Dios que p
tt qxiew cortar; y rmpsetido una piedra tomb fa came para cor t aria con d corse J4 la pic dr a- Fw
fofitnlfkt tuprebendiJo del angel Gabriel, y el le dixo ; Ye be jur ado por Dios quo lo be de c*rfjr, y men*

tinfi m Infer? jamas. Ala bora el angel It enfeno lajuperjluidad de fu came , y a quell* cor to. D nsa-

nera que anjs com todo bombre toma came de Adam, sneft efta obligado a csimplir aqstiUo q*e Adam
con jarammd fromitft* * Shalftiel. hakkabala. V. Poc. Spec. p. 320. Gagnier, Not. in Abnl-

fed. vit. Moh. p. 2. 3 V. Poc. Spec. p. 304. 4 Sec before, p. 18. 5 Abulfed. vit. Moh

P-i2 7 . 6 V. ibid. p. 38, 39.

p 2 have

The Preliminary Difcourfe. 5e&. IV.

have been particularly fet down and deferibed, tho’ with fome few
miftakes, by other writers ', and ought not to be abridged, unlefs in
fome fpccial cafes ; as on a journey, on preparing for battle, Gfc.

For the regular performance of the doty of prayer among the
Mohammedans , befides the particulars above-mentioned, it is alfo re-
quifite that they turn their faces, while they pray, towards the tem-
ple of Mecca x ; the quarter where the fame is fituate being, for
that reafon, pointed ouc within their Mofques by a nich, which they
call <7/ Mehrdb, and without, by the fituation of the doors opening into
the galleries of the fteeples : there are alfo tables calculated for the
ready finding out their Keblah, or part towards which they ought to
pray, in places where they have no other direction *.

But what is principally to be regarded in the difeharge aF this
duty, lay the Mojlem doctors, is the inward difpbfition of the heart,
which is the life and fpirit of prayer ♦; themoft punctual obfervance
of the external rites and ceremonies before-mentioned being of little
or no avail, if performed without due attention, reverence, devotion,
and hope * : fo that we mult not think the Mohammedans , or the
confidcrate part of them at leaft, content themfelves with the mere
opus opera turn, or imagine their whole religion to be placed therein 6 .

I had like to have omitted two things which in my mind deferve
mention on this head, and may, perhaps* be better defended than
our contrary praftice. One is, that the Mohammedans never addrels
themfelves to God in fumptuous apparel, tho’ they are obliged to
be decently cloathed ; but lay afide their coftly habits and pompous
ornaments, if they wear any, when they approach the divine pre-
fence, left they Ihould feem proud and arrogant The other is, that
they admit not their women to pray with them in public j that fex
being obliged to perform their devotions at home, or if they vifit
the mofques, it muft be at a time when the men are not there : for
the Modems are of opinion that their prefence inlpires a different
kind of devotion from that, which, is requifue in a place dedicated to
the worfhip of God 8 .

The

1 V. Hotting. Hitt. Ecclef. Tom. 8. p. 470—520. Bobov, in Liturg. Turcic. p ; i, kc. Gre-
Jot, Voyage de Conftant. p. 253.-264- Chardin, V07. dbPerfe. Tom. II. p. 388, See. Sc Smith,
de monbu. acroAit. Tnrcar. Ep. .. p. 33, &c. * Korin, chap, 2. p. 17. See the notes there,

<s X- de * ti - vet - PerC P- 8> 9. & « 36. 4 A1 Ghaxali. 1 V. Poc. Spec. p. 305.

« V. Smith, ubi fup. p. 40. ^ Reland. de Rel. Moh. p. 96: See Kor. chap. 7. p. 1 io. s A

Mtor, named Ahmed Eh Ahdallfi, in a Latin epifUe by him written to Maurice prince of Oram ,
and Emanuel prince of Portugal, containing a cenfure of the Cbrijlian religion, {a copy of which,
once belonging to Mr. Selden> who has thence tranicribed a confiderahlc in his treatife De

Syne-

Se&. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe. 109

The greater part of the particulars comprized in the Mohamme-
dan inftitution of prayer, their prophet feems to have copied from
others, and efpecially the Jews-, exceeding their inftitutions only in
the number of daily prayers \ The Jews are direfted to pray three
times a day *, in the morning, in the evening, and within night j in
imitation of Abraham J, Jfaac 4 , and Jacob 5 : and the practice was
as early, at leaft, as the time of Daniel 6 . The feveral pofturesufed
by the Mohammedans in their prayers are alfo the fame with thofe
prefcribed by the JewiJh Rabbins , and particularly the moft folemn
aft of adoration by proftrating themfelves fo as to touch the ground
with their forehead 7 j notwithflanding the latter pretend the prafticc
©f the former, in this refpeft, to be a relic of their ancient manner of
paying their devotions to Baal-Peor 9 . The Jews likewife conftantly
pray with their faces turned towards the temple of Jerufalem
which has been their Kebla from the time it was firft dedicated by
Solomon IO ; for which reafon Daniel , praying in Ghaldea, had the
windows of his ohamber open towards that city 11 : and the fame was
the Kebla of Mohammed and his followers for fix or feven months **„
and till he found himfelf obliged to change it for the Caaba. The
Jews moreover are obliged by the precepts of their religion to be
careful that the place they pray in, and the garments they have on
when they perform their duty, be clean ,J : the men and women
alfo among them pray apart, (in which particular they were imitated
by the eaftern Chrijlians-,) and feveral other conformities might bo
remarked between the JewiJh public worlhip, and that of the Mo-
hammedans ,+ .

The next point of the Mohammedan religion is the giving of alms j Of aim*,
which are of two forts, legal, and voluntary. The legal alms are of
indifpenfable obligation, being commanded by the law, which direfts
and determines both the portion which is to be given, and of what

Sjmdriis vett . EbntorA. 1 . c. laxii now in the Bodleian library,) finds great fault with the
fjma: manner in which mafs is iaid among the R man Catholics* for this very reafon, among others
His words are: Ubuttnque congregant ur ftml virl if fi* miner* ibi mens non eft inters ta (f devota
tTi'i'.T inter celebrandum mijftim (ff/Krifieia, fmnittet if virt mntuU nfpeBibtts , figrthy ae nutibus eeeen-
iunt fravorum nppsiitum* if dqfi deriorum fuorum ignes : if qttsndo hoc non fterrt* fatten humana/ragi-
litas deh3 at ur muluo if retiproca afpefiu 5 if ita non poteft ejfe mens quiet a t attest ta* et demte*

1 The Snbianr* according to feme, exceed the Mohammedans in this point, praying feven times a
day. See before, p. 14. * Gemar. Berachoth. 5 Gcncf. *ix. 27; 4 Gcnef. xxiv. 63.

1 Genef. xxviii. 11, ifc. 6 Dan. vi. 10. 7 Vide Millium, de Mohammedifmo ante Moham.

jx 427, See. Sc Hyde, de rel. vet. Perf. p. 5, Stc. 9 Maimonid. in Epift. ad Ptofelyt. reiig. V. Poc.

%e«k p, 306. 9 Gemar. Bava Bathra, & Berachoth. 10 1 King*, viih 29, See* 11 Dan.

vi. to. Some fey eighteen months. V. Abulfed. Vit, Moh. p. 54. • * Maimon. in Halathoth

Tephilla, c. 9, 5. 8, 9. Menum hammeor, fob 28. a* 14 V. Mill lam, ubi fupra, p. 4*4, Sc fcq.

things

>110

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t. IV.

things it ought to be given ; but the voluntary alms are left to every
one’6 liberty, to give more or lefs, as he {hall fee fit. The former
kind of alms fome think to be properly called Z acdt, and the latter
Sadakat j tho’ this name be alfo frequently given to the legal alms.
They are called Z acdt, either becaufe they encreafe a man’s ftorc, by
drawing down a bleffing thereon, and produce in his foul the virtue
of liberality *, or becaufe they purify the remaining part of one’s
fubftance from pollution, and the foul from the filth of avarice 4 ;
and Sadakat, becaufe they are a proof of a man’s fincerity in the wor-
fliip of God. Some writers have called the legal alms tyfhes, but
improperly, fince in fome cafes they fall fhort, and in others exceed
that proportion.

The giving of alms is frequently commanded in the Koran, and
often recommended therein jointly with prayer ; the former being
held of great efficacy in caufing the latter ro be heard of God:
for which reafon the Khalif Omar Ebn Abd'alaziz ufed to fay, that
prayer carries us half way to God, fajling brings us to the door of his
palace, and alms procures us admijpon 3 . The Mohammedans therefore
efteem almsdeeds to be highly meritorious, and many of them have
been illuftrious for the exercife thereof. Hafan the fon of Ali, and
grandfon of Mohammed, in particular, is related to have thrice in his
life divided his fubftance equally between himfelf and the poor, and
twice to have given away all he had 4 : and the generality are fo
addided to the doing of good, that they extend their charity even
to brutes *.

Alms, according to the prefcriptions of the Mohammedan law, are to
be given of five things ; i. Of catde, that is to fay, of camels, kine, and
ffieep. 2. Of money. 3. Of corn, 4. Of fruits, viz. dates and raifins.
And 5. Of wares fold. Of each of thefe a certain portion is to be
given in alms, being ufually one part in forty, or two and a half
per Cent, of the value. But no alms are due for them, unlefs they
amount to a certain quantity or number ; nor until a man has been
in pofleffion of them eleven months, he not being obliged to give
alms thereout before the twelfth month is begun: nor are alms due
for cattle employed in tilling the ground, or in carrying of burthens.
In fome cafes a much larger portion than the before-mentioned is
reckoned due for alms : thus of what is gotten out of mines, or the

1 Al Beidawi. SeeKor. chap. 2. p.3*. 4 Idem. Compare this with what our Saviour fays.

' mnt' f fuch tbi H g lvfJ yt hmti an < d £ k l u \ aU tbin * s art cUm /*«•

D Hetbcl. Btbl. Orient, p. 5. * Ibid, p. 422. 1 V. Busbcq. Epift, a. p. i 7 a. Smith de

jftoeib. Tairc. Ep. i.p. 66, See. Compare EceJej, xi. 1. andProv. xii.io. ^ ’

fea,

Ill

Sedt. IV. The Preliminary Dtfcourfe.

fea, or by any art or profeflion over and above what is fufficient
for the reafonable fupport of a man’s family, and efpecially where
there is a mixture or l'uipicion of unjuft gain, a fifth part ought to
be given in alms. Moreover, at the end of the faft of Ramadan ,
every Mojlem is obliged to give in alms for himfelf and for every
one of his family, if he has any, a meafure * of wheat, barley, dates,
raifins, rice, or other provifions commonly eaten *.

The legal alms were at firft collected by Mohammed himlelf, who
employed them as he thought fit, in the relief of his poor relations
and followers, but chiefly applied them to the maintenance of thofe
who ferved in his wars, and fought, as he termed it, in the way of
God. His fucceflfors continued to do the fame, till, in procefs of
time, other taxes and tributes being impofed for the fupport of the
government, they leem to have been weary of adting as almoners to
their fubjedts, and to have left the paying them to their confciences.

In the foregoing rules concerning alms, we may obferve alfo foot-
fteps of what the Jews taught and pradtifed in refpedt thereto. Alms,
which they allb call Sedaka, i. e. jujlice , or rigbteoujitefs *, are greatly
recommended by their Rabbins , and preferred even to facrifices 1 * * 4 * ; as
a duty the frequent exercife whereof will effedlually free a man
from hell fire s , and merit everlafting life 6 : wherefore, befides the
corners of the field, and the gleanings of their harveft and vineyard,
commanded to be left for the poor and the ftranger by the law of
Mofes 7 , a certain portion of their corn and fruits is diredted to be fet
apart for their relief, which portion is called the tythes of the poor 8 .

The Jews likewife were formerly very confpicuous for their charity.
Zacheus gave the half of his goods to the poor * ; and we are told
that fome gave their whole fubftance : fo that their dodtors, at length,
decreed that no man Ihould give above a fifth part of his goods in
alms I0 . There were alfo perfons publickly appointed in every fyn~
agogue to colled! and diftribute the people's contributions “.

The third point of religious pradfcice is falling ; a duty of fo great of faft-
moment, that Mohammed ufed to fay it was the gate of religion, and “S*
that the odour of the mouth of him who fajieth, is more grateful to

1 This meafare is a and contains about fix or feven pound weight. 2 V. Roland, dereL

Mohammed. 1 . i. p. 99, Ac. Chardin, Voy. de Perfc* t. II. p. 41 5, &c. * Hence alms are

in the NetoTtftament termed A/jedjoffdrff- Matth. fi. 1. (Ed. Steph.) and 2 Cctix. 10. 4 Genur.

in Bava hathra. * Ibid, in Gittin. 6 Ibid, in Roih haihana. 7 Levit. six. 9, 10. Deut.

xxiv. 19, 8 cq. 9 V. Gemar. Hierofol. in Peah, &Maimon. in Halachoth maunoth Aniyyim.

c. 6. Confer Pirke Avoth, v. 9, 9 Luke xix. 8, 10 V. Reiand. Ant. facr. vet. Hcbr. p. 4QJ.

11 V. ibid. p. 138.

God

2 I 2

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se<5t. IV.

God than that of musk ; and al Ghazali reckons failing one fourth
fart of the faith. According to the Mohammedan divines, there are
three degrees of fafting : i. The reftraining the belly and other parts
of the body from fatisfying their lufts; 2. The reftraining the ears,
eyes, tongue, hands, feet, and other members from fin; and 3. The
fafting of the heart from worldly cares, and refraining the thoughts
from every thing befides God*.

The Mohammedans are obliged, by the exprefs command of the
Koran, to fail the whole month of Ramadan , from the time the
new moon firft appears, till the appearance of the next new moon ;
during which time they muft abftain from eating, drinking, and
women, from day-break till night % or fun-fet. And this injunftion
they obferve fo ftridly, that while they faft they fuffer nothing to
enter their mouths, or other parts of their body, efteeming the faft
broken and null if they fmell perfumes, take a clyfter or injection,
bathe, or even purpofely fwallow their fpittle ; fome being fo cautious
that they will not open their mouths to fpeak, left they fhould
breath the air too freely 3 : the faft is alfo deemed void if a man kifs

or touch a woman, or if he vomit defignedly. But after fun-fet
they are allowed to refrefh theinfelves, and to eat and drink, and enjoy
the company of their wives till day-break 4 ; tho’ the more rigid be-
gin the faft again at midnight s. This faft is extreamly rigorous and
mortifying when the month of Ramadan happens to fall in fummer,
(for the Arabian year being lunar 6 , each month runs through all
the different feafons in the courfe of thirty three years) the length
and heat of the days making the obfervance of it much more diffi-
cult and uneafy then than in winter.

1 Al Ghazali, Al Moftatraf. 2 Koran, chap. 2. p. 2t, 22. 5 Hence we read that the

Virgin Mary, to avoid anfwering the reflexions caft on her for bringing home a child, waa advifed
by the angel Gabriel to feign fhe had vowed a faft, and therefore ought n t to fpeak- See Kof&n,
cl tap. 19. p. 251. 4 The words of the Korda {chap. 2. p. 22 .) *«, Until ye can diflingnifi a

white thread f rota a black thread by the day-break ; a form of fpeaking borrowed by Mohammed from
the Jews, who determine the time when they are to begin their morning lefTon, to be fo foon as a
man can difcern blue from white, i. e. the blue threads from the white threads in the fringes of their
garments. But this explication the commentators do not approve; pretending that by the white
thread and the black thread are to be underftood the light and dark freaks of the day-break: and they
fiy the paffage was at firft revealed withonr the words of the daybreak; but MobamdkeSi followers
taking the expreffion in the firft fenfe, regulated their praXice accordingly, and continned eating
and drinking till they could diftinguifh a white thread from a black thiead, as they lav before them ;
to prevent Which for the future, the words rf the day-break were added as explanatory of the former.
Ai Beidawi. V. Pocock..Not. in Carmen Tograi, p. 89, &c. Chaidin, Voy. de Perfe, t. il. p. 422
s V. Chardin, lb. p. 421, Rdand, de Rclig, Moh. p. 109, *c. « Sec hereafter, VI

The

1 *3

Se&. IV. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

The reafon given why the month of Ramadan was pitched on
for this purpofe is, that on that month the Koran was fent down
from heaven '. fome pretend that Abraham , Mofes , and Jefus re-
ceived their refpedtive revelations in the fame month \

From the faft of Ramadan none are excufed, except only travel-
lers and fick perfons, (under which laft denomination the dodtors
comprehend all whofe health would manifcftly be injured by their
keeping the faft ; as women with child, and giving fuck, ancient
people, and young children j) but then they are obliged, fo foon as
the impediment is removed, to faft an equal number of other days :
and the breaking the faft is ordered to be expiated by giving alms
to the poor s .

Mohammed feems to have followed the guidance of the Jews in
his ordinances concerning fading, no lefs than in the former parti-
culars. That nation, when they faft, abftain not only from eating
and drinking, but from women, and from anointing therafelves
from day-break until fun-fet, and the ftars begin to appear 5 ; fpend-
ing the night in taking what refreftunents they pleafe °. And they
allow women with child and giving fuck, old perfons, and young
children to be exempted from keeping moft of the public fafts 7.

Tho’ my defign here be briefly to treat of thofe points only which
are of indifpenfable obligation on a Mojlem , and exprefsly required
by the Koran , without entring into their pra&ice as to voluntary
and fupererogatory works ; yet to Ihew how clofely Mohammed ' s in-
ftitutions follow the JewiJh y I fhall add a word or two of the vo-
luntary fafts of the Mohammedans . Thefe are fuch as have been re-
commended either by the example or approbation of their prophet;
and efpecially certain days of thofe months which they efteem fa-
cred : there being a tradition that he ufed to fay, That a faft of
one day in a facred month, was better than a faft of thirty days in
another month ; and that the faft of one day in Ramaddn, was more
meritorious than a faft of thirty days in a facred month 8 . Among
the more commendable days is that of Afhura , the tenth of Mohar-
ram ; which, tho’ fome writers tell us ic was obferved by the Arabs >
and particularly the tribe of Koreijh , before Mohammed's time 9, yet,
as others aflure us, that prophet borrowed both the name and the

E Koran* chap 2. p. 21. See alfo chaj>. 97. * AIBeidawi, ex trad. Moharameiis. 3 See

Koran, chap. 2. p. 21. A Siphra* fol. 252. 2. s Tofrphnth Gemar. Yoma, f.

* V. Gemar. Yoma, f. 40, & Maimon. in Halachoth Tanioth, c ■ > * 5. "V Gemar. Tk-
f, 12, & Yoma, fol. 83, ft Es Hayim, T&nith, c. 1. s Aa Ghazili. £ Al Bares i, m
Comment, ad Orat. Ebn Nobatse

q

faft

1 14. The Preliminary Difcourfe* Se&. IV,

faft from the Jews ; it being, with them, the tenth of the feventh
month, or Tj /ri, and the great day of expiation commanded to be kept by
the law of MoJ'es \ Al Kazwini relates, that when Mohammed came
to Medina and found the Jews there faded on the day of AJhura , he
alked them the reafon of it* and they told him, it was becaufe on
that day Pharaoh and his people were drowned, Mofes, and thofe
who were with him, efcaping : whereupon he faid, that he bore a
nearer relation to Mofes than they ; and ordered his followers to faft
on that day. However, it feems, afterwards he was not fo well
pleafed in having imitated the Jews herein ; and therefore declared,
that if he lived another year, he would alter the day, and faft on
the ninth, abhorring fo near an agreement with them *.

Of the The pilgrimage to Mecca is fo neceffary a point of pra&ice, that,
pilgrimage according to a tradition of Mohammedans who dies without performing it,
to Mticc. ma y ag we jj die a j tyw or a chrijiian and the fame is exprefsly com-
manded in the Kordn ♦. Before I fpeak of the time and manner of per-
forming this pilgrimage, it may be proper to give a ftiort account of the
temple of Mecca> the chief fcene of the Mohammedan worftiip ; in doing
which I need be the lefs prolix, becaufe that edifice has been already de-
fcribed by feveral writers *, though they following different relations
have been led into fome miftakes, and agree not with one another
in feveral particulars : nor, indeed, do the Arab authors agree in all
things, one great reafon whereof is their fpeaking of different times.
The tem- The temple of Mecca ftands in the midft of the city, and is ho-
defcribej' noure ^ tu l e °f Masjad al alharam, i. e. the facred or invi-

olable temple. What is principally reverenced in this place, and gives
fan&ity to the whole, is a fquare ftone building, called the Caaba,
as fome fancy, from it’s height , which furpaffes that of the other
buildings in Mecca *, but more probably from its quadrangular form,
and Beit Allah , i. e. the houfe of G o d, being peculiarly hallowed
and fet apart for his worlhip. The length of this edifice, from
north to louth, is twenty four cubits, its breadth from eaft to weft
twenty three cubits, and its height twenty feven cubits : the door,
which is on the eaft fide, ftands about four cubits from the ground ;
the floor being level with the bottom of the door 7 . In the corner

’ ] Levit. xvi. 29. & xxiii. 27. * Ebn al Athir. V. Pocock. Spec. p. 309. 3 Al Ghazali.

~' u Pl 3 - P- 47 > 48* See alfo chap. 22. p. 276, & chap. 2. p. 16, See. 1 Chardin, Voy. de
Perfe. T, II. p. tee. Bremond, Delcrittiocu dell’Egitto, See. 1 . 1. c. 29. Pitt's Account
of the Rel. &c- of the Mibametam, p. 98, Sec. Sc Boulainvilliera, Vie de Mahomed, p. 54, &c.
M'iich.Uft author, ia the molt particular. 6 Ahmed Ebn Yufef. 7 Sharif al Edrifi, & Kitab
Mafalec, apud Poe. Spec, p. 12% Sec.

next

/*--/ tet/A /Mtf, 'V _

r

-zg- — _

ttr

*"~ t*£-

jUP^-

Aa.

Ban^a/uej.jo Station of tAe
oirer tA t ^Jho

Scft. IV. 7 *he Pn! :i ' c,? v Diftaurfe. 115

n l a 1 ihi: iloof ii the bM Jlctte, ui dull take notice hyandbv.

On the north fide of the £-'.-?£<*, within a femkircukr enclofure fifty
cubits, long, lies the white /fane, laid 10 be the iepulchre of Ifmad,
which receives the rain-water that fails oil the Caaba by a fpout,
formerly of " ood *, but now of gold. The Caaba has a double roof,
fupporced within by three octangular pillars of aloes wood between
which, on a bar of iron, hang kune filver lamps. The out-fide is
covered with rich black damalk, adorned with an embroidered band
of gold, which is changed every year, and was formerly lent by the
Khali fs, afterwards by the Sultans of Egypt, and is now pro ided by
the Turisjb emperors. At a lmall durance from the Caaba, on the
e.ift tide, is the fiat ion or place of Abraham t where is another Hone
much refpected by the Mohammedans, of which fome thing will be
laid hereafter.

The Caaba, at fome difiance, is furrounded, but not intirely, by
a circular inclofure of pillars joined towards the bottom by a low
baluftrade, and towards the top by bars of filver. Juft without this
inner inclfure, on the fouth, north, and weft fides of the Caaba,
are three buildings, which are the oratories or places where three
of the orthodox feds affemble to perform their devotions, (the fourth
fed, fits, that of at Shafer , making ufe of the ftation of Abraham
for chat pur pole and cowards the fouth eaft fiand the edifice which
covers the well Zemesem, the tecafury, and the cupola of al Abbas

All thelc buildings are endofed, at a confiderable difiance, by a
magnificent piazza, or fqu.ire colonnade, like that of the Royal Ex-
change in London, but much larger, covered w ith linall domes or cupola’s ;
from the four corners whereof rife as many Minarets or fteeplcs, with
double galleries, and adorned with gilded fpires and creicents, as are
the cupola’s which cover the piazza and the other buildings. Between
the pillars of both inclotures hang a great number of lamps, which
are conftantly lighted at night. The firft foundations of this out-
ward inclofure were kid by Omar, the fecond Khaltf, who built no
more than a low wall, to prevent the court of the Caaba , which
before lay open, from being encroached on by private buildings; but
the ftrufhiie has been fince railed, by the liberality of many fuc-
ceeding princes and great men, to its prefent luftre h

This is properly all that is called the temple , but the whole terri-
tory of Mecca being alfo Hardm or facrtJ, there is a third enclo-

* Sbuif al EdriJi, ibid. * {den. ibid. Poe Spec. p. 116

q 2 fare.

n6

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t. IV.

fure, diftinguiftied at certain diftances by fmall turrets, fome live,
fome feven, and others ten miles diftant from the city *. Within this
compafs of ground it is not lawful to attack an enemy, or even to
hunt or fowl, or cut a branch from a tree; which is the true reafon
why the pigeons at Mecca are reckoned facred, and not that they are
fuppofed t6 be of the race of that imaginary pigedn whith fome
authors, who Ihould have known better, would perfuade us Moham-
med made pafs for the Holy Ghoft *.

The temple of Mecca was a place of worfhip, and in fingular
veneration vfith the Arabs from great antiquity, and many centuries
before Mohammed. Though it was moft probably dedicated at firft
to an idolatrous ufe yet the Mohammedans are generally perfuaded
that the Caaba is almoft coeval with the world ; for they fay that
Adam, after his expulfion from paradife, begged of God that he
might ere£t a building like that he had feen there, called BeitalMa-
mur, or the frequented houfe, and al Dor ah, towards which he might
direct his prayers, and which he might compafs, as the angels do the
celeftial one. Whereupon God let down a reprefentation of that
houfe in curtains of light +, and fet it in Mecca , perpendicularly un-
der its original *, ordering the patriarch to turn towards it when he
prayed, and to compafs it by way of devotion 6 . After Adam's
death, his fon Seth built a houfe in the fame form, of Hones and
clay, which being deftroyed by the deluge-, was* rebuilt by Abraham
and Iftnael ?, at Go d’s command, in the place where the former
had Hood, and after the fame model, they being directed therein by
revelation 8 .

After this edifice had undergone feveral reparations, it was a few
years after the birth of Mohammed rebuilt by the Koreijh on the old

* Gol. Not. in Alfrag. p. 99. 2 Gab. Sionila, & Job. Hefronita, de nonnnllis Orient, urbib.

ad calc. Geogr. Nub. p. 21. Al Mogholta'i, in his life 0 (Mohammed, lays the pigeons of the tem-
ple of Mecca are of the breed of thofe which laid their eggs at the; mouth of the cave where the
prophet and Abu Btcr hid themfelvei, when they fled from that city. Sec before, p. 51. 3 See

before, p. 17. 4 Some fay that the Beit al Marnr itfelf was the Caaba of A dam , which,

having been let down to him from heaven, was, at the flood, taken up again into heaven, and is
there kept. Zamakb. in Kor. c. z. * Aljflzi, ex trad. Ebn Abbas. It has been obferved,
that the primitive CbriJHan church held a parallel opinion as to the fituation of the celeftial Jertt-
falem with refpeft to the terreftrial : for in the apocryph&l book of the revelations of S Peter
(chap, xxvii.) after Jefus has mentioned unto Peter the creation of the fcven heavens, (whence,
by the way, it appears th«fc this number of heavem was not devifed by Mobamttied.) and of the
angels, begins the defcriptioij of the hkavenly Jerufalem in thefe words : We have created tbeupps -

Um it? ai fr ,he ? at ‘Z &?* tht l h . ir ^ btavtn ' b * n V n $ dir,Bl 3 the lower Jerufc-
lem, tfr- V. Gagmer, Not. ad lAbulfed. vit. Moh. p. 28. « Al Shahreftani. 2 V. Kor.

tlup 2. p. 16. « Al Jannabi* in via Abrah.

founda-

Sett. IV. Tbs Preliminary Difcourfe. * 1 1 7

foundation and afterwards repaired by Abdallah Ebn Zobeir , the
Khattf of Mecca* and at length again rebuilt by Tttjbf, furnamed
at HejdL In the feventy fourth year of the Hijra , with fome altera-
tions, in the form wherein it now remains *. Some years after,
however, the Kbaltf HaHbt al Rajhid, (or, as others write, his fa-
ther ai Mobil it or ha Grand father al Mart far,) intended again to
change what had been altered by al Hejdj, and to reduce the
Caaba to the oid form in which it was left by Abi allab j but was
diiFuadcd from meddling with it, left fo holy a place ftiould become
the iport of princes, and being new modelled after every one’s fan-
cy, Ihnuld lole that reverence which was iuftlv paid it 1 . But not-
wuhftimding the antiquity and holinels of this building, they have a
prophecy, by tradition from Mohammed, that in the laft times the
Etbiofiaas ill all come and utterly demoll ill it ; after which it will
not be rebuilt again for ever .

Before we leave the temple of Mecca, two or three particulars de-
ferve further notice. One is the celebrated black jhne, which is fet in fil-
ver, and fixed in the fouth eaft corner of the Caaba, being that which
looks toward Bajht, about two cubits and one third, or, which is
the lame thing, l’even fpans from the ground. This ftone is exceed-
ingly reipedted by the Mohammedans, and is killed hv the pilgrims
with great devotion, being called by fame the right hand r.f God on
earth. They fable chat it is one of the precious ftujies of paradife,
and fell down to the earth with Adam, and being taken up again,
or otherwife prefer ved at the deluge, the angel Gabriel afterwards
brought it back to Abraham when he was building the Caaba. It
was at firft whiter than milk, but grew black long fince by the touch
of a menltruous woman, or, as other? tei! us, by the fins of man-
kind k or rather by the touches and killes of fo many people } the lu-
perficies only being black, and the infide ftill remaining white 6 .

When the Ktirmatiaai among other prophanations by them offered
to the temple of Mecca, took away this ftone, they could not be
prevailed on for love or money to reftore it, though tbofe of Mecca
offered no left than five thouumi pieces of gold for it k Howcyey,
after they had kept it twenty two years, lecipg they could not thereby

1 V. ALuiu ] Mo li . 1 . 1^- 5 Rkfft# In Hit Grn. AL j. in ..hL & - ' * ! | .nr.., I -

4 Ahfsu- I Ebn Tufef. V. Poe* p. >15, " M /iiwtli. *. m Twi

E 1 n Vd -i' 0 Pm. Spec* p. *17, fife “ E idk 1 . Iii-ili

id tic > l j.t cif the Hijra 17s, jud v'bofc opinbn- ovcrfofocil fnu»l niciihl «■ oi M.hnnmr

Jijk* Bibl. Ortiint- Aft. CjruwiL -I- p I*-

drsm

1 1 8 The Preliminary Difcottrfe. Se£l. IV.

draw the pilgrims from Mecca, they font it back of their own accord j at
the fame time bantering its devotees by telling them it was not the
trueftone: but, as it is faid, it was proved to be no counterfeit by its
peculiar quality of fwimming on water

Another thing obfervable in this temple is the ftone in Abraham's
place, wherein they pretend to ihew his footfteps, telling us he ftood
on it when he built the Caaba *, and that it ferved him for a fcaf-
fold, rifing and falling of itfelf as he had occafion though! another
tradition fays he ftood upon it while the wife of his fan lfmael ,
whom he paid a vifit to, waflied his head + . It is now enclofed in
an iron cheft, out of which the pilgrims drink the water of Zew-
zem J , and are ordered to pray at it by the Karan 6 . The officers of
the temple took care to hide this ftone when the Karmatiam took
the other ?.

The laft thing I (hall take notice of in the temple is the well
Zemzem on the eaft fide of the Caaba , and which is covered with a
fmall building and cupola. The Mohammedans are perfuaded it is the
very Ipring which guffied out for the relief of lfmael , when Hagar
his mother wandered with him in the defarc 8 ; and fome pretend it
was fo named from her calling to him, when (he fpied it, in the
Egyptian tongue, Zem, zem, that is. Stay, fay 9 , though it feems ra-
ther to have had the name from the murmuring of its waters. The
water of this well is reckoned holy, and is highly reverenced j being
not only drank with particular devotion by the pilgrims, but alfo
fentin bottles, as a great rarity, to moft parts of the Mohammedan domi-
nions. Abdallah , furnamed al Hdfedb , from his great memory,

particularly as to the traditions of Mohammed, gave out that he ac-
quired that faculty by drinking large draughts of Zemzem water I0 ,
to which I really believe it as efficacious as that of Helicon to the
infpiring of a poet.

To this temple every Mohammedan, who has health and means
fufficient ”, ought once, at leaft, in his life to go on pilgrimage j
nor are women excufed from the performance of this duty. The
pilgrims meet at different places near Mecca, according to the differ-
ent parts from whence they come **, during the months of Shawdl
and Dhu'lkaada', being obliged to be there by the beginning of

* Ahmed Ebn Vufef, Abulfeda. V. Poc. Spec. p. 1 19. 2 Abulfed. 8 V. Hyde, de rd.

vet. Perf. p. 35. 4 Ahmed Ebn Vufef, Safio’ddin. * Ahmed Ebn Yufef. * Chap. 2.

P- 16. T V. Poc. Spec. p. 120, tec. 8 Genef. xxi. 19. » G. Sionit. & J. Heir, de

oonnull. urb. Orient, p. 19. 10 D’Herbel. p. 5. »« See Kor. chap. 3. p. 48. and the notes

thereon. l * V. Bobov, de Peregr. Mecc. p. 12, &c.

Dhu’l-

Sect. IV. the Preliminary Difcourfe . 119

Bbrflbajju J which month, as its name imports, is peculiarly fet
■.pair For t her celebration of this iolemnify,

At the places above-mentioned the pilgrims properly commence
fuch ; when the men put on the lhrdtn or facred habit, which con-
hits only of two woolen wrappers, one wrapped about their middle
to cover their privities, and the other thrown over their flioulders,
having their heads bare, and a kind of flippers which cover neither the
heel nor the iuftep, and fo enter the file red territory in their way to
Mecca. While they have this habit on they muff nerher hunt nor
fowl ’, (though they are allowed to fifh *,) which precept is fo punc-
tually obferved, that they will not kill even a loufe or a flea, if they
find them on their bodies: there are tome noxious animals, how-
ever, which they have permUlion to kill during the pilgrimage, as,
kites, ravens, fcorpions, mice, and dogs given to bite During the
pilgrimage it behoves a man to have a conftant guard over his
words and actions, and to avoid all quart ell'tng, or ill language, and
all converfe with women, and obfeene difcourfe, and to apply his
whole intention to the good work he is engaged in.

The pilgrims, being arrived at Mecca, immediately vifit the tem-
ple, and then enter on the performance of the preferibed ceremonies,
which confift chiefly in going in proceflion round the Caaba, in run-
ning between the mounts Safa and Merit'd, m making the ftation on
mount Arafaty and flaying the victims, and fhaving their heads in
the valley of Mina. Thefe ceremonies have been fo particularly
deferibed by others + , that I may be excufed if I but juft mention the
moil material circumftances thereof.

In compaffing the Caaba, which they do feven times, beginning
at the corner where the black ftone is fixed, they ufe a fhorc quick
pace the three firft times they go round it, and a grave ordinary pace
the four laftj which, it is faid, was ordered by Mohammed , that his
followers might fhew themfelves ftrong and a£fcive, to cut off the
hopes of the infidels, who gave out that the immoderate heats of
Medina had rendred them weak s . But the aforefaid quick pace tl ey
are not obliged to ufe every time they perform this piece of devo-
tion, but only at feme particular times 6 . So often as they pails oy
the black ftone they either kift it, or touch it with their hand, and
kifs that.

* Kor q , chap. 5. p, gp * Ibid. 1 At Beid- ^ Bobov, de Pcrcgr. Mec-c. p. n,

Chardin, Voy; dc Per e F T. 2. p. 44c* dec- See alfo Pftfjfa account if therd. ike. of the Jf
tans, p. 92, &c- GigLiicr* Vie dc MA t. a. p. 258, &c. Abused. Ml h. p. 130, Re-

load. dcRcl Mob p. iij, dec. 1 Ehn al Athir- * Y. Poe Spec, p- 5 14

The

120

The Preliminary Difcourfe . Se&. IV.

The running between Safa and Merwa 1 is alfo performed feven
times, partly with a flow pace, and partly running *: for they walk
gravely till they come to a place between two pillars j and there
they run, and afterwards walk again ; fometimes looking back, and
fometimes flopping, like one who has loft fomething, to reprefent Ha-
gar feeking water for her fon J : for the ceremony is faid to be as
ancient as her time *.

On the ninth of Dbu'Ibajja, after morning prayer, the pilgrims
leave the valley of Mina, whither they come the day before, and
proceed in a tumultuous and ruftiing manner to mount Arafat s,
where they flay to perform their devotions till fun-fet : then they go
to Mozdalifa, an oratory between Arafat and Mina, and there fpend
the night in prayer, and reading the Koran . The next morning by
day-break they vifit al Majhir al haratn, or the facred monument 6 ,
and departing thence before fun-rift, hafte by Batn Mobajfer to the
valley of Mina, where they throw feven ftones ? at three marks or
pillars, in imitation of Abraham , who meeting the devil in that
place, and being by him difturbed in his devotions, or tempted to
difobedience, when he was going to facrifice his fon, was commanded
by G o d to drive him away by throwing ftones at him 8 ; though
others pretend this rite to be as old as Adam , who alfo put the devil
to flight in the fame place, and by the fame means ».

This ceremony being over, on the fame day, the tenth of Dhu’I-
hajja, the pilgrims flay their vi&ims in the faid valley of Mina-, of
which they and their friends eat part, and the reft is given to the
poor. Thefe vidtims mull be either flieep, goats, kine, or camels j
males, if of either of the two former kinds, and females if of either
of the latter, and of a fit age I0 . The facrifices being over, they
{have their heads and cut their nails, burying them in the fame
place ; after which the pilgrimage is looked on as compleated 11 :
though they again vifit the Caaba, to take their leave of that facred
building.

The above-mentioned ceremonies, by the confeflion of the Mo-
hammedans themfelves, were almoft all of them obferved by the pa-
gan Arabs many ages before their prophet’s appearance j and parti-

1 See before, p. 20.

* See Kor. chap'. 2. p. 23

Al Ghazali. 3 Reland, de Rel. Moh. p. 121. 4 Ebn al Athlr.

c ji 1 « — *3' . Se ® lbld * Mr. Gagnier has been twice guilty of a miltake in con-

founding this monument with the facred inclofure of the Caaba. V. Gago- Not ad Abulfed

” ?;.' 3 1 • * V ! e de ^ ah - *• *• P z6z - 7 Dr- Pocack, from al GhazM, fays feventn
at different tHn« and plapes. Spec. p. 3 1 5. 8 Al Ghazali, Ahmed Ebn Yufef. ? » Ebn

4 l Athar. V. EeUni ubi fup. p. 1 1 7 . » See Kor. chap. 2. p. 23.

cularly

Sett. IV. *The Preliminary Difcourfe.

cuiarlv the com pa fling of the Caaba , the running between Safe and
Mfrwd, and die throwing of the (tones in Mi a a', and were confirmed
by Mohammed, with fame alterations in fuch points as feemed moft
exceptionable : thus, for example, he ordered that when they com-
pared the Caaba, they fhould be ckatbed whereas before his time
they performed that piece of devotion naked, throwing off their
cloaths as n mar k that they had caft off their fins *, or as figns of
their dt (obedience towards GodI

It is alfo acknowledged that die greater part of thefe rites are of
no intrinfic worth, neither affecting the foul, nor agreeing with na-
tural reafon, but altogether arbitrary, and commanded meerly to try
the obedience of mankind, without any farther view; and are there-
fore to be complied with, not that they are good in themfdves, buc
becaufe God has fo appointed +. Some, however, have endea-
voured to find out fome reafons for the arbitrary injunctions of this
kind; and one writer fuppofing men ought to imitate the hea-
venly bodies, not only in their purity, but in their circular motion,
feems to argue the proceffion round the Caaba to be therefore a ra-
tional practice Reland 6 has obferved that the Romans had fomething
like this in their worfhip, being ordered by Numa to ufe a circular
motion in the adoration of the gods, either to repreieni the orbicular
motion of the world, or the perfecting the whole office of prayer to
that God who is maker of the univerfe, or elfe in allufion to the
Egyptian wheels, which were hieroglyphics of the inftability of hu-
man fortune 7 .

The pilgrimage to Mecca , and the ceremonies prdcribed to thofe
who perform it, are, perhaps, liable to greater exception than any
other of Mohammed ' s inftitutions ; not only as filly and ridiculous
in themfelvGS, but as relics of idolatrous fuperftition 8 . Yet who-
ever ferioutly confiders how difficult it is to make people fubmit
to the aboliflung of ancient cuftoms, how unreafonable foever,
which they are fond of, el'peciiilly where the intereft of a confidera-
ble party is alfo concerned, and that a man may with lefs danger
change many things than one great one 9, muft excufe Mohammed's

1 Kor. clup. ?. p. till up- 1 At Falls, de tempore nor. Aralmm, apufi MiMluati de
MoluraiutdifniQ Mob- p < 323- Compare [fatal* lriv. 6 . 3 Jills L al Beid. Thh hojim

cynics very urar # if it be not t£s fime Wlttt th-tof the Jdfmitti - * Al GhjstiUL V. Afrulfa-.

Hill. Djii p- it i- 4 Abb jijiiit Elm Tofiul, in vita Hai Ebn VoLdhin, p. i^i. See Mr,
Qfitffs EngUjb trinfljtion rSicreoij p. 117. * De Rcl Mah. p. 123. 7 PlMtarck in Nuron,

H Matnvjiudc* [in Epiib ad ProfcL ret J pretends that the worfhip of Mrmry vraj performed by
throwing of Rones, ana shat of Cbtffxfi by mating bare the head, and putting on unLcwn
JStttfli* 9 According 1 } the jftaxim, TtUixi <rfl mxJla zutlart f wim unum

r Yielding

■ •©

122

"The Preliminary Difcourfei Sedt. V.

yielding fome points of lefs moment, to gain the principal. The
temple of Mecca was held in exceflive veneration by all the Arabs
in general (if we except only the tribes of Hay, and Khathaam , and
fome of the poflerity of al Haretb Ebn Caab r , who ufed not to go
in pilgrimage thereto) and efpecially by thofe of Mecca> who had a
particular Lntereft to fupport that veneration ; and as the moll filly
and infignificant things are generally the objedts of the greateft fu-
perflition, Mohammed found it much eafier to abolifh idolatry itfelfi
than to eradicate the fuperftitious bigottry with which they were
add idled to that temple, and the rites performed there : wherefore,
after feveral fruitlefs trials to wean them therefrom *, he thought it
belt to compromife the matter, and rather than to fruftrate his
whole defign, to allow them to go on pilgrimage thither, and to di-
redt their prayers thereto contenting himfelf with transferring the
devotions there paid, from their idols to the true God, and chang-
ing fuch circumftances therein as he judged might give fcandal.
And herein he followed the example of the raoft famous legiflators,
who inftituted not fuch laws as were abfolutely the beft in them-
felves, but the belt their people were capable of receiving: and we
find God himfelf had the fame condefcendanee for the Jews , whofe
hardnefs of heart he humoured in many things, giving them there*
fore Jlatutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they Jhould not
live

1 Al Sliahreflani. * See Kor. chap. z. p. if. 3 Ezek. xx. 25. V. Spencer, de Urim Sc.
Thummiro, cap. 4. J. 7.

Section V.

Of certain negative Precepts in the Koran,

The de-
fign of this
and the
two fol-
lowing
feltions.

Of the
prohibi-
tion of
wine.

H AVING in the preceding fedtion fpoken of the fundamental
points of the Mohammedan religion, relating both to faith and
to pradtjee, I fhall in this and the two following difeourfes, in the
ame brief method, of fome other precepts and inftitutions of the
Koran which deferve peculiar notice, and fir ft of certain things
which are thereby prohibited.

The drinking of wine t under which name all forts of ftrong and
inebriating liquors are comprehended, is forbidden in the Koran in

more

123

Sett. V. 7%e Preliminary Di/coutfe.

more places than one '. Some indeed have imagined that excefs
therein is only forbidden, and that the moderate life of wine is al-
lowed by two paflages in the fame book 1 * : but the more received
opinion is, that to drink any ftrong liquors, either in a lefler quan-
tity, or in a greater, is abfolutely unlawful; and though libertines
indulge theml'elves in the contrary practice *, yet the more confclcn-
tious are lo ftridt, efpecially if they have performed the pilgrimage
to Mecca *, that they hold it unlawful not only to tafte wine, but
to prefs grapes for the making of it, to buy or to fell it, or even to
maintain themfelves with the money arifing by the fale of that li-
quor. The Perfiam, however, as well as the Turks, are very fond
of wine; and if one alks them how it comes to pais that they ven-
ture to drink it, when it is lb directly forbidden by their religion;
they anfwer, that it is with them as with the Cbrifiiant , whofe reli-
gion prohibits drunkennefs and whoredom as great fins, and who
glory, notwithftanding, fome in debauching girls and married women,
and others in drinking to excels s .

It has been a queftion whether coffee comes not under the above- Whether
mentioned prohibition 6 , becaufe the fumes of it have fome effect on
the imagination. This drink, which was firft publickiy ufed at op^bc
Aden, in Arabia felix, about the middle of the ninth century of lawful,
the Ilejra, and thence gradually introduced into Mecca , Medina,

Egypt, Syria, and other parts of the Levant, has been the occafion
of great difputes and dilorders, having been fometimes publickiy
condemned and forbidden, and again declared lawful and allowed T .

At prefent the ufe of coffee is generally tolerated, if not granted,
as is that of tobacco, though the more religious make a fcruple of
taking the latter, not only becaufe it inebriates, but alfo out of re?
fpedl to a traditional Ikying of their prophet, (which, if it could be
made out to be his, would prove him a prophet indeed,) That in
the latter days there Jhottld be men icho Jbould bear the name of Mof-
lems, but jbotdd not be really fucb ; and that they Jhould fmohe a cer-
tain weed, which jlmld be called tobacco : however, the eaffern na-
tions are generally fo add idled to both, that they fay, a dijh of tof-
fee and a pipe of tobacco are a complete entertainment ; and the Per-

1 See chap. z. p- 25, A chap, 5 p.94. 1 Cfcp.z.p 25, & chap. 16. p. 2ig. V. D’Herbel.

Bib!- Orient, p. 696. 3 V. Smith, de motih 6 c tnftit, Turcar. Ep. 2. p. 28, fee . 4 V. Char-

din, ubi fupra, p. 212. 1 Chardin, ubi fap p. 344. 4 Abd’alkader Mohammed a] Anlari

has written a treatise concerning: Coffee, wherein he argues for iu ]awfuJnc&» V. D’Hcrbel. Art.

CahffaL 7 V + Le Traitc hiiltorique de l’origine tc da progretdu Cafe, a la jin da Voy. dc

1 ' Arabie hear, dc la Roque*

fusnt

X 2

124

The Preliminary Difcour/e. Seft. V.

fans have a proverb, that coffee without tobacco , is meat without fait l .

Opium and beng, (which latter is the leaves of hemp in pills or
conferve) are alfo by the rigid Mohammedans edeemed unlawful,
though not mentioned in the Koran , becaufe they intoxicate and
difturb the underdanding as wine does, and in a more extraordinary
manner: yet thefe drugs are now commonly taken in the eaft? but
they who are addicted to them are generally looked upon- as de-
bauchees \

Whywmc Several dories have been told as the oceafion of Mohammed? s pro-
kidden . hibiting the drinking of wine 3 ; but the true reafons are given in
the Kor&n , viz. becaufe the ill qualities of that liquor furpafs its
good ones, the common effedts thereof being quarrels and disturban-
ces in company, and negledt, or at lead indecencies, in the per-
formance of religious duties +. For thefe reafons it was, that the
prieds were, by the Levitical law, forbidden to drink wine or drong
drink when they entred the tabernacle and that the Nazarites 6 and
Rechabites 7, and many pious perfons among the Jews and primitive
Chrijlians , wholly abdained therefrom; nay, fame of the latter went
fo far, as to condemn the ufe of wine as finfulA But Mohammed
is fa id to hare had a nearer example than any of thefe, in the more
devout perfons of his own tribe 9.

©f the Gaming is prohibited by the Kordn 10 in the fame paflages, and for
tion'of ^ ame rea f° n s, as wine. The word al Me far, which is there

gaming, ufed, fignifies a particular manner of cading lots by arrows; much
pradtifed by the pagan Arabs, and performed in the following man-
ner. A young camel being .bought and killed, and divided into ten,
or twenty eight parts, the perfons who cad lots for them; to the
number of feven, met for that purpofe; and eleven arrows were
provided, without heads or feathers, feven of which were marked,
the fird with one notch, the fecond with two, and fo on, and the
other four had no mark at all 11 : thefe arrows were putpromifctioully
into a bag, and then drawn by an indifferent perfon, who had ano-
ther near him to receive them, and to fee he adted fairly? thofe
to whom the marked arrows fell, won fhares in proportion to their

_ * ® e ' an< ): DHfcrt. Mifcell. T. 2. p. 280. V. Chardin, Voy. de Perfe, T. 2. p. 14, & 66 .
n V nl Cb 4 rd .^* ,b,d - 68 ’ &c - & D’Herbel. p. 200. * V. Prid. Life of Mahf p.82, &c.

flufbeq, Epift. j, p< 255, and Maundeville’s Travels, p. 170. * Kor. chap. 2. p. 2?, ch p. r.

p. 94, & chap, 4. p. 66. See Prov. xxiii. 29, &c. * Levit. x. 9. 6 Numb. vi. 2. 7 Jerem.

xxxv. 5, &c. 8 This was the herefy of thofe called Encratita:, and Ajuarij. Kbm&f, a Magiaa

heretic, alfo declared wine unlawful ; but this was after MobammtA'i time. Hyde, de rel. vet. Perf.
£lA°°’ V. Reland.de rel. Moh. p.271. IO Chap. 2. p, 25. chap. p. 94. 11 Some

writers, as al Zamakb. and al Sbirazi, mention but three blank arrows^

lot.

12 j

8e&. V. The Preliminary Difcmrfe.

Jot, and thofe to whom the blinks fell, were entitled to no part of
the camel at all, but were obliged to pay the full price of it. The
winners, however, tailed not of the flefh, any more than the Infers,
but the whole was diftributed among the poor y and this they did
out of pride and oftentation, it being reckoned a thame for a man
to ftand out, and not venture his money on fuch an occafion This
cuftom, therefore, though it was of fome ufe to the poor, and di-
verfion to the rich, was forbidden by Mohammed *, as the lource of
greater inconveniences, by occafioning quarrels and heart-burnings,,
which arole from the winners infulting of thofe who loft.

Under the name of kfs the commentators agree that all other
games whatsoever, which are fubjed to hazard or chance, are com-
prehended and forbidden, as dice, cards, tables, &c. And they are
reckoned fo ill in themfelves, that the teftimony of him who plays
at them, is by the more rigid judged to be of no validity in a court
of juftice. Chefs is almofl the only game which the Mobammed/zn
dodors allow to be lawful, (though it has been a doubt with fome *,)
becaufe it depends wholly on (kill and management, and not at all
on chance: but then it is allowed under certain reftridions, viz.
that it be no hindrance to the regular performance of their devo-
tions, and that no money or other thing be played for or betted v
which laft the Turks and Sonnites religioufly obferve, but the Perjiaits
and Mogofs do not *. But what Mohammed is fuppoled chiefly to
have diihked in the game of chefs, was the carved pieces, or men,
with which the pagan Arabs played, bang little figures of men,
elephants, horfes, and dromedaries * j and thefe are thought, by
fome commentators, to be truly meant by the images prohibited in
one of the pafiages of the Koran 6 quoted above. That the Arabs
in Mohammed * s time adually ufed fuch images for chefs -men appears
from what is related, in the Sonna, of Alt, who palling accidentally
by fome who were playing at chefs, aiked. What images thy were
which they were jb intuit upon 7 ? for they were perfcdly new to him,
that game having been but very lately introduced into Arabia, and
not long before into Per fin, whir her it was fir if brought from India
in the reign of Khofrii Nujhirwdrt 8 . Hence the Mohammed an doc-
tors infer that the game was disapproved only for the hike of the

1 A'l^arca Nodhm z\ dorr. & Kithr *1 dorr, si Zsmakh. al Firauzabidi* si Sbfriii in Orn,
i] Hand, *1 Befcllwi, fire. V. Poc- Spec p. 31^ kc. 2 Korn , chap y p. 82: ■ V,

Hyde, de Lutiii LicUntal. in ProIcE- a< * Shahikidii-m. 4 V- Eund. ibiit, i V. Boudens »
iMd, A in Hilt. Shnhikdij, p . 135, Ac, 6 Ckap. 5. p. 9.^ ' Sokcikss' al DirniML k

Uki *1 Mtllitraf, apod Hyde, ubi fup p. 8. * Khondcmir, apiad eund. ib p, 4 1 .

images -

126 The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sedt. V.

images: wherefore the Somites always play with plain pieces of

wood or ivory ; but the Perjians and Indians, who are not fo fcru-
pulous, continue to make ufe of the carved ones *.

The Mohammedans comply with the prohibition of gaming much
better than they do With that of winej for though the common
people, among the T arks more frequently, and the Perjians more
rarely, are addidted to play, yet the better fort are feldom guilty of it \
Gaming, at leaft to excefs, has been forbidden in all well-ordered
ftates. Gaming-houfes were reckoned fcandalous places among the
Greeks , and a gameftfir is declared by Arijlotle 3 to be no better than
a thief: the Roman fenate made very fevere laws againft playing at
games of hazard \ except only during the Saturnalia ; though the
people played often at other times, notwithftanding the prohibition:
the civil law forbad all pernicious games 5 j and though the laity
were, in fome cafes, permitted to play for money, provided they
kept within reafonable bounds, yet the clergy wef€ forbidden to
play at tables (which is a game of hazard,) or even to look on while
others played 6 . Accurfius, indeed, is of opinion they may play at
chefs, notwithftanding that law, becaufe it is a game not fubjedt to
chance t, and being but newly invented in the time of Jujlinian,
was not then known in the weftern parts. However the monks for
fome time were not allowed even chefe 8 .

As to the Jews, Mohammed's chief guides, they alfo highly difap-
prove gaming : gamefters being feverely cenfured in the Talmud , and
their teftimony declared invalid 9 .

Of the Another practice of the idolatrous Arabs forbidden alfo in one of
prohibi-^ t h e above-mentioned paflages IO , was that of divining by arrows,
lining ar- The arrows ufed by them for this purpofe were like thofe with
which they caft lots, being without heads or feathers, and were
kept in the temple of fome idol, in whole prefence they were con-
fulted. Seven fuch arrows were kept at the temple of Mecca 11 ;
but generally in divination they made ufe of three only, on one
of which was written. My Lord hath commanded me, on another,

rows

1 V. Hyde, libi fup. p. 9. * V. Eundem, in Prolog. & Chardin, Vo y. de Perfe. T. 2.

V. 46. 3 Lib. 4. ad Nicom. 4 V. Horat. 1 . 3. Gann. Od. 24. * ff. de akatoribus.

Novell, juft. 123,/cc. V. Hyde, ubi fup. in Hift. Aleae, p. 119. 6 Authent. interdicimus,

c. de epifeopis. 7 In com. ad legem prad. 6 J>o Prefne, in Glofs. 9 Bava Melia,
84. i, Rofli halhana, Sc Sanhedr. 24. 2. V. etiam Maimon. in tra&. Gezila. Among the modern
civilians, Ma/cardus thought common gamefters were not to be admitted as witnefTea, being infa-
mous perfons. V. Hyde, ubi fop. in Proleg. & in Hift. Aleae, J. III. 10 Kor. chap. e. p. 04.
1 1 See before, p, 20.

My

127

Se£t. V. 73>i? Preliminary Dijcourje.

My Lord hath forbidden me, and the third was blank. If the firft
was drawn, they looked on it as an approbation of the enterprize in
queftion ; if the fecond, they made a contrary conclufion ; but if
the third happened to be drawn, they mixed them and drew over
again, till a decifive anfwer was given by one of the others. Thefe
divining arrows were generally consulted before any thing of mo-
ment was undertaken ; as when a man was about to marry, or about
to go a journey, or the like r . This fuperftitious practice of divin-
ing by arrows was ufed by the ancient Greeks *, and other nations ;
and is particularly mentioned in feriptute , where it is faid, that the
king of Babylon food at the parting of the way, at the bead of the
two ways, to ufe divination ; be made his arrows bright, (or, accordr
ing to the verfion of the vulgate, which feems preferable in this
place, he mixed together, or fhook the arrow s,) he cmfulted with ima-
ges, & c. the cqmmentary of St. Jerom on which pafiage wonder-
fully agrees witn what we are told of the aforefaid euftom of the-
old Arabs : He Jhall jland, fays he, in the highway, and confult the
oracle after the manner of bis nation, that be may caft arrows into a
quiver, and mix them together, being written upon or marked with the
names of each people, that be may fee whofe arrow will come forth , and
which city he ought frjl to attack + .

A diftindtion of meats was fo generally ufed by the eaflem na- Of forbid-
tions, that it is no wonder that Mohammed made fome regulations deafood *
in that matter. The Kordn, therefore, prohibits the eating of blood,
and fwines flefh, and whatever dies of itfelf, or is (lain in the name
or in honour of any idol, or is firangled, or killed by a blow, or a
fell, or by any other beaft s . In which particulars Mohammed feems
chiefly to have imitated the "Jews, by whofe law, as is well known,
all thofe things are forbidden ; but he allowed fome things to be
eaten which Mafes did not 6 , as camels flefh 7 in particular. In
eafes of neceflity, however, where a man may be in danger of
ftarving, he is allowed by the Mohammedan law to eat any of the
faid prohibited kinds of food 8 ; and the Jewijh doctors grant the
feme liberty in tbe like cafe 9 . Though the averflon to blood and
what dies of itfelf may feem natural, yet fome of the pagan Arabs

1 Ebn aS Aihir, al Zjmakh & al Beid. in Kor. c. 5, A 1 Moftatraf, &c. V. Poc. Spec. p. 327,.

See. & D HerbeL Bibl. Orient. Art. Acdah. 1 V, Potter, Abdq; of Greece, Vol. 1. p. 534*

3 Ezcle. xxL 21 4 V Poc Spec p. 329, 8ec 4 Chap. 2. p. 2a ch. y: p. 82. chap. 6. p. i 1 1,

& 1 14, & chip. 16. p. 225, 6 Lev. xi. 4. 7 See Kor. chap. 3. p. 42, 8c 47, 8c chap. 6. p. 1 1^

8 Kor. chap 5. p. 83 and in the other paffagei laft quoted. * V, Maimon. in Hilacboth Me-
lachun. chap. 8 §. I, 8c c.

ufect

1 2$ The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. V,

ufed to eat both: of their eating of the latter fome inftances will
be given hereafter ; and as to the former, it is faid they ufed to p^ r
blood, which they fometimes drew from a live camel, into a gff^
and then broiled it in the fire, or boiled it, and eat it *: this food they
called Mofwadd, from Afwad, which fignifies black ; the fame nearly
refembling our black-puddings in name as well as compofition *. The
eating of meat offered to idols I take to be commonly pradtifed by
all idolaters, being looked on as a fort of communion in their wor-
fhip, and for that reafon efteemed by Chri/lians, if not abfolutely
unlawful, yet as what may be the occafion of great fcandal 3 : but
the Arabs were particularly fuperftitious in this matter, killing what
they eat on ftones eredted on purpofe round the Caaba , or near
their own houfes, and calling, at the fame time, on the name of
fome idol *■. Swine’s-flefh, indeed, the old Arabs feem not to have
eaten ; and their prophet, in prohibiting the fame, appears to have
only confirmed the common averfion of the nation. Foreign
writers tell us that the Arabs wholly abftained from fwine’s-flefh s,
thinking it unlawful to feed thereon 6 , and that very few, if any, of
thole animals are found in their country, becaufe it produces not
proper food for them 7 ; which has made one writer imagine that if
a hog were carried thither, it would immediately die *.

Of ufury. In the prohibition of ufury 9 I prefume Mohammed alfo followed
the yews, who are ftridlly forbidden by their law to exercife it among
one another, though they are fo infamoufly guilty of it in their
dealing with thofe of a different religion : but I do not find the pro-
phet of the Arabs has made any diftindtion in this matter.

Superfti- Several fuperftitious euftoms relating to cattle, which feem to
tious cuf- have been peculiar to the pagan Arabs , were alfo abolifhed by Mo-
ladnVto hammed. The Koran 10 mentions four names by them given to certain
ctttka- camels or fheep, which for fome particular reafons were left at free
holifhcd. liberty, and were not made ufe of as other cattle of the fame kind.
Thefe names are Bahtra, Sa'iba, Wajtla , and Ha mi: of each whereof
in their order.

As to the firft jt is faid that when a fhe-camel, or a fheep, had
borne young ten times, they ufed to flit her ear, and turn her loofe’
to feed at full liberty j and when fhe died, her flefh was eaten by

1 Nothr al dorr, al Firauz. al Zamakh. & al Beid. * Poc. Spec. p. 320. 9 Compare

AQi xv. 29, with 1 Cor. viii. 4, &c. * See the fifth chap, of the Kor. p. 82. and the note*

there. ' Solin. de Arab. cap. 33. 6 Hieronym. in Jovin. 1 . 2. c. 6. 7 Idem, ib s So

intis, ubi fupra. 9 Kor. chap. 2. p. 33. 10 Chap. 5. p. 96.

the

129

Scft. V. The Preliminary Difeourfe.

tile men only, the women being forbidden to eat thereof : and fuch
a camel or Cheep, from the jUtthig of her ear, they called Babira »
Or the Babira was a Che- camel, which was turned loofc to feed,
and whole fifth young one, if it proved a male, was killed and eaten
by men and women promiicuoufiy; bur if it proved a female, had
ks ear (lit, and was dumifled to free pafture, none being permitted
to make ute of its flefli or milk, or to ride on it; though the women
were allowed to eat the fleih of it, when it died: or it was the fe-
rn fie young of the Sdiba, which was ufed in the fame manner as
its dam ; or elfe an ewe, which had yeaned five times x . Thefe,
however, are not all the opinions concerning the Babira : for fome
fuppofc that name was given to a (lie- camel, which after having
brought forth young five times, (if the laft was a male,) had her
ear Air, as a mark thereof, and was let go looi'e to feed, none driv-
ing her from pafture or water, nor ufing her for carriage * ; and
others tell us, that when a camel had newly brought forth, they
ufed to flit the ear of her young one, faying, O God, if it live,
4t /?'.?// be for mr ufi, but if it die, it jhxll be deemed rightly flaw ;
and when it died, they eat it K

Sdiba fig n;fies a fhe-camel turned koft to go where Che will. And
this was done on various accounts: as when Che had brought forth
females ten times together; or in fatisfadtion of a vow; or when
a man had recovered from ficknefs, or returned fa fe from a journey,
or his camel had cfcaped fome figna! danger either in battle or
ocherwife. A camel lb turned lonfe was declared to be Sdibt j, and,
as a mark of it, one of the vertebra or bones was taken out of her
back, after which none might drive her from pafture or water, or
ride on her *. Some fay that the Sdiba , when fhe had ten times to-
gether brought forth females, was fuffered to go at liberty, none be-
ing allowed to ride on her, and that her milk was not to be drank by
any but her young one, or a gueil, till fhe died ; and then her flefh
was eaten by men as well as women, and her laft female young
one had her ear flit, and was called Babira , and turned loofe as her
dam had been K

This appellation, however, was riot fo ftribtly proper to female
camels, but that it was given to the male when his young one had
begotten another young one 6 : nay a fervant fee at liberty and dif-
milled by his mafter, was alfo called Sdiba 7 ; and fome are of opi-

1 AI Firauzabxdi. 3 A1 Zamakh. a] BcidiwI* al Moftatraf, 3 Ebn al Athxr 4 A1
FkaiBt&i al Zamakh- * Al jawhari. Ebn al Athxr. 6 Al Finuz, 7 Idem, al jiwhri* See.

S nioQ

1 30 the Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t V.

nion that the word denotes any animal which the Arabs, ufed to
turn loofe in honour of their idols, allowing none to make ufe of
them, thereafter, except women only *.

Wafila is, by one author *, explained to fignify a (he-camel, which
had brought forth ten times, or an ewe which had yeaned^ feven
times, and every time twins ; and if the feventh time (he brought
forth a male and a female, they faid, JVofilat akhdba , i. e. She is
joined, or was brought forth with her brother , after which none might
drink the dam’s milk, except men only; and (he was ufed as the
Sdiba. Or JVafila was particularly meant of (heep ; as when an
ewe brought forth a female, they took it to themfelves, but when
(he brought forth a male, they confecrated it to their gods, but if
both a male and a female, they faid, She is joined to her brother , and
did not facrifice that male to their gods: or Wafila was an ewe
which brought forth firft a male, and then a female, on whofe ac-
count, or becaufe Jhe followed her brother , the male was not killed ;
but if (he brought forth a male only, they faid, Let this be an of-
fering to our gods 1. Another 4 writes, that if an ewe brought forth
twins feven times together, and the eighth time a male, they facri-
ficed that male to their gods; but if the eighth time (he brought
both a male and a female, they ufed to fay. She is joined to her brother ,
and for the female’s fake they fpared the male, and permitted not
the dam’s milk to be drank by women. A third writer tells us, that
Wafila was an ewe, which having yeaned feven times, if that which
(he brought forth the feventh time was a male, they facrificed it, but if a
female, it was fuffered to go loofe, and was made ufe of by women
only ; and if the feventh time (he brought forth both a male and a
female, they held them both to be facred, fo that men only were
allowed to make any ufe of them, or to drink the milk of the fe-
male : and a fourth 5 deferibes it to be an ewe which brought forth
ten females at five births one after another, i. e. every time twins,
and whatever (he brought forth afterwards was allowed to men,
and not to women, Gfc.

Hami was a male camel ufed for a ftallion, which, if the females
had conceived ten times by him* was afterwards freed from labour ,
and let go loofe, none (hiving him from pafture or from water ;
nor was any allowed to receive the lead benefit from him,- not even
to (hear his hair 6 .

1 », I ?? thr al *! orr ' * Nodhm al dorr. * A1 Firauz. * Mem, al Zanukh. 4 A1 >wha«.

1 AlMotanezi. « Al Fir**, al Jjwhari.

Thefe

Seft. V. The Preliminary Difcourfi^ 131

Tbele things were obfervcJ by the old Arabs in honour of their
falfe gods ’, and as part of the worlhip which they paid them, and
were aferibed to the divine inftitution ; but are all condemned in
the Koran, and declared to be impious fuperftitions *.

The law of Mohammed alfo put a flop to the inhuman cuftom, Thecof-
which had been long pra&tfed by the pagan Arab, of burying their
daughters alive, left they (hould be reduced to poverty by providing ing their
for them, or elie to avoid the difpleafure and difgrace which would
follow, if they ftiould happen to be made captives, or to become jj^.
fcand&lous by their behaviour the birth of a daughter being, for
thefe reafons, reckoned a great misfortune 4 , and the death of one
as great a happineis The manner of their doing this is differently
related: fame fay that when an Arab had a daughter born, if he
intended to bring her up, he fenc her, cloathed in a garment of
wool or hair, to keep camels or (heep in the defart ; but if he de-
fig ned to put her to death, he let her live till fhe became fix years
old, and then faid to her mother, Perfume her, and adorn her, that
I may carry her to her mothers ; which being done, the father led
her to a well or pit dug for that purpofe, and having bid her to
look down into it, pufhed her in headlong, as he ftood behind her,
and then filling up the pic, levelled it with the reft of the ground:
but others fay, that when a woman was ready to fall in labour, they
dug a pit, on the brink whereof (he was to be delivered, and if the
child happened to be a daughter, they threw it into the pic, but if
a fon, they faved it alive 6 . This cuftom, though not obferved by
all the Arabs in general, was yet very common among feveral of
their tribes, and particularly thole of Koreifh and Kendah\ the for-
mer ufing to bury their daughters alive in mount Abu Dalama , near
Mecca f. In the time of ignorance, while they ufed this method to
get rid of their daughters, Safad , grandfather to the celebrated poet
al Farazdak, frequently redeemed female children from death, giv-
ing for every one two (he-camels big with young, and a he-camel j
and hereto al Farazdak alluded when, vaunting himfelf before one
of the Khaltfs of the family of Omeyya , he faid, I am the fon of the
giver of life to the dead ; for which ex predion being cenfured, he ex-
cufed himfelf by alledging the following words of the Koran g , He
who jarotth a foul alive, jhall be as if he bad faved the lives of all

1 Jj’Ial. in Kor * K or. chap. 5. p 96* and chap. 6. p. 1 13, 1 14 V Poc. Spccim. p.

— 334 * Al Betdiwi, al Zamakh. al Moftatraf. 4 See Kerin, chap 16 p. zi8. 1 Al

MckUtai. 6 Al Zamakh. 7 Al Moftatraf. 8 Chap. 5 p. 87.

S 2

man-

132

The Preliminary Difc-o'urfe. Sed. VI.

mankind \ The Arabs , in thus murdering rif their children, were
far from being lingular*, the pradice of expofihg infants and putting
them to death being fo common among the ancients, that it is re-
marked as a thing very extraordinary in the Egyptians;- that they
brought up ali tHeir children 1 and by the laws of Lycur ^ 3 no child
was allowed to be brought up without the approbation of public
officers. At this day, it is laid, in China , the poorer fort of people frequent-
ly put their children, the females erpe^!!^ 1 to death, with impunity 4.

This wicked pradttce is condemned by the Koran in feveral paf-
fages one of which, as fomc commentators 6 judge, may alfo con-
demn another cuftom of the Arabians , altogether as wicked, and as
common among other nations of old, viz. the facrificing of. their
children to their idols; as was frequently done, in particular, in fe-
tisfadion of a vow they ufed to make, that if they had a certain
number of fons born, they would offer one of them ih facfifice.

Several other fuperftitioUB cuftoms were likewife abrogated jjy
Mohammed ; but the fame being of lefs motnent, and not particularly
mentioned in the Kordfy or having been occafionally taken notice
of ellewhere, I lhall fey nothing of them in this place.

1 A1 Moftatraf. y. Ehn Khalekan, in vita al Farazdafc, Sc Poc. Spec. p. 334. a Strabo,
1 - 17^ V. Diodor. Sic. 1 . 1 c 80. 3 V. Plutarch, injijrqgrgo. " f V, Pafendorf. de Jure oat.

& gent. L 6. c. 7. 6. The Grecians alfo treated daughters ejpecUUy in this Manner ; whence

that faying of Ptfidipptlsj

t |M)« 7 srf itqtr airm wr rvxifa

i 9 0W > I e.

A man t bo ppor will apt expoje bis fon 9
But if ht's rich i wiNfoarit freferve bis daughter.

See Potter'* Antiq. of Grew, Vol 2. p. 333. 1 6, p. 113, 115. chap. i& p. 218. and

chap. 17. p. 230. Sec alfo clyip. 81. P482. * Al Zanukfau al Bad.

Section VI. .

Of the Inflitutiom $ the Koran in Civil affairs.

bammeian r ~T _ ^HE Mohammedan civil law is founded on the precepts and
c5vH la ** A determinations of the Ksrdn, as the civil laws of the Jews
£££. wer f. ° n thofe of the Pentateuch-, yet being Varioufly interpreted, ac-
rb. cording to the different decifions of their civilian^ and efpecially of
their four great dodors, Abu Hkntfa, Matec, dl Shdfei, and Ebn
Hanbal -, to treat thereof fully and diftindly, in the manner the
cunofity and ufefulnefs of the fubjed deferves, would require a large
volume : wherefore the mdft that can be expeded here, is a fummary
view of the principal inftitutions, without minutely entring into a
' 1 Seei. VIII. detail

Seel. Vi, The Preliminary Difeourfe. j 33

ikuil of particulars. We flull begin with chafe relating to mar-
riage ami divorce.

Thai polygamy, for the moral kwfulnefs of which the Mohamm - Of the
rfitu doctors advance fcvcral arguments is allowed by the Korda,

every o. e knows ; though few arc acquainted with the limitations *nd JU
wuli which it is allowed. Several learned men have fallen into the vorce ‘
vulgar milUke, that Mohammed granted to his followers an un-
bounded plurality j tome pretending that a man may have as many
wives 1 , and 01 hers as many concubines', as he can maintain;
whereas, according to the exprefs words of the Korda \ no man can
have more than tour, whether wives or concubines 5 ; and if a man
apprehend any inconvenience from even that number of ingenuous
wives, it ia added, as an advice, (which is generally followed by the
middling and infenur people ) that he marry one only, or if he can-
not be contented with one, that he take up with his ihe-flaves, not
exceeding, however, the limited number ’j and this is certainly the
utmoft Mohammed allowed his followers: nor can we urge, as an
argument againft io plain a precept, the corrupt manners of his fol-
lowers, many of whom, efpecially men of quality and fortune, in-
dulge themfelves in criminal excefles 8 ; nor yet the example of the
prophet himfelf, who had peculiar privileges in this and other points,
as will be observed hereafter. In making the above-mentioned limi-
tation, MdwwMi '3 was directed by the decifton of the Jtwift doc-
tors, who, by way of counfel, limit the number of wives to four
though their law con Roes them not ro env certain number 1 .

Divorce is alio well known to be allowed by the Moharntyidan
law, as it was by the Mofak, with this difference only, that ac^

1 S ebe Wt $ II p- !9 2 Ntc- Gi^nut* in Cringe. ATcor. 1 2 19 Ofcsri|Lt, in

Itiner.r P Grc;. Tl< lohsiu >„ : n SruD ;.ufii, 1 - jl.c. 2. 1 , 22 -Sc 37 c^-.l It cull ? p de mor ib. Tun?*
p. *4 ] frygr the ft! nuy htve mdvc bwfnl wfvee, ttirf no more. RU*w f.Ufdv -iferw

the refcrint o! ilie ftumbe: of shcLr wm-i to he. fao preeftpt of thcii religion, tut a rule fcpcrindii .td
on a poll : u ETt-sifider^iii'n Psef lUtt o- the O^vrt** empire* bonJc 3. chap, z\. x Merits,
in Pro 4 r. id reftic. Ale r . p«n 4 p 52, k - 1 Frrekatis* life ofM.li p 1 1 4. Chj.jJi-n h Yoy. de
Pcr!c + T. 1 p s66‘ Du R.et\ S-nnm ■- re it h ReL <fca Turcs, mi* a la teie de u veifion de L 1 A 1-
car Rk*ui, ubi i.upr*! PuuiKh.rf. dt jure flat. & gent. 1 - &. c. i.J i?L * Chap.. .1 p. bc„

' V. Cj.ign«r p in r;risit s-i A bulk r vs: M«ih- p. 1 ( - . Rcl»ny:S. dertl. Moh p. 2^, &c & Sdcfen.

Vx. He^r \ 1 cip 9 4 V . fttfesjid, ubi imp. p r44_, T Jv r. cfespl p, a $\t

f T (who, ti'cepijiif; .1 fc\\' fill v ftoriu he tells from hear- fay, defer ves more cr:d it
this (atoc. uavdlcrj of ’Ifetteir ipeaJun£ of the i . >/ flr A oWcWS^ ietrer-jt other

trull . cb.'l Mjt'rmtf iUti n v-v^Eimn !ed j man llwu l h-ve two nitei* or or sour; iNaud 1
tkt M:f -juv. uen took nine iemrains a? many as the;, jjjlglu fulbtat Maunder.

Travel^ p. if .t 9 in Halac 4 «^ c. 14 10 Idem* ib. V. Selden. U^ur.

Hebx 1 . 1 . c 9

cordmg

134

The Preliminary Difcoutfe. Se&. VI.

cording to the latter a man could not take again a worn m whom
he had divorced, and who had been married or betrothei to ano-
ther *; whereas Mohammed * to prevent his followers from divorcing
their wives on every light occafion, or out of an inconftant humour,
ordained that if a man divorced his wife the third time, (for he
might divorce her twice without being obliged to pare with her, if
he repented of what he had done,) it ihould not be lawful for
him to take her again, until {he had been firft married and bedded
by another, and divorced by fuch fecond hulband *. And this pre-
caution has had fo good an effed, that the Mohammedans are fel-
dom known to proceed to the extremity of divorce* notwithftand-
ing the liberty given them ; it being reckoned a great difgrace fo to
do: and there are but few, beiides thofewho have little or no fenle
of honour, that will take a wife again, on the condition enjoined \
It mull be obferved that though a man is allowed by the Mohamme-
dan, as by the JewiJh law +, to repudiate his wife even on the
flighted difguft, yet the women are not allowed to feparate them-
felves from their hulbands, unlefs it be for ill ufage, want of proper
maintenance, negled of conjugal duty, impotency, or fome caufe of
equal import ; but then Ihe generally lofes her dowry s, which (he *
does not, if divorced by her hulband, unlefs Ihe has been guilty of
impudicity, or notorious difobedience 6 .

When a woman is divorced, (he is obliged* by the diredliott of
the Koran, to wait till Ihe hath had her courfes thrice, or, if there
be a doubt whether Ihe be fubjedt to them or not, by realon of her
age, three months, before Ihe marry another j after which time ex-
pired, in cafe Ihe be found not with child, Ihe is at full liberty to
difpofe of herfelf as Ihe pleafes ; but if {he prove with child, {he
muft wait till {he be delivered: and during her whole term of wait-
ing, {he may continue in the huflband’s houfe, and is to be main-
tained at his expence; it being forbidden to turn a woman out be-
fore the expiration of the term, unlefs {he be guilty of dilhonefty 7 .
Where a man divorces a woman before confummation, {he is not
obliged to wait any particular time 8 ; nor is he obliged to give her
more than one half of her dower If the divorced woman have a

* ***»•>> I erem - iU - *• V - Selden. ftp- 1 . i. c. ii. * Korin, chap. 2. p. 27.

* V. Selden. nbi fup 1 . 3. cap. 2t. and Ricsut's State of the Ottom. empire, b. 2. chap. 2..
Dent. xxiv. t Leo Modena, Hill de git nu Hebr. part t. c. 6. V. Selden. ubi fop. ' V.

Buabeq. Ep. 3. p. 184. Smith, de morib. ac inftit. Tnrcar. Ep. 2. p. 52. & Chardin, Vov.de
Perle. T. 1. p. 169. « Korin, chap. +. p. 62. 7 Korin, chap. 2. p. 26, & 27. & chap.

6 }- p. f5f 8 lb. chap. 33. p. 348. 9 lb. chap. 2. p. 28.

young

r 35

Sedt. VI. The Preliminary Dijcourje.

young child, (he is to fuckle it till it be two years oldj the father,
in the mean time, maintaining her in all refpedb: a widow is alfo
obliged to do the fame, and to wait four months and ten days before
(he marry again *.

Thefe rules are alfo copied from thofe of the jfewf, according to
whom a divorced woman, or a widow, cannot marry another man,
till ninety days be paft, after the divorce or death of the hufband * :
and (he who gives fuck is to be maintained for two years, to be
computed from the birth of the child ; within which time (he muft
not marry, unlels the child die, or her milk be dried up

Whoredom, in (ingle women as well as married, was, in the be-
ginning of Mohammedifm , very feverely punifhed ; fuch being ordered
to be (hut up in prifon till they died: but afterwards it was
ordained by the Sonna, that an adultrefs (hould be ftoned ♦, and an
unmarried woman guilty of fornication fcourged with an hundred
ftripes, and banifhed for a year *. A (he-flave, if convidted of adul-
tery, is to fuffer but half the puniflunent of a free woman 1 * * * * 6 7 , viz.
fifty ftripes, and banifliment for fix months; but is not to be put
to death. To convidt a woman of adultery, fo as to make it capital,
four witnefles are exprefly required ?, and thofe, as the commentators
fay, ought to be men : and if a man faKely accufe a woman of re-
putation of whoredom of any kind, and is not able to fupport the
charge by that number of witheflis, he is to receive fourfeore ftripes,
and his teftimony is to be held invalid for the future ®. Fornication,
in either (ex, is by the fentence of the Koran to be punched with an
hundred ftripes

If a man accufe his wife of infidelity, and is not able to prove it
by fufficient evidence, and will fwear four times that it is true, and
the fifth time imprecate G o d’s vengeance on him if it be falfe, (he
is to be looked on as convidted, unlefs (he will take the like oaths,
and make the like in i recation, in teftimony of her innocency ;
which if (he do, (he is free from puni£hmenc, though the marriage
ought to be diffolvcd ,c> .

1 lb chap. z. p. 37. and chap. 6 5. * Mi£hju d tit. Yabimoth. c- % Gcmar, Baby) ad eundt

tit. Mai men io Halach Girufhin, Shy than Ardds* pan 3 * Miflma, & Gem aw* & MaimOn,

ubi fupra v Gera- Babjl. ad tit. CetuboEh, c. 5. Sc Jof. Rro, in ShylHIn Arndi. c* 50 i- 2 V.

Seldcni Ux. Hebr. 1 2. c 1 1, and I. 3. u 10. in fin. 4 And the adulterer alfo* according to a

pafiage once extant in the Kora *, and (l 11 in force as fome fuppofo See the notes to Ktr. c. 3 p.

37 and the Prel Pile. p. 67- * Kof chip, 4. p 61- See tile notes there, 6 Ibid, p. 64.

7 Ibid, p 6a* 8 Kor. chap. 2 4.. p. 288. 3 Ibid, p. 287. This law relates not to married

people, as StJdcn fuppofes* Ux, Hcb, J!. 3 . c. 12. 10 Ibid. p. 288, See xhc notes there.

1 3 6

The Preliminary Difcottrfe » Se£t. VI,

In moft of the laft mentioned particulars the decifions of the Ko-
ran alfo agree with thole of the Jews. By the law of Mofes adul-
tery, whether in a married woman or a virgin betrothed^ was pu-
nished with death j and the man who debauched them was to fuffer
the fame puniihmenf *. The penalty of Simple formation was
fcourgihg, tin gen ral punishment in cafes where none ^ particularly
appointed: and a betrothed bond-rpaief,- if convidled of- adultery,
underwent the fame punishment, being, exempted from death, be-
cauje Jhe was not free *. By the fame, law no perfon was to be put
to death on the oath of one witnefs * : and a man who Slandered his
wife was alfo to, be cka/lijed* that is fcoprged* and fined one hundred
Shekels of filver ♦. The method of trying a woman fufpedted Of
adultery where evidence was wanting,; jby (forcing her to drjnkthe
bitter water of jealoufy s, though difufed by the Jews long before
the time of Mohammed 6 , yet* by reafon of the oath of curfing
with which the woman was ^barged, and to which^he was obliged
to fyy r Amen, heart great nefentWance to the expedient deyifed by
that prophet on the like occafion*

The institutions of Mohammed relating to the pollution of. women
during their courfes the taking of Slaves to wife 8 , and the pro-
hibiting of marriage within certain degrees 9 , have likewife no fmall
affinity with the institutions of MoJes 10 ; and the parallel might be
carried farther in feveral other particular^

As to the prohibited degrees it may be obferyed, that the pagan
Arabs abstained from marrying their mothers, daughters, and aunts
both on the father's fide and on the mother’s, and held it a molt
Scandalous thing to marry two filters, or for a man to take his fa-
ther’s wife 11 ; which lall was notwithstanding too frequently prac-
tifed **, and is exprefsly forbidden in the Koran *3.

1 Lev. xx. i<?. bent. xxii. it. The kind of death to be inflifled on adulterers in common
cafei beipg not expreffed, the Talmudist generally fuppofe it to be Jfranglfng ; which they think
is tiefigned Where ever 1 the phrafe jball i ft put to death, or Jball' die the death, is nfetf, as they ima-
gine is by theexpreffion his blood JbaU be upon him: and hence it has been concluded by
fomc, that the woman taken in adultery, mentioned in the gofpel (John viii.) was a betrothed
maiden, becaufe fuch a one and her accomplice were plainly ordered to be ftoned (Diet. xxii. 23,
24.) But the ancients feem to havebeeti Of 4 different 'opinion; and to have underltbod ftouing to
be thepuniffiment of adulterers in generall V. Selden. Ux. Hebr. 1 . 3. C\ 1 1, & 1 2. * Levit.

xix. 20. 3 Deut. xix. I.J. xvii. 6, and Numb. xxxv. 30. 4 Deut. xxii. 13, ig.

1 Numb. v. 11, &c. 6 V. Selden. ubi fupr. 1 . 3. e. 15. & Leon. Modena, de* rid Hebraic!,

parte 4. c. 6. ? Kor. chap. 2. p. 2j. * lb. chap. 4. p and 64, &c. 9 Chap. 4.

P; " 3 - ... '° See Lev. xv. 24. xviii. 1 9, and xx. 18. E ral: — u. Deut. xxi. 10,— 1 4. Le-

n t 'ir V, n 1 ' ” AbulfediHift. Gen. al Shahx:ii,’.ju, apod Poe. Spec. p. 3*1, & 338.

V. Poc. lb. p. 337, &C. «J Chip. 4. p.63. r 3 i3

Before

Se£t. VI. The Preliminary Difcourfe. 137

Before I leave the fubjaft of marriages, it may be proper to take ° f ^
notice of fume peculiar privileges in relation thereto, which were
granted by G o D to Mohammed, as he gave out, exclufive of all other of it ban,.
A UJlems. One of them was, that he might lawfully marry as many f^'" o re *
wives, and have as many concubines as he plea fed, without being t hehw«oF
confined to any particular number 1 ; and this he pretended to have mmiage.
been the privilege of the prophets before him. Another was, that
he might alter the turns of his wives, and take fuch of them to his
bed as he thought fit, without being tied to that order and equality
which others are obliged to obferve *. A third privilege was, that
no man might marry any of his wives J , either fuch as he fhould
divorce during his life-time, or fuch as he fhould leave widows at
his death : which laft particular exa&ly agrees with what the Jendjh
doctors have determined concerning the wives of their princes; it
being judged by them to be a thing very indecent, and for that rea-
fon unlawful, for another to marry either the divorced wife or the
widow of a king ♦ ; and Mohammed , it feems, thoughc an equal
refpedt, at leaft, due to the prophetic , as to the regal dignity, and
therefore ordered that his relidfcs fhould pafs the remainder of their
lives in perpetual widowhood.

The laws of the Koran concerning inheritances are alfo in feveral of tie
refpeSs conformable to thofe of the Jews, though principally de-
figned to abolifh certain practices of the pagan Arabs , who ufed to C es.
treat widows and orphan children with great injuftiec, frequently
denying them any (hare in the inheritance of their fathers or their
hufbands, on pretence that the fame ought to be diftributed among
thofe only who were able to bear arms, and difpofing of the wi-
dows, even againft their confent, as part of their hufbands pofleffions s .

To prevent fuch injuries for the future, Mohammed ordered that
women fhould be refpe&ed, and orphans have no wrong done them ;
and in particular that women fhould not be taken againft their wills,
as by right of inheritance, but fhould themfelves be entitled to a
diftributive part of what their parents, hufbands, and near relations
fhould leave behind them, in a certain proportion 6 .

The general rule to be obferved in the diftribution of the de-

1 Ivor. chip 33. p 348, Sec. See alfo chip. 66 , and the notes there. * Ivor. chap. 33.
p 549. See the notes there. * chap 33. p. 34:!, 330 4 Milhm P t It. Sanhedr. c, 2.

-u Gem ar, in eta fid. m. Mikaon. Rilachoth Mdaoihn* c 2. V. Selden Ue. Hebr. I 1 c. ic.

Prid. fife &r Mak. p. 1 18. ; ee dup. 4. p. 60,61, Sc and the notes there- V . eiiam

Pm. Spec. p. 337. * Kor- tlup. 4, \ih\ itipri.

t

ceafed’s

_ 7 j Pr el'iminary Difcourfe. Se£l. VI,

ceafed’s eft^tc \i, that a male fhall have twice as much as a female
but to this rule there are fome few exceptions ; a man’s parents, for
example, and alfo his brothers and fillers, where they arc entitled
not to the whole, but a fmall part of the inheritance, being to have
equal (hares with one another in the diftribution thereof, without
making any difference on account of fex *. The particular propor-
tions, in fcveral cafes, diftindtly and fufficiently declare the intention
of Mohammed ; whofe decifions expreffed in the Kordn 3 feem to
be pretty equitable, preferring a man’s children firft, and then his
neareft relations.

If a man difpofe of any part of his efface by will, two witnefles,
at the lead, are required to render the fame valid j and fuch wit-
neffes ought to be of his own tribe, and of the Mohammedan reli-
gion, if fuch can be had *. Though there be no exprefs law to the
contrary, yet the Mohammedan doctors reckon it very wrong for a
man to give away any part of his fubftance from his family, unlefs
it be in legacies for pious ufes; and even in that cafe a man ought
not to give all he has in charity, but only a reafonable part in pro-
portion to his fubftance. On the other hand, though a man make
no will, and bequeath nothing for charitable ufes, yet the heirs are
directed, on the diftribution of the eftate, if the value will permit,
to beftow fomething on the poor, efpecially fuch as are of kin to
the deceafed, and to the orphans K

The firft law, however, laid down by Mohammed touching inheri-
tances was not very equitable } for he declared that thofe who had
fled with him from Mecca , and thofe who had received and afiifted
him at Medina , fhould be deemed the neareft of kin, ' and confequent-
ly heirs to one another, preferably to and in exclusion of their rela-
tions by blood ; nay tho’ a man were a true believer, yet if he had
not fled his country for the/ake of religion and joined the prophet,
he was to be looked on as a ftranger *: but this law continued not
long in force, being quickly abrogated

It muft be obferved that among the Mohammedans the children of
their concubines or flaves are efteemed as equally legitimate with
thofe of their legal and ingenuous wives ; none being accounted
baftards, except fuch only as are born of common women, and
whofe fathers are unknown.

' Ibid. p. 61, & 81. V. Chardin, Voy. de Perfe. T. z. p. 293. 1 Kor. ibid. p. 61, 6 z.

Ibid. & p. 81. 4 Kor. chap* 5. p. 96. s Kor. chapJ 4. p. 6i. 6 Chap. 8. p. 148

7 Ibid. &chap. 33. p. 342. r T

Se&. VI. The Preliminary Difcwrfe.

As to private contradta between man and man, the confcientious
performance of them is frequently recommended in the Koran \
For the preventing of difputes, all contrails are direwted to be made
before witnefles *, and in caie fuch contrails are not immediately ex-
ecuted, the lame ought to be reduced into writing in the prefence
of two witnefles i at leail, who ought to be Maflems and of the male
fex'i but if two men cannot be conveniently had, then one man
and two women may fuffice : the fame method is alio direiled to be
taken for the fecurity of debts to be paid at a future day; and
where a writer is not to be found, pledges are to be taken *. Hence,
if people truft one another without writing, witneffes, or pledge,
the parry on whom the demand is made is always acquitted if he
denies the charge on oath, and fwears that he owes the plaintiff no-
thing, unlefs the contrary be proved by very convincing circum-
flances

Wilful murder, though forbidden by the Koran under the fevereft
penalties to be infli&ed in the next life 6 , is yet by the fame book
allowed to be compounded for, on payment of a fine to the family
of the deceafed, and freeing a Mojlem from captivity : but it is in
the eleftion of the next of kin, or the revenger of blood, as he is
called in the Pentateuch , either to except of inch fatisfattion, or to
refute it ; for he may, if he pi cafes, infift on having the murtherer
delivered into his hands, to be put to death in fuch manner as he
fliall think fit 7 . In this particular Mohammed has gone again#: the
exprefs letter of the Mofaic law, which declares that no fatisfaclion
fhall be taken for the life of a murderer 8 ; and he teems, in fo
doing, to have had refpefl to the cuftoms of the Arabs in his time,
who, being of a vindictive temper, ufed to revenge murder in too
unmerciful a manner whole tribes frequently engaging in bloody
wars on fuch occafions, the natural confequence of their indepen-
dency, and having no common judge or fuperior.

If the Mohammedan laws feem light in cafe of murder, they may

E erhaps be deemed too rigorous in cafe of manslaughter, or che
illing of a man undefignedly ; which muff be redeemed by fine,
(unlefs the next of kin {hall think fit to remit it out of charity,)

1 Chap. 5 p.«2. qhnp. 17 . p. 230- chap. 2. p, 34, &c. * Chap. *. p. 34. J The

Time $ei| to have been required by the Jtwijb law, even in cafes where life was not concerned.
See Dear, arix. 15. Mattb xviii. John viii. 1- 2 Or xiii i< 4 Iwr^ 2, p. 33, 34. 1 V.

Chardin, Voy. de Perfe T 2 p. and the notes to Kor . chap. 5 p 97 Kor ch.

4. p. 72. 7 Chip. 2. p. 20, 2i chap 17. i> 230. V. Chardin, ubi lop. p. 299, &c. 8 Nunrh

auQtf* 31, 9 This is particularly forbidcSen in the Koran, chap. 1- p. 230.

t 2

*3 9

Of pri-
vate con-
trail*.

Of murder
and man*

daughter.

and

! 40

Of theft.

Of reta-
liation.

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se<fl. VI.

and the freeing of a captive : but if a man be not able to do this,'
he is to fad two months together, by way of penance *. The fine
for a man’s blood is fet in the Sonna at an hundred camels 1 ; and is
to be diftributed among the relations of the deceased, according to
the laws of inheritances : but it mud be obferved, that tho’ the
perfon flain be a Mojlem, yet if he be of a nation or party at en-
mity, or not in confederacy with thofe to whom the flayer belong^
he is not then bound to pay any fine at all j the redeeming a captive
being, in fuch cafe, declared a fufficient penalty K I imagine that Mo-
bammed , by thefe regulations, laid fo heavy a punifhment on invo-
luntary manflaughter, not only to make people beware incurring the
fame, but alfo to humour, in fome degree, the revengeful temper of his
countrymen, which might be with difficulty, if at all, prevailed on
to accept a lighter fatisfa&ion. Among the Jews, who feem to have
been no lefs addidted to revenge than their neighbours, the man-
flayer who had efcaped to a city of refuge was obliged to keep him-
lelf within that city, and to abide there till the death of the per-
fon who was high pried at the time the fad: was committed, that
his abfence and time might cool the paffion and mitigate the re-
fen tmenc of the friends of the deceafed : but if he quitted his afy-
lum before that time, the revenger of blood, if he found him,
might kill him without guilt ♦ j nor could any fatisfadlion be made
for the flayer to return home before the prefcribed time 5.

Theft is ordered to be punifhed by cutting off the offending part,
the hand 6 ; which, at fird fight, feems jud enough : but the lalw of
JuJiinian , forbidding a thief to be maimed ?, ie more reafonable ;
becaufe dealing being generally the effect of indigence, to cut off
that limb would be to deprive him of the means of getting his live-
lihood in an honed manner 8 . The Sonna forbids the infixing 0 f
this punifhment, unlefs the thing dolen be of a certain value! I
have mentioned in another place the further penalties which thofe
incur who continue to deal, and of thofe who rob or affault peo-
ple on the road 9. r

As to injuries done to men in their perfons, the law of retalia-
tion, which was ordained by the law of Mofes w , is alfo approved by

Kor. chap. 4. p. 72. * See the notes to chap. 37. p. gfi<v

See Numb. nxv. 26, *7, 28. _« Ibid. ver. 32. < Koun, chap. 5. p. 87. * * ’Novell.

134.0. «3
chap. 5. p 87

8 V. Pufendoif, de Jure nat Sc gent. 1 . F c. 3. J. 26.

10 Exod. XXi. 24, (*fc. Levit. xxiv. 20. Deut. xix. 21 .

? Kor. chap. 4. p. 72.
37. 7 Novell.

s See the notes to

the

Se6t. VI. The Preliminary Dtjcourje. 141

the Kordn 1 : but this law, which Teems to have been allowed by
Mohammed to his Arabians for the fame reafons as it was to the
yews, viz. to prevent particular revenges, to which both nations
were cxtreamly addicted ', bcin lt neither ftrittly juft, nor practicable
in many cafes, is feldom put in execution, the puniihment being
generally turned into a mul& or fine, which is paid to the parry in-
jured 3 . Or rather Mohammed defigned the words of the Koran re-
lating thereto fhould be underftood in the fame manner as thofe of the
Pentateuch mod probably ought to be; that is, not of an aCtual re-
taliation, according to the ftridfc literal meaning, but of a retribution
proportionable to the injury: for a criminal had not his eyes put
out, nor was a man mutilated, according to the law of Mofes, which,
belides, condemned th* r who had wounded any perfon, where death
did not enfue, to pay a fine only 4 ; the ex predion eye for eye, and
tooth for tooth being only a proverbial manner of fp faking, the fenfe
whereof amounts to this, 'That every one (hall be punched by the
judges, according to the hetnoufnefs of the fa£t 5 .

I 11 injuries and crimes of an inferior nature, where no particular Oftfcrp®.
puniihment is provided by the Koran, and where a pecuniary com-
penfation will not do, the Mohammedans, according to the pra&ice of crimes
the Jews in the like cafe 6 , have recourfe to Jiripes or drubbing, the
mod common chaftifement ufed in the eaft at this day, as well as
formerly ; the cudgel, which for its virtue and efficacy in keeping
their people in good order, and within the bounds of duty, they
fay came down from heaven, being the inftrument wherewith the
judge’s fentence is generally executed \

Notwithftanding the Koran is by the Mohammedans in general re- j he ^
garded as the fundamental'parc of their civil law, and the decifions fans of
of the Sonna, among the Turks, and of the Imams, among thofe of
the Perjian fed, with the explications of their feveral d odors, are fol-
ufually followed in judicial determinations, yet the feculir tribunals lowedb y
do not think themfelves bound to obferve the fame in all cafes, but uTtrib^
frequently give judgment agaln.it thofe decifions, which are not al- mli.
wavs confonant to equity and reafon; and therefore diftin&ion is to
be made between the written civil law, as adminiftered in the eede-
fiaftical courts, and the law of nature or common law (if I may fo

1 Chap, 5. p. £ 3 , 89. 2 V. GrotiuHi, dt Jure belli Sc pici.-ji Lie. 2- i Et. 3 V, Char-

din, T. 2 p. 299. Th; taliffi Ilhcw Ife ciubiilheil among the o!d R^.sm by the law* of the
twelve lablei, was not to be inBHledj l-v d"a the ddisqne&i could not a^iee ith the perfon in-
jured. V. A. GdL No£L Aide. L 20- e. 1. & Fe fitim, in voce Ti/to. * See EjtiJ. xxu jg,

19. -nd 22. 1 BirbeyraCi in Grot ubs fupra. V. Cleric, in Exod xxi. 24, & Deut. xsx. 21

6 See Deut, ixv. 2, 3. 7 V. Gltlot, Voy* de Conitant- p, 220, Sc Chardin, ubi fupra, p. 303

ea 11

14-2

OF war
againft in
fidels.

The "Preliminary Difcourfe. Se6l, VI.

call it) which takes place in the fecular courts, and has the execu-
tive power on its fide \

Under the head of civil laws, may be comprehended t le injunc-
’ tion of warring againft infidels, which is repeated in fevei al paflages
of the Koran \ and declared to be of high merit in ihe fighr 0 f
God, thofe who are flain fighting in defence of the faith being
reckoned martyrs , and promifed immediate admiflion ir o par dife 3 .
Hence this duty is greatly magnified by the Mohamt dan ivines,
who call the fword the key of heaven and hell , and perfua Je their
people that the leaft drop of blood fpilt in the way of God, as it is
called, is moft acceptable unto him, and that the defer.dine the ter-
ritories of the Mojlems for one night, is more meritorious than a
faft of two months *: on the other hand, defertion, or refilling to
ferve in thefe holy wars, or to contribute towards the carrying them
on, if a man has ability, is accounted a moft heinous crime, being
frequently declaimed againft in the Koran 3. Such a dodlrine, which
Mohammed ventured not to teach till his circumftances enabled him
to put it in pradlice 6 , it muft be allowed, was well calculated for
his purpofe, and ftood him and his fucceflors in great ftead: for
what dangers and difficulties may not be defpifed and overcome by
the courage and conftancy which thefe fentiments necefiarily infpire?
Nor have the Jews and Chrijlians, how much foever they deleft! fuch
principles in others, been ignorant of the force of enthufiaftic he-
roifm, or omitted to fpirit up their refpe&ive partifans by the like argu-
ments and promtfes. Let him who has lijled bimfelf in defence of the law,
fays Maimonides 7 , rely on him who is the hope of Ifrael, and the faviour
thereof in the time of trouble 8 j and let him know that he fighti for the
profejfion of the divine unity: wherefore let him put his life in bis hand »
and think neither of wife nor children, but bamfh the memory of them
from his heart , mvitig bis mind wholly fixed on the war. For if he
Jhould begin to waver in bis thoughts , he would not only confound himfelf
but fn again ft the law, nay the blood of the whole people hangeth on bis
neck: for if they are difeomfited, and be has not fought ftoutly with
all his might , it is equally the fame as if he had Jhed the blood of them
all } according to that faying, let him return , lejl bis brethrem heart

1 V. Chardin, ubi fupra, p, 290, &c. * Chap. 22. p. 278. chap. 2. p. 22. chap. 4. p. yo,

&c. ebap. 8. p. *41, &c. chap. 9. p. 149, 154. chap. 47. & dup. 61. p. 449. &c. 3 Chap.

2. p. 18. chap. 3 p. 52, 55. chap. 47. p. 410. chap. 61. ■?. 449. ♦ Reland, de jure milit. Mo-

“'f'hn t . V - ch *P- 9 - P- iS 4 . &c. chap. 3. p. 52, fcc. « See before, p. 48.
7 Halach. Melachun, c. 7. ® Jnsm. xiv. 8. s Job xui. 14.

fail

i43

Scj51. VI. The Preliminary Dlfccurfe.

fail as his own '. 'To the fame pnrpcfe doth the Kib.ib accomodate
that other pdfiage, Curji'd be he who doth the work of the Lord neg-
ligently, and curfid be be who keepeth back his f iord from Mood *. On
tie contrary, he who bchaveth bravely in battle, to the utmofl of bis
endeavour, without trembling, with intent to glorify G o d’s name,
ought to expcbl the victory with confidence, and to ap/rdc/id no danger
or misfortune, but may be ajfttred that he will have a haute built him in
Iff ad, appropriated to him and his children forever s as it is /aid, God
fit ail certainly snake my lord a jure hcuje, becaufe he bath fought the
battles of the Lor d, and his life /hall br bound up in the bundle o f
life with the Lord his God 5 . More paflages of this kind might
be produced trom the Jewijb writers; and the Ckrifiians come not
far behind them. We are defirons of knowing, lavs one + writing to
the Franks engaged in the holy war, the charity of you all ; for that
every one (which we fpeak not becauje we wtfh it) who yball fait [fair:
hfe his life in ibis warfare, Jkali be by no means denied the kingdom of
heaven: And another 5 gives the following exhortation ; Laying a fide
all fear and dread, endeavour to aB effeSlually again/! the enemies of
the holy faith , and the adverfaries of all religions : tor the Almighty
knWL'etk, if any of you die, that be dietb for the truth of the faith, and
the fahation of his country, and the defence of Chriftians ; and there-
fore be Jhall obtain of him a celejlial reward. The Jews indeed, had
a divine commidipn, extemive and explicit enough, to attack, fub-
due and deflroy the enemies of their religion ; and Mohammed pre-
tended to have received one in favour of himfclf and his Mojhrns,
in term6 equally plain and full ; and therefore it is no wonder that
they fhould aft confidently with their avowed principles : but that
Cbrijlians fhould teach and praftife a doftrine fo oppofite to the
temper and whole tenour of the gofpel, feems very ftrange ; and yet
the latter have carried matters farther, and fhewn a more violent
fpirit of intolerance, than either of the former.

The laws of war according to the Mohammedans, have been al-
ready fo exaftly fet down by the learned Reland 6 , that I need fay
very little of them. I (hall therefore only obferve fome conformity
between their military laws and thofe of the Jews.

While Mobammedffm was in its infancy, the oppofers thereof
taken in battle were doomed to death, without mercy; but this was

1 Dent . xx 2 Jerm- xiviii. ns- 3 I xxv 28, 29. + Nicofau, in Jure ca-
non e- omnium, 25 quail. 5. 1 Leu IV, it. quictt. 8- 6 la his treatife Dt Jvte miliur i

MQbmmi*2R3r+ in the third ml ot his Dijfrrfafisntj MifttihsrtF*

judged

144

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se<£t. VI.

judged too fevere to be put in practice when that religion came to
be fufficiently eftablilhed, and paft the danger of being fubverted by
its enemies \ The fame fentence was pronounced not only againft the
feven Canaanitifh nations % whofe poffeffions were given to the If
raelites, and without whofe deftrudlion, in a manner, they could not
have fettled themfelves in the country defigned them, but againft
the Amalekites J and Midianites + who had done their utmoft to cut
them off in their paffage thither. When the Mohammedans declare
war againft people of a different faith, they give them their choice
of three offers, viz. either to embrace MohammediJ'm, in which cafe
they become not only fecure in their perfons, families, and fortunes,
but entitled to all the privileges of other Mojlems } or to fubmit and
pay tribute 5, by doing which they are allowed to profefs their own
religion, provided it be not grofs idolatry, or againft the moral law;
or elfe to decide the quarrel by the fword, in which laft cafe, if the
Mojlems prevail, the women and children which are made captives
become abfolute flaves, and the men taken in the battle may either
be flain, unlefs they turn Mohammedans , or otherwife difpofed of at
the pleafure of the prince 1 * * * * 6 * * . Herewith agree the laws of wat given
to the Jews, which relate to the nations not devoted to deftru&km?;
and Jofhua is faid to have fent even to the inhabitants of Canaan,
before he entered the land, three fchedules, in one of which was
written, Let him fly , who will ; in the fecond. Let him fur render,
who will ; and in the third, Let him fight-, who will 8 ; though none
of thofe nations made peace with the Ijraelites (except only the Gi-
beonites , who obtained terms of fecurity by ftratagem, after they had
refufed thofe offered by Jcfhua) it being of the Lord to harden
their hearts , that he might defir oy them utterly 9 .

On the firft confiderable fuccefs of Mohammed in war, the difpute
which* happened among his followers in relation to the dividing of

1 See Kor. chap. 47. p. 409, 410. and the notes there; and chap. 4. p. 72. chap. 5. p. 87

* Dtut. xx 16. — 18. 3 lb. chap. xxv. 17. — 19. * Numb. xxxi. 17. * See chap. 9*

p. 1 <5 z, «nd the notes there. 6 See the notes to chap. 47. p. 410. 7 Dtut . xx. io* ir'

* Talmud Hierofol. apudMaimonid Halach. Melachim, c. 6 . $. 5. R* Bechai, ex lib. Siphre.*

V. Selden. dc Jure nat. Sc gent. fee. Hebr. 1 . 6. c. 13 , Sc 14, & Schickardi Jus Regiom Hebr. c $.
Theor. 16. 9 JoJb. xi. 20. The Jews, however, fay that the Girgajbitef, believing they

could not efcape the deftru&ion with which they were threatned by God, if they perftfted to de-
fend themfelves, fled into Africa in great numbers; (\L Talm. Hierof. ubi fup,) And this is aligned
as the reafon why the Girga/bitcs are not mentioned among the other Canaaniitjb nations who af-

fembled to fight againft JoJbua , (Jifh. ix. 1.) and who, were doomed to utter extirpatfcfa (Deut.

xx, 17.) But it is obfervabte, that the Girgajbites are not omitted by the Septuagint in either of
thofe texts, and that their name appears in the latter of them in the Samaritan Pmat&xb: they
Are alfo joined with the other Canaauites as having fought againft IJrad, in JoJb* xxiv. 11.

the

Stch VL The Preliminary Difcourfe.

the fpoil, rendered it neceflary for him to make fome regulation
therein: he therefore pretended to have received the divine commif-
fion todiftribute the fpoil among his foldiers at his own difcretion % re-
trying thereout, in the firil place, one fifth part * for the ufes after
mentioned} and in confequer.ee hereof, he took himfelf to be autho-
rized on extraordinary occafions to dtftribute it as he thought fit,
without obierviag an equality. Thus he did, for example, with the
fpoil of the tribe of Hawdzen taken at the battle of Honein y which
he bellowed by way of p re Tents on the Meccans only, palling by thofe
of Medina^ and highly diftinguiihing the principal Korajhites , that
he might ingratiate himfelf with them, after he had become mailer
of their city He was alio allowed in the expedition againll thofe
of al Nadir to take the whole booty to himfelf, and to difpofe thereof
as he pleafed, becaufe no horfes or camels were made ufe of in that
expedition 4 , but the whole army went on foot ; and this became
thenceforward a law 5 : the reafon of which feems to be, that the
fpoil taken by a party confifting of infantry only, Ihould be conli-
dered as the more immediate gift of God 6 , and therefore properly
left to the difpofition of his apoftle. According to the Jwi, the
fpoil ought to be divided into two equal pans, one to be lhared
among the captors, and the other to be taken by the prince *, and by
him employed for his own fupport and the ufe of the public. Mofes ,
it is true, divided one half of the plunder of the Midianites among
thofe who went to battle, and the other half among all the congrega-
tion 8 : but this, they lay, being a peculiar cafe, and done by theex-
prefs order of God himfelf, mull not be looked on as a precedent
It Ihould feem, however, from the words of *fo(hua to the two tribes
and half, when he fent them home into Gilead after the conquell and
divifion of the land of Canaan , that they were to divide the fpoil of
their enemies ‘with their brethren , after their return '° : and the half
which was in fucceeding times taken by the king, was in all proba-
bility taken by him as head of the community, and reprefenting the
whole body. It is remarkable that the difpute among Mohammed s men
about lharing the booty at Bedr 11 , arofe on the fame occafion as did
that among David s foldiers in relation to tne fpoils recovered from the

1 Kor, ship 8 p. 139 * lb. p 144. 3 Abnlfcd in vit. Moh. p. 118, Sec . V Kor. c.

9. p. 13&. and she notes there. * Kor. chip, 59 p 444, See the notes there. 1 V Abul-

fed. obi [up, p. 91 6 V. Kor c>up. ubi supra. y Gemar. BahjL ad tit. Sar-hedr c.

£, V, Selden- dc jure nat. Se gent, f be, Hcbr- lib, 6. c- 16. 8 Numb . ugh. 27. 9 V. Miim.

Hakcb M clacii c. 4- 15 xxii S- 11 See Kor. c 8 p. 139 an- the notes there.

jltna*

u

146 7 he Preliminary Difcourfe. Se6t. VI.

Amalekites 1 ; thofe who had been in the ad ion mfift ing that they who
tarried by the fluff fhould have no part of the'Tpoil; and that the
fame decifion was given in both cafes, which became a law for the
future, to wit, that they Jhould fart alike.

The fifth part direded by the Koran to be taken out of the fpoil
before it be divided among the captors, is declared to belong to God,
and to the afoflle, and his kindred, and the orphans , and the poor, and
the traveller * : which words are varioufly underftood. Al Shafei
was of opinion that the whole ought to be divided into five pans ;
the firft, which he called GoD’i party to go to the treafury, stnd be
employed in building and repairing fortrefies, bridges, and other pub-
lic works, and in paying faiaries to magiftrates, civil officers, profef-
fors of learning, minifters of public worfhip, &c. the fecond part to
be diflributed among the kindred of Mohammedy that is, the defen-
dants of his grandfather Hdjhem t and of his great uncle al Motalleb
as well the rich as the poor, the children as the adult, the women
as the men j obferving only to give a female but half the fhare of a
male: the third part to go to the orphans: the fourth part to the
poor, who have not wherewithal to maintain themfelves the year
round, and are not able to get their livelihood : and the fifth part to
travellers, who are in want on the road, notwithftanding they may be
rich men in their own country +. According to Make Ebn Am the
whole is at ’ the difpofition of the Imam or prince, who may diftri-
bute the fame at his own diferetion, where he fees mbft need s, Abu l
Aliya went according to the letter of the Karan t and declared his opinion
re be that the whole fhould be divided into fix parts, and that Gotfs
parr fhould be applied to the fervice oF the Caaba : while others fup-
pofed G o d’s part and the apoftle's to be one and the fame 6 . Abu
Hanlfa thought that the fhare of Mohammed and his kindred fank at
that prophet’s death, fince which the whole ought to be divided among
the orphans, the poor, and the traveller “ Some infift; that the
kindred of Mohammed entitled to a fhare of the fpoils are the pofterity
of Hdjhem only; but thofe who think the defendants of his brother
al Motalleb have alfo a right to a diftributive part, alledge a tradition
in their favour purporting that Mohammed himfelf divided the fhare
belonging to his relations among both families, and when Othmdn Ebn
Affdn and JobeirEbn Matdm (who were defended from Abdjhams and

* 1 Stffflf. XXX. 21 —
fcended from this latter.
4 Xdean. 7 Idem.

2 5 - * Kor. <hap. 8. p. 144. 3 Note, al Sbifti himfelf was de-

4 Al Bern. V. ttcland. dc Jure milk Moham. p. 42, &c. * idem.

Nawffal

Se<ft. VII. The Preliminary Difcourje. 147

Nawfai the other brothers of Hojhem) told him, that though they
diluted not the preference of the HSjhemitcs, they could not help
taking it ill to fee luch di tie fence made between the family of
al Motalleb and themielves, who were related to him in an equal de-
gree, and yet had no part in the diftributiort, the prophet rep.cd,
that the dclcendants of al Matalhb had forfaken him neither in the
time of ignorance, nor fince the revehtien of 7 flam ; and joined his
finders together in token of the itrift union between them and the
Hajhemim \ Some exclude none of the trib; of Fareijh from re-
ceiving a part in the divi lion of the fpoil, and make no diftindtion
between the poor and the rich} though, accor ng to the more rea-
fonable opinion, fuch of them as are poor only are intended by the
text of the Ktt. ; n y as i6 agreed in the cafe of he ft ranger : and others
go lo far as to affert that the whole fifth commanded to be referved
belongs to them only, and that the orphans^ and the pear, and the
traveller , are to be underftood of fuch as are of that tribe *. It muft
be obk rved, that immoveable poiTeffiorts, as lailds, &c. taken in war,
are fubjedfc to the fame laws as the moveable ; excepting only, that
the fifth part of the former is not actually divided, but the income
and profits thereof, or of the price thereof, if fold, are applied to
public and pious ufes, and diftributed once a year, and that the
prince may either take the fifth part of the land itfelf, or the fifth
part of the income and produce of the whole, as he {hall make his
eledtion.

* Idem. * Idem.

Section VII.

Of the Months commanded by the Koran to be kept facred\
and of the fetting apart of Friday for the efpecial Ser-
vice of God.

I T was a cuftom among the ancient Arabs to obferve four months The old
in the year Z9 facred, during which they held it unlawful to wage ^ rai ‘ <*-
war, and took off the heads from their {pears, ceafing from incur- Months
fions and other hoftilities. During thofe months whoever was in fear in the
of his enemy lived in full fecuritv ; fo that if a man met the mur- ** & *
derer of his father or his brother, he durft not offer him any cr

u 2 vio-

148

Tht Preliminary Difcoarfev Se<ft. VII.

violence 1 : a great argument , fays a Learned writer, of a humane dif-
pofltion in that nation ; who being by rea/on of the independent govern-
ments of their fever al tribes „ and for the prefervation of their juft
right s r expofed to frequent quarrels with one another, had yet learned to cool
their inflamed breafls with moderation , and refrain the rage of war by
fated times of truce

This inftitution obtained among all the Arabian tribes, except
only thole of 7 ay and Khathdam , and fome of the defcendanta of
al Hareth Ebn Caab, (who diftinguifhed no time or place as faered *,)
and was fa reLigiowfly obferved, that there are but few inftances in
hiftory (four, fay fome, fix, fay others ♦,) of its having been tranf-
grefledi the wars which were carried on without regard thereto,
being therefore termed impious. One of thofe inftances was in the war
between the tribes of Koreijh and Kais Aildn, wherein Mohammed him-
felf ferved under his uncles, being then fourteen V or* as others fay,
twenty 6 years old.

The months which the Arabs held, faered were al Moharram, Ra~

fby Dhu’lkaada, and Dhid lhajja the firft, the feventh, the eleventh
and the twelfth in the year Dhu lhajja being the month wherein
they performed the pilgrimage to Mecca, not oqly jtbat month, but
alfo tne preceding and the following were for that reafon kept invr-
olable, that every one might fafely and without interruption pals
and repafs to and from the feftival 8 , Rftjob is faid to have been
more ftri&ly obferved than any of the other three 9, prohaHy be-
caule in that month the pagan 'Arabs, uied to fall 10 ; Ramadan , which
was afterwards let apart by Mohammed for that purpofe, being in
the time of ignorance dedicated to drinking in excefs By reafon
of the profound peace and ftcurity enjoyed'in this month, one part
of the provifions brought tfy the caravans or purveyors annually fet
qut by the Koreijh for the fupply of Mecca ,2 , was djftritmted among

1 L l 'i'.': 1 |‘ Vi . v * * |\

' ^ad\Golimn ad:)Alftag. fcc, Al Stiah«*ftani, apud Pd* Spec p,

3rr. APJfc wha 4 »j FhWb. * Otilib; ubCfu t* Al Shahreflani, nbi ftpra! See
before, p. 122. * Al Mogholtai. * Abulfeda, vit. Moh. p. n, *A1 Kpdaai al Frrauz.

apud Poc. Spec. p. 174. Al Mogbaltdi mentions both opinions. 7 Mr. Bayle'fDift* &
Crit, Art. la Mectjuc, Bsrp. F.) accufeg Dr. PriJcaux of an inconfiflency fpj 1 faying in one nla cft
(Life of Milk |h Of# thatthefe facced mdfrtfis were the firft, the the efeverctb; and the

twelfth, and in atothet pJlf e , Hb. a that Ihrde of them were contiguous Bat

trus mult be mere abfence of mind in Mr.B*yTt: tor are 90 1 the eleveiuh, the twelfth, and the
iitft monthh Tfe two learned ^(tiT^Oa/iSiind ReUni, haVe alfo made a fmafl flip

in V *efc fee ted iponthi, which, ( tell- re the tko firft and thfc two laft in the

25 a [\ V. Golu Lex. Arab col, 6 qu Sc Reland. d^Jurp imlrt. Mphanupedapor. p. c. 8 V.
Gol rn Alfrag. p, 9. * V. ibid. p. 6. 10 Al Makrizi, apud Poc. ubifupra. * ** Tdem,

2 Wa» % chap, 106. p 503,

Alfrag. P . 9:

fc Auftor Nmfc al Azh&v ibid.

the

149

Se&. VII. The Preliminary Dtjcourje.

the people; the other part being, for the like realon, diftributed at
the pilgrimage

The obfervance of the aforetiiid months feetned fo reafonable to Theofc-
Mohammed, that it met with his approbation; and the lit me is ac- o'/rhofo
cordingly confirmed and enforced by l’everal pa li ages of the Koran *, month*
which forbid war to be waged during thofe months agiinft fuch as
acknowledge them to be titered, but gram, at the lame time, full ran.
permiffion to attack thofe who make no luch diftindtion, in the tit-
ered months as well as in the prophane K

One practice, however, of the pagan Arabs, in relation to thefe
facrcd months, Mthawtned thought proper to reform: for fome of
them, weary of fitting quiet for three months together, and eager to m mb to a
make their accuftomed incurfions for plunder, tried, by way of ex- ^ 0 ^ ne
pedient, whenever it fimed their inclinations or convcniency, to put andthere-
off the observing of al Mobarram to the following month Safar +, d ; lC j“® ar
thereby avoiding to keep the former, which they luppofed it lawful y eV s"to
for them to prophane, provided they fandtified another month in lieu four, by
of it, and gave public notice thereof at the preceding pilgrimage. This
transferring the obfervation of a titered month to a prophane month, mo nih,
is what is truly meant by the Arabis word al Nafi, and is abfolutelycon- forbidden,
demned, and declared to be an impious innovation, in a paffage of the
Koran 5 which Dr. Prideaust 6 , milled by Golius 7, imagines to relate
to the prolonging of the year, by adding an intercalary month thereto*

It is true, the Arabs, who imitated the Jews in their manner of
computing by lunar years, had alfo learned their method of redu-
cing them to filar years, by intercalating a month fomecimes in the
third, and fometimes in the fecond year 8 ; by which means they
fixed the pilgrimage of Mecca (contrary to the original institution)
to a certain (eafon of the year, viz. to autumn, as moft convenient
for the pilgrims, by reafon of the temperatenefs of the weather, and
the plenty of provisions * ; and it is alfo true that Mohammed forbad
filch intercalation by a pail age in the fame chapter of the Kordn .*•
but then it is not the paffage abovememioned, which prohibits a
different thing, but one a little before it, wherein the number of
months in the year, according to the ordinance ©f God, is declared
to be twelve IO ; whereas, if the intercalation of a month were al-

1 Al Edrifi jpiud Poc. 'Spccfm. p. 1 2 j+ * Clap. 9. p. 154- cHap. p. 22; tFup, 4. p ;

chip, j &c. * Cftjp. 9. p. 1 i chip. ’ . p. it. * See she notes to chap 9; ubi

Tup. 1 Chip. g r Ibid. « Life of Mtib- p 66 7 In AIErte* p 12. 8 See Frid* Pre-

face 10 itic ftril voE of hm Connedt p. vi* Sit, 9 V Gol. ubi Jupra. 10 Kor. c hap, 9.

154. Sec alfo dup. 2. p- 22.

lowed,.

150 The Preliminary Difcour/e. SeA. VII.

lowed, every third or fecond year would confift of thirteen, , contrary
to G o d’s appointment.

Of the The fetting apart of one day in the week for the more peculiar
putofFn- attendance on G o d’s worfhip, fo ftri&ly required by the Jewijb
d ay. and Cbrifiian religions, appeared to Mohammed to be fo proper an
inftitution, that he could not but imitate the profeflqrs thereof in
that particular } though, for the fake of diftindtion, he might think
himfelf obliged to order his followers to pbferve a different day from
either. Several reafons are given why the fixth day of the week was
pitched on for this purpofe 1 ; but Mohammed feems to have pre-
ferred that day chiefly becaufe it was the day on which the people
ufed to be affembled long before his time *, though fuch affemblics
were had, perhaps, rather on a civil than a religious account. How-
ever it be, the Mohammedan writers beftow very extraordinary enco-
miums on this day, calling it the prince of days , and the moji excel-
lent day on •which the fun rifes * j pretending alfo that it will be the
day whereon the laft judgment will be. folemnized *: and they eftecm
it a peculiar honour to IJlam, that God has been pleafcd to ap-
point this day to be the feaft-day of the Mojlems , and granted them
the advantage of having firft obferved it K

Though the Mohammedans do not think themfelves bound to keep
their day of public worfhip fo holy as the Jews and Cbrijlians are cer-
tainly obliged to keep theirs, there being a permiflion, as is gene-
rally fuppofed, in the Koran 6 , allowing them to return to their em-
ployments or diverfion after divine fervice is over } yet the more de-
vout difapprove the applying of any part of that day to worldly af-
fairs, and require it to be wholly dedicated to the bufinefs of the
life to come 7 .

Of the Since I have mentioned the Mohammedan weekly feaft, I beg leave
juft to take notice of their two Beirdms 8 , or principal annual feafts.
The firft of them is called, in Arabic , Id al fetr , i. e. The feajl of
breaking the f 'aft, and begins the firft of Sbawdl, immediately fuc-
ceeding the faft of Ramadan j and the other is called Id al korbdn,
or Id al adhd, i. e. I he feajl of the facrifice , and begins on the tenth
of Dbu lhajja, when the victims are {Lain at the pilgrimage of
Mecca 9 . The former of thefe feafts is properly the lejfer Beit dm.

See chap. 63. p. 451. and the notes there. 2 A! Beidawi. 3 Ebn al Athir, 8 c al Gha-
a P^ *>.'• P- S« 7 - 4 V. ibid. < Al Ghazali. ibid. ‘ Chap. 63. ubi fupra.

Ub, 9 fu LJ‘ 5 1 *' The word Beirim ia Turkijb, and properly iignifie* a ftafl-

tUj or holiday. 9 See chap. 9. p. 49. and before, J. IV. p. 1 ao.

and

Seft. VIII. The Preliminary Difeourfi* 151

and the latter, the prefer BeirSm *: but the vulgar, and mod au-
thor* who have written of the Mohammedan affairs exchange the
epithets, and call that which follows Ramadan the greater Be tram,
becaufe it is obferved in an extraordinary manner, and kept for three
days together at Cwjlantivcfle and in other parts of Turkey, and in
Perjia for five or fix days, by the common people at leaff, with
great demonftrations of public joy, to make themfelves amends, as
it were, for the mortification of the preceding month 3 j whereas
the feafi of [aerified, though it be alfo kept for three days, and the
firft of them be the moil lolemn day of the pilgrimage, the princi-
pal aft of devotion among the Mohammedans, is taken much lefs no-
tice of by the generality of people, who are not ftruck therewith
becaufe the ceremonies with which the fame is obierved are performed
at Mecca , the only feene of that folemnicy.

1 V. Reland, de ReMg. Moh. p. 109, A D’Herbel. Bibl. Orient. Art Bar dm- 2 Hyde, in
nods ad Bobov, p 16. Chiidin, Yoy. de Perfc, Tom. II. p. 450. Ricauf s Sure of the Ottmc*

Empire, 1 . 2. c. 24, Ac. 3 V. Chardin, A Rican t, nbifupra.

Section VIII.

Of the principal SeSis among the Mohammedans ; and of
thafe who have pretended to Prophecy among the Arabs,
in or fince the Time of Mohammed.

B EFORE we take a view of the fefts of the Mohammedans , it Of the
will be neceffary to fay fomething of the two fciences by which khokW 0
all difputed queftions among them are determined, viz. their Scbolaflic Seal divt
and PraSlical Divinity. nityofthe

Their fcbolajlic divinity is a mongrel fcience, confiding of logical,
metaphyfical, theological, and philofophical difquifitions, and built
on principles and methods of reafoning very different from what are
ufed by thofe who pals among the Mohammedans themfelves for the
founder divines or more able philofophers % and therefore in the
partition of the fciences this is generally left out, as unworthy a
place among them a . The learned Maimonides 3 has laboured to ex-

1 Poc. Spec. p. 196* 1 2 Apod Ebn Sins, in libcDo de divifione feientiar. A Nafiro'ddin a 1 Tflfi,

in praeUt. ad Eihk, 3 More Neroch, 1 . 1. c. 71* A 73.

152 The- Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£t. VIII,

pofe the principles and fyftems of the fcholaftic divines, as fre-
quently repugnant to the nature of" the world and the order of the
creation, and intolerably abfurd.

This art of handling religious difputes was not known in the in-
fancy of Mobammedifm, but was brought in when fe&s fprang up,
and articles of religion began to be called in queftion, and was at
iirft made ufe of to defend the truth of thofe articles againft inno-
vators 1 * j and while it keeps within thofe bounds is allowed to be a
commendable ftudy, being neceflary for defence of the faith : but
when it proceeds farther, out of an itch of deputation, it is judged
worthy of cenfure.

This is the opinion of al Ghazdli *, who obferves a medium be-
tween thofe who have too high a value for this fcience, and thofe who
abfolutely rejedt it. Among the latter was al Shdfei , who declared
that, in his judgment, if any man employed his time that way, he
deferved to be fixed to a flake, and carried about through all the Arab
tribes, with the following proclamation to be made before him; This
is the reward of him who , leaving the Koran and the Sonna, applied
hirnfelf to the ftudy of fcholaftic divinity 3 . Al Gbazdli, on the ether
hand, thinks that as it was introduced by the invafion of herefies,
it is neceflary to be retained in order to quell them: but then
in the perfon who ftudies this fcience he requires three things,
diligence , acutenefs of judgment , and probity of manners ; and is by no
means for fuffering the fame to be publickly explained *. This fci-
ence, therefore, among the Mohammedans t is the Art of cont rover ft,
by which they difcufs points of faith , concerning the cflence and at-
tributes of God, and the conditions of all poflible things, either in
refpedt to their creation, or final reftauration, according to the rules
of the religion of Iftam s.

The other fcience is practical divinity or jurijprudence , and is the
knowledge of the deeiiions of the law which regard pra&ke , ga-
thered from diftindt proofs.

Al Ghazali declares that he had much the fame opinion of this
fcience as of the former, its original being owing to the corruption of
religion and morality; and therefore judged both fciencee to be necef-
fery not in themfelves, but by accident only, to curb the irregular
imaginations and pafiions of mankind (as guards become necefiaryin
the highways by reafon of robbers) the end of the firft being the

1 Al Ghawli, «pud Poc. ubi fupra* a Ibid. * V, Poc. ib. p. 19^ * Al Ghi-

ma 1. ibid. 1 Ebn al Kofia, ajpud cund. ibid. p. 193.

fup-

Seel. VIII. The Preliminary D'fcmrfe.

*53

fupprcfiing of herefits, and of the other the deufion of legil con-
troverfies, for the quiet and peaceable living of mankind in this
world, and for the preserving the rule by which the magiftrate may
prevent one man from injuring another, by declaring what is law-
ful and what U unlawful, by determining the fatisfaftion to be
given, or punilhment to be in Aided, and by regulating other out-
ward ad ions ; and not only fo, but to decide of religion itfelf and
its conditii ns, fo far as relates to the profeffion made by the mouthy
it not being the bufinefs of the civilian to enquire into the heart * .*
the depravity of mens manners, however, has made this knowledge
of the laws fo very requlfite, that it is vfually called the fcience , by
way of excellence, nor is any man reckoned learned, who has not
applied himfelf thereto *.

The points of faith, fubjeft to the examination and difeuflion of
the fcholaftic divines, are reduced to four general heads, which they
call the four bafei t or great fundamental articles K

The firft balls relates to the attributes of God, and his tuiity
eonfiftent therewith. Under this head are comprehended the ques-
tions concerning the eternal attributes , which are aflerted by fdme,
and denied by others ; and alfo the explication of the ejjential dttri-
butes , and attributes of aft ion j what is proper for God to do, and
what may be affirmed of him, and what it is impoffible for him to
do. Thefe things are controverted between the AJharians, the Ke-
ramians , the Mojajfemiam or Corpora/i/h, and the Mdtazaiites ♦.

The fecond bafis regards preddlination, and the jullice thereof:
which comprizes the queftions concerning G o d’s purpoji and decree ,
man’s compulfion or necejjity to aft, and his co-operation in producing
aftions, by which he may gain to himfelf good or evilj and alfo
thofe which concern Go d’s willing good and evil, and what things
are fubjeft to his power , and what to his knowledge ; fome maintain-
ing the affirmative, and others the negative. Thefe points are difi*
puted among the Kadarians t the Najarians, the Jabartans, the AJhd-
rians, and the Keramians J.

The third bafis concerns the promifes and threats , the precife ac-
ceptation of names ufed in divinity, and the divine decifions ; and
(Comprehends queftipns relating to faith t repentance , promifes , threats ,
forbearance , infidelity and error. The controverfies under this head

Tha

points of
faith in
difpute a-
mong the
fchool^
men.

1 Al Ghazali V. ibid. p. 198 — 1 .4. * V. ib. p. *04. 5 V. AbtillarJg Hift Dynafl.

f. 166. 4 Al Shahreftani, apad Poe. ubi. fup. p, 204, &c 1 Idem, ib. p. 20$.

X

arc

» 5 +

The Preliminary Difcourfe.

Seft. VIII.

are on foot between the Morgiom, the Waidians , the M6tazaUte$ }
the AJharianSy and the Keramians *.

The fourth bafis regards hijlory and reafon , that is, the juft weight
they ought to have in matters belonging to faith and religion; and
alfo the mtjfion of prophets , and the office of Imam, or chief pontiff.
Under this head are comprized all cafuiftical queftions relating to the
moral beauty or turpitude of adtions ; enquiring whether things are al-
lowed or forbidden by reafon of their own nature, or by the pofitive
law; and alfo queftions concerning the preference of adtions, they*-
vour or grace of God, the innocence which ought to attend the pro-
phetical office, and the conditions requifite in the office of Imam ;
fome aflerting it depends on right of fuccejfion , others on the confent
of the faithful and alfo the method of transferring it, with the for-
mer, and of confirming it, with the latter. Thefe matters are the
fubjedts of difpute between the Shiites , the Mitazalites, the Kerd-
mians, and the Azarians \

The Mo- The different fedts of Mohammedans may be diftinguiffied into two
bamntian forts ; thofe generally efteemed orthodox , and thofe which are efteemed
heretical.

The former, by a general name, are called Somites or Traditio-
nifisi becaufe they acknowledge the authority of the Sonna t or col-
ledtion of moral traditions of the fayings and adtions of their pro-
phet, which is a fort of Jupplement to the Koran , diredting the ob-
lervance of feveral things omitted in that book, and in name, as
well as defign, anfwering to the Mifima of the ffetvs i.

The Sonnttes are fubdivided into four chief fedts, which, notwith-
ftanding fome differences as to legal conclufions in their interpretation
of the Koran , and matters of practice , are generally acknowledged
to be orthodox in radicals , or matters of faith , and capable of falva-
tion, and have efcch of them their feveral ftfctions or oratories in the
temple of Mecca *. The founders of thefe fedts are looked upon as
the great mafters of jurifprudence, and are faid to have been men
of great devotion and felf-denial, well verfed in the knowledge of
thofe things which belong to the next life and to man’s right con-
duct here, and diredting all their knowledge to the glory of God.
This is al Ghazdli’s encomium of them, who thinks it derogatory
to their honour that their names fhould be ufed by thofe who, neg-

r ' u n ’j\ P R*,° m l ’ !i em : ibi , d ;. lr 5 Y* w C - L Spec - P- z 98 - Prii, life of Mib. p. r u
♦See before d p **5 M ° h ‘ 68 ’ &c ' ^ lum > Mohammedifmo ante Moh. p. 368, 36^

ledting

fefts ei-
ther ortho-
dox > or
heretical

The Or-
t hod ox or
Sunnites,

Divided
into four
feai f

*55

Se£L VIII. The Preliminary Difcmtrfe.

leding to imitate the other virtues which make up their character,
apply themfelves only to attain their fkill, and follow their opinions
in matters of legal practice *.

The fir lT: of the four orthodox feds is that of the Hanfites , fo Of the
named from their founder, Abu Hamfa al Nomdrt Ebn Tbdbet , who
was born at Cufa , in the eightieth year of the Hejra, and died in
the one hundredth and fiftieth, according to the more prefera-
ble opinion as to the time \ He ended his life in prifon at Bagh-
dad, where he had been confined becaufe he refufed to be made Kadi
or judge 3 ; on which account he was very hardly dealt with by his
fuperiors, yet could not be prevailed on, either by threats or ill treat-
ment, to undertake the charge, chufing rather to be punifbed by them
than Ay God, fays al Qbazdli ; who adds, that when he excufed
himfelf from accepting the office by alledging that he was unfit for
it, being afked the reafbn, he replied. If I fpeak the truths I am
unfit j but if I tell a /ye, a lyar is not fit to be a judge . It is faid
that he read over the Kordn in the prifon where he died, no lefs
than feven thoufand times ♦.

The Hanefites are called by an Arabian writer 1 * * * 5 the followers of
reafm, and thofe of the three other feds, followers of tradition ; the
former being principally guided by their own judgment in their de-
cifions, and the latter adhering more renacioufly to the traditions of
Mohammed.

The fed of Abu Hanifa heretofore obtained chiefly in Irak 6 , but
now generally prevails among the Turks and Tartars: his dodrine
was brought into great credit by Abu Yufofi chief juftice under the
Khalifs al Hddi and Har&n al Rajbtd 7 .

The fecond orthodox fed is that of Malec Ebn Am, who was born of the
at Medina, in the year of the Hejra 90, 93, 94 8 , or 95 9 , and died fc&of M*-
there in 177 IO , 178 11 or 179 “, (for fo much do authors differ.)^'

This dodor is laid to have paid great regard to the traditions of Mo-
bammed * 3 . In his laft illnefs, a friend going to vific him found
him in tears, and afleing him the reafon of it, he anfwered. How
Jbould I not weep ; and who has more reajbn to weep than I f Would

1 V. Poc Spec. p. 293* 2 Ebn Kbalpcin. 3 This w r » the true caufe of his iniplffits-

ment and and nor his refufing to fubferibe to the opinion of abfoJute preddHr. Alien,

as D'Hirfakt writes, [Bibb Orient, p. 2 1 .) milled by the dubious acccptatiun of the: word

which fignifies not only God’j dtcra in particular, hut alfo the giving jintena 4s a judge in

general : nor could Aba Hauij-i have be d reckoned prthqdox, had he denied one of the principal

articles of faith. 4 Poc. %ec P p. 297, 298. 1 Al Shahreftanf, ibid ® Idem. T V.

D'Hefbcl. Bibl. Orient, p. 21. fr 22. 8 Abu'lfeda. 9 Ebn Khalecfn. 17 Idem. 11 Abul-

fed*, ia Elmacinua, p. 114- 13 febn Khalec. V. Poc. Spec. p< 294

X 2 tO

1 56 "The Preliminary Difcourfe . Se£t. VIII.

ft God that Jor every queftion decided by me according to my own opi-
nion, I had received fo many Jiripes ! then would my account* be eafier.
Would ft God / had never given any decifion of my 'own 1 ! Al Gha -
zali thinks it a fufficient prof f of Makers directing his knowledge
to the glory of God, that being once ailked his opinion as to
forty eight tjueftions, his anfwer to thirty two of them was, that he
did not know ; it being no eafy matter for one who has any ocher
view than God’s glory, to make fo frank a confeflion of his ig-
norance *.

The dodtrine of Make is chiefly followed in Barbary and other
parts of Africa <

of the The author of the third orthodox fedt was Mohammed Ebn Edris

fefto el a i Shdfei, born either at Gaza or Afcalon in Palefline, in the year of
the Hejra one hundred and fifty, the fame day (as fome will have it)
that Abu Uantfa died, and was carried to Mecca at two years of
age, and there educated K He died in two hundred and four 4 , in
Egypt , whither he went about five years before \ This dodtor is
celebrated for his excellency in all parts of learning, and was much
efteemed by Ebn Hdnbal his contemporary, who ufed to fay that he
was as the fun to the world , and as health to the body. Ebn Hanbal,
however, had fo ill an opinion of al Sbdfei at firft, that he forbad
his fcholars to go near him ; but fome time after one of them, meet-
ing his mafter trudging on foot after al Sbdfei, who rode on a mule,
afle'ed him how it came about that he forbad them to follow him* and
did it himfelf? to which Ebn Hanbal replied, Hold thy peace ; if thou
but attend his mule thou wilt profit thereby 6 .

Al Sbdfei is faid to have been the firft who difeourfed of jurifpru-
dcnce, and reduced that fcience into a method 7 one wittily fay-
ing, that the relators of the traditions of Mohammed were afle p till
al Sbdfei came and waked them *. He was a great enemy to the
fcholaftic divines, as has been already obferved Al Gbazdli tells
us that al Sbdfei ufed to divide the night into three parts one for
ftudy, another for prayer, and the third for deep. It is al o related
of him that he never fo much as once fwore by God, either to
confirm a truth, or to affirm a falfhoodj and that being once afked
his opinion, he remained filent for fome time, and when the reafon
of his filence was demanded, he anfwered, I am confidering firfi

1 Idem, apud eund. ibid. * Al Ghazalf, ibid. * Ebn Khalecan. * Vet Abu'lftdt

fays he lived fifty pight year*; < Ebn Khalecan. « Idem. 7 Idem. 8 Al Zaf.rani,

«4?ud Poc. Spec. p. *96. * See before, p. 15 a.

•whether

*57

Se&, VIII, The Preliminary Dtjemrje .

tt'/wtar /V /if letter to /peak or to hid me tongue. The following fay-
ing is alio recorded of him, 'tv.-. Whoever pretends to love the world
and its Creator at the fame time, is a har The followers of this doc-
tor are from him called ShafnUs, and were formerly ip read into
Mikeard irtfibr and other parts eaftward, but are now ch icily of Arabia.

Ahmed Eln Hanbal, the founder or the fourth fed:, was born in
the year of the Her- a 164 ; but as to the place of his birth there are Ebn Hun-
two traditions : feme fay he was born at Merit in Khttra/an, of which iai -
city his parents Were, and that his mother brought him from thence
to Baghdad at her bread ; while others allure us that fhe was with child
of him when the came to Baglddd, and that he was born there. \ Ebn
Hanbal in pfocefsof time attained a great reputation on account of his
virtue and knowledge; being io well verfed in the tradr ions of Mobam-*
med, in particular, that it is faid he could repeat no Icis than a million
of them 3 * He was very intimate with al Shifts, from whom he
received moft of his traditionary knowledge, being his conftant at-
tendant till his departure for Egypt +. Refuting 10 acknowledge the
Kordn to be created *, he was, by order of the Khalil ,d Motafem,
ieverely fco urged and imprifoned 6 . Ebn Hanbal dial at Baghdad, in
the year 241, and was followed to his grave by eight hundred thou-
fand men, and fixry thoufand women. It is relare a fdmething
very extraordinary, if not miraculous, that on the dav of his death
no left thaft twenty tl oufimd Cbrifliam, Jews, add Mrgt&tt s, em-
braced the Mohammedan faith 7 . This feft enert aied fo faff, and be-
came fo powerful and bold, that in the year 323, in the Khalifat of
al Radi, they raifed a great commotion in Baghdad, 1 ntr n* people’s
houfes, and fpilling their wine, if they found an , and beating thefing-
ing-women they met with, and breaking their inftrument> _nd a fe-.
vere edidt was publiflied ■ ,i| mft them, before they could be reduced
to their duty 8 : but the Raitbaiifes at prvfent are no. very numerous,
few of them being to b. met with out of the limit* of Arabia.

The heretical fedts among the Mohammedans are ihofe which hold Of. 1 ***
heterodox opinions in fundamentals, or matters of faith.

The firft controverfies relating to fundamentals b gan when moft of nong the
the companions of Mohammed were dead 9 : tor in their days was no
difpute, unlefs about thing* of final! moment, it we except only the when

« they be-

1 V. Poc Spec p. 295 — 297 x Ebn Kba tecta: } Tdem 4 Hem, * See be* 8 an *

fore, feft III. p. 67, Sc c. 6 Ebn 1 h let-in, Abutfarag. Hilt r>yn p 2 ^ See 7 Ebn

Khalecan 41 Aba’ffar. obt fup. p. 301, See. * Al Shjhrtiiiiii, apud Poc. Spec. p. 194*

Auftor Shar£ al Mawakef> apud eand, p. 210.

differ*-

1^8 The Preliminary Difcourpt. Se£h VIII.

diffenfions concerning the Imdtrn^ or rightful fuccefibrs of their pro-
phet, which were ftirred up and fomented by ii tereft and ambition;
the Arabs continual employment in the wars, during that time, allow-
ing them little or no leifurc to enter into nice enquiries and fubtle
diftindions: but no fooner was the ardour of conqueft a little abated
than they began to examine the Kordft more nearly ; whereupon dif-
ferences in opinion became unavoidable, and at length fo greatly mul-
tiplied, that the number of their feds, according to the common
opinion, are feventy three. For the Mohammedans feem ambitious
that their religion ffiould exceed others even in this refped ; faying,
that the Magtans are divided into feventy feds, tbe j'V'zpr into feventy
one, the Chrijlians into feventy two, and the Mojlems into feventy
three, as Mohammed had foretold *; of which feds they reckon one to
be always orthodox, and intitled to falvation *.

The firft herefy was that of the Kbdrejitts, who revolted from
Ali in the 37th year of the Hejra ; and not long after, Mdbad al
Jokni, Gbaildn of Datnafcus, and Jonas al Afivdri broached hete-
rodox opinions concerning predeftinadon, and tbe afcrjbing of good
and evil unto Godj whofe opinions were followed by Wafel Ebn
Atd 3 . This latter was chefcholar of Hafan of Rafra, in whole fchool a
queftion being propofed, whether he who had committed a grievous fin
was to be deemed an infidel or not, tbe Kharcjitts (who ufed to c»me
and difpdte there) maintaining the affirmative, and the orchodox the
negative, IVdJel , without waitiag his raafter’s decifion, .withdrew ab-
ruptly, and began to publiffi among his fellow fcholars a new opinion
of his own, to wit, that fuch a finner was in a middle ftate ; and
he was thereupon expelled the fchool ; be and his followers being
thenceforrh called Motazalites, or Separates *.

The feveral feds which have arifen fince this time are varioufly
compounded and decompounded of the opinions of four chief feds,
the Motazalites , the Sefdtians, the Khdrejites , and the Shiites 5 .

Of the I. The Mitazalites were the followers of the before-mentioned

Mittza- WdfelEbnAtd. As to their chief and general tenets, 1. They entirely

* V. Poc, ibid. 2 Al Shahreftani, apod eund. p. z 1 1. 3 Idem, Sc Au&or Sharb al Ma-

wafek, obi fup. * Iidem, ib. p. 21 1, 212. Et Ebn Khalecan, in vita Wafdli, 1 AlSbab-
reftaai * who alfo reduce# them to four chief feds, puts the Kadarians in the place of the Motaza-
liliu Abk'iferagi*t (Hift, Dyn. p. 166.) reckons fix principal feds, adding the Jabariant and the
MtsrpUiu 1 and the author of Sharb at Mamakef* eight, viz. the Motazalitth the SbiiUtg the
Kharejitis, the Morgiaar, the Najafiam, the Jabarian , the Mojbabbebitn , and the fed which
he ca lf al Najia , bccaufe that alone will be favcd, being according to him the fed of the JJba-
riant . V. Poe. Spec. p. 209.

rejeded

Se£t. VIII. The Preliminary Dtfcourfe.

rejected all eternal attributes of God, to avoid the diftin&ion of
perfons made by the Cbriftians j faying that eternity is the proper or
formal attribute of his ejfence ; that God knows by his ejjence , and
not by his knowledge * ; and the fame they affirmed of his other attri-
butes 2 (though all the Mdtazaiites do not underftand thefe words in
one fenfe ;) and hence this fe€fc were alfo named Moattalite £ from
their divefling God of his attributes 3 : and they went fo far as to
fay, that to affirm thefe attributes is the fame thing as to make more
eternals than one, and that the unity of God is inconfiftent with
fuch an opinion and this was the true do&rine of Wdfel their
mafter, who declared that whoever aflerted an eternal attribute , af-
ferted there were two Gods s . This point of fpceulation concern-
ing the divine attributes was not ripe at firft, but was at length
brought to maturity by WajH'% followers, after they had read the
books of the philofophers 6 . 2. They believed the word of God

to have been created in fhfjecta (as the fchoolmen term it,) and to
confift of letters and found ; copies thereof being written in books,
to exprefs or imitate the original. They alfo went farther, and af-
firmed that whatever is created infubje&o, is alfo an accident , and lia-
ble to periffi 7 . 3. They denied absolute predcilinathn, holding that

God was not the author of evil, but of good only ; and that man
was a free agent 8 : which being properly the opinion of the Ka-
dartam, we defer what may be farther laid thereof till we come to
fpeak of that feft. On account of this tenet and the firft, the M4-
tazalites look on themfelves as the defenders of the unity and iuftice
of God 9 . 4. They held that if a proftiTor of the true religion be
guilty of a grievous fin, and die without repentance, he will be
eternally damned, though his puniffiment will be lighter than that
of the infidels lo . 5. They denied all vifion of God in paradife by
the corporeal eye, and rejected all comparifons or fimiUtudes applied
to God".

This fe£t are laid to have been the firft inventors of fcholaftic di-
vinity **, and are fubdivided into feveral inferior fedls, amount-
ing, as fome reckon, to twenty, which mutually brand one another with
infidelity 13 : the moft remarkable Of them are,

1 Miitm ftiJfj teaches the feme, not as the doftrine of the but hid own. V More

Kev. 1 1 c. 57 2 XI Shahreftani, apud P c Speer, p *14 p. 16^ * V Poc.

•Spec. p. 224 * Sharh al MawikeF, £ al Shahretl apud Po p 216 Mnm&xiAtt : in Proleg,

ad Pirke Abtnh, §. viti ) ifferta the lame th ng. 1 V ibid * Al Shihreft it> p 215.

1 Abalfang. Sc al Sh hreJt. nbi ftp. p- 217. See be tore III. p 67* h V. Poc - Spr,
p 240. 9 Al Sh hreft. Sc Sharh al'M>i'akdf, apbd P«c. ubi fup. p 214. 10 Mirracc. Prodr.

ad ref. Alcor. part III. p. 74. J 1 Idem, ih, x * V, Poc. Spec. p. 213. & D*Herbel. Art
Motazelak ,3 Audtor al Mawakcf. apud Poc. ib. I # The

160 The Preliminary Difaltyfe. : Se£t VIII.

1. The Hodetlians , or fbHotftreH nf, Idwttd&n Abu Hodeil \ a
Motazalite doctor, who differed ffltPPtbiog fsom the common
form of expreflion ufed by *thi$ fed, faying that God
knew by His knowledge , but that his knpwledge was his ejj'ence ;
and fo of the otner attributes : iwhich opinion he took from the pbi-
lofophers, who affirm the cffence of God to be fimple, and with-
out multiplicity, and that his attributes are npt pofterior or acceflory
to his eflerice, or fubfifting therein, but are his eflence itfelf : and
this the more orthodox take to be next kin to making diftindions in
the deity, which is the thing they fo much abhor in the Cbrijlians *.
As to the Koran's being created, he made fome diftindion ; holding
the Wotd of' G o D to be partly not ift fubjfffo, (and therefore uncre-
ated,) as when he fpake the word Kuh, i. e. Fiat, at the creation,
and partly in fubjeffo, as the precepts, prohibition?, &c 1 2 * * . Marracci 3
mentions an opinion of Abu Hodeil's concerning predettination, from
an Arab writer +, which being by him exprefied in a manner not
very intelligible, I chufe to omit.

2. The Jobbdiam, or followers of Abu Ali Mohammed Ebn Abd
el IVahbdb , furnamed al yobbdi, whofe meaning when he made ufe
of the common expreflion of the M°ta%aJites, that God knows }y
his ejj'ence, See. was, that God’s being knowing is not an attribute,
the fame with knowledge, nor fuch a ftate as rendred his being know-
ing neceffary K He held G o d’s word to be created in ftbjrblo, as
in the preferved table, for example, the mepiory of Gabriel Mpham-
med \ &c 6 . This fed:, if Marracci has given the true ferde of his
author, denied that God could be feen in paradife without the af-
fiftance of corporeal eyes } and held that man •prodqped his ads by
a power fuperadded to health of body, and foundnefs of limbs;
that he who was guilty of a mortal fin, was neither a believer nor
an infidel, but a tranfgrefibr, (which was th$ pyiginpjL opinion of Wa-
fel,) and if he died in his fins, would be doomedco hell for e^erpity;
and that God conceals bathing of whatever he knows from his
fervants ?.

3. The Hafhemians •, who were fo named from their matter Abu
Hdjhem Abd al Salatn , the fon of Abu Ali al yobbai, and whole te-
nets nearly agreed with thofe of the preceding fed 8 . Abu Hdjhem
took the Motazalite form of exprefliin, that God knows by his ef-

1 Al Shahreftani, apud Poc. p. 215, 216, 217. 1 Idem, apnd cuqd. p. 217, &c. 3 In

Prodr. part. 3. p. 74. * Al Shahreft. ' Idem, apud Poc. Spec. p. aic. 6 Idem, & Auc-

tor a] MawSkef, ib. p. 21 8. 7 Marracci, ubi fup. p. 75. ex al Shahreft. « V. Eund. ibid.

* fenCe,

Sect. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

fence, in a different fenfe from others, fuppofing it to mean, that
God hath or is endued with a diJPqfition , which is a knonim pro -
perty, or quality, poflerior or acctflbry to his exigence *. His fol-
lowers were fo much afraid of making God the author of evil,
that they would not allow him to be faid to create an infidel ; becaufe,
according to their way of arguing,, an infidel is a compound of infi-
delity and man , and G o d is not the creator of infidelity \ Abu Ha-
[hem, and his father Abu Ali al Jobbai , were both celebrated for their
fkill in fcholaftic divinity K

4 . The Nodbdmians, or followers of Ibrahim al Nodbam ; who hav-
ing read books of philofophy, fet up a new fe<ft, and imagining he
could not fufficiently remove God from being the author of evil,
without divefling him of his power in refpedt thereto, taught that
no power ought to be aferibed toGoo concerning evil and rebellious
adtions : but this he affirmed again ft the opinion of his own difei-
ples, who allowed that God could do evil, but did not , becaufe of
its turpicude +. Of his opinion as to the Koran’s being created we
have fpoken elfewhere *.

5. The Hayetians, fo named from Ahmed Ebn Hdyet , who had

been of the fedt of the Nodbdmians , but broached fome new notions
on reading the philofophers. His peculiar opinions were, 1. That
Cbrifi was the eternal word incarnate , and took a true and real body,
ahd will judge all creatures in the life to come 6 : he alfo farther af-
ferted, that there are two Gods, or Creators ; the one eternal, viz.
the mod high God,, and the other not eternal, viz. Chrift which
opinion, though Dr. Pocock urges the fame as an argument that he
did not rightly understand the Cbrifiian myfleries 8 , is not much dif-
ferent from that of the Arians and Socmans . 2. That there is a

fucceflive tranfmigration of the foul from one body into another }
and that the laft body will enjoy the reward or fuffer the punifhment
due to each foul 9 and 3. That God will be feen at the refurrec-
tion, not with the bodily eyes, but thofe of the underftanding IO ,

6. The Jdbedbians , or followers of Amru Ebn Bahr furnamed al
yJbedb, a great dodlor of the Motazalites , and very much admired for
the elegance of his compofures 11 } who differed from his brethren in
that he imagined the damned would not be eternally tormented in

1 Al Shahrelt apod Poc. p. 215. 2 Idem, ib. p 3 Ebn Khaledin, in vitls eorum.

4 Al Slubreft obi fup. p. 241, 242. V. Marracc Prjd part. 3, p. 74. * See be'or , fe£t III.

p 68. Ai SKihreft. ubi fop. p. 210. Abn’lfarag p.167 1 Al Sh:hfdl- al Mma et, 8 c

Ebn Kofia, ifod Poc. obi fup. p. 219. * V Poc. ib. 9 Mmacc* 8 c -<] SbahreH. obi t Ep.

Marracc. is. p. 75. 1 E V. D'HerbcL Bibl. Orient, art. GiahedL

y hell ,

162

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Sedk VIII*

hell, but would be changed into the nature of fyt, and that the fire
would of itfelf attradl them, without any neceffity of their going into
it He alfo taught that if a man believed God to be his Lord *
and Mohammed the apojlle of God, he became one of the faithful*
and was obliged to nothing further x . His peculiar opinion as to the
Koran has been taken notice of before } .

7. The Mozddriam, who embraced the opinions of Ifa Ebn Sobeib
al Mozddr , and thofe very abfurd ones: for, befides his notions relat-
ing to the Koran ^ he went fo diredtly counter to the opinion of
thofe who abridged G o d of the power to do evil, that he affirmed
it poffible for God to be a lyar , and unjufi *. He allb pronounced
him to be an infidel who tbruft himfeif into the fupream govern-
ment 6 : nay he went lb far as to aflert men to be infidels while they faid
There ts no God but God, and even condemned all the reft of mankind
as guilty of infidelity ; upon which Ibrahim Ebn al Sendi alkcd him
whether paradife, whofe breadth equals that of heaven and earth,
was created only for him and two or three more who thought as
he did ? to which it is faid he could return no anfwer

8. The Bajhariam , who maintained the tenets of Bajkar Ebn Mo-
tamer, the mailer of al Mozddr 8 , and a principal man among the
Mdtazalites. He differed in fome things from the general opinion of
that fedt, carrying man’s free agency to a great excefs, making it even
independent: and yet he thought God might doom an infant
to eternal punilhmenr, but granted he would be unjuft in fo doing.
He taught that Go d is not always obliged to do that which is beft,
for, if he pleafed, he could make all men true believers. Thefe fec-
taries alfo held that if a man repent of a mortal fin, and after-

* Wards return to it, he will be liable to fuffer the punHhment due to

the former tranfgrdffion 9 .

9. The Tbamarrtiitns t who follow Tbamama Ebn Bafhdr , a chief M 6 -
tazalite. Their peculiar opinioi^ were, 1. Thatfinners Ihould remain
in hell forever. 2. That free adliohs have no producing author. 3. That
at the refurredtion all infideli, Idolaters, atheifts, Jews, Cbr'tjlians %
Magi am, and heretics lhall be reduced to dull ,0 .

10. The Kadariam-, which is really a more ancient name than
that of MotazaHtes -, Mdbad al Johns and his adherents being fo
called* who difputed the dodtrine of predeftinatjqn before Wajel

1 Al Shahreft. obi Cup. p. 260. 3 Martacc. ubi flip.' * Se£l. III. p. 68. * V. ib &

f. 67. 1 Al Shahreft. apud Poc. p. 241. « Marracc. ubi fop. p. 75. * Al Shahreftani,

ubifup. p. 220. 8 Poc. Spec. p. 22L. 9 Marracc. ubi fup. a® Idem, ib.

quitted

163

Sedt. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourje.

quitted his matter 1 : for which reafon fome ufe the denomination of
Kadariam as more extcnfive than the ocher, and comprehend all the
MdtazalUes under it *. This feel deny abfolute predefiination, fay-
ing that evil and injuftice ought not to be! attributed to God, but
to man, who is a free agent, and may therefore be rewarded or
punifhed for his actions, which God has granted him power either
to do or to let alone h And hence it is faid they are called Kada -
riant, becaufe they deny al Kadr , or God’s ahjoluU decree ; though,
others, thinking it not fo proper to affix a name to a fedt from a doc-
trine which they combat, will have it come from Kadr, or Kodrat,
i. e. power, becaufe they ajfcrt man s power to adt freely ♦. Thole;
however, who give the name of Kada riant to the Motazalites are
their enemies, for they difclaim it, and give it to their, an tag onifts
the yabarians, who like wife refufe it as an infamous appellation t,
becaufe Mohammed is faid to have declared the Kadariam to be the
Magians of his followers 6 . But what the opinion of thefe Kadariam
in Mohammei s time was, is very uncertain: the Mbtazalites fey the
name belongs to tbofe who effort fredeftinatkn, and make God
the author of good and evil ■, vtz. the Jabariam ; but all the other
Mohammedan fedts agree to fix it on the M6tazalites, who they fay
are like the Magians in eftablifhing two principles, light, or God,
the author of good, and darknefs, or the Devil, the author of evil :
but this cannot abfolutely be faid of the MotazaUtey, for they (at
leaft the generality of them) aferibe men’s good deeds to God, but
their evil deeds to themfelves; meaning thereby that man has a
free liberty and power to do either good or evil, and is matter of
his adtionS ; and for this reafon it is that the other Mohammedans call
them Magians, becaufe they afferc another author of adt ions befides
God 8 . And, indeed, it is a difficult matter to fey what Moham-
im-ii ' s own opinion was in this matter ; for on the one fide the Ko-
ran itfelf is pretty plain for abfolute predeftination, and many lay-
ings of Mohammed are recorded to that purpofe and one in parti-
cular, wherein he introduces Adam and Mofes difpucisg before God
in this manner: Tifoy, fays Mofes, art Adam; whom God created,
and animated with the breath of life, and caufed to be vt&rjhipped by
the ang. 's, and placed hi paradfe, from whence mankind have hem ex-
pelled for thy fault: whereto Adam anlwered, 1‘fou art Moles ;

f Al SiuhiE-ft, 2 A] Finuzib, V. Pcc Spec, p 231, 232* & 214.. 1 Al Shah reft, V,

Fm- Spci_\ p, 3.5 % & *4j3 t Arc. 4 V, Pac. ib. p 238 1 Al Motam?.!, al SbahrciL V ib.

(5.232, li-LEii, &c. 7 ib, ? V. Poc. ib. p. 23 3 j <&c. y V> ib. p 23?.

y 2 whom

164

OF the
feft of the
Stfatiam »

‘The Preliminary^ Difiourfe. Sedt VII f.

•whom God chofe for his apojile , and intrujled with hit word, Ay giving
thee the tables of the law, and whom he vouchfafed to admit to difcourfe
•with hitnfelf: how many years doji thou find the law was written before
I was created ? Says Mofes, Forty : And doji thou not find , replie 4 Adam ,
thefe words therein ; And Adam rebelled againfi bis Lord and tranf-
grefjed f which Mofes confefling, Doji thou therefore blame me, con-
tinued he, for doing that which God wrote of me that I fhould do
forty years before I was created ; nay, for what was decreed concerning
me fifty thoufand years before the creation of heaven and earth ? In the
conclufion of which difpute Mohammed declared that Adam had the
better of Mofes On the other fide, it is urged in the behalf of
the Motazalites , that Mohammed declaring that the Kadarians and
Morgtans had been curfed by the tongues of feventy prophets, and
being a Iked who the Kadarians were, anfwered, 'Tbofe who affert that
God predejlinated them to be guilty of rebellion, and yet punifhes them
for it: al Hafan is alfo fa id to have declared, that God fent Mo-
hammed to the Arabs while they were Kadariajts, or Jabarians, and
laid their fins upon God: and to confirm the matter this fentence
of the Koran is quoted 1 ; When they commit a fltby adlion, they fiq,
We found our fathers praftifmg the fame, and God hath commanded
us Jo to do : Say, Vi <:rtly God commandeth not filthy adlions 3 .

11. The Sefdtians held the oppofite opinion to the MotazalitH in
refpedt to the eternal attributes of God, which they affirmed,-, making
no diftindtion between the efi'ential attributes and thofe of operatm:
and hence they were named Sefdtians, or Attributes. Their dom-
trine was that of the firft Mohammedans, who were not yet acquainted
with thefe nice diftindiions : but this fedt afterwards introduced ano-
ther fpecies of declarative attributes, or fuch as were neceflarily ufed
in hiftorical narration, as hands, face , eyes, &c. which they dj| not
offer to explain, but contented themfelves with faying they were in
the law, and that they called them declarative attributes \ How-
ever, at length, by giving various explications and interpretations of
thefe attributes, they divided into many different opinions: fome
by taking the words in the literal fenfe, fell into the notion of a
likenefs or fimilitude between G o d and created beings ; to which it is
faid the Karaites. among the Jews, who are for the literal interpre-
tation of Mofes' s law, had fhewn them the way s : others explained
them in another manner, faying that no creature was like God,

* Eb " al At, ” r ' al Bokhari, apud Poc. p. 336. * Chap. 7. p. , ,o. 5 Al Mot -

pud eund. p, 237, 23S. 4 Al Shahreft. apod Poc. Spec. p. 223. * V. Poc th. p 224.

Se&. Vlir. The Preliminary Dijcvurje.

but that they neither underflood, nor thought it neceflary to explain
the precife fignification of the words which feem to affirm the fame
of both ; it being fufficient to believe that God hath no companion
or fimilitude Of this opinion was Make Elm Ans, who declared as
to the ejtprefllon of G o d’s fitting on bis throne, in particular, that
though the meaning is known, yet the manner is unknow n ; and that it
is neceffary to believe it, but herefy to make any queftions about it *.

The feds of the Sefiitians arej

l. The Afkdrians, the followers of Abu l Ha fan al Ajldri, who
was firft a Motazalite, : nd the fcholar of Abu Alt al Jobbai, but dis-
agreeing from his mailer in opinion as to Go d’s being bound (as the
Mbtazaiites aflert) to do always that which is befi or moil expedient,
left him, and fet up a new fed of himfelf. The occafion of this
difference was the putting a cafe concerning three brothers, the firft
of whom lived in obedience to God, the fecond in rebellion againft
him, and the third died an infant. Al Jobbai being afk d what he
thought would become of them, anfwered, that the firft would be
rewarded in paradife, the fecond punijhed in hell, and the third nei-
ther rewarded nor punijhed: but what, objeded al AJhdri, it the third
fay, O Lord, if thou badjl given me longer life , that I might have en-
tred paradif e with my believing brother , it would have been better fir me ,
to which al Jobbai replied, that God would anfwer, I knew that if thou
hadjl lived longer , that ueuldjl have been a wicked perfm, and therefore,
ca/l into bell . Then, retorted al AJhdri, the fecond will lay, O Lord,
why didfi thou not take me away while I was an infant, as tbou didfi my
brother, that I might not have deferved to be punijhed for my Jim, nor
to be cafl into bell ? To which al Jobbii could return no other an-
fwer, than that God prolonged his life to give him an opportunity
of obtaining the higheft degree of perfedion, which was beft for
him; but alAjhari demanding farther, why he did not for the fame
reafon grant the other a longer life to whom it would have been
equally advantageous; Al Jobbai was fo put to it, that he alked whe-
ther the devil poffeffed him ? No, lays al Ajhiri, but the majhr's afs
will not paji the bridge 1 ; i. e. he is pofhi

The opinions of the Ajhdrians were, i. That they allowed the
attributes of God to be diftind from his effence, yet fo as to forbid
any ampetrijm to be made between God and his creatures This
was all’o the opinion of Ahmed Ebn Hanbal, and David al Ijpabdm ,

1 V, mid. IV 1 AvcK'f al MswAjef f h al SjiiiJi, apud Poc. obi Tup- p. 230, fire. Ebn
KJiultt in , iu d Jjbiiv'i. : *ii Shansi. = p «» J Poc. Spe . p. 23a

and

i66

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. VIII.

and others, who herein followed Make Ebn Am , and were fo cau-
tious of any affimilation of God to created beings, that they de-
clared whoever moved his hand while he read thefe words, I have
created with my hand , or fir etched forth his finger , in repeating tins
faying of Mohammed , 'The heart of the believer is between two fingers
of the Merciful , ought to have his hand and finger cut off 1 ; and the
reafons they gave for not explaining any fuch words were, that it is
forbidden in the Koran, and that fuch explications were neceffarily
founded on conjecture and opinion , from which no man ought to
fpeak of the attributes of God, becaufe the words of the Kordn
might by that means come to be underftood differently from the au-
thor’s meaning : nay fome have been fo fuperftitioufly fcrupulous in
this matter as not to allow the words hand, face , and the like, when
they occur in the Kordn, to be rendred into Perfian or any other
language, but require them to be read in the very original words? and this
they call the Jafe way *. 2. As to predeflination, they held that

God hath one eternal will, which is applied to whatfoever he willetb,
both of his own adtions and thofe of men, fo far as they are created
by him, but not as they are acquired or gained by them ; that he willetb
both their good and their evil, their profit and their hurt, and as he
willetb and knoweth, he willetb concerning men that which he know-
eth , and hath commanded the pen to write the fame in the prefer ved
Table : and this is his decree, and eternal immutable counfel and pur-
fefe 1. They alfo went fo far as to fay, that it may be agreeable to
the way of God that man fhould be commanded what he is not
able to perform *. But while they allow man fime ptrwtr, they feem
to reftrain it to fuch a power as cannot produce any thing new-, only
God, lay they, fo orders his providence, that he creates, after, or
toiler, and together with every created or new power, an aCiion which
is ready whenever a man wilts it, and fets about it: and this aCiion
is called Cash, i. e. Acquifition, being in refpedt to its creation , from
God, but in refpedt to its being produced, employed, and acquired,
from man s. And this being generally efteemed the orthodox opinion,
it may not be improper farther to explain the fame in the words of
fome other writers. The eledive ad ions of men, fays one, fall
under the power of God alone; nor is their own power effedual
thereto : but God caufeth to exift in man power and choice ; and
it there be no impediment, he caufeth his aCiion to exift alfo, fubjedt

4

1 Idem, a pud euad. p. 228* & c . 2

Idem, ib. p. 2 *<S. ^ AlShahreft,

V. Poc, ib. 3 AI Shahreft, apud eund-
#*ptid Poc. -p 245, See.

to

167

Se&. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourfe .

to his power, and joined with that and his choice j which action, as
created, is to be alcribud to G o d, but as produced, employed, or ac-
quired, to man. So chat by the acquisition of an adtion is properly
meant a man's joining or fc mneclivg the fame with bis fmver and will,
yet allowing herein no impnflian or influence on the exigence
thereof, lave only that it is lubjedt to his power *. Others, how-
ever, who are alio on the fide of al Ajhdri, and reputed orthodox,
explain the matter in a different manner, and grant the imp • ■jjion or
influence of the created power of man on his adtion, and that [ K is power
is what is called Acquiftion *. But the point will be Hill clearer, if
we hear a third author, who rehearfes the various opinions, or expli-
cations of the opinion of this fedt in the following words, viz. A-
bul Hafan al Apart afferts all (he adtions of men to be fubjedt to the
power of God, being created by him, and that the power of man
hath no influence at all on that which he is impowered to do ; buc
that both the power, and what is fubjedt thereto, fall under the power
of God: al Kadi Abu Beer fays that the ejfence or fub fiance of the
adtion is the effedt of the power of God, but its being either an
adtion of obedience , as prayer, or an adtion of difobedience , as forni-
cation, are qualities of the adtion, which proceed from the power
of man : AbdP almalec, known by the title of Imam al Haramesn ,
Abu'l Uofein of By fra, and other learned men, held that the adtions of
men are effedted by the power which God hath created in man,
and that God cauleth to ex! it in man both power and will, and that
this power and will do neceiiarily produce that which man is im-
powered to do: and Abulfitak al Isfardyent taught, that that which
maketh tmpreflton, or hath influence on an adtion, is a compound
of the power of God and the power of man 3. The fame author
obferves, that their anceftors, perceiving a manifest difference between
thofe things which are the efledts of the eleflion of man, and thole
things which are the nece/fary effedts of inanimate agents, deftitute
both of knowledge and choice, and being at the fame time preffed
by the arguments which prove that G o d is the Creator of all things,
and confequently of thofe things which are done by men, to con-
ciliate the matter, chofe the middle way, aliening adtions to proceed
from the power of God, and the acqutfltion of man ; God’s way of
deiling with his fervants being, that when man intendeth obedierec,
God createth in him an adtion of obedience and when he inrendeth

1 Auftnr Shrill a 1 MtwafcoF, apud eund p 547. * Al Shahrcft. ib. p. 248. 1 * 3 Au£tar

Sharh al Taw ilea, apud eund. ib. p. 148, lrc»

dif-

i68

The. Preliminary Difcourfe. Se&. VIII.

difobedience, he createth in him an action of difobedience j fo that man
feemeth to be the effective producer of his adlion, though he really
be not *. But this, proceeds the fame writer, is again prefled with
its difficulties, becaufe the very intention of the mind is the work of
God, fo that no man hath any (hare in the produ&ion of his own
actions j for which reafon the ancients difapproved of too nice an
inquiry into this point, the end of the difpute concerning the fame
being, for the mofl: part, either the taking away of all precepts pofi-
tive as well as negative, or elfe the aflbeiating of a companion, with
God, by introducing fome other independent agent befidea him,
Thofe, therefore, who would fpeak more accurately, ufe this form:
'There is neither compulfiony nor free liberty , but the way lies between the
two’, the povver and will in man being both created by God, though
the merit or guilt be imputed unto man. Yet, after all, it is judged
the fafeft way to follow the fteps of the primitive MoJlems l and,
avoiding fubtle deputations and too curious enquiries to leave
the knowledge of this matter, wholly unto God*. 3. As to mortal

fin

1 Idem, ib. p. 249, 2 jo. * Idem, ib. p. ajo, 2Si. I trail the reader will not be offended
if, as a farther ill u ft ration of what has been faid oq this fubjeft (in producing of which I have pur-
pofely kept to the original Mohammedan expreflions) I tranferibe a palTage or two from a poftfeript
fabjoined to rhe epiftle I have quoted above (§. iv. p. 108.) in which the point of free-will is treated
ex profrffb. Therein the Moorijb author, having mentioned the two oppofite opinion# of the Ka~
darianj , who allow free will, and the Jabarians, who make man a neceffary agent (the foi *r of
which opinions, he fays, feems to approach neareft to that of the greater part of ChrifttaWi and
of the Jepis) declares the true opinion to be that of the Sonnites . who aflert that man hath pbwer
and will to chafe good and evil, and can moreover know he fhall be rewarded if he do well, and
fliall be pnniflied if he do ill i but that he depends notwithftandibg on God’s power, and willeth,
if God willeth, but not other wife. Then he proceeds briefly to refute the twoextream opinions,
andfirft to prove that of the Kadarians , though it be agreeable to God's juftice, inconfiftent with
his attributes of wifdom and power : Baphiit\a enim Dei , fays he, comprebendlt qmcquid fait fcf futu-
Xum eft ab * ter nit ate in finem ttfque mundi poftea. Et ita novit ab aterno omnia opera creaturarum,
Jfa bonq n jive mala, qua fuerint creata cum potent i 4 Dei , 1 $ ejus libera 1 $ determinate voluntate,
ft&t ipfi vifumfuit. Denique novit eum q:ti f uterus erat mains, & tamen creavit cum, & Jim i liter bo-
mm, quem etidtn creavit: neque negari pot eft qntn, fi ipfi libuiffet , peiuijfit omnes crearc bones s pticuit
tamen Dm ertare boms & males, cum Jjfo fill fit abfoluta & libera voluntas, is? perfefta eledio , fcf non
hominu ${a enim Salomon in Juts proverbds dixit , Vitam & mortem , bonum malum, divides
paupertatem t eje fcf venire a Deo . Chriftiani etiam dicunt S. Paulum dixiffe in fuis epiftolis', Dicet
edam lutumfigulo, qu are facts unum vas ad honor em, aliud vas ad contumdiam ? Cum i'gitur mifer
homo fuedKcream a mluntate Dei & pound a, nihil aliud poteft tribui ipfi qudm ipfi fenfus cognofcendi
& a * ben* veftnalefqiat. unica caufa ( id eft, fenfus cognofcendi) etit ejus gloria: tel

fan* caufa : per talm txfin feajum nevit quid foni vel mali adverfus Dei prarctpte facer it. The opi-
nion of the J (Adrians, on the other hand, he rejefts as contrary to man’s confcioufnefi of his own
p^ver andchfticc, and mcmMent wjth God’s juflice, and his having given mankind laws, to the
nhfervmg or tmfgreffidfc 0 f which he has annexed rewards and punHWents, After this he pro.
ceeds to explain the third opinion in the following words. Ter da opinio Zunis (i. e. BmmtmtrnA

qu* yera eft, affirm* homini poteft at e^effe, fed limitatam d faa ( aufa, id eft, dependent^ d Dei £
tentta voluntate, £sT propter tllam cog^donem qua filiberat bene vel motif acere n effe pana

tel

Se£. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

fin. the AJhdriam taught, that if a believer guilty of fuch fin die
without repentance, hisfentence is to be left to God, whether he par-
don him out ot his mercy, or whether the prophet intercede for
him, (according to that faying recorded of him, My inter cejjkn jhall
b: employed for itoje among my people who jhall have been guilty of gri-
•vous crimes,} or whether he punifli him in proportion to his de-
merit, and afterwards, through his mercy, admit him into paradife:
but that it is not to be fuppofed he will remain forever in hell with
the infidels, feeing it is declared that whoever (hall have faith in his
heart but of the weight of an ant, fliall be delivered from hell-fire 1
And this is generally received tor the orthodox dottrine in this
point, and is diametrically oppolite to that of the Mofazalitcs.

Thefe were the more rational Se/atians , but the ignorant part of them,
not knowing how otherwife to explain the expreffions of the Koran
relating to the declarative attributes, fell into moft grofs and abfurd
opinions, making God corporeal , and like created beings \ Such were,

2. The MoJhabbebite$ t or Affimilators ; who allowed a refemblmce
between God and his creatures 3 , fuppofing him to be a figure

ni proem o. Manifefiitm eft in drlemime non fuiffeak aw potent tom pretter Dei mfiri timprttntiu e eu~
jut potentia peddeLmt paJJMifin, id ifi r fn* peter atsi ejfe 9 aiw ah ipfifuerint cresta Sspiftilinverb

Dei novit etiam qtut nan funt fa-twa ; ptfuttn rj'jf 9 af srtmrit pj, peink tamen , fs ita Dee
piiKttijfet. Ita m r b jfptentin Dei qtu* tram mpjfi&Jsj. id p.-i? am fa tyrant rifi ; qua t a men
nulk pais* pendent ah tjm pteniut ; ah ejm taint tsiastLt nulla fiudemt i lui psjitslis. — •Didusas wm &
Dei potentia Utmpttidcrt trfm Dtum mktm tpji ttfr cteare afiquid quad j mweaUtr y quiffi*ti

j/hnnlecdem temper r t film ha-: first ex mpofftiHius i nmprettendip tamen faplenui tab aiiqsiimn
* pettier- ah ejxs pstwtiA — Jptiemd ighttrDei fender fsBmqurd potefi ejft, & p.jfijs/e tjiejfti qua fern-
per psrJta f/ da re tfih pfflhSMhtf* Et Ji ht fetiktn ceguofianm* ts gm/cemus fariter m ru quod efi,
fru futurstm rit 9 fire fine spera m&w* five qftiims afind y pendere a fita fchwij Dei. Et be non prt-
ratim intriJigitser, jid r n grnere de smni is quod ft & moveiur* Jive in cmlii five in terri ; (jT nee aii-
qua pemtia pottji \mptim Dei potentia f cun nutia alia petatig aifktjfit, prater Dai \ potentia
verb mfita fin * i d nifi a Dei potentia: tf cum potentia noftra dmtnr rife a camd fua , idea iitmus
potent tom nofiram ?j$ Qrnmims czapnrabim am fstentia Dei: tn enim mod* quo firamtn ntmfup dm tn
Ttusris, it4 hfira f Minfin & vritituas d Dei p+teathi* Ita fate Dei fsreutia temper r? para la etUm ad
ottidendum afiqwm i utji qtns tsainem o:riJat, usn ditimvt f stent: I horn mb id f* 3 um 9 fid aterna
fsiintta Dei: erw tmm ff td tribune ftttutier fatnink* Potent :a item Dei, dm /infer fit farata 9

& ante ipftm famp§m t ad midunditM; Ji fold bominis fotentii id fad am ejje dicer mu t 7 &
mrtretstr, premia fine Dei (qua airiti erat } jam ihi ejfet fruftrd : quia ptA mortem non potef potentia
Dei eum iff rum oeddere i ex quo j'raeretur fotentiam Dei impediri d potentia hminh f & pc tent font
komni J Mttelf* &*»:.' >-■ pthmfim Dei i fixed eft abmrdumi $ imppjftkih, * Igitur Dens eft qui

tperMue aterndjud : fi vefb hmim injtdainr :.ripa t five in tail hotnicidb 9 five tn hoc

tfi qsmnit'i .•?./ pr^fta tf kgw* Hstf*ini trmiistrjridm fix ejus dcilh t qua eft avo-
Ismtate rfi & fftestia ; juw t:r 5 inf mi — If* \fi punfturi ithd indfaifihUt y fifty urn* qv?I d mb-
sift mi 'cApiuirt ut jApienMjJkrm Sdi Abo Hiimct Slgac^li (i- c. Dewhm Aba Hamed at Ghazali)
(cajtijffiniui Dew ewud&f f J jkq utHtihtn verbis: Ita ah Ji turn & prfun-

dtm & .tkjhufum tfi istriHgeri faftBum iUui Liter i Arhurii, ut nequt chamderes ad fcribendx*% 9
*mhe nVa rariwei aj /xprtmtitdttm fujjimuh (A -mm, qwtquri de hoc re Ittuii fiffih b*firzm > n~
pifi & rift tant i & lam marts . 1 A' Shahreft. apud Poc. Spec. p. 258. 4 V. Poc.

ib, p, 255, Abulf.ir + p. 167, &c. 3 AlMawakcf, apud Poc. ib.

Z

com-

170

The Preliminary Difcourfe . Se£t. VIII

compofed of members or parts, eicher fpiricual or corporeal, and ca-
pable of local motion, of afeent and defeent, &c \ Some of this
fedt inclined to the opinion of the Holulians , who believed that the
divine nature might be united with the human in the fame perfon;
for they granted it poffible that God might appear in a human
form, as Gabriel did : and to confirm their opinion they alledge Mo-
hammed's words, that he faw his Lord in a mofi beautiful form, and
Mofes's talking with God face to face a . And

3. The Keramiam , or followers of Mohammed Ebn Keram, called
alfo Mojafiemians , or Corporalifis 5 who not only admitted a refemblatice
between God and created beings, but declared God to be corpo-
real K The more fober among them, indeed, when they applied
the word body to God, would be underftood to mean, that he is a
felf-fubfifiing being , which with them is the definition of body : but
yet fome of them affirmed him to be finite, and circumfcribed either
on all fides, or on fome only, (as beneath , for example,) according to
different opinions 4 j and others allowed that he might be felt by the
hand, and feen by the eye. Nay, one David al Janviri went fo far
as to fay, that his deity was a body compofed of flefh and blood,
and that he had members, as hands, feet, a head, a tongue*, eyes,
and ears; but that he was a body, however, not like other bodies,
neither was he like to any created being : he is alfo faid farther to
have affirmed that from the crown of the head to the breaft he was
hollow, and from the bread: downward folid, and that he had black
curled hair Thefe moft blafphemous and monftrous notions were
the confequence of the literal acceptation of thofe paffagea in the
Koran which figuratively attribute corporeal adtions to God, and
of the words of Mohammed , when he faid, that God created man
in his own image , and that himfelf had felt the fingers of Goz> t which
he laid on his back, to be cold: befides which, this fedt are charged
with fathering on their prophet a great number of fpurious and
forged traditions to ffipporc their opinion, the greater part whereof
they borrowed from the Jews , who are accufed as naturally prone
to affimilate God to men, fo that they deferibe him as weeping for
Noah' s flood till his eyes were fore 6 . And indeed, though we grant
the Jews may have impofed on Mohammed and his "followers in
many inftances, and told them as folemn truths things which them*
felves believed not or had invented, yet many expreffions of this

* Al Shahreft. apud eund. ib. p. 226. * V. Marracv. Prodr. part iii. p. 76. 3 Al Shah-

reft, ubi fupra. 4 Idem, ib. p. 225. 1 Idem, ib. p. 226, 227. « Idem, ib. p. 227, 228.

kind

Sett. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourje.

kind are to be found in their writings; as when they introduce God
roaring like a Ivon at every watch of the night, and crying, Alas!
that I have laid icaflc my boufe, and fuffered my temple to be burnt ,
and Jest my children into banifbmnt among the heathen, &c *.

4. The Jakartans ; who are the diredt opponents of the Kada-
riaw, denying free agency in man, and afcribing his actions wholly
unto G o d 7 . They take their denomination from el Jabr, which
fignifks nccefjity, or compuljhn ; becaufe they hold man to be nec'jj'a-
rih and inevitably conjlrained to att as he doe9, by force of God's
eternal and immutable decree J , This fedt is diitinguifhed into fe-
veral fpecies; fome being more rigid and extream in their opinion,
who are thence called pure Jabarians , and others more moderate,
who are therefore called middle Jabarians. The former will not al-
low men to be faid either to off, or to have any power at all, either
operative or acquiring ; aflerting that man can do nothing, but pro-
duces all his aaions by necefpty, having neither power, nor will, nor
choice, any more than an inanimate agent : they alfo declare that re-
warding and ptmijhing are alfo the effedts of necejjity j and the fame
they fay of the impofing of commands. This was the dodtrine of
the Jabmians, the followers of Jnbm Ebn Safwdn, who likewife
held that paradife and hell will vaniih, or be annihilated, after thofe
who are deftined thereto refpedtively (hall have entred them, fo that
at laft there will remain no extfting being befides God 4 ; fuppofing
thofe words of the Koran, which declare that the inhabitants of para-
dife and of hell Jhall remain therein forever , to be hyperbolical only,
and intended for corroboration, and not to denote an eternal dura-
tion in reality *. The moderate Jabarians are they who aferibe fome
power to man, but fuch a power as hath no influence on the adtion:
for as to thofe who grant the power of man to have a certain influ-
ence on the adtion, which influence is called Acquifitioa , fome 6 will
not admit them to be called Jabarians ; though others reckon thofe
alfo to be called middle Jabarians, and to contend for the middle
opin ion between abjblute necefjity and abfolute liberty, who attribute to man
acqmfuion, or concurrence in producing the adtion, whereby he gaimth
commendation or blame, (yet without admitting it to have any infsi-
ence on the action,) and therefore make the A/hdriam a branch of
this fedt 7 . Having again mentioned the term Acquijstion, we may

1 Ta 3 m. BcfSchothi c. i. V Poc# ubi fupra, p.228. 2 V. Abulfirag, 168. 5 A] Shah-

rdt ai Mawik^f, & EboalKdEt* apud Poc. ib. p. 23 Si Arc. 4 A! Shjhreit al MatarcxzE At
Ehri Hi KrctFi, apod etmd* p. 239, 2 f 2 , See, * JLtem, ib p. 2O0. * AI Shahrc L lihn

aJ Kofis, & a)

perhaps

z 2

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Se£l\ Vllf.

perhaps have a clearer ide^ of what the Mohammedans mean thereby,
when told, that it is defined to be an adtion directed to the obtaining
of profit , or the removing of hurt, and for that reafon never applied
to any adtion of God, who acquireth to himfelf neither profit nor
hurt \ Of the middle or moderate Jabarians-, were the Najarians ,
and the Derarians. The Najarians vvere jfie adherents of Al Hafan
Ebn Mohammed al Najdr, who taught that God was he who cre-
ated the adtions of med, both good and bad, and that man acquired
them, and alfo that man’s power bad an influence on the adtion, or
a certain cooper ation, which lip called Acquifition ; and herein he
agreed with al Ajhari *. The Derarians were the difciples of Derar
Ebn Amriiy who held alfo that men’s adtions are really created by God,
and that man really acquired them K The Jabarians alfo fay ; that
God is abfolute Lord of his creatures, and may deal with them
according to his own pleafure, without rendring account to any, and
that if he fhould admit all men without diftindlion into paradife, it
would be no impartiality, or if he (hould caft them all into hell it
would be no injuftice *. And in this particular likewife they agree
with the AJhdrians, who affert the fame s, and fay jhat reward is a
favour from God, and punijhment a piece of jufiice ; obedience be-
ing by them considered as a fign only of future reward, and tranf-
greffion as a fign of future puniftunent 6 .

£. The Morgians'y who are faid to be derived from the ’Jabarians 7.
Thefe teach that the judgment of every true believer, who hath
been guilty of a grievous fin, will be deferred till the refurredtiaB;
for which reafon they pafs no fentence on him in this world, either
of abfolution or condemnation. They alfo hold that dtjhbedknce
with faith hurteth not; and that, on the other hand, obedience with

* Ebn al Koffa, apnd Poe. ubi ftp. p. 240. a Al ShahrcfF. apod cund. p. 24$. 3 j_

dem, ib. + Abulfarag. p. 168, &c. 1 Al Shahreflam, ubi fup. pag. 252, &c.

6 Sharh al Tawalea* ib. To the fame effe£l writes the Meorijb authot quoted above, from whom
I will venture to tranferibe the following paffage, with which he concludes his difeourfe on Free-
will. IntelleBus fere famine natural i nwit Deum ejfe reBum judicem iff juflum , fui nan aliler officii
creator am quamjufte : etiam Deum effe abjolmm Dominum, banc or bis maebinam effe ejus , iff ah eo

ere at am ; Deum nullis deher-e raiionem redder^ cum quicquid agat , agat jure profir fa fibi : iff ita abfr*
lute fioterit officer e fir arqio vel pee no quern vnlt, cum omnis creator a fit ejus, ntc facit cuiquatn inju-
riam, etfi earn tormentu & f cents aternis officiate plus enim heni iff tmmodi accefiit creator a quanta
dccepit effe a fuo creator e> quatn ituonmodi iff damni quando ab eo damn at a eft iff affe&a tor mentis iff
feenis. Hoc autem intelligitur fi Deus abfqlute id faeret. Quandt) eumDexs t fiietate & miferkordia motus*
digit aliquos tit ifig ferviant,' Dominus Deus gratia fua id facit ex infinitd'bonitaU ; iff quando al fa
ques Jcrelinquit, iff ficenis iff torment is affi c it , ex jujlitia iff rcBitudinc* Et tandem dicimus omnes
f aenas effe jufias qua a Deo veniunt % iff noftrd tantum culfia % iff omnia bona effe a fi fatali iff. mifericor w
dia ejus infinite. 7 Al Shabreft. ubi fup. p, 256,

i?3

Se6t VIII. The Preliminary Dijcourje.

infidelity profiteth not *. As to the reafon of their name the
learned differ, becaufe of the different flgnifications of its root, each
of which they accommodate to fome opinion of the fedt. Some
think them fo called becaufe they faflpm e works to intention, that
is, efteem works to be inferior in degree to intention and profeflion
of the faith *; others, becaufe they allow hope, by afferting that dif-
obedience with faith hurteth not, &c. others take the reafon of the
name to be, their deferring the fentence of the heinous finner till
the refurre&ion 3; and others, their degrading of Alt, or removing
him from the firft degree to the fourth ♦: for the Morgiam , in fome
points relating to the office of Imam, agree with the Khdrejites,

This fedt is divided into lour fpecies: three of which, according as
they happen to agree in particular dogms with the Kbdrffes , the
Kadarians, or the Jaboriam , are dillinguilhed as Morgiam of thole
fedts, and the fourth is that of the pure Morgiam ; which laft fpe-
cies is again fub-divided into five others 5 . The opinions of Mokatel
and Bajhar , both of a fedt of the Morgiam called Tbaubaniam ,
fhould not be omitted. The former aliened that difobedience hurts
not him who profefles the unity of God, and is endued with
faith ; and that no true believer lhall be call into hell : he alfo
taught that God will furely forgive all crimes befides infidelity j
and that a difobedient believer will be punilhed, at the day of refur-
redlion, on the bridge 6 laid over the midll of hell, where the flames
of bell-fire lhall catch hold on him, and torment him in proportion
to his difobedience, and that he lhall then be admitted into para-
dife 7. The latter held, that if Goo do call the believers guilty of
grievous fins into hell, yet they will be delivered thence after they
lhall have been fufficiently punilhed; but that it is neither pofiible
nor conlillent with jullice, that they Ihould remain therein forever :
which, as has been obferved, was the opinion of al Afbdri.

III. The Kbdrrjitei are they who depart or revolt from the lawful or the
prince ellablilhed by public confent; and thence comes their name,
which fignifies revolters or rebels 8 . The firft who were fo called, ar - " '
were twelve thoufand men who revolted from Ali, after they had
fought under him at the battle of Seffein , taking offence at his fuh*
mitting the decifion of his right to the Khalifat , which Modwiyab
difputed with him, to arbitration, though they themfelves had firft

1 Abul&r. 169+ * Al Firsmz. 3 Ebn al Aihtr, A! Motarrezi. 4 Al Stub-reft ubi

fep. p. 254, &i€. * Idem, ibid. * See before, IV. p. 91 7 A 3 Sbahreft, nbi Rpra,

p. 257. 8 Idem, ib. p 269,

. obliged

The Preliminary Dtfcourfe. Se&. VIII,

obliged him to it \ Thefe w.ere alfo called Mohakkemit or Judi-
ciarians ; becaufe the reafon which they gave for their revolt was,
that Ali had referred a matter concerning the religion of God to
the judgment of men, whereas the judgment, in fuch cafe, be-
longed only unto God 1 * * . The herefy of the Khdrejim confided
chiefly in two things, i. In that they affirmed a man might be
promoted to the dignity of Imdm , or prince, though he was not of
the tribe of Korai/h, nor even a freeman, provided he was a juft and
pious peffon, and endued with the other requifite qualifications ; and al-
fo held, that if the Imdm turned afide from the truth, he might be put
to death or depofed j and that there was no abfolute necefiity for any
Imdm at all in the world. 2. In that they charged Ali with fin, for
having left an affair to the judgment of men, which ought to have
been determined by God alone ; and went fo far as to declare him
guilty of infidelity, and to curfe him, on that account J . In the
38 th year of the Hejra , which was the year following the revolt, all
thefe Kharejites who perfifted in their rebellion, to the number of
four thoufand, were cut to pieces by Alt, and as feveral hiftorians 4
Write, even to a man: but others fay nine of them efcaped, and
that two fled into Oman , two into Kerman, two into Sejejldn^ two
into Mefopotamia, and one to Ttel Mawrun ; and that thefe propagated
their herefy in thofe places, the fame remaining there to this day *.
The principal fe£ts of the Kharejites, befides the Mobakkemites above-
mentioned, are fix ; which, though they greatly differ among them-
fefves in other matters, yet agree in thefe, viz. that they abfolutely
rejedt Othman and Ali, preferring the doing of this to the greateft
obedience, and allowing marriages to be con crafted on no other terms;
that they account thofe who are guilty of grievous fins to be infi-
dels; and that they hold it neceffary to refill the Imdm when he
tranfgrefles the law. One feft of them deferves more particular no-
tice, viz.

The W iidians ; fo called from at Wdid, which fignifies the threats
denounced by G o d againft the wicked. Thefe are the antagonifts
of the Morgiafts f and afiert that he who is guilty of a grievous fin
ought to be declared an infidel or apoftate, and will be eternally
punifhed in hell, though he were a true believer 6 : which opinion of
theirs, as has been observed, occafiorted the firft rife of the Motaza -

1 See Ocklefa Hilt, of the Saras. V. I. p. 60, & c. * A 1 ShahtetL ubi Tap. p. 270. } I-

dem, lb. * Abu’lfedj, al Jmnabi, Blraacinus, p. 40. « A1 Shahrefla^i. See OiifW* Hilt.

«f the Sanjaas, ubi fup, p. 63. « Abolfar. p. 169. AI Shahreft. a>ud Poc Spec. p. 256.

* lites.

J 7 5

Sed!t. VIII. The Preliminary Dlfcourfe .

/r/fj. One y set far EHn Mchaflfftar, of the fed of the Nodbamians,
was yet more kvere than the tt'didiam, pronouncing him to be n re-
probate and an apoftate w! o fteals but a grain of corn *.

IV. The are the opponents of the KkirqUts : their name

properly fignities feBaries or adherents in general, hot is peculiarly
ukd to denote tlrofe of Alt Ebn Abi Tilth ; who maintain him to be
lawful Kbalif and I*} dm, and that the fupream authority, both in
ipiriuials and temporals, of right belongs to his defendants, nof-
withftanding they may be deprived of it by the injuftice of others,
or their own fear. They alfo teach, that the office of ImSm is not
a common thing, depending on the will of the vulgar, fo that they
may fet up whom they pleafe ; but a fundamental affair of religion, and
an article which the prophet could not have negkded, or left to the
fancy of the common people *: nay Ibme, thence called Im&miam, go
fo far as to affert, that religion eonfifts folely in the knowledge of the
true Imdrn J . The principal feds of the Shiites are five, which are
fub-divided into an alnioft innumerable number ; fo that feme under-
ftand Mohammed" s prophecy of the feventy odd feds, of the Shiites
only. Their general opinions are r i. That the peculiar defignation
of the Itrtdm and the teftimonies of the Koran and Mohammed con-
cerning him, are neceflarv points. 2. That the Imc ms ought necefla-
rily to keep themfelves free from light fins as well as more grievous.
3. That every one ought publickly to declare who it is that he ad-
heres to, and from who nr he leparates himfelf, by word, deed, and
engagement; and that herein there fhould be no diffimularion. Buc
in this laft point fome of the Zeidians, a fed fo named from Ze d,
the fon of Alt furnamed Zein al Media, and great grandfon of AH,
diffented from the reft of the Shiites + . As to other articles, wherein
they agreed nor, fome of them came pretty near to the notions of
the MkazAites, orhers to thofe of the Ahjhalbehites , and others to
thofe of the Samites 5 . Among the latter of thefe Mohammed al
Baker, another fon of Zein al abedin'r, feems to claim a place : for
his opinion as to t';e will of God was, that God willeth fomething
in us, and fomething frtm us, and that what he willeth from us he
hath revealed to us ; for which rcafr m he i h night it prepoikrou? that we
fhould employ our thoughts sbouc thofe things which God willeth
in us, and negled thoie which he willeth fr&ht us: and as to God’s
decree, he held that the way lay in the middle, and that there was

1 V. Poc ib p. 2 A] Shalircft. ft. p- 26?. AboJfar p. lf'Q. 3 Al Shahreft. ib;

g 4 Idejn, ik V D'Herbe]. Bifri Odtni An* SchVh+ 1 V. Poc ib.

neither

Of tic
fe£l of the

Sbitttj.

176

The Preliminary Difcourfe. Scd. VIII.

neither compdlfion, nor free liberty \ A tenet of the Khattdbians,
or difciples of one Abttl Khattdb , is too peculiar to be omitted.
Thefe maintained paradife to be no oilier' than the pleajures of this
•world, and bell-fire to be the fains thereof, and that the world will
never decay : which propofition being firft laid down, it is no won-
der they went farther, and declared it lawful to indulge themfelves
in drinking wine and whoring, and to do other things forbidden by
the law, and alfo to omit doing the things commanded by the law *.

Many of the Shiites carried their veneration for Alt and his defcen-
dan ts fo far, that they tranfgreffed all bounds of reafon and decency }
though fome of them were lefs extravagant than others. The Gho-
la'ites, who had their name from their excejfioe zeal for their Imams ,
were fo highly tranfported therewith, that they raifed them above
the degree of created beings, and attributed divine properties; to them;
tranfgreffing on either hand, by deifying of mortal men, and by
making God corporeal : for one while they liken one of their Imams
to God, and another while they liken God to a creature i. The
fe< 5 ts of thefe are various, and have various appellations in different
countries. Abd'allah Ebn Saba (who had been a Jew, and had af-
ierted the fame thing of JoJhua the fbn of Nun) was the ring-leader
of one of them. This man gave the following falutation to AIL
viz. Thou art Thou, i. e. Thou art God : and hereupon the Gho-
laites became divided into feveral fpecies ; fome maintaining; the
fame thing, or fomething like it, of AH, and others of fome of one
of his defcendants; affirming that he was not dead, but would return
again in the clouds, and fill the earth with juftice + . But howmuch-
foever they difagreed in other things, they unanimoully held a me-
temfjychofis, and what they call al Holul, or the defcent of G 0 d on
his creatures ; meaning thereby that G 0 d is prefent in every place,
and fpe^ks with every tongue, and appears in fome individual per-
fon s : and hence fome of them aflerted their Imams to be prophets,
and at length gods 6 . The Nofairians and the IJhakiam taught that
fpiritual fubftances appear in groffer bodies j and that the angels and
the devil have appeared in this manner. They alfo affert that God
hath appeared in the form of certain men ; and fince, after Moham-
med, there hath been no man more excellent than Alt , and, after
him, his fans have excelled all other men, that Go d hath appeared
m their form, fpoken with their tongue, and made ufe of their

* Idem h 0 r ' ft ^ b- *#• p !? em> & .? bn 11 Koira * ‘ ib - P- *60. * Idem, ibid

tvHu ni £ 4 ' a V ' “macc. Prodr. part. ui. p. 80, &c. « Idem, ib. p. 26 e. « V.

D Herbel. Bibl. Or. Art. Hakem beamrilhh. * *

hands,

1 77

Se&. VIII. 7 ‘be Preliminary Difcourfe.

hands, for which reafon, fay they, we attribute divinity to them *.
And to fupport thefe blafphcmies, they tell feveral miraculous things
of Aliy as his moving the gates of Kbaibar *, which they urge as a
plain proof that he was endued with a particle of divinity and with
fovereign power, and that he was the perfon in whofe form God
appeared, with whofe hands he created all things, and with whofe
tongue he publilhed his commands ; and therefore they fay he was
in being before the creation of heaven and earth J . In fo impious
a manner do they feem to wreft thofe things which are faid in ferip-
ture of Christ, by applying them to Ali. Thefe extravagant
fancies of the Shiites, however, in making their Imams partakers of
the divine nature, and the impiety of feme of thofe Imams in lay-
ing claim thereto, are fo far from being peculiar to this fett, that
mod of the other Mohammedan fedts are tainted with the fame mad-
nefs; there being many found among them, and among the Sufis
efpecially, who pretend to be nearly related to heaven, and who
boaft of ftrange revelations before the credulous people ♦. It may
not be amifs to hear what al Ghazdli has written on this occafion.
Matters are come to that pafs, fays he, that fome boaft of an union
•with God, and of difcourftng familiarly with him, without the interpofi-
tion of a vail, faying , It bath been thus faid to us, and We have thus
Jpoken ; offering to imitate Hofein al Hallaj, who was put to death for
fome words oj this kind uttered by him, be having faid (as was proved
by credible witneffes,) I am the Truth 5 , or Abu Yazid al Baftami, of
whom it is related that be often ufed the expreffion , Sobhani, /. e. Praile
be unto me 6 ! But this way of talking is the . caufe of great mifebief
among the common people j tnfomucb that husbandmen , neglecting the
tillage of their land, have pretended to the like privileges ; nature being
tickled with difeourfes of this kind, which fumijh men with an excufit
for leaving their occupations, t nder pretence of purifying their finds ,
and attaining I know not what degrees and conditions. Nor is there any
thing to hinder the tnoft ftupid ft Hows from forming the like pretenfions ,
and catching at fucb vain exprejfions : for whenever what they fay is
denied to be true , they fail not to reply , that our unbelief proceeds from
learning and logic ; affirming learning to be a vail, and logic the work of
the mind ; whereas what they tell us appears only within , being difeovered
by the light of truth . But this is that truth the fparks whereof have

1 raem, ib. Abulfer. p. 169. 2 See Frid. Life of Mab. p. 93. * 3 Al Shah, ubi fopr.

p. 266. + Pocock. Spec. p. 267. * V. B l Hcrbd. Bibl. Orient Art. Hallage. * V.

Ibid. Art. Baftham.

a a flown

178

The Preliminary Difcoarfe. Se&. VIII.

Jlowti into fever al countries , and occafdned great mif chief S\ fo that it is
more for the advantage of Go d’j true religion to put to death one of
thofe who utter fuch things , than to bejlow life on ten others ’.

Thus far have we treated of the chief feds among the Mohammedans
of the firft ages } omitting to fay any thing of the more modern
fe£ts, becaufe the fame are taken little or no notice of by their own
writers, and would be of no ufe to our prefent defign *. It may be
proper, however, to mention a word or two of the great fchifm at this
day fubfifting between the Sonnites and the Shiites , or partifansof Ali,
and maintained on either fide with implacable hatred and furious
zeal. Tho’ the difference arofe at firft on a political occafiorj, it has
notwithfianding been fb well improved by additional circumftatices,
and the fpirit of contradiction, that each party deteft and anathe-
matize the other as abominable heretics, and farther from the truth
than either the Cbrijlians or the Jews 1 * 3 . The chief points where-
in they differ are, 1. That the Shiites rejedt Abu Beer , Omar , and
Qthmdn , the three firft Khali fs, as ufurpers and intruders; whereas
the Sonnites acknowledge and refpedt them as rightful Imdms. 2. The
Shiites prefer Ali to Mohammed, or, at leaft, efteetn them both
equal ; but the Sonnites admit neither Ali , nor any of the prophets,
to be equal to Mohammed. 3. The Sonnites charge the Shiites with
corrupting the Koran , and negledting its precepts; and the Shiites
retort the fame charge on the Sonnites. 4. The Sonnites receive the
Sontta , or book of traditions of their prophet, as of canonical au-
thority ; whereas the Shiites reject it as apocryphal and unworthy
of credit. And to theft: difputes, and fome others of left moment,
is principally owing the antipathy which has long reigned between
the Turks , who are Sonnites , and the Perjians, who are of the fe<ft
of Ali. It feems ftrange that Spinofa , had he known of no other
fchifm among the Mohammedans , fhould yet never have heard of
one fb publicity notorious as this between the Turks and Perflate-,
but it is plain he did not, or he would never have affigried it as the
reafon of his preferring the order of the Mohammedan-church to
that of the Roman , that there have arifen no fchifms in the former
fince its birth 4 .

1 A1 Ghazali, apod Poe. ubi fup. * The reader may meet with fome account of them in
Rytaut's State of the Ottom. Empire, 1 . 2. chap. 12. J V. ib. ch. 10. & Chardin. Vo y. de

Perfe, T. II. p. 169, 170, &c. * The words of Spimfa are; Ordinam Romanae eccltfi£—~~

faliticum £jf f hirimh lucrofam tffe fatten net ad, decipiendam pleietn, Of bominum animos coercendum
tommodiorem ijio tredtrem , ni ordo Mahumedanas ecclefite ejfet, qui long e tandem antectllit. Nam &
Sfo temfort bxe fuptrjUtio incepit, nulla in eorum talefia ftbifmata orta pint. Open Pofth. p. 61 3.

As

Sett. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourje. 179

As fucccfs in any project feldom, fails to draw in imitators, Mo- Of per-
kammed's having raifed himfelf to fuch a degree of power and re- Ending*®
putation by afting the prophet, induced others to imagine they prophcfy"
might arrive at the fame height by the fame means. His moft con-
liderable competitors in the prophetic office were Mofeilama and al andfmcc.
Afead, whom the Mohammedans ufually call the turn hars.

The former was of the tribe of Honeifa , who inhabited the pro- of Mfc-
vince of Yamhna, and a principal man among them. He headed
an embafly lent by his tribe to Mohammed in the ninth year of
tl e Hejrn, and proteffed himfelf a Mojlem 1 : but on his return home,
confidering that he might poffibly ffiare with Mohammed in his
power, the next year he fet up for a prophet alfo, pretending to be
ioined with him in the commiffion to recal mankind from idolatry
to the worlhip of the true God 2 * ; and he publiffied written reve-
lations, in imitation of the Koran, of which Abiilfaragius 3 has pre-
ferved the following paflage, viz. Now hath God been gracious unto
her that was with child, and hath brought forth from her the foul,

1 which runneth between the feritonceum end the bowels. Mofeilama, hav-
ing formed a confiderabie party among thofe of Honeifa , began to
think himfelf upon equal terms with Mohammed, and fent him a
letter, offering to go halves with him 4 , in thefe words : From

Mofeilama the apoflle of God, to Mohammed the apojlle of God.

Now let the earth be half mine, and half thine. But Mohammed ,
thinking himfelf too well eftablilhed to need a partner, wrote him
this anfwer : From Mohammed the apoflt of God, to Mofeilama the
lyar. The earth is G o d’s : be givetb the fame for inheritance unto
Jucb of bis jervants as be pkafeth ; and the happy ijfue / hall attend
thofe who fear him s . During the few months which Mohammed
lived after this revolt, Mofeilama rather gained than loft ground, and
grew very formidable; but Abu Beer, his fucceffor, in the eleventh
year of the Hejra, fent a great army againft him, under the com-
mand of that confummate general Kbdled Ebn al IV alt d, who en-
gaged Mofeilama in a bloody battle, wherein the falfe prophet hap-
pening to be flain by Wabjha, the negro Have who had killed Ham -
za at Otbd, and by the fame lance 6 , the Mojlems gained an entire
vidtory, ten thoufand of the apoftates being left dead on the fpof,
and the reft returning to Mobammedifm 7 .

1 Abulfed r> 1 60. * Idem, Elnwc* p. 9.. 3 Hift. Djmaft. p. 164. A Abulfed. uti

Tup. 1 AlBeidiwi, in Kor c. 5. * Abulfed. ubi flap. 7 Idem, ib. Abutfafag. p. 173.

£imac. p. 16, Ac. Sec Qcklef* Hilt* of the Sarac. Vol. I. p. 15, Ac.

a a 2 Al

i So The Preliminary Dtfcourfe. Seel. VIII.

Of ai Af- yil Afwad, whofe name was Aihala, was of the tribe of Ans, and
governed that and the other tribes of Arabs defeended from Madb-
baj \ This man was likewife an apollate from Mohammedifin, and
fet up for himfelf the very year that Mohammed died \ He was
furnamed Dbu'lhemdr , or the majler of the afs, becaufe he ufed fre-
quently to fay, The majier of the afs is coming unto me 3 j and pre-
tended to receive his revelations from two angels named Sohaik and
Shoraik +. Having a good hand at legerdemain, and a fmooth
tongue, he gained mightily on the multitude by the ftrange feats
which he (hewed them, and the eloquence of his difeourfe J : by
thefe means he greatly encreafed his power, and having made hiav-
felf mailer of Najrdn and the territory of al Tayef 6 , on the death
of Badban , the governor of Taman for Mohammed , he feized that
province allb, killing Sbabr , ' the Son of Badban , and taking to wife
his widow, whofe father, the uncle of Firuz the Deilamitt , he had
alfo flain 7 . Thefe news being brought to Mohammed , he lent to his
friends, and to thofe of Hamddn $ a party of whom, confpiring with
Kais Ebn Abdal Taghuth, who bore al Afwad a grudge, arid* with
Firuz and al Afwad s wife, broke by night into his houfe, where
Firuz furprized him and cut off his head. While he waa difpatch-
ing he roared like a bull ; at which his guards came to the chamber
door, but were fent away by his wife, who told them the prophet
was only agitated by the divine infpiration. This was done the very
night before Mohammed died. The next morning the confpiracors
caufed the following proclamation to be made, viz. I bear witnefs
that Mohammed is the afojlle of God, and that Aihala 's a lyar\
and letters were immediately fent away to Mohammed, with an ac-
count of what had been done : but a meffenger from heaven out-
ftripped them, and acquainted the prophet with the news, which he
imparted to his companions but a little before his death ; the letters
themfelves not arriving till Abu Beer was chofen Kbalif It is faid
that Mohammed on this occalion told thofe who attended him, that
before the day of judgment thirty more impoftqrs, belides Mofeilama
and al Afwad, Ihould appear, and every one of them fet up for a
prophet. The whole time from the beginning of al Ajwaifs rebel-
lion to his death, was about four months 8 . *

1 Al Soheili, apod Gagnier. in not. ad Abulf. vit. Mob. p. 1 » Elmac. p. 0. 3 A-

btilfed. ubi (up. * Al Soheili, obi fopra. 1 Abulfed. ubi fupr. 6 Idem, & Elmac. ubi
fupr. 7 idem, al Jaanabi, ubi fop. ® Idem, ibid.

In

Se<£t. Vi II. The Preliminary Dijcourje. 1 8 1

In the fame eleventh year of the Hejra, but after the death of ° [
Mohammed , as feems mo ft probable, Toleiba Ebn Khowailed fet up ba '
for a prophet, and Sejdj Bint al Mondar * for a prophetefs.

Toleiba was of the tribe of Afad, which adhered to him, together
with great numbers of the tribes of Gbat/an and Tay. Againft them
likewise was Kbdled fent, who engaged and put them to flight, obliging
Toleiba with his (hattered troops to retire into Syria, where he ftaid
till the death of Abu Beer : then he went to Omar and embraced
Mokammedifm in his prefence, and having taken the oath of fidelity
to him, returned to his own country and people \

Sejdj, furnamed Omm Sdder, was df the -tribe of Tamim y and the Of Sejaj.
wife of Abu Cabdala , a fbothfayer of Tamdma. She was followed not
only by thofe of her own tribe, but by feveral others. Thinking
a prophet the moft proper hufband for her, (he went to Mofeilama,
and married him; but after fhe had ftaid with him three days, fhe
left him, and returned home 3 . What became of her afterwards I
do not find. Ebn Sbobnab has given us part of the conversion which
palled at the interview between thofe two pretenders to infpiration ;
but the fame is a little too immodeft to be tranflated.

In fucceeding ages feveral impoftors from time to time ftarted
up, moft of whom quickly came to nothing: but fome made a
confiderable figure, and propagated fedb which continued long after
their deceafe. I ftiall give a brief account of the moft remarkable
of them, in order of time.

In the reign of al Mobdi, the third Kballf of the race of al Of a!M-
Abbds, one Hakem Ebn Hdfkem \ originally of Menl in Khoraftn , i * ' nsa -
who had been an under-fecretary to Abu Mojlem , the governor of
that province, and afterwards turned foldier, palled thence into
Maward'lnabr, where he gave himfelf out for a prophet. He is
generally named by the Arab writers at Mokanna, and fometiroes al
Borkai, that is the vailed, becaufe he ufed to cover his face with a
vail, or a gilded mafk, to conceal his deformity, having loft an eye
in the wars, and being otherwife of a defpicable appearance; tho‘
his followers pretended he did it for the fame reafon as Mofes did,
viz. left the lplendor of his countenance ftiould dazzle the eyes of
the beholders. He made a great many profelytes at Nakbfhob and
Kajh, deluding the people with feveral juggling performance, which

1 Ebn Sbdbiwb If Elmacitm call her the daughter of al Haretb . * Elmac. p. 16 a}

Reidawi, \ n Kor. c. 5* * Ebo Shohuah. V. Elmac. p. 16* 4 Or Ebn Ata* according

to Ebn Sbebnab.

they

I 82

The Preliminary D 'tfcourfe, Sed:. VIII,

they fwallowed for miracles, and particularly by caufing the appear-
ance of a moon to rife out of a well for many nights together;
whence he was alfo called, in the P erf an tongue, Sazendeh mah , or
the moon-maker. This impious impoftor, not content with being re-
puted a prophet, arrogated divine honours to himfelf, pretending
that the deity refided in his perfon : and the dodtrirre whereon he
built this, was the fame with that of the Gholdites abovementioned,
who affirmed a tranfmigration or fucceffive manifeftation of the di-
vinity through and in certain prophets and holy men, from Adam to
thefe latter days, (of which opinion was alfo Abu Mojlem himfelf 1
but the particular dodtrine of al Mokanna was, that the perfon in
whom the deity had laft refided, was the aforefaid Abu Mojlem, and
that the fame had, fince his death, paffed into himfelf. The fac-
tion of al Mokanna , who had made himfelf matter of feveral forti-
fied places in the neighbourhood of the cities abovementioned,
growing daily more and more powerful, the Khalif was at length
obliged to fend an army to reduce him ; at the approach whereof al
Mokanna retired into one of his ftrongeft fortrefles, which he had
well provided for a fiege, and fent his cmiffaries abroad to perfuade
people that he raifed the dead to life, and knew future events. But be-
ing ftraitly befieged by the Khalif' s forces, when he found there was
no poffibility for him to efcape, he gave poifon in wine to his
whole family and all that were with him in the cattle, and when
they were dead he burnt their bodies, together with their cloatba and
all the provifions, and cattle ; and then, to prevent his own body’s
being found, he threw himfelf into the flames, or, as others fay,
into a tub of aqua forth, or fome other preparation, which con-
fumed every part of him, except only his hair : fo that when the
befiegers entred the place they found no creature in it, fave one of
al Mokanna s concubines, who, fufpedting his defign, had hid her-
felf, and difcovered the whole matter. This contrivance, however,
failed not to produce the effedf which the impoftor defigned among
the remaining part of his followers j for he had promifed them
that his foul fhould tranfmigrate into the form of a grey-headed
man, riding on a greyifh beaft, and that after fo many years, he
would return to them, and give them the earth for their pofieffion:
the exportation of which promife kept the fe<fl in being for feveral

Tl)i» explains a doubt of Mr. Bajh concerning a paffage of Etruvisui, at tranflated by Er-
ftmus, and corredted by Btffitr. V. B»yle, Drdt. Hift, Art. Abutnujlims, vers la fin, &
Kcm. B.

ages

Se&. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourfe. 183

ages after *, under the name of Mobeyyidites, or, as the Per fans cat!
them, Sefid jdmebghi. n, i. e. the chat bed in white, becaufe they wore
their garments of that colour, in oppofition, as is fuppofed, to the
Khalifs of the family of Abbes, whofe banners and habits were
black.. The hiftorians place the death of al Mokanna in the i62d,
or 163d year of the Hejra \

In the year of the Hejra 201, Babec, furnamed al Khorremi, and Of Bdbic
Kborremdtn , either becaufe he was of a certain diftridt near Ardebtl alKJ ’° rr *'
in Adberbijdn, called KL&rrem, or becaufe he inftituted a merry re-
ligion, which is the fignification of the word in Per fan, began to take
on him the title of a prophet. I do not find what do&rine he
taught ; but it is faid he profeffed none of the religions then known
in Afia. He -gained a great number of devotees in Adherbijdn and
the Pet fan Irak , and grew powerful enougK to wage war with the
Khaltf al MdmUn, whofe troops he often beat, killing feveral
of his generals, and one of them with his own hand; and by
thefe victories he became fo formidable that al Motafem, the fuccef-
for of al Mdmun, was obliged to employ the forces of the whole emr
pire againft him. The general fent to reduce Babec was Afjhid, who
having overthrown him in battle, took his caftles one after another
with invincible patience, notwithftanding the rebels gave him great
annoyance, and at laft (hut up the impoftor in his principal fortrefs; which
being taken, Babec found means tocfcape thence in difguife, with fome
of his family and principal followers; but taking refuge in the ter-
ritories of the Greeks, was betrayed in the following manner. Sahel,
an Armem :?? officer, happening to know Babec, enticed him, by of-
fers of fervice and refpedt, into his power, and treated him as a
mighty prince, till, when he fat down to eat, Sahel clapt himfelf
down by him ; at which Babec being furprized, afked him how he
dared to take that liberty unafked? It is true, great king, replied Sa-
hel, 1 have committed a fault ; for who am I, that I Jhould fit at
jour majefifs table t And immediately fending for a fmith, he made
ufe of tHis bitter farcafm, Stretch forth your legs , great king, that this
man may put fetters on them. After this Sahel fenc him to Afjhid,
tho’ he had offered a large fum for his liberty, having fiift ferved
him in his own kind, by caufing his mother, filler, and wife, to

1 They were a fe& in the daj n of Afotlfaragiuu who lived abovo five hundred year* after
this cXErsDniimry event; and may, for ought I know, be fo ftill. a Ex Ahu*lfarag. Hift.

Dyn. p. 226. Lebb al Tawarikh, Ebn Shohnah, al Tabari, Sc Khondamir* V. D’Herbel. Bibl.

Orient Art Hakem Ben Hafchun.

b%

1 84 The Preliminary Difcourfe. Seft. VIII,

be ravilhed before his face; for fo Babec ufed to treat his prifoners.
Afjhid , having the arch-rebel in his power, conducted him to W
Motafem , by whofe order he was put to an ignominious and cruel
death. This man had maintained his ground againft the power of
the Khaltfs for twenty years, and had cruelly put to death above
two hundred and fifty thoufand people; it being his cuftom never
to fpare man, woman or child, either of the Mohammedam or their
allies *. The fe&aries of Babec which remained after his death,
feem to have been entirely difperfed, there being little or no mention
made of them by hiftorians.

of Mab- About the year 235, one Mahmud Ebn Faraj pretended to be

Fara^" MoJ'es refufcitated, and plaid his part fo well that feveral people be-
lieved on him, and attended him when he was brought before the
Khalif al Motawakkel. That prince, having been an ear-witncfs of
his extravagant difcourfes, condemned him to receive ten buffets from
every one of his followers* and then to be drubbed to death ; which
was accordingly executed ; and his difciples were impriioned till they
came to their right minds 1 2 .

of the The Karmatiam , a fedt which bore an inveterate malice againft
t h e Mohammedans , began firft to raife difturbances in the year of the
Hejra 278, and the latter end of the reign of al Motamed. Their
origin is not well known ; but the common tradition is, that a poor
fellow, whom fome call Karmata, came from Kbuzijlan to the villages
near Cufa, and there feigned great fan&ity and ftridtnefs of life 4 and
that God had injoined him to pray fifty times a day, pretending alfo
to invite people to the obedience of a certain Imam of the family of
Mohammed : and this way of life he continued till he had made a
very great party, out of whom he chofe twelve, as his apoftles, to
govern the reft, and to propagate his dodtrines. But the governor
of the province, finding men negledted their work, and their hus-
bandry in particular, to fay thofe fifty prayers a day, feized the fel-
low, and having put him in prifon, fwore that he fhould die; which
being over-heard by a girl belonging to the governor, fhe, pitying
the man, at night took the key of the dungeon from under her
mafter’s head as he flept, and having let the prifoner out, returned
the key to the place whence {he had it. The next morning the go-
vernor found the bird flown; and the accident being publickly known
raifed great admiration, his adherents giving it out that God

1 Ex Abolfarag. p. 252, &c. Elmacin. p. 141, & c . & Khondamir. V. D’Herbel. Art. Bi-

I fete. * Ebn Shohnah, V. D’Herbel. p. 537.

had

Se&. VIII. The Preliminary Dijcmrje.

had taken him into heaven- Afterwards he appeared in another
province, and declared to a great number of people he had gr»r about

him, that it was not in the power of any to do him hurt; notwith-
Handing which, his courage failing him, he retired into Syria, and
was not heard of any more. Hts fed, however, continued and eit-
creafed, pretending that their mailer had msiuf'eftcd himfclf to be a
true prophet, and had left them a new law, wherein he had changed
the ceremonies and form of prayer ufed by the Mcjlems, and intro-
duced a new kind of fart ; and that he had alio allowed them to
drink wine, and dilpenfed with feveral things commanded in the
Kanin. They alio turned the precepts of that book into allegory ,
teaching that prayer was the Jymbol of obedience to their Irni.-n,
and failing that of file nee, or concealing their dogms from ftraugej :
they alfo believed fornication to be the tin of infidelity ; and the guilt
thereof to be incurred by thofe who revealed the mv ft cries of their
religion, or paid not a blind obedience to their chief. They ace laid
to have produced a book, wherein was written (among order things, i
In the name of the moji merciful God. A1 Fani Ebn OthmVn of
the, town of Nafrana faith, that Chrift appeared unto him in a human
form, , and /aid, Thou art the invitation : thou art the demonfi ration :
thou art the camel: thou art the beafl: thou art John the jim of Za-
charias: thou art the Holy Ghoft ’. From the year above-mentioned
the Karmntians, under leveral leaders, gave almoft continual difturb-
ance to the Khali js and their Mohammedan fubjedb for feveral years;
committing great disorders and outrages in Chaldea, Jr a bin, SV’
and Mjopo/amia , and at length eftablifhing a eonlidoable principal li-
ly, the power whereof was in its meridian in the reign of Abu
Dbdher, famous for his taking of Mecca, and the indignities by him
offered to the temple there, but which declined foon after his time
and came to nothing *.

To the Kanautiam the Jfmaelians of Afsa were very near of kin,
if they were not a branch of them. For thefe, who were alfo
called al McUihedah, or the Impious, and by the writers of the hif-
tory of the holy wars, AJfaJjtm, agreed with the former in many re-
fpe&$ ; fuch as their inveterate malice againffc thofe of other religions,
and efpecially the Mohammedan, their unlimited obedience to their
prince, at whofe command they were re^dy for alfaffi nations, or any
other bloody and dangerous enterprize, their pretended attachment to

1 Aptjd Airaifkr. p. 27$.. 1 2 Ex Abwlfar. ibid. Efmacino, p. 174. &c. Shshnafc, Khon-

Jamir. V. D Hcrbcl. Art. Carmath.

b b a

i86

The Preliminary Difcourfe.

Se<a. VIII.

a certain Imam of the houfe of Alt, &c. Thefe Ijmadiam in T n e
year 483 pofleffed themfelves of al Jebdl, in the Perjian Irak, un-
der the condudt of Haj’an Sabah ; and that prince and his defen-
dants enjoyed the fame for an hundred and feventy one years* till the
whole race of them was deftroyed by Holagu the Tartar *.

And Ba- The Batenites, which name is alfo given to the Ijmaeliam by fome

unuti ‘ authors, and likewife to the Karmatians *, were a fed: which pro-
feffed the fame abominable principles, and were difperfed over feveral
parts of the eaft 3. The word fignifies Efoterics , or people of inward
or hidden light or knowledge.

Of d Mr Abu’ l Teyyeb Ahmed, fur named al Mot anabbi, of the tribe of Jo fa,

tantbbi. is too famous on another account not to claim a place here. He
was one of the moft excellent poets among the Arabiam , there be-
ing none befides Abu Temam who can difpute the prize with him.
His poetical in/piration was fo warm and exalted, that he either mif-
took it, or thought he could perfuade others to believe it to be pro-
phetical, and therefore gave himfelf out to be a prophet indeed $ and
thence acquired his furname, by which he is generally known. His
accomplilhments were too great not to have fome fuccefs; for feve-
ral tribes of the Arabs of the defarts, particularly that of Kelab,
acknowledged him to be what he pretended. But Lulu, governour in
thofe parts for Akhjhtd king of Egypt and Syria, foon put a ftop fo the
further progrefs of this new fed, by imprifoning their prophet, and
obliging him to renounce his chimerical dignity j which having done,
he regained his liberty, and applied himfelf folely to his poetry, by
means whereof he got very confiderable riches, being in high efteem at
the courts of feveral princes. Al Motanabbi loft his life, together with
his fon, on the bank of the Tigris , in defending the money which
had been given him by Adado' ddawla, foltan of Perjia, againft fome
Arabian robbers who demanded it of him j with which money he
was returning to Cufa, his native city. This accident happened in
the year 354 ♦.

Of Baba. The laft pretender to prophecy I fhall now take notice of, is one
who appeared in the city of Amajia, in Nat olio, in the year 638,
and by his wonderful feats feduced a great multitude of people
there. He was by nation a Turkmdn , and called himfelf Baba, and
had a difciple named Ifaac, whom he fent about to invite thofe of

*v*s 7 . % . u mcruct, p, 035, CC C.

* V. Elmacin. p.

* Pr*f. in nnrm

Prxf. in opera

bis

187

Sed. VIII. The Preliminary Difcourfe.

his own nation to join him. Ifaac accordingly, coming to the ter-
ritory of Someifat , publilhed his commiflion, and prevailed on many
to embrace his mafter‘s fe£t, efpecially among the Turkmans j fo that
at laft he had fix thoufand horfe at his heels, befides foot. With
thefe Baba and his difciple made open war on all who would not
cry out with them, There is no God but Godj Baba is the apojile of
God: and they put great numbers of Mohammedans, as well as Chrtf
nans, to the fword in thofe parts j till at length both Mohammedans
and Chrifians , joining together, gave them battle, and having en-
tirely routed them, put them all to the fword, except their two chiefs,
who being taken alive, had their heads ft ruck off by the executioner.

I could mention feveral other impoftors of the fame kind, which
have arifen among the Mohammedans fince their prophet's time, and
very near enough to compleat the number foretold by him: but I
apprehend the reader is by this time tired as well as myfelf, and (hall
therefore here conclude this difcourfe, which may be thought already
too long for an introduction.

1 Abulfar. p. 4.79. Ebn Shohnah, D’Hcrb. Art. Baba.

a L

-t

■ . mwwK

( * )

A L

KORAN.

CHAP. I.

Inti tied) The Preface, or Introdudion a $ revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

P Raife be to God, the Lord of all creatures b ; the moft merciful, the
king of the day of judgment. Thee do we worfhip, and of thee do
we beg afliftance. Direft us in the right way, in the way of thofe
to whom thou haft been gracious *, not of thofe againft whom thou
art incenfed, nor of thofe who go aftray c .

B CHAP.

*

• The Prefaet , Ac] In Arabic al Fat that .
This chapter is a prayer, and held in great vene-
ration by the Mohammedans t who give it feveral
other honourable titles ; as the chapter of prayer ,
of pr*tjt f of tbankjgifring* oi trtafitrt* See. They
efteem it as the quintefTence of the whole Koran ,
and often repeat it in their devotions both public
and private, as the Cbrift'tans do the Lord's
Prayer I * .

* Lord tf ati ereatnresi] The original words are,

Rjilrl Vfl/jjftEJia , which literally iignify Lord *f
ttxr/dj : but Jlxmtiu in this ind ther places
of the Ktrin properly mean the thre- fpecies of
rational creatures, Men. Genii, and Angels, F^-
therjWirrrjiW Jus endtfrv cured to prove from this
pjiTj^e th^t bhbitmmd relieved a plurality of
wafldi, which he ells the error of the hLmhbm,
Scz 1 • but this imputation the learned Rthtod ba*
flactvji tt- hi £f]-.; : rdy grrumdlcfa

£ &}r L \ f } m hi tie right raty, &cj This laft
icnt^ncre crvnM a petition, that God would
lead the {-applicants into the true religion, by
v. r ;. .h is meant Uae Mohammedan in the Koran of-

1 F Bobovium de pretii\ Mxkunrxil p 9

p.? 6. W in Nitn aJ Jfk • gap* i. 3 De reiigm,

Beidaw^&c.

ten called tbt right wdy\ in this place more par-
ticularly defined to be, tbt way <f theft to whom
God hath r:n gratis wj, that is, of the prophets
and faithful who preceded Mohammed i under
which appellations are alfo comprehended the
Jews and Cbri/Hans % fuch as they were in the
times of their primitive purity, before they had
deviated from their refpe&ive inftitutions , not tb*
ft "; of tbt ttfjJern Jews, whofe fignal calamities
are marks of the juft anger of God againft them
for their ©hftinacy and difobedience i m* the
Chriftians of this age f who have departed from
the true doftrine of Jefus* and ar^ bewildered in
a labyrinth of error +.

This is the common expofition of the pafTape ;
>W al Zai&t&b/l'arij and feme others, by a diffe-
rent application ot the negatives, refer the whole
to the true believers ; and then the fenfc frill run

tW : Tbt n van of ih&Ji to rkim the u hail btengrn-
tgattfjt wktm those art not me?. *d r r*:S v
haw m ertj. Which tranftation the ang in a -
will vtsf well bear

%- _ * In Prodram adrtfiet ■ ASartni Part. IV

MtrhammeJ. p. 262 * Jallalo ddi^. Al

2

Al KORAN.

Chap. 2 .

CHAP. 11.

Intitlgd > The Cow a ; revealed partly at Mecca, and

partly at Medina.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

A L. M. b There is no doubt lh this b'ook ; it is a direction to the pious,
who believe in the rtiyfterids 0 ofplitb', who obferve the appointed times
of prayer, and diftribute alms out of what we have bellowed on them ; and
who believe in that 'revelation, which hath been ftttt dbWri unto thefe) and that
which hath been fent down unto the freshets before thee d , and have firm af-
furancc in the life to come* : thefe are direfted by their Lord, and they fhall
profper. As for the unbelievers, it will be equal to them whether thou ad-
monifh them, or do not admonifh them ; they will not believe. God hath
fealed up their hearts and their hearing; a dimnefs covereth their fight, and
they /hall fiiffer a grievous puni/hment. There are lome vzho fay. We believe
in Go d, and the laft day ; but are not really believers : they /celt t<5 deceive
God, and. thofe who do believe, but they deceive themfelves only, and are Hot
fenfible thereof. There fs an infirmity in their hearts* and G od hath increa-
jed that Infirmity f ; and they fhall fuffer a moft painful puhifhmeht, becaufe
they have dilbelieved. When one faith unto them, Aft not corruptly 1 in the
earth ; they reply, Verily we are men of integrity h . Are not they them-

• felves

* This title was occafioned by the ftory of properly fignifies tbehstterpart of any thing* and
the red heifer, mentioned^. 9. by -way of excellence the text lift , the latter or

b A.LsM.j As tofche meaning of thefe letters, future fiate after deathiand is oppofed to al-dtmya w
fee the Preliminary Difcourfe, $o&. 3. this world ; and al-ouL r, the former or pttfknt lip,

*. My fieri ft.] The Arabic word is gbeib, which The Hebrew word ahbaritb, from, the fame root,
properly fignifies a thing that is abfent, at a great is ufed by Mofes in this fefcfe, and is tranflatcd
difiance, or inviftble , fuch as the refurred ion, latter end*.

paradife, and hell. And this is agreeable to the f Mohammed here* and elfewheft frequently,
language of feripture, which defines faith to be imitates the truly infpirtd writers* In making
the widence'of thing s not fee* 1 . God by operation an the minds of reprobates to

d The prophets before tbee] The Mohammedans be* prevent their conversion. This fatality or pre-
lie ve that God gave written revelations not only deftinatibn, as beKetfed by the Mohammedans ,
to Mofes , Jefud, and Mohammed , but to feveral hath been fufficiently treated of in the Prelimi -
other prophets 2 j tho* they acknowledge none of nary Difcourfe.

thofe which preceded the Koran to be now ex- * Alt not corruptly] Literally ufgupt not in
tant, except the Pentateuch of Mofes, the Pfalms the earth , by which fome expqAtOI* underftand
of David, and the Gofpel of Jefits , whichyet they the fowing of falfe do&rine, ..r 4 -_ corrupting pco-
fay were even before Mohammed's time altered plefs principles.

and corrupted by the fetes and Chrifiians j and h Men of integrity] According to the explica-
therefore will not allow our prefent copies to be tion in the preceding note, this wonl mufl be
genuine. . . tranllated reformers, who promote true piety by

e The life to come] The origin al word al-dkherat their doftrine and example.

1 Heb '*b u Se * Rorn ' IxW - 2 S* 2 Corinth, iv. 18. & v. y. 2 V. Rbland. De reBg Mob dm.

p. 34. UDiJfert. de Samaritmsyp, 34, 3 Numb. xxiv. 20. Deut. viii. 16.

C h a p. 2. Al KORAN. 3

felves corrupt doers ? but they are not fenfible thereof. And when one faith
unto them, Believe ye as others * believe ■, they anfwer. Shall we believe as
fools believe ? Are not they themfelves fools ? but they know it not. When
they meet thofe who believe, they fay. We do believe : but when they retire
privately to their devils u , they fay. We really bold w ith you, and only mock
at tbefe people : God fhall mock at them, and continue them irt djeir impiety •,
they if] i,l 11 wander in confufion. Thefe are the men who have purchased error
at the price of true direction : but their traffiek hath not been gainful, neither
have they been rightly diredted. They are like unto one who kindleth a fire*,
and when it hath enlightened all atound him 4 ; God takethaway their light *
and leaveth them in darknds, they fhall not fee ; they are deaf, dumb, and
blind, therefore will they not repent. Or like a ftormy cloud from heaven,
fraught with darknefs, thunder, and lightning*, they put their fingers in their
ears, becaufe of the noife of the thunder, for fear of death ; God encompaflf-
eth the infidels : the lightning wanteth but little of taking away their fight ;
fo often as it enlighteneth them, they walk therein, but when darknefs cometh
on them, they Hand ftill ; and if God fo pleafed, he would certainly deprive
them of their hearing and their fight, for God is almighty. O men of MEC
CJ ferve your Lord who hath created you, and thofe who have been before
you : peradventure ye will fear him ; who hath fpread the earth as a bed for
you, and the heaven as a covering, and hath caufed water to defeend from
heaven, and thereby produced fruits for your fuftenance. Set not up therefore
any equals unto God, againft your own knowledge. If ye be in doubt con-
cerning that revelation which we have fent down unto our fervant, produce
a chapter like unto it, and call upon your witneffes, befides God *, if ye
fay truth. But if ye do it not, nor fhall ever be able to do it ; juftly fear the

B 2 fire

• Other ] The firft companions and followers
of Mohammed 1 .

h Devils] The prophet, making nfe of the
liberty zealots of all religions have, by pre-
fer ipti on, of giving ill language, bellows this
name on the Jewifowbbxm and Cbtiftian priefts;
tho’ he feemS chiefly to mean the former, againft
whom hfe had hy much the greater fpleen.

* tn this pafiige, MibummtJ compares thofe
who believed not on Jiiria, to a man who wants
to kindle a fire, but as foon as it burns up, and
the flames give a light, Ihuts his eyes, left he
ihould fee. As if he had faid ; You, O Arab?- it /,
have long defired a prophet of your own nation,
and now I am lent unto you, and have plainly
proved my mUfictii by the excellence of my doc-
trim- and motion, you relift convidion, and
refuk Co believe in me; therefore fhall God leave
you in your ignorance.

4 The fenfe feems to be here imperfed, and
may be compleated, by adding the words, he
turns frm it, fonts bis eyes, or the like

• Their light] That is of the unbelievers, to
whom the word their being in the plural, feems
to refer s tho’ it is not unufoal for Mebmsmd In
afledation of the prophetic ftyle, fuddenly to
change the number againft all rules of grammar
f Here he compares the unbelieving Arab
to people caught in a violent ftorm. Toperceite
the beauty of this comparifon, it muft be ob-
ferved, that the Mohammed :n dodors Jay, this
tempeft is a type Or linage cf the Korav it felf :
the thunder flgnifying Hie threats therein con
tained ; the lightning, the promifet ; and the
darknefs, the myfteries. The terror of the
threats makes ther ftop their ears, unwilling to
hear truths fo diftgreeabfe ; when the pfemifes
are read to them, they aftfnd with plealure; but
v. hen any thing myftenou* or difficult of belief
occurs, they (land ftodc ftill, and will not fub-
mit to be direded.

* Tour witneffes befides God] 1. e Your falfe
gods and idols.

1 Jalla lo 1 ddi N.

4 Al KORAN. Chap. 2.

fire whofe fewel is men and (tones, prepared for the unbelievers. But bear
good tidings unto thofe who believe, and do good works, that they 1 * (hall have
gardens watered by rivers j fo often as they eat of the fruit thereof for fufte-
nance, they Jhall fay. This is what we have formerly eaten of ; and they fhall
be ftipplied with feveral forts of fruit having a mutual refemblanctf to one
another \ There fhall they enjoy wives lubjeft to no impurity, and there
lhall they continue for ever. Moreover God will not be afhamed to propound
in a parable a gnat, or even a more defpicable thing b : for they who believe
will know it to be the truth from their Lord ; but the unbeliever will fay.
What meaneth God by this parable? he will thereby miflead many, and
will direft many thereby : but he will not miflead any thereby, except the
tranfgrefiors, who make void the covenant of God after the dfobKJJung there-
of, and cut in funder that which God hath commanded to be joined, and aft
corruptly in the earth they lhall pprifh. How is it that ye believe not in
God ? Since ye were dead, and he gave you life c ; he will hereafter caufe you
to die, and will again reflore you to life ; then lhall ye return unto him. It
is he who hath created for you whatfoever is on earth, and then let his mind to
the creation of heaven, and formed it into feven heavens *, he knoweth all
things. When thy Lord faid unto the angels, I am going to place a fubfti-
tute on earth d ; they faid, Wilt thou place there one who will do evil therein,
and fhed blood? but we celebrate thy praife, and fanftify thee. GOD anfwer-
ed, Verily I know that which ye know not 5 and he taught Adam the names

Of

M Some commentators 1 approve of this fenfe,
fuppofing the fruits of paradife, tho’ of various
taftes, are alike in colour and outward appear-
ance : but others * think the meaning to be,
that the inhabitants of that place Will find there
fruits of the fame or the like kinds, as they ufed
to eat while on earth.

h This was revealed to take off an objection
made to the Koran by the infidels, for conde-
fcending to fpeak of iuch infignificabt infetts, as
the fpider, the pifmire, the bee, &V. 3 .

e Ye were dead, and be gave you life , &c.] i e.
Ye were dead while in the loins of your fathers,
and he gave you life in your mothers wombs;
and after death ye lhall be again raifed at the re-
furreflion 4 .

d Concerning the creation of Adam, here in-
timated, the Mohammedans have feveral peculiar
traditions. They fay the Angels, Gabriel, Michael,
and Ifrafil, were fent by God, one after another,
to fetch for that purpofe feven handfuls of earth
from different depths, and of different colours
(whence fome account for the various complexion
of mankind * ); but the earth being apprehen five
of the confluence, and deiiring them to repre-

fent her fear to God, that the creature he de-
ligned to form, would rebel againft him, and
draw down his curie upon her, they retungd
without performing Gods command ; whereupon
he feftt dzra'il on the lame errand, who execut-
ed his commfifion without remorie j for which
reafon, God appointed that angel to fcparate
the fouls from the bodies, being therefore called
the angel of death. The earth he had taken was
carried into Arabia, to a place between Mecca
and Tayef, where being firft kneaded by the an-
gels, it was afterwards fafhionod by God hkn-
felf into a human form, and left to dry 6 for the
Ipace of forty days, or as others fay, as many
years ; the angels in the mean time often vifit-
ing it, and Eblis (then one of the angels who
are neareft to God’s prefence, afterwards the
devil) among the reft ; but he not contented
with looking on it, kicked it with his foot till it
rung, and knowing God defigned that creature
to be his fuperior, took a fecrct refolution never
to acknowledge him as fuch. After this, God
animated the figure of clay, and indued it with
an intelligent foul, and whoa he had placed him
in paradife, formed Eve out of his left fide 7 -

1 Jallalq'ddin. * ^/Zamakhshari. 3 Yahya. 4 Jallalo’ddir. * Al

Termed i, from a trad hi m of Abu Musa 4/ Ashari. 6 Karin, c. cc. 7 Khond amir.

Jallalq’ddin. Comment* in Koran 9 &c. V, D Herbelot, Bibliotb. Orient, p. 55.

Chap. 2. Al K 0 R A N. 5

of all things, and then propofed them to the angels, and faid. Declare unto
me the names of tbefe tilings if ye lay truth. They anfwered, Praife be unto
thee, we have no knowledge but what thou teacheft us, for thou art know-
ing and wile. GOD laid, O Adam, tell them their names. And when he
had told them their names, GOD faid, Did I not tell you that I know the
fee rets of heaven and earth, and know that which ye difeover, and that which
ye conceal*? And when we faid unto the angels, Worlhip h Adam ; they all
worfhipped him, except Eblis who refilled* and was puffed up with pride, and
became of the number of unbelievers c . And we faid, O Adam, dwell thou
and thy wife in the garden d , and eat of the fruit thereof plentifully wherever
ye will •, but approach not this tree *, left ye become of the number of the
tranfrrefibrs. But Sat an cuufed them to forfeit paradife r , and turned them
out of tbe fate tf bappimfs wherein they had been i whereupon, we faid. Get
ye down *, the one of you an enemy unto the other } and there lhall be a

dwell-

■ This ftory Mobamml borrowed from the
JaoiJb traditions ; which lay, that the angels
having fpoken of man with fome contempt,
when God confulted them about his creation,
God made anlwer, that the man was wifer than
they ; and to convince them of it, he brought all
kinds of animals to them, and asked them their
names ; \x hich they not being able to tell, he
put the lame queflion to the man, who named
them one after another ; and being asked his
own name, and Go d’s name, he anfwered very
juftly, and gave God the name of Jehovah *.
The angels adoring of JJafa is alio mentioned
in the Talm r i 2 .

k tpjrpnp.] The original word fignifies pro-
perly to pro frdti soft ftif, till the forehead touches
the ground ; which is the humbleft poll arc of a-
doration, and finally due to God only ; bat it is
fometimes, as in this place, ufed to exprefs that
civil worlhip or homage, which may be paid to
creatures 3 .

e This occafion of the devil’s fall has fome
affinity with an opinion which has been pretty
much enter t ined among Cbrttfians 4 , viz. that
the angdl being informed of God’s* intention to
creaCc man after his ov-n irr ige, and to dignify
human nature by Christ’s afluraing it. Tome
of them thinking their glory to be eel ipfed there-
by, envied man’s happinefs, and fo revolted.

4 Mvbammed, as appears by what prefently fol-
low 5, does not phce this garden or paradife on
caith, but in the feventh heaven

• Concerning this tree or the forbidden fruit,
the Mohammedans, as well as the Cbriftians, have
various opinions. Some /ay it was an ear of
wheat ; fome will have it to have been a fig-tree,
and others a vine 6 . The ftory of the fall is
told, with fome further circuxnltances, in the lie-

ginning of the 7th chapter.

* Satm ■ fid tbm to forfeit paradife] They
have a tradition that the devil offering to get in-
to paradife to tempt Adam, was not admitted by
the guard; whereupon he begged of theaoimab,
one after another, to carry him in, that he might
fpcak to Adam and his wife ; but they allrefufed
him, except the ferpent, who took him between
two of his teeth, and fo introduced him. They
add, that the ferpent was then of a beautiful
form, and not in the fhape he now bears 7 .

1 Get ye down] The Mohammedans fay, that
when they were caft down frpm paradife, Adam
fell on the ifle of Ceyh n or Serendib, and Eve near
Joddah (the port of Mm*} in Arabia ; and that
after a feporatiutt of 200 years, Aiam was, on
his repentance, conduced by the angel Gabriel
to a mountain ne;r Mara, w here he found and
knew his wife, the mountain being thence nam-
ed Arrfat ; and that he afterwards retired with
her to Ceyi rt „ where they continued to propa-
gate their fpecies 8 .

It may not be improper here to mention ano-
ther tradition concerning the gigantic ftature of
our firft parents. Their prophet, they fay, af-
firmed Adam to have been as tall as a high p lm-
tree 9 ; but this would be too much in propor
tion, if that were really the print of his foot
which is pretended fo be fuch, on the top of »
mountain in the ifle of Cey/a, thence named
Pico de Adam, and by the Arab writer Rabin,
being fomewhat above two (pans long ro (tho T o-
thers fay it is feventy cubits long, and that v\ hen
Aid m fet one foot here, he had the other in the
fea 1 1 ) ; and too little, if Eve ‘■vere of fo enormo 1 -
a fize, as is (aid, that when her head 1 ■ y on one
hill near Mecca, her knees relied on two others
in the plain, abodt two musket fhot aiunder 12 .

1 V . Rivin- Serpent . fedu & ip - 56. 2 /Z.Moses Haddarsh an ^ in BerejbU rabkoh . 3 Jalualo’d-
din. 4 Iren aeus, Lact. Greg. Nyssbn. dec, T Fid - -Mar r acc- inAk.p 24. 6 V . tbid.pzz
7 V . ib B ZTHerbelot, Bib!. orient.'p. 55. 9 Yahya. Monconys / i. /

tic. See Knox's Account of Ceylon . 11 Amcnnes relations des Jades £sY. p. 3 12 Mq^cgn v : , m.

6 A1 K 0 R A N. Chap. 2 ,

dwelling place for you on earth, and a provifion for a feafon. And Adam
learned words of prayer from his Lord, and God turned unto him, for he is
eafy to be reconciled and merciful. We faid, Get ye all down from hence ;
hereafter (hall there come unto you a di reft ion from me*, and whoever (hall fol,
tew my direction, on them (hall no fear come, neither (hall they be grieved }
but they who fhall be unbelievers, and accufe our figns b of falJehood, they
(hall be the companions of hell fire, therein (hall thev femain for ever. Q
children of Israel % remember my favour wherewith I nave favoured yoa; and
perform your covenant with me, and I will perform my covenant with yoa ; and
revere me : and believe in the revelation which I have font down, confirming
that which is with you, and be not the firft who believe not therein, neither
exchange my figns for a fmall price •, and fear me. Cloath not the truth with
vanity, neither conceal the truth againft your own knowledge > obferve the
jtatea times of prayer, and pay your legal alms, and bow down yourfdves with
thofe who bow down. Will ye command men to do juftice, and forget your
own fouls ? yet ye read the book of the law : do ye not therefore underftand ?
Ask help with perfeverance and prayer *, this indeed is grievous, unlefe to the
humble, who femujly think they (hall meet their Lord, and that to him they
fhall return. O children of Israei,, remember my favour wherewith I have
favoured you, and that I have preferred you above all nations: dread the day
Wherein one foul (hall not make fatisfeftion for another foul, neither (hall any
jnwrcelfion be accepted from them, nor fhall any compenfation be received,
neither (hall they be helped. Remember when we delivered you from the peo-
ple df Pharaoh, who grievoufly opprefied you, they flew your male children,
and let your females live : therein was a great trial from your Lord, And
when we divided the fea for you and delivered you, and drowned Pharaoh's
people while ye looked on *. And when we treated with Moses forty nights ;
then ye took the calf ' for your G O D, and did evil} yet afterwards we forgave

you.

■ A dircBion from me] Gob here promifes law, which bear wltnefs to thole troths, nor to
Adam that his will fhould be revealed to him and corrupt them by publHhing falfe copies of the
his poflcrity; which promlfe th 1 Mohammedans Pentateuch, for which the. writers w$re but poor-
believe- was fulfilled at fevcral times by the mi- ly paid

niftty of fevcral prpphets, from Adam himfelf 4 See the ffory .of Mofes and Pbar*& more
who was the firft, to Mohammed, who was the particularly related chap, vli. & jx.
laft. The number of books revealed unto Adam ft 'Tbe.calf.] The pekorr who caft this calf, the
they la y was ten Mohammedans fay was (not Aaron but) A Sdmeri ,

* Signs. This word has various fignificatipos one of the pHncipa! men among the children of
in the Koran ; fometime?, as in this paflagq, it Ifrael, fome of whofe defendants it is pretended
fignifies divine revelation * or feripture in general; ftill inhabit an iflandof that name in the' Arabian
fometimes the vtrfes of the Koran in particular; gulf 4 . It was made df the rings 1 and bracelets
and at other times vifible miracles . But the fenfe of gold, filver, and djther materials, which the
is cafily diftinguiihed by the context. IJraelitet had borrow*! of the Egyptian ; for

J 1 a ar ^ h . ere caflc( * u P° n » t0 ^ceive Aaron , who commanded in his brother? abfence,

the Karin, as verifying and confirming the Pen - having ordered dl Sdmeri to colleft thofe oma-
tateucb, particulwly with refpeft to the unity of ments from the people, who carried on a wick-
God and the million of Mohammed 2 . And they cd commerce with them, and to fceep them to-
are exhorted not to conceal the paflages -of their gcth er

1 V. Hottinger Hifi. orient, p. u. Reland, it relig. Mohammed, p. 21. » Yahta. * Jal-

lalq ddin. 4 Gfdgr,Nubitnf. p . 45. * Kotin c. 7.

Chap. 2. Al KORAN. 7

you, that peradventut e ye might give thanks. And when we gave Moses the
book of the law* and the diftinftion between gdod t and evil , that peradvemure
ye might be directed. And when Moses laid unco his people, O my people,
verily ye have injured your own fouls, by your taking the calf for your God i
therefore be turned unto your Creator, ana flay thofe among you who have been
guilty of that crime * •> this will be better for you in the fight of your Creator :
and thereupon he turned unto you, for he is eafy to be reconciled, and merciful.
And when ye fai l, O Moses, we will not believe thee, untill we fee Goo
manifcftly *, therefore a piinilhtntnt came upon you, while ye looked on s then
we railed you to life after ye had been dead, that peradventure ye might
give thanks b . And we caufed clouds to overfhadow you, and manna and
quails * to defeend upon you, tag. Eat of the good things which we have
given you for food : and they injured not us, but injured their own fouls.

And when we faid, Enter into this city *, and eat of the frovi/iens thereof
plentifully as ye will', and enter the gate worshipping, and fay, Forgivenefs * !
we Will pardon you your fins, and give increafe unto the well-doers. But
the ungodly changed the expreflion into another ', different from what had
been fpoken unto them •, and we fent down upon the ungodly indignation
from heaven*, becaufe they had tranfgrefied And when Moses afked

drink.

getter till the return of Mojh ; al Simeri un-
detftandhig the founder’s art, put them altoge-
ther into a fhfnace, to melt them down into one
mils, which came out in the form of s calf 1 .
The IjratlHfh accnftomed to the Egyptian idola-
try, pyiflg a religious worlhip to this image, al
Samtri went farther, and took fome daft from
the fbotfteps of the horfe of the angel Gabriel,
Who toarchedattheheadof the people, and threw
it into the mouth of the calf, which immediate
ly began to low, and became animated * ; for
fuch was the virtue of that duft 3 . One writer
fays that all the Israelites adored this calf, ex-
cept ofsly

■ And Jky tbe gf*hy\ In tkU particular, the
narration agrees witli chit of Mofos, whp order-
ed the Lev it a to flay every man bis brother s :
bnt the IcnpJure fays, then fell of the people that
day about 3000 (the Vulgate fays 23000) men 6 ;
whereas the commentators of the Korda make
the number 6f the (liin to amount to 70000;
fcnd add, that Go d fent a dark cloud which hin-
dred them from feeing one another, left the fight
fhould move thofe who executed the fentcnce to
cetnpiffion 7 .

6 The perfons here meant, are (aid to have
been feventy men, who were made choice of bv
and heard the voice of God talking with

him. Bnt not being fatisfied with that, they de-
manded to fee God ; whereupon they were all
ftruck dead by lightning, and on Mofin'% inter -
ceffiou reftored to life 8 .

e The eaftern writers fay, thefe quails were
of a p ecu 'Jar kind, to be found no where but in
Ta/nartr from whence they were brought by a
fouth wind in great numbers to the IfraeUtes
camp in the deftrt The Arab, call thefe birds
Sake a t which is plainly the fame with the He-
brew Sakeim, and fay they have no bones, but
are eaten whole 10 .

* This riiy 1 ] Some commentators fuppofe it to
be Jlfrifh ; others, Jentfaim-

* Forgivenejs /] The Arabic word is Hitt atom
which tome take to fjgnify that profeffion of the
unity of God, fo frequently ufed by the Jl fabam-

La ildba ilia dkto, There ;j no god but

God.

f Changed tbe fxpretfh# into another] Accord-
ing to Jaflalo'diin* inftead of Hittaton, they
cried Habbat ft ftrmrat, i. e. a grain fir an *ar
of t'.ir/ej ; and m ridicule of the divine com-
mand to enter the city in an humbje pollute,
they indecently crept in upon their breech.

* Indignation frm heaven] A peftilcnce which
carried off near 70000 of them 1 1 .

1 See Exoal xxxii. 24. 2 Korin 9 c . 7. 3 Jalla lo'ddin, V . D’Herbelot Bil-l orient ,

f. 6jo. 4 Abu’lfbda. 1 Exod . Xxxii. 26, 27. 6 Ibid . 28. T jALi^ALo’DDict, fcfr.

9 Ismael Ebn ali. 9 See Pfahnbanw. 26. 10 V . DUbrbilot EibL orient, p. 4-7.

11 Jallalo’ddih.

8 Al KORAN. Chap. 2 .

drink for his people, we faid. Strike the rock * with thy rod ; and there
gulhed thereout twelve fountains * according to the number of tbe tribes , and all
men knew their refpeSlive drinking-place. Eat and drink of the bounty of
Gqd, and commit not evil in the earth, acting unjuftly.— And when ye faid,
O Moses, we will by no means be fatisfied with one kind of food ; pray unto
thy Lord therefore for us, that he would produce for us of that which the
earth bringeth forth, herbs, and cucumbers, and garlick, and lentils, and
onions c ; Moses anfwered. Will ye exchange that which is better, for that
which is worfe ? Get ye down into Egypt, for there fhall ye find what ye defire :
and they were fmitten with vilenefs and mifery, and drew on themfelves in-
dignation from God. This they fuffered, becaufe they believed not in the
figns of God, and killed the prophets unjuftly ; this, becaufe they rebelled
and tranfgreffed. Surely thofe who believe, and thofewho Judaize,and Chriftians,
and Sabians*, whoever believeth in God, and the laft day, and doth that
which is right, they fhall have their reward with their Lord, there fhall
come no fear on them, neither fhall they be grieved. Call to mind alfo when

we

• Tbe rock ] The commentators fay this was ter means of information in this refpedt, than to

a ftone which Mofcs brought from mount $inai 9 fall into fuch a miftake ; for the rock Hands
and the lame that fled away with his garments within the borders of Arabia , and fome of his
which he laid upon it one day, while he wafli- countrymen muft needs have fecn it, if he tim-
ed : they add that Mojes ran after the ftone nak- felf did not, as it is moll probable he did. And in
cd, till he found himfelf, ere he was aware, in effect he fceras to be in the right. For one who
the midft of the people, who on this accident went into thofe parts in the end of the 15 century,
were convinced of the falfhood of a report, tells us exprefsly, that the water iffued from
which had been raifed of their prophet, that he twelve places of the rock, according to th^ num-
was burften, or as others write, an hermaphro- ber of the tribes of Ifrael ; tgreff<e font aqu<e lor*
dhe T . gijfimet in duodecim locii pejr*> juxta numerumdws-

They deferibe it to be a Square piece of white dedm tribuum Jjrael A late curious traveller $
marble, fhaped like a man’s head ; wherein they obferves, that there are 24 holes in the Hone,
differ not much from the accounts of European which may be eafily counted; that ;s to fay, iz
travellers, who fay thin rock Hands among feve- on the flat iide, jnd as many on the oppofite
ral IeiTer ones, about 100 paces from mount Ho- roand fide, every one being a foot deep, and an
reb , and appears to have been loofened from the inch wide; and he adds, that the holes on one
neighbouring mountains, having no coherence fide do not communicate with thofe on the o-
with the others 5 that it is a huge mafs of red ther 5 which a lefs accurate fpe&atot; not per-
granite, almoft round on one fide, and flat on the ceiving (for they are placed horizontally* within
other; 12 feet high, and as many thick, but 2 foot of the top of the rock) might conclude
broader than it is high, and about 50 feet in cir- they pierced quite through the ftone, and fo
cumference 3 . reckon them to be^but iz.

b Twelve fountains ] Manned thinks this cir- c See Numb. «. 5.

cumftance looks like a Rabbinical fiAion, or elfe 4 Jews, Chriftians, and Sabians, whoever be -

that Mohammed confounds the water of the rock lievetb , 6 fc ] From thefe words, which are re
at Horeb, with the \z wells at Elim 3 ; for he peated in the 5th chapter, fcveral writers * have
fays, feveral who have been on the fpot, affirm wrongly concluded that the Mobamn'dans hold
there are but 3 orifices whence tbe water iilucd *. it to be the doArine of their prophet, that eve-
But it is to be prefumed that Mohammed had bet- ry man may be laved in his own religion, pro-
vided

* J^hliALO’pDiN, Yahta. 2 B&bypbnbach. Itinerar . ebartam.p. i.Sicard, dans Us Memoir a

des Miffittus wl 7. p. 14. 3 Exod. xv 27. Numb, xxxul 9. * Mar* acc. Pradr. part 4. p. 80.

!ttr dendach, ubifuf . 6 Sjcard, ubi jut. 7 Seldbn ,dejure nat . & gentium Hebr.i 6. c. 12.

Asqbl. a $, Joseph. Gazephjiac. Perfic, p. 365. Nic. Cusanus in Cribratione Ahoranu

L y (0 z. See.

Chap. 2. Al KORAN . 9

we accepted your covenant, and lifted up the mountain of SlNJi over you s
faying , Receive the Imv which we have given you, with a refolution/o keep //,
and remember that which is contained therein, that ye may beware. After this
ye again turned back, fo that if it had not been for God’s indulgence and
mercy towards you, ye had certainly been deftroyed. Moreover ye know
what befell thofe of your nation who tranlgrefled on the fabbath day b ; We
faid unto them. Be ye changed into apes, driven away from the foeiet; of
men . And we made them an example unto thofe who were contemporary
with them, and unto thofe who came after them, and a warning to die pi-
ous. And when Moses laid unto his people, Verily God commandeth you
to facrifice a cow e ; they anfwered, Doft thou make a jeft of us ? Mo-
SES feid, God forbid that I fhould be one of the foolilh. They faid.
Pray for us unto thy Lord, that he would fhew us what cow it is. MOSES

C anfwered,

vided he be fincere and lead a good life. It is lows. In the days of David fome IfraAiUs
true, fome of their do&ora do agree this to be dwelt at Ailab, or E lot b, onthe JW fea, where on
the purport of the words 1 * ; but then they fay the night of the fabbath the fifh ufed to come in
the latitude hereby granted was foon revoked, great numbers to the fhore, and flay there all the
for that this palTage is abrogated by feveral others fabbath, to tempt them ; but the night following
in the Koran, which exprefcty declare, that none they returned into the fea again. At length*
can be faved who is not of the Mobammdan fome of the inhabitants negletling God's com-
faith ; and particularly by thofe words of the 3 d mand, catched fifh on the fabbath, and dreffed
chapter. Whoever follow etb any other religion than and eat them ; and afterwards cut canals from
Iflam (i. e. the Mohammedan ,) it Jball net be ae- the fea, for the fifh to enter, with fluices, which
eeptei of him, and at the laft day he Jball hi of they fhut on the fabbath, to prevent their return
thofe who perijh z . However, others are of opi- to the fea. The other part of the inhabitants,
nion that this paflage is not abrogated, but in- who ftri£Uy obferted the fabbath, ufed both per-
terpret it differently i taking the moaning of it fuafioa and force, to flop this impiety, but to
to be, that no man, whether he be a Jew, a no purpofe, the offenders growing only more
Cbrifttan, or a Sabi an , fhall be excluded from and more obftinate ; whereupon DtfwVcurfed
falvation, provided he quit his erroneous religion the fabbath' breakers, and God transformed them
and become a MJUm , which they (ay is intend- into apes. It is faid, that one going to fee a
ed by the following words. Whoever believeth in friend of his that was among them, found him
God and the laft day , and doth that which is right, in the fhape of an ape, moving his eyes about
And this interpretation is approved by Mr. Re - wildly, and asking him whether he was not fuch
land, who thinks the words here import no a one ? the ape made a fign with his head, that
more than thofe of the apoffle, Ik ftvry nation it was he ; whereupon the friend faid to him,
he that f tenth God, and worketb rightfouffrejj, is Did not I advife yon to defifl ? at which the ape
Accepted with ban 3 ; from which it muff not be wept. They add, that thefe fcnhappy people
irtfen ed, that the religion of nature, or any o- remained three days in this condition, and were af-
ther, is fufocient to five, without faith in towards deftroyed by a wind which fwept them
Christ \ all into the fea 6 .

* When we lifted up mount Sinai over you] The * God commandeth you to furific* a cm. See.]
Mohammedan tradition is, that the Israelites re- The occafion of this facrifice is thus related,
filling to receive the law of Mofes, God tore up A certain man at his death left his fon, then a
the mountain by the roots, and fhook it over child, a coW-cilf, which wandred in the delart
their heads, to ^errify them into a compliance 5 . till he came to age; at which time his mother

b Thofe who tranfgrejfei on the fabbath day, &c.] told him the heifer was his, and bid him fetch
The ftoiy to whicn this -paflage refers, is as fol- her, and fell her for three pieces of gold. When

the

1 See Chardin j Foyages, vol . 2 j >. 326, 331. * Anu 4 LfcAS*ii HebatalLah ie tSroganfe

fcf abrogato. 3 Alls x. 35. 4 F. Reland. de rel. Mob am. f* 128. fcfr. * JaldaloV

iun. 6 Abu’lfxpa.

IO j41 K 0 R A 'N. Chap. 2 :

anfwcred, He faith, She is neither an old cow, nor a young heifer, but of a
middle age between both : do ye therefore that which ye are comma r.detjl
They fijia, Pray for us unto thy Lord that he would fhew us what colour ihe
is of. MOSES anfwered, He faith, She is a red cow *, intenkly red, her
colour rejoiceth the beholders. They faid. Pray for us unto thy Lord, tha;
he woul4 farther lhew us what cow it is* for feveral cows with us are like one
another, and we, if God pleafij, will be directed. Mo$ES anjjweitd* He
faith. She is a cow not broken Jo plough the earth, or water the held, a
found one, there is no blemilh to her- They faid r Now haft thou brought
the truth. Then they facrificed her j yet they wanted but little of leaving
it undone b . And when ye flew a man, and contended among your felves
concerning him, God brought forth to light, t hat which ye conceafod. For we
faid, Strike tie dead body with parr of the'Jacr^ed cow ' : fo God raifeth the
dead to life, and lheweth you his fignsj that peradventure ye may undvrftaiid.
Then were your hearts hardened after this, even as ftones, or exceeding them
in hardnefs : for from fome ftones have river? burfted forth, others have
been rent in funder, and water hath iffued from them, and others have fallen
down for fear of God. But God is not regardlefs of that which ye do.
Do ye therefore defire that the Jews fhould believe you ? yet a part of them
heard the word of Gop, and then, perverted k, after they had under flood it,
againft their own conference. And when they meet the true believers, they
fav. We believe: but when they are privately aflemHed together, they far.
Will ye acquaint them with what God hath revealed unto you, that they may
difpute with you concerning it in tire, prefence of your Lord ? Do ye not

. there-

the you he man came to the market with his filch and fuch particular marts, to be hilled ,
beifqr, an angel in the (hipe of a man accoited but there pejng ho oilier ivhich anlW c,! [ j; j
him, and bid him fix pieces 'of gold for her ; but defefiptioii, except the orphan’s heifer, (Gy
he would not take the money, till he had asked were obliged to'buj' her for as much cold .15 for
his mothers content ; which when he had ob- hide would hold; acport^ng'to Tome, fur her hilt
tajned, he returned to the market place, and weight in gold, and as others (ay, for ten times
met the aggjcj, whp now offered him twice as as much. This heifer t ey facrificed, . ln d ,J e
much for the he]fer, provided he would' Gy, no- dead body being, by diyine direfUoa, Itruc-.
thmg'ojf it to his ihotn«j'.but the yoUhe man a part of ^ revived, atid Handing up, pained the
rcfuhng, went and acquainted her with (fie ad- pci-fan whohad lulled him; after which it imme-
di ducal offer. The woman pefcefvihi it was an dlately foil down dead again 1 . The whole
bid her fon go back and ask nim what ftory teems to be borrowed from the red heifer,
muft be done with the heifer j whereupon the which was ordered by the Jemijb lav to be
angel told the young man, that, in a little tim<;, bUmf,' and the allies kept for purifying thofc who
the children or Ifrael would buy that heifer of happened to touch a dead corps a .
him at any jyice. And foon after it happened * A ted c<m] The epithet in the original is
that an Ifrttelkt, named Hammel, was killed ; but this word we do not ufe in fpeakinc

t; a relatWR ofjy?, who, to. prevent difcdvfry, of thecqlpurof cattle.
r:qv,cV; .i foe $ftdy tg . * '$e 4 Cf{nfjde t ably difiant * AfiJ wnttf but folk -f it ■■>»*

from mat; vyj^fire the f*ft mi committed. The ihe exorbiuut price" whidi

hitnd* 1 I the {Jain man accuifcl fojne Qtfc?r pcf- they were obliged to pay for fhe heifer*

° f the before Mojes } but fay * JTttb pfrHf the ^,] i t. Her tongue, or

denying the faft, and there being po evidence the end of her tail
to convift thqn, God commanded a cow, of

1 Abu’lfeda*

2 Numb . xbt.

3 Jallalo’ddjb,

Chap. 2. Al KORAN. n

therefore underflfand ? Do not they know that God knoweih tli it which they
conceal as well a* that which they publifh ? But there are illiterate men among
them, who know not the book of the Urn, but only lying dories, although
they think other wife. And woe onto them who tmofcribe corruptly the book
af the Imv * with their hands, and then fay, This is from God : that they
may fell it for a fmall price. Therefore woe unto them btscaufe of that which
their hands hare written? and woe unto them For that which they have gain-
ed. They Uj, The fire of hell flial! not touch us but for a certain number
of days 1 * * . Anfiver, Have ye received any promife from God to tbdt purpef?
for God will not act contrary to his promife : or do ye fpfeak concerning
God that which ye know not? Verily whofo doth evil', and is encom-
paJTed by his iniquity, they fhall be the companions of hell fife, they lhall
remain therein for ever : but they who believe and do good works', they
/hall be the companions of parudile, they lhall continue therein for ever.
Remember alfo, when we accepted the covenant df the children of Israel, fay-
ing, Ye lhall not worth ip a»y other except Odd, and ye Jb.oll jhn v kindrt&s to
your parents and kindred, and to orphans, and to the poor, and fpeak tfiat
which is good unto men, and be conftant at prayer, and give alms. After-
wards ye turned back, except a few of you, and retired .ifir off. And when
we accepted your covenant, faying. Ye lhall not Ihed your bribers blood,
nor difpofiefs one another of your habitations. Then ye confirmed if , and
were wltneffes thereto- Afterwards ye were they who flew one another 4 , and
turned feveral of your brethren out of their houfes, mutually ufiifting each o-
ther againft them with injuftice and enmity \ but if they come captives unto
you, ye redeem them : yet it is equally unlawful for you to difpoffefs them.
Do ye therefore believe in part of the book of the l, fa?, and reje< 5 t other part
thereof? But whofo among you doth this, (hall have no other reward than
lhame in this life, and on the day or refurredtion they lhall be lent to a moft
grievous punifliment? for God is not regardlels of chat which ye do. Thefe
are they who have purchafed this prefent life, at the price of that which is

C 2 to

1 Mcbammri aguin accufes the Jffl : r of cor-
rupting their feripture,

* Twjirt of Mi jbittl fist isvri us, tor f t a
firtain hr r/dayi ;] That i-t
tarty , being the number of day ^ that their fore-
J a tiers WodSippcd the golden calf* after which
zhey gave out chat their punilhment fhould ceafe.
It b a reed -ed opinion among the J/etf at pre-
fine, th4t no period, be he ever (o wicked, or
of whatever feft, remain m lidi Above ele-
ven month?, or at m ft a year ; except Daihm
ana Mirant and iiheills, who w ill be torment-
ed then; to ill eternity *.

c IFthj* ] By in thi pltec

the commentatcrs gen t rail) underft m ! poly-
theiuii or idolatry ; which fin die'
believe, unleh repeated of inihbiiie, i unpardon-
able «md will bu pnniihtd by eternal dutasucion ;

1 Fid. Bartoloccii Bitoiaih Rabhim. Ton*

but all other (ins they hold will at length be for-
given. This therefore is that irremiifible impie-
ty, ib their opinion, which in the Niw Tefiamm
U called (bf jraagjttejl- frvty GkjL

4 Tv Jl no me anti hr* See ] This paffage w as
revealed on occafianof feme qaai+els which arofe
between the Jwj of the tribes of Ko*tid&* t and
thofc of a/ Jbf, al NulMr, and if Kbaz r aj. and
came to thru: height that they took arm and de-
ftroyed one smothers habitations, and turned one
another out of their houles ; but when ivere
taken captive, they redeemed them When they
were asked the reafon of cheir^dingm thi* man-
ner, they anfwered. That they were cUfihnandcd
by Ihek law to redeem the captive** but that
they ttinghi out of ftiatne p left their chid: fhould
bedefpiicd *•

2 . p. 128. T * Jt p . 421. * Jallato dd f n*

i2 Al KORAN. Chap. 2.

to come wherefore their punifhment fhall not be mitigated, neither lhafl
they be helped. We formerly delivered the book of the law unto Moses,
and cauled apoftles to fucceed him, and gave evident miracles to Jesus the
fon of Mary, and ftrengthened him with the holy fpirit *. Do ye therefore,
whenever an apoftle cometh unto you with that which your fouls defire not,
proudly rejefl him, and accufe fome of impofture, and flay others ? 'The
Jews fay. Our hearts are uncircumcifed : but God hath curled them with
their infidelity, therefore few fhall believe. And when a book came unto them
from God, confirming the fcriptures which were with them, although they had
before prayed for affiftance againft thofe who believed not b , yet when that
came unto them which they knew to be from G O D, they would not believe
therein: therefore the curfe of God fhall be on the infidels. For a vile
puice have they fold their fouls, that they fhould not believe in that which
God hath fent down' ; out of envy, becaufe God fendeth down his favours to
fuch of hisfervants as he pleafeth: therefore they brought on themfelvca in-
dignation on indignation ; and the unbelievers fhall fuffer an ignominious pu-
nilhment. When one faith unto them, Believe in that which God hath fent
down; they anfwer. We believe in that which hath been fent down unto us a : and
they reject what hath been revealed fince, although it be the truth, confirming
that which is with them. Say, Why therefore have ye flain the prophets of
God in times pal^t, ff ye be true believers ? Moses formerly came unto you
with evident figns, but ye afterwards took the calf for your god and did
wickedly. And when we accepted your covenant and lifted the mountain of
Sinai over you * , faying , Receive the law which we have given you, with a re-
folution to perform it, and hear •, they faid. We have heard, and have rebelled:
and they were made to drink down the calf into their hearts 1 for them un-
belief. Say, A grieyous thing hath your faith commanded you, if ye be true
believers*. Say, If the future manfion with God be prepared peculiarly for
you, exclufiveof the reft of mankind, wi fix for death, if ye fay truth: but
they will never wilh for it, becaufe of that which their hands have fent be-
fore them h ; God knoweth the wicked doers ; and thou fhalt furely find them

of

' The befy fpiriu] Wcmuft not imagine Mo-
hammed here means the Holy Gboft, in the Cbri -
flian acceptation. The commentators fay, this
Jpiric was the angel Gabriel, who fanftified Jefas
and confontly attended on him 1 .

b Although they bad before frayed, kc.} The
Jews in expectation of the coming of Mohammed
(according to the tradition of hist followers) ufed
this prayer, 0 God, help us againft the unbelievers
by the prophet who is to be ftnt in the left times
' The Hew.

4 The Pentateuch.
c See before p. 9 .

f They were made to drink down the caf, kc.]
Mofcs look the calf which they had made, and burnt
in the fire, and ground it to ponded*, andftnezo-
1 Jallalo’ddin. 3 Idem. * xxx ji,
al Be. daw 1 . i 1 Tift, v ^4,

ed it upon the water (of the brook that defti&itd
from the mount), and made the children tf Ifracl
drink of it * .

* A grievous thing, &c.] Mohammed here infers
from their forefathers difobedience in worfhiping
the calf, at the fame time that they pretended to
believe in the law of Mofes, that the faith of the
Jews in his time was as vain and hypocritical,
fmee they receded him, who was foretold there-
in* as an impoftor

* Which their bands have fent before them ,] That
is, by reafon of the wicked fbtgeriet which they
have beett guilty of in refped to the fcripturcs.
An expreffion much like that of St; Paul, where
he fay's, that fom men's fins are open bifire band,
going before to judgment K

20- Dent. ix. 21. 4 Jallalo’ddik Yahya.

Chap. *» Al K 0 R A N. i j

of all men the moft covetous of life, even wore than the idolaters : one of
them would defire his life to be prolonged a thoufand years* but none fhall
reprieve himfelf from punifhment, that his life may be prolonged : God feeth
that which they da Say, Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel * (for he hath
caufed tbe Koran to defeend on thy heart, by the permifllon of God, confirm-
ing that which was before revealed , a direction, and good tidings to the faith-
ful;) whofoever is an enemy to God, or his angels, or his apoftles, or to Ga-
briel, or Michael, verily God is an enemy to the unbelievers. And now
we have fent down unto thee evident figns b , and none will difbelieve them
but the evil-doers. Whenever they make a covenant, will fome of them reject
it ? yea the greater part of them do not believe. And when there came un-
to them an apoftle from God, confirming that ferifturt which was with them,-
fome of thole to whom the feriptures were given, call the book of God be-
hind their ba^ks, as if they knew it not : and they followed tbe device which
the devils devifed againft the kingdom of Solomon c ; and Solomon was not
an unbeliever j but the devils believed nor, they taught men forcery, and
that which was fent down to the two angels at Basel, Harut and Marut 4
yet thofe two taught no man until they had faid. Verily we are a temptation,
therefore be not an unbeliever. So men learned from thofe two a charm by
which they might cauie divifion between a man and his wife ; but they hurt

none

* Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, J The they fhould dig under his throne ; which hav-
eommentators fay, that the Jews asked, what mg done, they found the aforefaid books, which
angel it was that brought the divine revelations contained impious fupcrftitions. The better fort
to Mebammr,;, and being told that it was Gabriel* refufed to learn the evil arts therein delivered,
they replied, that he was their enemy, and the but the common people did; and the priefts pub'
meflenger of wrath and punishment; but if it had lilhed this fcandalous ftory q{ which

been Michael, they would have believed on him, obtained credit among the Jens* till Gob, lay
becaufe that angel was their friend, and the mef- the Mabanrinedam* cleared that king -by the mouth
fenger of peace and plenty. And on this occa- of their prophet, declaring that Solomon was no
fion, they fay, this pallage was revealed 1 idolater *.

That Michael was really the prote&or or d Tbe devils tastgbj forcery * and shat tchicb 0m
guardian angel of the Jens* we know from fent down to Harut and Marilt, tff.] Some fay on
Scripture 2 ; and it feems that Gabriel was, as ly that thefe were two magicians^ or angels font
the Perfians call him, tbe angel of rrwlaiiem, be- by Go d to teach men magic, and to tempt them 1 .
ing frequently fent on meflages of that kind * ; But others tell a longer fable; that the angels
for vhich reaion, it is probable, Mohammed pre~ expreffing their fur prize at the ■ ■ ickednefs of the
tended he was the angel from wham he received fons of Adam , after prophets had been fent to
the Koran . them with divine commiiSpns, God bid them

D Evident fignsf\ i. A the revelations of this chufe two out of their own number to be fent
book. down to be ju dges on earth. Whereupon they

' They followed tbe device of tbe devils againft pitched upon il - 'dt and Maft, who cxecu-
Solomon, £sfr ] The devils having, by God's ted their office with integrity for foflie lime, till
prmiflfon, tempted Solomon without fuccefs, Zebari > or the planet V ernes* defeended aud sp-
they made ufe of a trick to blaft his character, peared before them in theihape of a beautiful
For they wrote feveral books of magic, and hid woman, bringing a complaint againll her hus-
them under that prince's throne, and after his band (though others fay ffie Was a real woman.)
death, told the chief men that if they wanted to As foon as they fow her, they fell in love with
know by what means Solomon had obtained his her, and endeavoured to prevail on her to fetisfy
abfolutc power over men, genii, and the .winds, their defires ; but Ihe fkw up agaiine heaven ,

whither

1 Jalla j.o'pdin. i/Zamaxh. YahVa. * Dan. x \ i. i. * Hid . cb , v Hi. 16'. Wix.2i
Luke i. 19,26. &*Hyde derel . vet . ferjkr * 263, 4 Yahxa. Jalia£o'di*i*. * Jallalo'ddjs

14 Al KORAN. Chap 2 .

none thereby, unlds by God’s pefmifiion ; and theyfoa tried that which would
hurt i hem, and not profit them ; and yet they knew that he who bought that art
fhookl have no part in the life to come, and wofiil is the price fa# which they
have fold their foals, if they knew it. But if they had believed^ and feared
God, verily the reward 1 they would have bad from God would have betert bet-
ter, if they had known it. O true believers, fay not to our apojJk, Raima ;
but fay On-Dhorna • 5 and hearken : the infidels lhall fuffer a grievous punrffi-
rtrent. It is not the defire of the Unbelievers, either among thofe unto
Whom the ferippurfes have been given, or among the iddlaters, that any good
fhould be fent down unto you from your Lord : but God will appropriate his
mercy unto whom he pleafeth ; for God is exceeding beneficent^ Whatever
verfe we lhall abrogate* or caufe thee to forget, we will bring ar better than it,
or one like unto k. Doft thou not know that God is almighty ? Ddft thou
not know that unto God belongeth the kingdom of heaven' ana earth ? nei-
ther have ye any protector or helper except God. Will ye require of your
apoftle according to that which was formerly required of MoseS k ? but he
that hath exchanged faith for infidelity, hath already erred from the ftrait
way. Many of thofe unto whom the feriptures have been given, defire to
render you again unbelievers*, after ye have believed; out of envy from their
fouls, even after the truth is become manifeft unto them ; but forgive lAm,
and avoid them , till God lhall fend his command; for God is omnipotent.
Be conftant in prayer, and give alms ; and what good ye have fent before
for your fouls, ye mail find it with God ; furely God Teeth that which ye do.
They %, Verily none lhall enter paradife, except they who are Jews or
Chriftiaas c : this is their wilh. Say, Produce your proof of tbis^ if ye fpeak
truth. Nay, but he who refigneth himfelf d to God, and doth that which
is right e , he lhall have his reward with his Lord ; there lhall come

no

whither the two angels alfo returned, but were
not admitted. However, on the interceffion of a
certain pious J*ian, they were allowed to chuie
whether they would be punilhed in this life, or
in the other; whereupon they ohofe the fbrntef,
and now fuffer punifhmen* accordingly in Babel,
where they are to remain till the day of judgment.
They add that if a man has a fancy to learrt ma-
gic, he may go to them, and hear their voice,
but cannot fee them 1 .

This (lory Mohammed took directly from the
PerfianMagi, whp mention two rebellious angels
of the fame names, now hung up by the feet,
with their heads downwards, hi the territory of
Babel And the Jews have fosnething like this,
of the angel Sbamhozal % who having debauch-
ed himfelf with women, repented, and by way
of penance hung himfelf up between heaven
ana earth 3 .

• Say not unto our apoftle Rama, but Ondhor-

1 Yahya, fcfr. * V, Hyde, ubi /up. cap.

lalo’ddin. 1 Bee before p . q . 6 Jjwllam

na.] Thofe two Arabic wot<3s have both the
feme fhpAificatfow, viz, LSok on an and are a
kind or faltftation. Mohammed had a great aver-
fion to the firft, bfccaufe the Jews frequently
ufed it in derifion, it being a word of reproach
in their tongue * They aUuded* it feems, to
the Hebrew verb JflT rub, which Jlgnifies to h
bod or Fj tffcb&e&tf:

k What was formerly required of Mote] Name-
ly, to fee God manifeffly 5 .

c None /bull enter paradi/t, except Jews or
ChrHHans.J This paflage was reverted on occa-
ffon of a dtfpnte which Msbamftird had with
the Jews of Median, and the Chnfiim of Naj-
rSn, each of fhtni aflertfng that thofe of their
religion only fhould be feved

4 Bejsgnttb himfelf, &c.] Literally, rtfmtb his
fate, &b.

• And dtftb that which is rigPL &c ] That is,
afferteth the unity of God

i2. 3 Berefl&t rMnk, in Ge$tf vl z, 4 JaL’

IN. 9 Idem.

Chap. 2. At KORAN* 15

no fear on them, neither fliall they be grieved. The Jews fay. The Chriftians
are grounded on nothing * > and the Chriftians fay. The Jews are grounded
on nothing : \ Tf -C they foth read the feriptures. So like wife fay they who know
not the fir if turf, according to their laying. But God (hall judge between
them on the day ot the refurredion, concerning that about which they now
difagfee. Who T ' more unjuft than he who prohibited! the temples of God \
thaiT his name fhouU, be remembered therein, and who hafterh to tjeftroy
them? Thofe men cannot enter therein, but with fear : they fhallhave
ftuune in this world, and in the next a grievous pumlhnwnf, To God bchtfg-
etb the eaft and the weft •, therefore whitherfoever ye turn your felves to
pray, there is the face uf God •, for God is omniprefent and omnifeient.
They fay. Goo hath begotten children': God forbid 1 To him belongHb
whatever is in heaven, and < m earth *, all is ppflefled by him, the Creator
of heaven and earth ; and when We decreeth a thing, he dnly faith unto it,
Be, and it is. And they who know not the feripinres lay, Utdefs God
fpeak unto us, or thou Ihew us a fign, we will not believe. So faid thofe be-
fore them, according to their faying ; their hearts refemble each other. We
have already (hewn manifeft figns unto people who firmly believe ; we have
fent thee in truth, a bearer of good tidings, and a preacher ; and thou
fhalc not be Liueft toned concerning the companions of hell. But the Jews
will not be pleafgd with thee, neither the Chriftians, until thou follow their
religion » fay. The direction of God is the true dirq&ioh. And verily if
dieu follow their defires, after the knowledge which hath been given thee,
thou fhalc find no patron or protestor againft God. They to whom we
have given the book of tl>e A’u*. and who read it with its true reading,
they believe therein j and whoever believe th not therein, they lhall perifh.
O children of Ishaec, remember my favour wherewith I have favoured
you, and that I hare preferred you before all nations ; and dread the day
wherein one foul dull not make tkllsfadtion for another foul, neither Hull
any compenfiirion be accepted from them, nor (hall any interceffion avail,
neither fliall they be helped. Remember when the Lord tried Abraham by
certain words which he fulfilled: God faid. Verily I will conftitute thee
A

* fit Jen’* Oy, the Chriftians a, ■ grot ", hi on
mbit*, Itc J The Jetsi and CbrljUanr are here
ateuied of denying the truth of each aher's re-
ligion, notwithttanding they read the scriptures.
Whereas ( he Pntattucb bears tefti ninny to J ss vs,
and ihe Guipcl hear, lailmoay to Atyfr 1 .

• iftrj prsbibstfib tbs Hmpksof God, tsft . JOr
hiiidretli men from paying their iarations to
God in ihofe facred places. This I’.tffage, fays
yjHoto'.ilb, wjircealed on news being brought,
that the R 'hmj hd 'polled the temple of Jem-
ftlim i or elfe when the idolatrous Arabs eb-
ftrutied ALnmte^h viliting the temple of itfo-
tf, in the expedition of al Hatfibijn, which

happened in the 6th year ot the He a 1

* My God both ’ rytten ebibiWi;.] This
is fpostii nut only of the itbrijitsnu, and of the
y,rei ftiir they are acoqfed of holding Ozs < ,
or Ezr.:, to be the fon of <jop,}but »lfo the pa-
gan Arab, f, who imagined the angels to be
daughters of God.

J It i'/.'i tie ! ord tried Ahrihatn, God
tried Abrjkart chiefly bv coin maud tag him to
leave bis native toututy, and to offer his ion. But
The com [Tietiti tors (uppoferhc trial here meat tre-
bttd only to tome pirticulit cere monk t, fu h as
circumcifion, pilgrimage to the CVus,;, leverA
rites of pur.Bc.iiwn, and the like 5 .

* V. Abu’lfxpae sit. Mallei- p- 84. fsf, .

* Urn.

3 jAS*!.At> 0 'DDIi-

1 6 A 1 KORAN. Chap. z .

a model of religion * unto mankind ; he anfwered, And a lfo of my pofterity ;
God faid, My covenant doth not Comprehend the ungodly. And when we
appointed the holy houfe * of Meccu to be a place of refort for mankind,
and a place of fecurity ; and faid. Take the ftation of Abraham e for a
place of prayer ; and we covenanted with Abraham and Ismael, that
they Ihouid cleanfe my houfe for thole who Ihouid compafs it, and thole who
Ihould be devoutly afliduous thete, and thole who Ihouid bow down and worlhip.
And when Abraham faid. Lord, make this a territory of fecurity, and
bounteoufly bellow fruits on its inhabitants, fuch of them as believe vt God
and the laft day } God anfwered, And whoever believeth not, I will be-
llow on him little, afterwards I will drive him to the punifhmettt of hell-
fire ’, an ill journey lhall it be ! And when Abraham and Ismael raifed
the foundations of the houfe, faying. Lord, accept it from us, for thou art
he who heareth and knoweth : Lord, make us alfo religned 4 unto thee,
and of our pofterity a people religned unto thee, and Ihew us our holy
ceremonies, and be turned unto us, for thou art eafy to be reconciled* and
merciful : Lord, fend them likewife an apoftle from among them, who may

declare thy ligns unto them, and teach them the book of the Koran and
wifdom, and may purify them ; for thou art mighty and wife. Who will
be averfe to the religion of Abraham, but he whole mind is infatuated?
Surely we have chofen him in this world, and in that which is to come he lhall
be one of the righteous. When his Lord faid unto him, Relign thy felf
unto me ; he anfwered, I have religned my felf unto the Lord of all
creatures. And Abraham bequeathed this religion to his children, and Ja-
cob did the fame, faying. My children, verily God hath chofen this religkm
for you, therefore die not, unlefs ye alfo be religned. Were ye p relent
when Jacob was at the point of death ? when he faid to his fons. Whom will
ye worlhip after me ? They anfwered. We will worlhip thy Goo, and the
God of thy fathers Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, one God, and to
him will we be refigned. That people are now paffed away, they have
what they have gained'*, and ye lhaM have what ye gain ; and ye lhall not
be queftioned concerning that which they have done. They fay. Become
Jews or Chriftians that ye may be diredled. Say, Nay, we follow the
religion of Abraham the orthodox, who was no idolater. Sajr, We be-
lieve

* A model if religion] I have rather exprelT-
ed the meaning, than truely tranflated the Ara-
bic word Imam, which anfwers to the Latin
Antijies. This title the Mohammedans give to
their priefts, who begin the prayers in their
Mofques, and whom all the congregation follow.

* The holy boufit,Sec] That is the Caaba, which
is ufually called, by way of eminence, the Houfe.
Of the fanftity of this building and other par-
ticulars relating to it, fee the Preliminary Dif-
courfe, feft. IV.

* The ftation f Abraham, (Ac] A place fo
called within the inner inclofure of the Caaba,

where they pretend to Ihew the print of his foot
in a (tone 1 .

* Refigned] The Arabic word is Mojlem&na, in
the fmgular Moftem, which the Mohammedans
take as a title peculiar to themfclve*. The
Europeans generally write and pronounce it

Mufulman.

* What they have gained or deferved. The
Mohammedan notion, as to the imputation of
moral actions to man, which they call gain, or
acquifition, is fufficiently explained in the Preli-
minary Difcmrfe.

* See the Prelim . Difc. $. IV.

Chap. 2. Al KORAN \ 17

licve in God, and that which hath been fent down unto us, and that which
hath been fent down unto Abraham, and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and the tribes, and that which was delivered unto Moses, and Jesus, and
that which was delivered unto the prophets from their Lord : We make
nodiftindtion between any of them, and to God are we refigned* Now if
they believe according to what ye believe, they are furely directed, but if
they turn back, they are in fchilm. God fhall fiipport thee againft them, for
he is the hearer, the wife. The baptifm of God 1 hwe we receive^ and who
is better than God to baptize? him do weworfhip. Say, Will ye difpute
with us concerning God h , who is our Loan, and your Lord ? we have our
works, and ye have your works, and unto him are we fincerely devoted.
Will ye fay, truly Abraham, and Ismail, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the
tribes were Jews or Chriftians ? Say, Are ye wifer, or God ? And who is
more unjuft than he who hideth the teftimony which he hath received from
God c ? But God is not regardlefs of that which ye da That people are
paffed away, they have what they have gained, and ye (hall have what ye
gain, nor fhall ye be queftioned concerning that which they have done.

* The foolifh men will fay. What hath turned them from their Keblah, to- II.
wards which they formerly frayed*? Say, Unto God belongetb the eaft and
the weft : he dire&cth whom he pleafeth into the right way. Thus have we
placed you, O an intermediate nation % that ye may be witnefies

againft the reft of mankind, and that the apoftle may be a witnefs againft you.
We appointed the Keblah towards which thou didft formerly pray, onjy that
we might know him who followeth the apoftle, from him who tumeth back
on his heels' ; though this change feem a great matter, unlefs unto thofe whom

D God

■ The baptifm of God.] By baptifm is to be
understood the religion which God mftituted in
the beginning ; becaufe the figns of it appear in
the perfon who profeffes it, as the figns of water
appear in the cloaths of him that is baptized *.

* If ill ye difpute with us concerning God ?]
Thefe words were revealed, becaufe the Jews
infilled, that they firft received the feripturea,
that their Keblah was more ancient, and that no
prophets could arife among the Arabs ; and
therefore if Mohammed was a prophet, he mull
have been of their nation

* Who hideth the teftimony , &c.] The Jews are
again accufed of corrupting and Tupprcffing the
prophecies in the Pentateuch relating to Mobam -

4 What hath turned them from their Keblah,

IA .] At firft, Mohammed and his followers ob-
ferved no particular rite in turning their faces

towards any certain place, or quarter of the
world, when they prayed; it being declared to

be petfefUy indifferent 3 Afterwards, when the
prophet fled to Medina* he dire&cd them to turn
towards the temple of Jerufalem (probably to
ingratiate himfelf with the Jews,) which con-
tinued to be their Keblah for fix or {even months ;
but either finding the Jews too intractable, or def-
pairing otherwife to gain the pagan Arabs* who
could not forget their refpeft to the temple of
Mecca, he ordered that prayers for the future
fhould be towards the laiL This change was
made in the fecond year of the Hejra 4 , and oc-
cafioned many to fall from him, taking offence
at his inconftancy 5 .

* An intermediate nation , &c.] This feems to
be the fenfe of the words ; tho’ the commen-
tators 6 will have the meaning to be, that the
Arabians are here declared to be a moft juft and
good nation.

x Who turnttb back on his heels ;] i. e. retuineth
to Judaifm .

1 Jallalo’ddin. * Idem . 3 See before p* if, 4 f . Abulf. vit. Mobanu p, jf

* J all alq’ddjn. * Idem * Yahya* &V.

1 8 Al KORAN. Chap. 2.

God hath directed. But God will not render your faith of none effedt a ; fo r
God is gracious and merciful unto man. We have fecn thee turn about thy
face towards heaven with uncertainty , but we will caufe thee to turn thy
felf towards a Keblah that will pleafe thee. Turn therefore thy face towards
the holy temple of Mecca ; and wherever ye be, turn your faces towards that
place. They to whom the fcripture hath been given, know this to be truth
from their Lord. God is not regardlefs of that which ye do. Verily although
thou fhouldeft fhew unto thofe to whom the fcripture hath been given, all
kinds of figns, yet they will not follow thy Keblah, neither /halt thou fol-
low their Keblah ; nor will one part of them follow the Keblah of the other.
And if thou follow their defires, after the knowledge which hath been given
thee, verily thou wilt become one of the ungodly. They to whom we have given
the fcripture know our apoftlc , even as they know their own children; but fome
of them hide the truth, againft their own knowledge. Truth is from thy
Lord, therefore thou flialt not doubt. Every fed! hath a certain trad of
heaven to which they turn themfelves in prayer ; but do ye ftrive to run after
good things : wherever ye be, God will bring you all back at the rejurrtc-
tion, for God is almighty. And from what place foever thou comeft forth,
turn thy face towards the holy temple ; for this is truth from thy Lord ;
neither is God regardlefs of that which ye da From what place foever thou
comeft forth, turn thy face towards the holy temple ; and wherever ye be,
thitherward turn your faces, left men have matter of difpute againft' you *
but as for thofe among them who are unjuft: doers, fear them not, but fear
me, that I may accomplifh my grace upon you, and that ye may be di-
rected. As we have font unto you an apoftle from among you b , to rehearfe
our figns unto you, and to purify you, and to teach you the book of the Kor^u
and wifdom, and to teach you that which ye knew not : therefore remem-
ber me, and I will remember you, and give thanks unto me, and be notun-
believers. O true believers, beg afliftance with patience and prayer, for God
is with the patient. And fay not of thofe who are flain in fight fqr the reli-
gion of God % that they are dead; yea, they are living * : but ye do not un-
derftand. We will furely prove you by affliZiing you in fome meafure with
fear, and hunger, and deoreafe of wealth, and loft of lives, and fcarcir ot
fruits : but bear good tidings unto the patient, who when a misfortune
befalleth them, fay. We are God*s, and unto him fhall we furely n turn *.
Upon them (hall be bleftings from their Lord and mercy, and they are the
rightly directed. Moreover Safa and Merwah are two of the monuments of

God:

* They ere Jiving .J The foul* of martyrs, .tor
fuch they efteem thofe who die in battle again it
infidels) fays JaUala'dJin, are in the crops of
green birds* which have liberty to fly wher-
ever they pleafe in paradife, and feed on the fruit*
thereof.

* We are God*/, ami unto him jh& II wt farely re-
turn.] An expr eflh n frequently in the mouths ot
the Mohammedans A v hen under any great afflic*
tion, or in any imminent danger.

a God will not render jour faith of none ejfe8\\Ot
will not fuffer it to go without its reward, while
ye prayed towards Jerufalm.

h An apoftle from among youi] That is, of your
own nation.

* ***• in fight for thi religion of God.]

The original words are literally, who are flain in
the toft of God ; by which expreffion, frequent-
ly occurring in the Koran, is always meant war
undertaken againft unbelievers for the propagation
•f the Mohammedan faith.

Ch a p. 2. Al K 0 R A N. 19

God : whoever therefore goeth on pilgrimage to the temple of Msec \a or vi-
fiteth it, it fhall be no crime in him it he compafs them both *. And as for
him who voluntarily performeth a good work •, verily God is grateful and
knowing. They who conceal any of the evident figus, or die djredtion
which we have fent down, after what we have manifefted unto men in the
feripture, God fhall curie them ♦, and they who curie fhall curfe them b . But
as for thofe who repent and amend, and make known what they concealed, I
will be turned unto them, for I am eafy to be reconciled and merciful. Sure-
ly they who believe not, and die in their unbelief, upon them fhall be the
curfe of God, and of the angels, and of all men ; they fhall remain under it
for ever, their punifhment mall not be alleviated, neither fhall they be re-
garded *. Your God is one God, there is no God but He, the moft mer-
ciful. Now in the creation of heaven and earth, and the vicifiitude of night
and day, and in the fhip which faileth in the ten, leaden with what is profitable
for mankind, and in the rain water which God fendeth from heaven, quick-
ening thereby the dead earth, and replenifhing the fame with all forts of cattle,
and in the change of winds, and the clouds that are compelled to do fervice * be-
tween heaven and earth, are figns to people of underftanding : yet fome men
take idols befide God, and love them as with the love due to God ; but the
true believers are more fervent in love towards God. Oh that they who aft
unjuftly did perceive *, when they behold their punifhment, that all power
belongeth unto God, and that he is fevere in punifhing 1 When thofe who
have been followed, fhall feparate themfelves from' their followers f , and fhall
fee the punifhment, and the cords of relation between them fhall be cut in

D 2 funder ;

• Whoever gtftb on pilgrimage tv Mecca, it eaofe of the punilhmeat of ibe fcptilchre 6 , - y
pall be no crime in him if be compafs them bitbi] all who hear them, tint it by ail creatures except

Sofa and Merton are two mountains near A/. . men and genii.

whereon were anciently two idols, to which the * Regard ] Or, as Ja .it! 'Ij Vi? expound* it,
pagan Arabs ufed to pay a fupcrftitious venera- God will not wait for their repentance
tion 1 * . Jdialoidin lays this paiTage was re- * Compelled} The original ord fignifies pro-
vealed becaufc the followers of Mohammed made perl y that are prefid or compelled to do perpna! jrr-
a fcruple of going round thefe mountains, as the vice ■ itboutbire ; which kind of ter vice is often
idolaters did. But the true reafon of Ms allowing exafted by the 1- (tern princes of their fubje&s.
this relick of ancient fuperilition feems to be the and is called by the Grub and Latin writers, An-
difficulty he found in preventing it. Abu' l KA- gatia. The feripture often mentions this fort of
fem Hebato'Uab thinks thefe laft words are abro- compulsion or force ",

gated by thofe other. Who will resell ft re- * Ob that they who all unjuftly did perceive, <&c.]
ligion of Abraham, except be r- bo bath infatuated Or it may be tnnflated. Although tie ungodly will
bis fiul * T So that he will have the meaning to perceive , tcc. But fome copies inBead of yarn,
be quite contrary to the letter, as if it had been, m the third perfon, read tara, in the fecond ,
it pall be no crime in him if be 1 - not compafs them, and then it mull be render e 4 , Ob if (host didf fee
However the expo liters are all again!! him 3 , and when the ungodly behold their punipmm, Sec.
the ceremony of running between thefe two hills f When tbofi who have jbmojftd pdi Jeparatr
is 11 U 1 oblerved at the pilgrimage 4 . themfeha frim their followers. Sec ] That is,

* They who curfe pall curfe fbevi. j That is, the when the broachers or heads of new (efts lhall
angels, the believers, and all things in general '. at the laf! day farfake or walh their hands ot
But Tahya interprets it of the curfes which will their difciples, at if they were not accomplices
be given to the wicked, when they cry out be- in their fuperilition*.

1 Set the Prelim. Dip . /. 20. * See before p. 16. 3 V. Marracc. in Ale 6g. (Ac. * Si

ibtPrilim.Dif.Jcc 7 .lv . 1 Jallalo’ddik. 6 SeePrtlim. Difc.ft 8 .iV. 7 Matt. v. 41. xxvii. 32 {s’.

I ‘

20 Al KORAN. C HAP. 2.

funder ; the followers lhall fay. If we could return to life , we would fe-
parate our felves from them, as they have now leparated themfelvcs from
us. So God will fhew them their works ; they lhall %h grievoufly, and
(hall not come forth from the fire of bell. O men, eat of that which is law-
ful and good on the earth ; and tread not in the fteps of the devil^for he is
your open enemy. Verily he commanded! you evil and wickednefc, and that
ye Ihould fay that of God which ye know not. And when it is faid unto them
<wbo believe not. Follow that which God hath fent down ; they anfwer. Nay,
but we will follow that which we found our fathers pra&ife. What ? tho*
their fathers knew nothing, and were not rightly directed ? The unbelievers
are like unto one who crieth aloud to that which heareth not fo much as bis
calling, or the found of bis v oice. They are deaf, dumb, and blind, there-
fore do they not underftand. O true believers, eat of the good things which
we have bellowed on you for food, and return thanks unto Goo, it ye ferve
him. Verily he hath forbidden you to eat that which dieth of it lelf, and
blood, and fwine’s flefli, and that on which any other name but God’s hath
been invocated \ But he who is forced by neceffity, not lulling, jior return-
ing to tranfgrefs , it lhall be no crime in him if be eat of tbofe thing f, for God
is gracious and merciful. Moreover they who conceal any fart of the ferip-
ture which Gon hath fent down unto them, and fell it for a fmall price, they
lhall fwallow into their bellies nothing but fire ; God lhall not fpeak unto
them on the day of refurre&ion, neither lhall he purify them, and they
lhall fuffer a grievous punilhment. Thefe are they who nave fold dire&ion
for error, and pardon for punilhment : but how great will their fufferirig be

in the fire! This they Jhall endure, becaufe God fent down the book or tfcf
Koran with truth, and they who difagree concerning that book, are certainly
in a wide miltake. It is not righteoufnefs that ye turn your faces in fra\tr
towards the eaft and the weft, but righreoufnefs is of him who believetll in
God and the lall day, and the angels, and the feriptures, and the prophets;
who giveth money for Godu fake unto his kindred, and unto orphans, and
the needy, and the ftranger, and thole who afk, and for redemption of cap-
tives } who is conftant at prayer, and giveth alms ; and of thofe who per-
form their covenant, when they have covenanted, and who behave themfelvea
patiently in adverfity, and hardlhips, and in time of violence : thefe are they
who are true, and thefe are they who fear God. O true believers, the law of reta-
liation is ordained you for the flam : the free Jhall die for the free, and thefervant
for the lervant, and a woman for a woman* : buthe whom his brother lhall forgive,
may be profecuted, and obliged to make fatisfattion according to what is juft, and a

line

* For this reafon, whenever the Mohammedans woman. Regard is alfo to be had to difference
kill any animal for food, they always fay Bif- in religion, fo that a Mohammedan, tho’ a Have,

/lab, or In tie name of God ; which if it be is not to be put to death for an infidel, tho’ a
neglefted, they think it not lawful to eat of it. freeman r . But the civil mjgiftrates do not
A woman for a woman.] This is not to be think themfelves always obliged to conform to
flrifUy taken s for according to the Soma, a man this laft determination of the Sof/ua.
aifo is to be put to death for the mnrder of a

1 JaHALD DDli,

Chap. 2 , Al KORAN, 21

fine fhall be fet on him * v/ith humanity. This is indulgence from your
Lord, and mercy. And he who fhall tranfgrels after this, by killing the mur-
tberer, fhall fuffer a grievous pumftiment. And in this law of retaliation
ye have life, O ye of underftaiyhng, that peradventure ye may fear. It is or-
dained you, when any of you is at the point of deatfi, if he leave any goods,
that he bequeath a legacy to his parents, and kindred, according to what fhall
be reafonable b . This is a duty incumbent on thofe who fear God . But he
who fhall change the legal y , after he hath heard it bequeathed by the dying per-
[on , furcly the fin thereof fhall be on thole who change it, tor Gp» is h*
who heareth and knoweth. Howbeit he who apprehendeth from the teftator
any miftake or injuftice, and lhall compofe the matter between them, that
fhall be no crime in him, for God is gracious and merciful. O true believers,
a faft is ordained you, as it was ordained unto thofe before ypu, that ye may
fear God. A certain number of days Jhall ye faft : but he among you who
lhall be lick, or on a journey, Jhall faft an equal number of other days. And
thofe who can c keep it, and do not, muft redeem their neglelt by maintaining
of a poor man *. And he who voluntarily dealeth better with the poor man
than he is obliged, this lhall be better for him. But if ye faft it will be better
for you, if ye knew it. The month of Ramadan Jhall ye faft, in which
the Koran was fent down from heaven % a direction unto men, and declara-
tions of direction, and the diftin&ion between good and evil. Therefore let
him among you who fhall be prelent r in this month, faft the fame month •,
but he who fhall be lick, or on a journey, Jhall faft the like number of other days.
God would make this an eafe unto you, and would not make it a difficulty
unto you ; that ye may fulfill the number of days , and glorify God, for

that

* This is the common praAile in MobitniixtM a faft or maintain a poor man ; which liberty wae

countries, particularly in Pi rj ia 1 ; where the Toon after taken a ways and this pafiage abrogat-
rdations of the deceafed may take their choice, ed by the following, 'therefore let him who fhall
either to have the murthcrer put into their hands be prejent in this month , faft the Jam month .
to be put to death ; or elfe to accept of a pecu* Yet this abrogation, he jays, does not extend
niajy ktisfa&ion. to women with child, or that give fuck, left the

* That he bequeath a legacy to his parents and kin - infant fuffer.

dred, according to what Jo all be reafonable, &c.] Al Zamakbjhari, having firft given an explanati-
That is, the legacy was not to exceed a third part of on of EbnAbbis, who by a different interpretation
-lit ceftator’s fobftanec* nor to be given where of the Arabic word Yotikduabo, which fignifies
there no neceffity. But this iojunQion is can or are able to faft, renders it, Tlfofe who fend
abrogated by the Uw concerning inheritances. great difficulty therein , &c. adds an expofftion

c Thft toh can keep it, and do not , &c.] The of his own, by fuppofing fomething to be un-
expofitors differ much about the meaning of this derftood ; according to which the fenfe will be,
railage, thinking it very improbable that people Thofe tobo can faft and yet; have a legal cxcufe to
Should be left intircly at liberty either to faft or break it, muft redeem it, Sec,
not. on compounding for it in this manner. Jal - d By maintaining of a poor man.'} According to
idlifJdin therefore fuppofes the negative particle the ufual quantity which a man eats u a day,
f+i'i to be underftood, and that this is alio wed only and the cuitom of the country
tu siuifo who arc n. : Me to faft, by reafon of * See the Prelim . Difc . Sett. II.

^ge or dangerous ficknefs : but afterwards he f Who fhall be prefent} i. e. at home, and not
fi/s. thn in the beginning of Mohamcnedifin it in a ftfangc country, where the faft cannot be
w;_ free for them to chufe whether they would performed, or on a journey.

1 V, Chardin, Voyage de Perft f, II. p, 299, ttfe. * Jallai o dde%.

2 2 Al K 0 R A N* Chap. 2 .

that he hath directed you, and that ye may give thanks. When my fe r _
vants alk thee concerning me. Verily I am near * I will hear the prayer of
him that prayeth, when he prayeth unto me : but let them hearken 1 unto me,
and believe in me, that they may be rightly direfted. It is lawful for you
on the night of the faft to go in unto your wives a ; they are a garment ‘ unto
you, and ye are a garment unto them. God knoweth that ye defraud y 0 u r
felves therein , wherefore he turneth unto you, and forgiveth you. Now there-
fore go in unto them ; and earneftly defire that which God ordaineth you
and eat and drink, until ye can plainly diftinguifh a white thread from a black
thread by the day-break : then keep the faft until night, and go not in

unto them, but be conftantly prefent in the places of worfhip. Thefe are die
preferibed bounds of God, therefore draw not near them to tranfgrefs them.
Thus God declareth his figns unto men, that they may fear him. Con fume
not your wealth among your felves in vain •, nor prefent it unto judges, that
ye may devour part of men’s fubftance unjuftly, againft your own confciences.
They will afk thee concerning the phafes of the moon : Anfwer, They are
times appointed unto men, and to Jhew the feafon of the pilgrimage to
Mbcm. It is not righteoufnefs that ye enter houfes by the back parts there-
of*, but righteoufnefs is of him who feareth God. Therefore enter your
houfes by their doors } and fear God, that ye may be happy. And fight
for the religion of God againft thofe who fight againft you, but tranfgrefs
not by attacking them firjt , for God loveth not the tranfgreffors. And kill
them wherever ye find them, and turn them out of that whereof they have
difpofleffed you •, for temptation to idolatry is more grievous than daughter:
yet fight not againft them in the holy temple, until they attack you therein i
but if they attack you, flay them there. This fhall be the reward of the
infidels. But if they defift, God is gracious and merciful. Fight therefore
againft them, until there be no temptation to idolatry , and the religion be
God’s : but if they defift, then let there be no hoftility, except againft the
ungodly,^ A facred month for a facred month d , and the holy limits of
Mb:ca, if they attack you therein , do ye dfo attack them therein in retaliation j
and whoever tranfgrefleth againft you by fo doing, do ye tranfgrefs againft
him in like manner as he hath tranfgrefled againft you, and fear God? and
know that God is with thofe who fear him. Contribute out of your fubjtance
toward the defence of the religion of God, and throw not your felves with
your own hands into perdition * *, and do good, for God loveth thofe who do

good.

* It it lawful for you on the faft to go in unto your
wives by night,] In the beginning of Moham-
medifm , during the faft, they neither by with
their wives, nor eat nor drank after fupper. But
both are permitted by this pafTage. 1

* They are a garment unto you x &c.] A meta-
phorical expreffion, to fignfiy the mutual com-
fort a man and his wife find in each other.

* Some of the Arabs had a fuperftitiotis cuftom
after they had been at Mecca (in pilgrimage, as
jl feems) on their return home, not to enter

their houfe by the old door, but to make a hole
through the back part for a paflage, which
praftice is here reprehended.

As to thefe facred months, wherein it was
unlawful for the ancient Arabs to attack one a-
nother, fee the 'Prelim* Diy. Sett. VII.

* And throw not your Jclpes away, &c.] i. e. Be
not acceftary to youx own deftruaion, by neg-
le£ling your contributions towards the wars a-
gainft infidels, and thereby fuffering them to ga-
ther ftrength.

1 Jallalo’ddin.

Chap. 2. Al K 0 RA N. 23

good. Perform the pilgrimage of Mecca , and the vifitation of God : and if
ye be befieged, fend that offering which ftiall be the eafieft •, and lhave not
your heads *, until your offering reacheth the place of facrifice. But whoever
among you is fick, or is troubled with any diftemper of the head, muft re-
deem the /having his bead by faffing, or alms, or fome offering \ When ye
are fecure from enemies , he who tarrieth in the vifitation of the temple of
Mecca until the pilgrimage, fhall bring that offering which (hall be the
eafieft. But he who findeth not any thing to offer , (hall faff three days in
the pilgrimage, and feven when ye are returned : they (hall be ten days com-
pleat. This is incumbent on him, whole family (hall not be prefencatthe
holy temple. And fear God, and know that God is fevere in punilhing. The
pilgrimage mujl be performed in the known months * ; whomever therefore
purpofeth to go on pilgrimage therein, let him not know a woman, nor tranf-
grefs, nor quarrel in the pilgrimage. The good which ye do, God knoweth it.
Make provifion for .our journey •, but the beft provifion is piety : and fear me,
O ye of underftanding. It fhall be no crime in you, if ye feek an encreafe
from your Lord, by trading during the pilgrimage. And when ye go in pro-
ceffion e from Arafat f , remember God near the holy monument * ; and re-
member him for that he hath directed you, although ye were before this of the
number of thofe who go affray. Therefore go in proceflion from whence the
people go in proceflion, ana a(k pardon of God, for God is gracious and
merciful. Ana when ye have finifhed your holy ceremonies, remember
God, according as ye remember your fathers, or with a more reverend com-
memoration. There are fome men who fay, O Lord, give us our portion in
this world j but fuch (hall have no portion in the next life : and there are
others who fay, O Lord, give us good in this world, and alfo good in the
next world, and deliver us from the torment of bell fire. They lhall have a
portion of that which they have gained: God is fwift in taking an account \

Remember

* Shave nit ym beads, See ] For this was a f Arafat,~] A mountain near Mecca, fo called,
fign they had compleated their vow, and per- becaufe Adam there met and knew his wife, after
formed all the ceremonies of the pilgrimage a long reparation *. Yet others fay that Gabriel l

* Shall redeem the &>av ':ng bis bead by fafting, after he had inftrufted Abrabam in all the facred
&C.J That is, either by failing three days, or ceremonies, coming to Arafat, there asked him
feeding fix poor peapic. or foci i (king a fheep. if he knew the ceremonies which had been Qiewn

* lie cah tarrieth, Src.] This pafTage is fome- him ; to which Abrabam anfwering in the affir-

wbat obfeure. Yah a interprets it of him who mative, the mountain had thence its name *.
marries a wife during the vifitation, and perforins * The holy mnument ;] In Arabic , al Majbtr al

the pilgrimage the year following. Iftit fallal- bar am . It is a mountain in the farther part of
dddist expounds it of him who flays within the MozJalifa, where it is faid Mohammed flood pray-
facred inclofures, in order to compleat the cere- ing and praifing God, till his face became ex-
monies, which >!is it fhould fee in) he had not treamly Alining *. Bobovius calls it Par kb f , but
been able to do within the preferibed time. the true name feems to be Kazab ; the variation.

* Tic knitst mi/irb*, 1 ] i. e. Sbamal, Dhutiaaia, being occaiioned only by the different pointing of
and Dbsflkajya. See the Preliminary Difeourfe, the Arabic letters.

Seft. IV. * God is faift in taking an account ] For. he

* When ye go in proc/Jfitm,] The original word will judge all creatures, fays Jallali.,iit, in the
fignifies it ro/b forward impetumejly > as the pilgrims fpace of half a day.

do when they proceed from Arafat to Mozdalif a.

1 Jm.x,alo’ddi». * See before p. 5. not. g. 3 Al Hasan. * Jallalo’ddin. 1 Bo«r> v
de ptregr. Meccano, p. 15

24 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 2

Remember God the appointed number of day* 1 : but if any hafte to depart from
the valley of Mina in two days, it lhall be no crime in him. And: if any tarry
longer, it (hall be no crime in him, in him who feareth God. Therefore
fear God, and know that unto him ye (hall be gathered. There is a man
who caufeth thee to marvel 1 by his fpeech concerning this prefent lift* and call-
eth God to witnefs that which' is in his heart, yet he is moft intent in oppof.
ing thee ; and when he tumeth away from tbee , he hafteth to aft corruptly in
the earth, and to deftroy that which is fown, and fpringeth up * : but God
loveth not corrupt doing. And if one fay unto him. Fear God ; pride feizeth
him, together with wickednefs ; but hell (hall be his reward, and an unhappy
couch mall it be. There is alfo a man who fellech his foul for the fake of
thofe things which are pleafing unto God * ; and God is gracious unto bis fer-
vants. O true believers, enter into the true religion wholly, and follow
not the fteps of Satan, for he is your open enemy. Tf ye have flipped
after the declarations of our will have come unto you, know that God is
mighty and wife. Do the infidels expeft lefs than that God (hould come down to
them overfhadowed vfith clouds, and the angels alfo^ ? but the thing is decreed,
and to God (hall all things return. A(k the children of Israel how many
evident figns we have lhewed them ; and whoever (hall change the grace of
God, after it lhall have come unto him, verily God will be fevere in puniflj-
ing him. The prelent life was ordained for thofe who believe not, and they
laugh the faithful to fcorn ; but they who fear God (hall be above them, on
the day of the refurreftion : for God is bountiful unto whom he pleafeth with-
out meafure. Mankind was of one faith, and God lent prophets bearing
good tidings, and denouncing threats, and fent down with them the fcripture
in truth, that it might judge between men of that concerning which they
difagreed : and none difagreed concerning it, except thofe to whom the fame
fcripture s were delivered, after the declarations of God’s will had come unto
them, out of envy among themfelves. And God direfted thofe who believed,
to diat truth concerning which they difagreed, by his will : for God direfteth
whom he pleafeth into the right way. Did ye think ye (hould enter paradife,
when as yet no fuch thing had happened unto you, as bath happened unto thofe
who have been before you ? They fuffered calamity, and tribulation, and were
a (Rifted *, fo that the apoftle, and they who believed with him, (aid j When
will the help of God come ? Is not the help of God nigh ? They will a(k thee
what they (hall beftow in alms: Anfwer, The good which ye beftowi, let it be.
given to parents, and kindred, and orphans, and die poor, and the ftranger.

Whatfoever

* The appointed number of days,] i. e. Three
day* after flaying the facrifices.

* There is a man tobo caufeth thee to marvel , &c]
This perfon was al Akhnas Ebn Sboraik, a fair-
fpokendifTembler, who fwore that he believed in
Mohammed, and pretended to be one of his friends,
and to contemn this world. But Goo here reveals
to the prophet his hTpocrify and wickednefs

* Ht hafteth to aft corruptly , and to deftroy that
tohicb it fmrt, &c,] Setting fire to his neigh-
bour’s corn, and killing his affes by night a .

4 There is a man who feUeth his pvt, &c ] The
perfon here meant was one Sobeib , who being
perfecutcd by the idolaters of Mecca, forfook ad
he had, and fled to Medina 3 .

1 Jallalo’ddih,

2 Idem . 3 Idem:

Chap. 2. Al KORAN \ 25

Whatfoever good ye do, God knoweth it. War is injoined you aga'mjt the
Infidels ; but this is hateful unto you : yet perchance ye hate a thing which is
better for you, and perchance ye love a thing which is worfe for you : but
Goo knoweth and ye know not. They will ask thee concerning the
facred month, whether they may war therein: Anfwer, To war therein is

grievous ; but to obftrudt the way of God, and infidelity towards him, and
to keep mu from the holy temple, and to drive out his people from thence,
is more grievous in the fight of God, and the temptation to idolatry is more
grievous than to kill in the facred months. They will not ceafe to war againft
you, until they turn you from your religion, if they be able : but who-
ever among you fhall turn back from his religion, and die an infidel, their
works fhall be vain in this world, and the next j they fhall be the com-
panions of bell fire, they lhall remain therein for ever. But they who be-
lieve, and who fly for the fake of religion, and fight in God’s caufe, they
fhall hope for the mercy of God ; for God is gracious and merciful. They
will ask thee concerning wine * and lots b : Anfwer, In both there is
great fin, and dfofome things of ufe unto men c ; but their finfulnefs is greater
than their ufe. They will afk thee alfo what they fhall beftow in alms : Anfwer,
What ye have to fpare. Thus God fheweth his figns unto you, that pen-
adventure ye might ferioufly think of this prelent world, and of the next.
They will alfo alk thee concerning orphans : Anfwer, To deal righteoufly with
them is beft ; and if ye intermeddle with the management of what belongs to them,
do them no wrong ; they are your brethren : God knoweth the corrupt dealer
from the righteous ; and if God pleafe, he will furely diftrefs you 4 , for God is
mighty and wife. Marry not women who are idolaters, .until they believe:
verily a maid fervant who believeth, is better chan an idolatrefs, although lhe
pleafe you more. And give not women- who believe , in marriage to the idola-
ters, until they believe i for verily a fervant, who is a true believer, is better
than an idolater, thougK he pleafe you more. They invite unto bell fire, but
God inviteth untoparadife and pardon through his will, and declareth his
figns unto men, that they may remember. They will afk thee alfo, con-
cerning the courfes of women : Anfwer, They are a pollution : therefore feparate
your felves from women in their courfes, and go not near them, until they
be cleanfed. But when they are cleanfed, go in unto them as God hath com-

E manded

* Wine.] Under the name of wine all forts prohibited 3 . And the moderate ufe of wine

of ilrong and inebriating liquors are compre- they alfo think is allowed by thefe words of the
hended l . t6th chapter. And of the fr$its of palm- trees asd

* Lots.'] The original word, al Meifir, pro- grapes ye obtain inebriating drink, and alfo good
perly fignifies a particular game performed with noarifbment. But the more received opinion is,
arrows, and much in ufe with the pagan Arabs, that both drinking wine or other ftrong liquors
But by lots vie are here to underltand all games in any quantity, and playing at any game of
whatfoever, which are fubjeft to chance or chance, are aofolutely forbidden *.

hazard, as dice, cards, &c *. * God will fstrely diftrefs you.'] viz. By his curie,

* In both there is great fin, and alfo fine things which will certainly bring to nothing what yc
of ufe.] From thefe words fome fuppofe that on- fhall wrong the orphans of.

ly drinking to excels, and too frequent gaming are

1 See the Prelim. Difi. §. V. * See ibid. 3 V. Jallaxo'ddin Id oIZjm akhsilau.
* See the Prelim. Difi. ubi fup.

a6 Al KO R A N. Chap. 2 .

commanded you *, for God loveth thofe who repent, and loveth thofe who
are clean. Your wives are your tillage ; go in therefore unto your tillage in
what manner foever ye will®: and do firft fome adt that may be profitable un-
to your fouls'} and fear God, and know that ye muft meet him } and bear
good tidings unto the faithful. Make not God the objedt of your oaths 4 ,
that ye will deal juftly, and be devout, and make peace among men * } for
God is he who heareth and knoweth. God will not punilh you for an in-
confiderate word f in your oaths } but he will punilh you for that which your
hearts have aflented unto : God is merciful and gracious. They who vow to
abjlain from their wives, are allowed to wait four months * : but if they go back
from their vow , verily God is gracious and merciful h ; and if they refolve
on a divorce, God is he who neareth and knoweth. The women who are di-
vorced fhall wait concerning themfelves until they have their courfes thrice J ,
and it fhall not be lawful for them to conceal that which God hath crea-
ted in their wombs \ if they believe in God and the laft day ; and their
hufbands will a6t more juftly to bring them back at this time., it they defire a
reconciliation. The women ought alio to behave towards their hufbands in like
manner as their hufbands Jhould behave towards them, according to what is juft:

but

* As God bath commanded jou ;] But not while
they have their courfes, nor by ufmg prepofter-
ous venery *.

b In what manner foever ye will;] That is in
any-pofture ; either Handing, fitting, lying, for-
wards, or backwards. And this paflage, it is
faid, was reveal’d to anfwer the Jews, who pre-
tended that if a man lay with his wife backwards,
he would get a more witty child a . It has been
imagined that thefe words allow that prepo-
fterous lull, which the commentators fay is for-
bidden by the preceding* but I queftion whe-
ther this can be proved.

* Do firfi fome 48 that may profit your fouls ;}
i. e. Perform fome aft of devotion or charity.

4 Make not God the objeft of your oaths; ] So as
to fwear frequently by him. The word tra rela-
ted obie8 t properly fignifies a but to fhoot
at with arrows J .

* That ye will deal jufily , &c.] Some commen-
tators * expound this negatively. That ye will
not deal jufily , nor be devout , See. For fuch wick-
ed oaths, they fay, were cuftonrfary among the
idolatrous inhabitants of Mecca ; which gave oc-
cafion to the following faying of Mohammed ;
When you fwear to do a thing, and afterwards find
it better to do olberwife ; do that which is better,
and make void your oath*

1 An inconfi derate word{^ When a man fwears
inadvertently, and without defign.

*Tbey who vow to abfiain from their wives , are

allowed to waif four months That is, they may
take fo much time to confiaer ; and fhall- not, by
arafh oath, be obliged aftually to divorce them.

h If they go back from their vows, &c.] fu e If
they be reconciled to their wives within four
months, or after, they may retain them ; and
God will difpenle with their oath.

1 This is to be underftood of thofe only with
whom the marriage has been confummated ; for
as to the others there is no time limited. Thofe
who are not quite paft childbearing (which if wo-
man is reckoned to be after her courfes ceafej and
lhe is fifty five lunar years, or about fifty three
folar years old) and thofe who are too young to
have children, are allowed three months only ;
but they who are with child, muft wait till they
be delivered 5 .

* They Jball not conceal what God hath created tit
their wombs;'] That is, they fhall tell the real
truth, whether they have their courfes, or be
with child, or not ; and fhall not, by deceiving
their husband, obtain a reparation from him be-
fore the term be accompfif&ed: left the firft hus-
band’s child ihould, by that means, go to the
fecond ; or the wife, in cafe of the firft husband’s
death, fhould fet up her child as his heir, or de-
mand her maintenance during the time fhe went
with fuch child, and the eipences of her lying
in, under pretence that fhe waited not her full
preferibed rime, 6 ..

1 Ebh Abbas, Jallalo’ddim. 2 Jallalo’ddin, Yahya, Al Zamakhihabi. Fid:
dertr. nat. /. iv. v - 1258, &c. * Jallalp'ddin. ♦ Idem . Yahta, 5 Jaw*-

to’DDiw, 6 Yahya.

Chap. 2. Al KORAN. 27

but the men ought to have a fuperiority over them. God is mighty and wife.
Ye may divorce your wives twice ; and then either retain them with humanity,
or difmifs them with kindnefs. But it is not lawful for you to take away any
tiling of what ye have given them, unlefs both fear that they cannot obferve
the ordinances of God *. And if ye fear that they cannot obferve the ordinances
of God, it fliall be no crime in either of them on account of that for which the
wife fliall redeem her felf b . Thefe are the ordinances of God; therefore tranf-
grefs them not; for whoever tranfgrefleth the ordinances of God, they are un-
juft doers. But if the hujband divorce her a third time, fhe fliall not be law-
ful for him again, until fhe marry another hufband. But if he alfo divorce
her, it fliall be no crime in them, if they return to each other, if they think
they can obferve the ordinances of God ; and thefe are the ordinances of God,
he dedareth them to people of underftanding. But when ye divorce women,
and they have fulfilled their prefcribed time, either retain them with humani-
ty, or difmifs them with kindnefs ; and retain them not by violence, fo that
ye tranfgrefs c ; for he who doth this, furely injureth his own foul. And make
not the fignsof God a jeft : but remember God’s favour towards you, and
that he hath fent down unto you the book of the Koruk, and wifdom, ad-
monifhing you thereby ; and fear God, and know that God is omnifcienr.
But when ye have divorced your wives, and they have fulfilled their prefcrib-
ed time, hinder them not from marrying their husbands, when they have a-
greed among themfelves according to what is honourable. This is given in
admonition unto him among you who believeth in God, and the kft day.
This is moft righteous for you, and moft pure. God knoweth, but ye know
not. Mothers after they are divorced fliall give fuck unto their children two
full yean, to him who defireth the time of giving fuck to be compleated ; and
the father fliall be obliged to maintain them and cloath them in the mean
time, according to that which fliall be reafonable. No perfon fliall be obliged
beyond his ability. A mother fliall not be compelled to what is unreafonahle
on account of her child, nor a father on account of his child. And the heir
of the father fliall be obliged to do in like manner. But if they chufe to wean
the child before the end of two years , by common confent, and on mutual con-
fideration, it fliall be no crime in them. And if ye have a mind to provide
a nurfe for your children, it fliall be no crime in you, in cafe ye fully pay
what ye offer her, according to that which is juft. And fear God, and
know that God feeth whatfoever ye do. Such of you as die, and leave
wives, their wives muft wait concerning themfelves four months and ten days*,
and when they fliall have fulfilled their term, it fliall be no crime in you,
for that which they fliall do with themfelves , according to what is rea-

E 2 fonable.

* Unlefs both fear they cannot obferve the or Jin- liberty with part of their dowry.

encos 4 God.] For if there be a fettled averfion * The wives of hub as die, nstsft wait fair
on either fide, their continuing together may months and ten days-, J That is to lay, before they
have very ill, and perhaps fatal confeqnences. marry again; and this not only for decency fake,

* It pall be no crime if jbe redeem berfelfi ] ie. but that it may be known whether they be with
If ihe prevail on her husband to difmifs her, by child by the decealed or not.

releifuig part of her dowry. • For that which they pall do with tbemfehesi\

* And retain them not by force , p that ye tranf- That ls,* t if they leave off their mourning weeds,
grefsi\ viz. By obliging them to purciufc their and look out for new husbands.

28 At KORAN. Chap. 2.

fonable. God well knoweth that which ye do. And it fhall be no crime in
you, whether ye make public overtures of marriage unto fucb women, within
the hid four months and ten days, or whether ye conceal fucb you r defigns in
your minds: God knoweth that ye will remember them. But make no pro-
mife unto them privately, unlefs ye fpeak honourable words ; and refolve
not on the knot of marriage, until the prefcribed time be accomphfhcd ; and
know that God knoweth that which is in your minds, therefore beware of
him, and know that God is gracious and merciful. It fhall be no crime in
you, if ye divorce your wives, fo long as ye have not touched them, nor
fettled any dowry on them. And provide for them (he who is at his eafe
muft provide according to his circumftances,and he who is ftraitened according
to his circumftancesj necefTaries, according to what fhall be reafonable.
This is a duty incumbent on the righteous. But if ye divorce them before ye
have touched them, and have already fettled a dowry on them, ye fhall give
them half of what ye have fettled, unlefs they releafe any fart, or he relea k part
inwhofehand the knot of marriages*; and if yg releafe the whole, it will
approach nearer unto piety. And forget not liberality among you, for God
feeth that which ye do. Carefully obferve the appointed prayers, and the mid-
dle prayer b , and be alliduous therein , with devotion towards God. But if
ye fear any danger , fray on foot or on horfeback ; and when ye are fafe, re-
member God, " how he hath taught you what as yet ye knew not. And
fach of you as fhalf die and leave wives, ought to bequeath their wives a
year’s maintenance, without putting them out of tbeirhaufes: but if they go
out voluntarily it fhall be no crime in you, for that which they fhall do with
themfelvcs, according to what fhall be reafonable 5 God is mighty and wile.
And unto thofe who are divorced, a reafonable provifion is alfo due *, tbit is a
duty incumbent on thofe who fear God. Thus God declareth his figns unto
you, that ye may underftand. Haft thou not confidered thofe, who left
their habitations, fand they were thoiifand$)for fear of death c ? And God

faid

* Unlefs they, tithe in whofe hand the knot of

marriage is, releafe it, Ac.] i. e. Unlefs the wife
agree to take Ms than half her or

lefs the husband be fa geperous as to give her
more than half, or the whole ; which is here ap-
proved of as moff commendable.

* The middle prayer. 'jlahya interprets this from
a tradition of Mohammed* who being asked
which was the middle prayer, anfwered. The
evening prayer,which was inftituted by the pro-
phet Solomon. But Jallald&Hi | allows a greater
latitude, and fuppofes it teflr^be the afternoon
prayer, the morning prayer, the noon prayer,
or any other.

' Haft thou not tonjidrred thofe who left their
habitations fir fear of death, &c.] Thefe were
feme of the children of Ifrael, who abandoned

1 Jalxalo’dbjn, Yaj

their dwellings becanfe of a peftifence ; or, as
others fay, to av aid ferving in a religious war :
but as they (fed, > God (truck them 11 dead in a
certain valley. About eight dava or more after,
when their bodies were complied, the prophet
Ezekiel the (on of Buzi happening to pafs that
way, at the fight of their bones. Wept • where-
upon God laid to him. Call to theft:, O Ezekiel,
and I will reftore them to life. And accordingly or
the pfophefs call they alfarofe.and livedfeveral
years after ; but they retained the colour and
ftench of dead corps, as long as they lived, and
the deaths they wore changed as blaekas pitch:
which qualities they tranfmtttetf to their pofte-
rky 2 . As to the number of thefe Jfmdkt f, the
commentators are not agreed; they who reckon
leall fay they were 3000, and they who reckon

va, Abuxfkda, £ff<V

Chap. 2. Al KORAN. zg

faid unto them, Die 5 then he reftored them to life, for God is gracious towards
mankind*, but the greater part of men do not give thanks. Fight for the
religion of God, and know that God is he who heareth and knoweth. Who
is he that will lend unto God on good ufury*? verily he will double it unto
him manifold ; tor God contradeth and extendeth bis band as he pleafeth,
and to him lhall ye return. Haft thou not confidered the afiembly of the
children of Israel, after the time ef Moses j when they faid unto their pro-
phet Samuel, Set a king over us, that we may fight for the religion of God?
The prophet anfwered. If ye are injoined to go to war, will ye be near re-
filling to fight? 1 hey anfwered. And what ihouldail us that we fhould not
fight for the religion of God, feeing we are difpoffefled of our habitations,
and deprived of our children ? But when they were injoined to go to war, they
turned back, except a few of them : and God knew the ungodly. And their
prophet faid unto them. Verily God hath fet Talut ", king over you : they
anfwered. How lhall he reign over us, feeing we are more worthy of the king-
dom than he, neither is he pofieffed of great riches ? Samuel faid. Verily
God hath chofen him before you, and hath caufed him to increafe in know-
ledge and ftature, for God giveth his kingdom unto whom he pleafeth ; God
is bounteous and wife. And their prophet faid unto them. Verily the fign
of his kingdom lhall be, that the ark lhall come unto you* : therein fhall be
tranquility from your Lord 4 , and the relicks * which have been left by the fa-
mily of Moses, and the fiunily of Aaron ; the angels lhall bring it* Verily
this lhall be a fign unto you, if ye believe. And when Talut departed with
his foldiers, he laid. Verily God will prove you by the river : for he who
drinketh thereof, lhall not be on my fide ( but he who lhall not tafte thereof
he lhall be on my fidej except he who drinketh a draught out of his hand.

And

Wflftt 70,000. This ftory Teems to hare been
aien from Esc* kk _ vifion of the refurrettion of
dry bones 1 ,

Some of the Mohammedan writers will have
Ezekiel to have been one of the judges of ljrael t
and to have fucceeded Otbo*ki file fen of Caleb.
They al To call this prophet Ebn al ajuz, or the
fin f ihi} old ; beciufe they uy his mo-

ther obtained him by her prayers in her old
age 2

* me let II lend unto God , on good ufnry f ] r\z r

By contributing towards the rftabliOimeht of his
true religion*

* Jaffa.] So the Mohammedans name Saul*

* The ark Jhalf come unto you, &c.] This ark,
fay 5 yalfaio'ddiitj contained the images of the
prophets, and w- s Tent down from heaven to
Adu, w+ find at length -came to the Ijuitlket*
who pu: great confidence therein, and contimi-
ally carried it in the front of their army, till U
was taken by the Amaiekites * But on chit occa-

1 Ezek. rxxvii. i— io* 2 Jl Thalabi,

A J^LLALo'ddJU.

Bon the angels brought it back, in the fight of
all the people, and placed it at the feet of Toldi*
who was thereupon unanimoufly acknowledged
for their king.

This relation Teems to have ariTen from Tome,
imperfeft tradition of the taking and Tending
back the ark by the EhtUftims 1 ,

d Therein jh ft .& trsnsptitUffflvm your herd ;}
That is, became of the great confidence the
I/reelites plated in it, having won feveral bat-
tles by miraculous aflifhnce. I imagine
however, that the Arahh word Satina t> which
fignifies tranquility or jkursty of mind, and is To
underftood by the common liters, may not impro-
bably mean the dfoitic prfence or gkrj 9 which
ufed to appear on the ark, and which die Jeeas
ciptefs by the inmc word fhechinah*

rtffrh, &e.} ThcTe were the /hoes and
rod dj Moles* the mitrn of Aaron* a pot of Man r-
na, and the broken pieces of die two tables of
the law 4 .

Abu Ishax, * 3 a Sam. iv, v and vi.

go Al KORAN. Chap. 2.

And they drank thereof, except a few of them*. And when they had patted
the river , he and thofe who believed with him, they faid. We have no ftrength
-to day, againft Jalut b and his forces. But they who confidered that they
Ihould meet God at the refurreftion, faid. How often hath a fmall army dif-
comfited a great army, by the will of God ? and God is with thofe who pa-
tiently perfevere. And when they went forth to battle againft Jalut and his
•forces, they faid, O Lord, pour on us patience, and confirm our feet, and
help us againft the unbelieving people. Therefore they difcomnted them,
by the will of God, and David flew Jalut. And God gave him the king-
dom and wifdom, and taught him his will c i and if God had not prevented
men, the one by the other, verily the earth had been corrupted : but God is
beneficent towards bis creatures. Thefe are the figns or God : we rehearfe

them unto thee with truth, and thou art furely one of thofe who have been
III. fent by God. * Thefe are the apoftles j we have preferred fome of them be-
fore others : fome of them hath God lpoken unto, and hath exalted the de-
gree of others of them* And we gave unto Jesus the fon of Mary manifeft
figns, and ftrengthened him with the holy fpirit d . And if God had pleafed,
they who came after thofe apoftles, would not have contended among them-
felves, after manifeft figns had been fhewn unto them. But they fell to va-
riance ; therefore fome of them believed, and fome of them believed not ; and
if God had fo pleafed, they would not have contended among themfelves, but
God doth what he will. O true believers, give alms of that which we have
beftowed on you, before the day cometh wherein there lhall be no merchan-
dizing, nor friendfhip, nor interceffion. The infidels are unjuft doers. God I
there is no God but he* ; the living, the felf-fubfifting: neiSier (lumber nor
fleep feizeth him ; to him belongetb whatfoever is in heaven, and on earth.
Who is he that can intercede with him, but through his good pleafure ? He
knoweth that which is paft, and that which is to come unto them, and they
lhall not comprehend any thing of his knowledge, but fo for as he pleafeth.
His throne is extended over heaven and earth f , and the prefervacion of both

< is

* And they drank thereof except a few> &c.] The
number of thofe who drank out of their hands
were about 313 1 * . It feetns that Mohammed has
here confounded Saul with Gideon , who by the
divine direction took with him againft the Mi-
di anites fuch of his army only, as lapped water
out of their hands, which were 300 men a .

fc Jdlut] Or Goliab.

* His will\) Or xohat he pleafed to teach him.
Tabya moft rationally underftands hereby the di-
vine revelations which David received from
God ; but Jallatiddin the art of making coats
of mail (which the Mohammedans believe was
that prophet’s peculiar trade) and the know-
ledge of the language of birds.

d See before p. 12. Note a.

* God! there is no God but he , &c.] The fol-

lowing feven lines contain a magnificent descrip-
tion of the divine majefty and providence ; but it
muft not be fuppofed the translation comes up to
the dignity of the original. This paffage isjaflly
admired by the Mohammedans , who recite it in
their prayers; and iome of them wear it about
them, engraved on an agate or other precious
ftonc 3 .

f His throne is extended over heaven and earth ,
&c.) This throne, in Arabic called Corf, is by
the Mohammedans fuppofed to be God’s tribu-
nal, or feat of juftice; being placed under that o-
ther called al Arjb , which they fay is his im-
perial throne. The Corfi allegorically fignifies
the divine providence* which fuftains and go-
verns the heaven and the earth, and is infinitely
above humane comprebenfion 4> .

1 Idem , Yahya. * Judges v ii. 3 Bobov, de prec. Moham. p. 5. faf Relan n. Differ t. de

gemmis Arab. p. 235, 239. 4 Fid. D’Her helot. BibL Orient . Art* Corfi.

Chap. 2. Al KORAN \ 3*

is no burthen unto him. He is the high, the mighty. Let there be no violence
in religion Now is right direction manifeftly diftinguilhed from deceit:
whoever therefore Ihall deny TAGUT b , and believe in God* he Ihall furely
take hold on a ftrong handle, which ihall not be broken ; Gon is he who
heareth and feeth. God is the patron of thofewho believe ; he ihall lead them
out of darknefs into light: but as to thofe who believe not, their patrons are
Tagut ; they ihall lead them from the light into darknefs j they mail be the
companions of bell fire, they ihall remain therein for ever. Hail thou not
confidered him who disputed with Abraham concerning his Lord e , becaufe
God had given him the kingdom ? When Abraham faid, My Lord is he
who giveth life, and killeth : he anfwered, I give life, and I kill. Abra-
ham faid. Verily God bringeth the fun from the eaft, now do thou bring it
from the weft. Whereupon the infidel was confounded ; for God diretfteth
not the ungodly people. Or baft thou not confidered how he behaved who paf-
fed by a city which had been deftroyed, even to her foundations 4 ? He faid.
How ihall God quicken this city , after ihe hath been dead ? And God cau-
fed him to die for an hundred years, and afterwards raifed him to life. And
God faid. How long haft thou tarried here ? He anfwered, A day, or part
of a day. God faid. Nay, thou haft tarried here an hundred years. Now
look on thy food and thy drink, they are not yet corrupted * and look on
thine afs : and this have we done that we might make thee a fign unto men.
And look on the bones of thine afs , how we raife them, and afterwards cloath
them with fleih. And when this was ihewn unto him, he laid, I know that
God is able to do all things. And when Abraham faid, O Lord, ihew
me how thou wilt raife the dead e j Go d faid, Doft thou not yet believe ? He

anfwer*

* Let there be no violence in religion .] This
pall age was particularly dire&ed to (ome of Mo-
bammed* s firft profelytea, who having Tons that
had been brought up in idolatry or Judaifm,
would oblige them to embrace Mohammedifm by
force l .

* Tagut\] This word property fignifies an
fibl, or whatever is worfhipped belides God ;
particularly the two idols of the Meccans, Alldt ,
and al Uzza ; and alfo the devil, or any feducer.

* Him who diluted with Abraham t &c.] This
was Nimrod ; who, as the commentators fay*
to prove his power of life and death by ocular
demonftradoiH caufed two men to be brought
before him at the fame time, one of whom ho
(lew, and faved the other alive As to this
tyrant's pcrfecution of Abraham , fee chap. 21.
and the notes thereon.

* Haft thou not confidered him who pajjfed By a eity
which bad been deftroyed, &c.] The perfon here
meant, was Ozair or Ezra , who riding on an
afs by the ruins of JerufaUtth after it had been
deftroyed by the Chaldeans , doubted irrhis mind

1 Jallalo'ddin. % Jallalo’ddin, Yah
3 Nthem. ii. \ 2. 4 See D’Herbelot,£.

by what means God could raife the city and its
inhabitants again; whereupon God caufed him'
to die, and he remained in that condition 1 00
years; at the end of which God reftored him to
life, and he found a basket of figs and a crufe
of wine he had. with him, not in the leaft fppiled
or corrupted, but his afs was dead", the bones on-
ly remaining; and thefe, while theprophet look-
ed on, were raifed and cloathed with flefh, be-
coming an a& again, which being infpired with
life, began immediately to bray

This apocryphal ftory may perhaps have taken
its rife from Nebemiab'* viewing of the ruins of
Jtrufalem

* When Abrahim faid 9 Lord Jbew me how thou
wik raife the dead.] The occafiion of this requeft
of Abraham i* faid to have been on a doubt
propofed to him -by tho devil, in human form,
howiir was poffible for the fcveral parts of the
corps of a man which lav on the fea fhore, and
had been partly devourea by the wild beafts, the
birds, and the fifh, to be brought together at the
refurreftion 4 .

See D’Herbel. BibL OrienuArl. Ozair*
■S-

3* A KORAN. Chap. 2 .

nnfwered, Yea ; but 1 ask this that my heart may reft at eafe. God faid
take therefore four birds, and divide them •; then lay a part of them on every
mountain; then call them, and they fhall come fwiftly unto thee : and know
that God is mighty and wife. The fimilitude of thofe who lay out their fub-
ftatlce for advancing the religion of God, is as a grain of corn which produceth
feven ears, and in every ear an hundred grains ; for God giveth twofold un-
to Whom he pleafeth: God is bounteous and wife. They who lay out their
fubftance for the religion of God, and afterwards follow not what they have
fo laid out by reproaches or mifchief b , they fhall have their reward with their
their Lord ; upon tnem fhall no fear come, neither fhall they be griev
ed. A fair fpeech, and to forgive, is better than alms followed by mif-
chief. God is rich and merciful. O true believers, make not your alms of
none effedt by reproaching, or mifchief, as he who layeth out what he hath
to appear unto men to give alms , and believeth not in God and the laft day.
The likenefs of fuch a one, is as a flint covered with earth, on which a vio-
lent rain falleth, and leaveth it hard. They cannot profper in any thing which
they have gained, for God dire&eth not the unbelieving people. And the
likenefs of thofe who lay out their fubftance from a defire to pleafeGoD, and
for an eftablifhment for their fouls, is as a garden on a hill, t>n which a vio-
lent rain falleth, and it bringeth forth its fruits twofold ; and if a violent
rain falleth not on it, yet the dew falleth thereon : and God feeth that which
ye do, Doth any of you defire to have a garden of palm-trees and vines',
through which rivers flow, wherein he may have all kinds of fruits, and that he
may attain to old age, and have a weak off-fpring ? then a violent fiery wind
fhall ftrike it, fo that it fhall be burned. Thus God declareth hisfigiw unto
you, that ye may confider. O true believers beftow aims of the good things
which ye have gamed, and of that which we have produced for you out of the
earth, and chufe not the bad thereof, to give it in alms , fuch as ye would not
accept your felves, otherwife than by connivance d : and know that God is

rich and worthy to be praifed. The devil threatened! you with poverty, and
commanded! you filthy covetoufnefs ; but God promifeth you pardon from
himfelf and abundance: God is bounteous and wife. He giveth wifdom un-

to

* Take four birds and divide them .] Thefe birds,
according to the commentators, were an eagle
(a dote, Cry others^ a peacock, a raven, and a
cock i which Abrabam cut to pieces, and
mingled their flelh and feathers together, or,
as fome tell us, pounded all in a mortar,
and dividing the mafs into four parts, laid them
on fo many mountains, but xept the heads,
which he had preferved whole, in his hand.
Then he called them each by their name, and
immediately one part flew to the other, till they
all recovered their firft fliape, and then came to
be joined to their refpettive head* l .

This feems to be taken from Abraham's facri-
iice of birds mentioned jby Mofes with fome

additional drcumftances.

b Atof follow not alms by refr&thtf or mifchief . ;
&c.] i. e. Either by reproaching (|he perfon
whom thev have relieved, with what they have
done for tnem; or by exposing his poverty to
his prejudice 3 .

* Doth any of you iefirt a g#rJm M &cj This
garden is an emblem of alms given out ofhypo-
crify,or attended with reproaches which periih,
and will be of no fervice hereafter to the giver 4 ’.

4 By connivance.] That is, on having fome a-
mends made by the feller of fuch goods, either
by abatement of the price, or giving fcmething
elfe to the buyer to make up the value.

4 Jallalo’ddin. See D’Her helot, ubifitpra. » Gen. xv. 3 J A llal#’ddin. + Idem-

Chap. 2. Al K 0 R A N. 33

to whom he pleafeth ; and he unto whom wifdom is given, hath received much
good : but none will confider, except the wife of heart. And whatever alms
ye lhall give, or whatever vow ye lhall vow, verily God knoweth it *, but
the ungodly lhall have none to help them. If ye make your alms to appear,
it is well i but if ye conceal them, and give them unto the poor, this will be
better for you, and will atone for your fins : and God is well informed of
that which ye do. The direction of them belongeth not unto thee ; but God
diredteth whom he pleafeth. The good that ye lhall give in alms Jhall redound
unto your felves ; and ye lhall not give unlels out of defire of feeing the
face of God \ And what good thing yc lhall give in alms , it lhall be repaid
you, and ye lhall not be treated unjuftly unto the poor who are wholly em-
ployed in fighting for the religion of God, and cannot go to and fro in the
earth ; whom the ignorant man thinketh rich, becaufe of their modefty :
thou lhalt know them by this mark, they ask not men with importunity ;
and what good ye lhall give in alms , verily God knoweth it. They who dif-
tribute alms of their fubftance night and day, in private and in public, lhall
have their reward with their Lord j on them lhall no fear come, neither
lhall they be grieved. They who devour ufury lhall not arife from the dead,
but as he arifeth whom Satan hath infedted by a touch*: this /ball happen
to them becaufe they fay. Truly felling is but as ufury: and yet God hath per-
mitted felling and forbidden ufury. He therefore who when there cometh unto
him an admonition from his Lord, abftaineth from ufury for the future , lhall
have what is paft forgiven him , and his affair belongeth unto God. But who-
ever returneth to ufury , they ftiall be the companions of bell fire, they lhall
continue therein for ever. God lhall take his blefling from ufury, and lhall
increafe alms : for God loveth no infidel, or ungodly perfon. But they who
believe and do that which is right, and obferve the Hated times of prayer,
and pay their legal alms, they lhall have their reward with their Lor d :
there lhall come no fear on them, neither lhall they be grieved. O true be-
lievers, fear God, and remit that which remaineth of ufury % if ye really be-
lieve ; but if ye do it not, hearken unto war, which is declared againjl you
from God and his apoftle : yet if ye repent, ye lhall have the capital of
your money. Deal not unjuftly with others., and ye lhall not be dealt with
unjuftly. If there be any debtor under a difficulty of paying bis debt , let bis
creditor wait till it be eafy for him to do it •, but if ye remit it as alms, it
will be better for you, if ye knew it. And fear the day wherein ye lhall return
unto God, then lhall every foul be paid what it hath gained, and they lhall
not be treated unjuftly. O true believers, when ye bind yourfelves one to the

F other

• Out of defire of feeing the fact of God.] i. e. vuliwe agitation of body.

For the Uke of a reward hereafter, and not for * Remit what remaineth tf ufury ,] Or the
any worldly confidcration 1 . intereft due before ufuiy was prohibited.

* As he whom Satan bath tnfetted, &c.] viz. For this fome of Mohammed's followers exaflt-
Like damnifies or po defied perfons, that is, in ed of their debtors, fuppoftng they lawfully
great horror and dtftra&ion of mind and con- might a .

1 Idem.

2 Idem .

34 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 2 .

other in a debt for a certain time, write it down ; and let a writer write between
you according tojuftice, and let not the writer refufe writing according to what
God hath taught him * but let him write, and let him who oweth, the debt
didtace, and let him fear God his Lord, and not diminilh ought thereof, But
if he who oweth the debt be foolifh, or weak, or be not able to didfcate
himfelf, let his agent* didtate according to equity ; and call to witnefi two
witneffes of your neighbouring men ; but if there be not two men, let there be
a man and two women of thofe whom ye fhall choofc for witneffes : if o ne of
thofe women lhould miftake, the other of them will caufe her to recolledt.
And the witneffes lhall not refufe, whenfoever they lhall be called. And dif-
dain not to write it down, be it a large debt, or be it a fmall one, until its
time of payment : this will be more juft in the fight of God, and more right
for bearing witnefe, and more eafy, that ye may not. doubt. But if it be a pre-
fent bargain which ye tranfadt between your felvcs, it lhall be no crime in you,
if ye write it not down. And take witneffes when ye fell one to the other, and
let no harm be done to the writer, nor to the witnefs which if ye do, it will
Purely be injuftice in you : and fear God, and God will inftrudt you, for God
knoweth all things. And if ye be on a journey, and find no writer, let pledges
be taken : but if one of you trnft the other, let him who is trufted return what
he is trufted with, and fear God his Lord. And conceal not the tefttmony, for
he who concealeth it, hath furely a wicked heart: Gop knoweth that which ye
do. Whatever is in heaven, and on earth is God’s : and whethet ye manifeft
that which is in your minds, or conceal jt, God will call you to account for
it, and will forgive whom he pleafeth, and will punifh whom he pleafed* ; for
Gop is almighty. The apoftle believeth in that which hath been fent down un-
to him from his Lord, and the faithful alfo. Every on etf them belie veth in
God, and his angels, and his feriptures, and his apofties: we make no dif-
tin&ion at all between his apofties b . And they fay, We have heard, and do
obey: we implpre thy mercy, O Lord, for unto thee muft we return, God
will not force any foul beyond its capacity : it lhall have the good which it
gained), and it (hall fuffer the evil which it gameth. O Lord punifh us not, if
we forget, or ad ftnfiijly : O Lord lay not on us a burthen like that which
thou haft laid on thofe who Have been before us c •, neither make us, O Lord,
to bear what we have not ftrengph to bear, but be favourable unto us, and
fpat« us, and be merciful unto us. Thou art our patron, help us therefore a-

C H A P.

CH thofe mho have been before us:] That is on the
ferns, who, as the commentators tell us, were
ordered to kill a man by way of atonement, to
give one fohrth of their fubftanrtr in alms, and to
cut off an uneleatr ulcerous put*, and were for-
bidden to eat fit, ot aWmafi that divided the
hoof, and were obliged to oblerve the fabbath,
and other particulars wherein the MohastBeema
are at liberty *.

3 Idem. 4 Yahta.

gairnt tne unbelieving nations.

* His agent .] Whoever manages his affairs,
whether his father, heir, guardian, or inter-
preter 1 .

“ Wt make no dijiinAtbn between his apo/ftes.]
But this, fiy thi MohammedtHs , the jews do,
who receive Mafes, but reject fefus ; and the
Chrifiians, who receive both thofe prophets, but
r<$<A Mohammed 1 .

! Lay not on us fneb a burthen, as thou ildfl hy

Jallalo’odin.

Stem.

Chap. 3.

Al KORAN.

35

CHAP. III.

Intitled , The family of Imran*; revealed at Medina.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

' \ L. M. \ There is no God but God, the living, the felf-fobfifting :
He hath fent down unto thee the book of the with truth, con-

firming that which was revealed before it ; for he had formerly fent down the
law, and the gofpel, a direction unto men j and he had alfo fent down the
diftin&ion between good and evil. Verily thole who believe not the figns of
God, lhall fufter a grievous punilhment j for God is tnighty, able to revenge.
Surely nothing is hidden from God, of that which is on earth, or in heaven:
it is ne who formeth you in the wombs, as he pleafeth ; there is no God but
he, the mighty, the wife. It is he who hath fent down unto thee the book,
wherein are fome verfes clear to be underftood, they are the foundation of the
book and others are parabolical r . But they whole hearts are psrverfe will
follow that which is parabolical therein, out of love of fchifm, and a defire
of the interpretation thereof yet none knoweth the interpretation thereof,
except God. But they who are well grounded in knowledge fay. We be-
lieve therein, the whole is from our Lord *, and none will con fider except
the prudent. OLqrd, caule not our hearts to fwerve from truths after thou
haft dire&ed us : and give us from thee mercy, for thou art he who giveth.
O Lord, thou (halt furely gather mankind together, unto a day of refurrec-
tion : there is no doubt of it, for God will not be contrary to the promile.
As for the infidels, their wealth lhall not profit them any thing, nor their
children, againft God : they lhall be the fewel of hell fire. According to the
wont of the people of Pharaoh, and of thofe who went before them, they
charged our figns with a lie ; but God caught them in their wickednels, and
God is fevere in punilhing. Say unto thole who believe not. Ye lhall be
overcome, and thrown together into hell ; an unhappy couch Jball it be. Ye

F 2 have

* Imran.] This name is gives in the Koran The contents of the Koran are here diftin-

to the father of the virgin Mary. See below, gnifhed into fuch JafTages as are to be taken in
p 38. the literal fenie, and fuch as require a figurative

• 4 - L. M.] For the meaning of thefe let- acceptation. The former being plain and ob-

ters. the reader is referred to the Preliminary vious to be under flood, compote the fundamen-
Difcourfe, Seft. III. tal put, or, as the original ezprefles it, tbt mother

c Wherein are feme verjtyetfpr to be underflood, of the book, and contain thp principal do&rines
—and others ere parabolical.] This paffage is and precepts; agreeably to, and confidently with
tranflated according to the expofition of alZa- which, thofe pafiages which are wrapt up in
mskbpari Imd al Beidam, which feems to be metaphors, and delivered in an aenrigmatical, al-
the trueft. legdrieal ftile, are always to be interpreted *.

1 See the Prelim. Di/e. $- III.

36

Al KORAN.

Chap. 3,

have already had a miracle Jhewn you in two armies, which attacked each
other *: one army fought for God’s true religion, but the other were infi-
dels ; they faw the faithful twice as piany as themfelves in their eye-fight ;
for God ftrengtheneth with his help whom he pleafeth. Surely herein was
an example unto men of underftanding. The love and eager defirei of wives,
and children, and fums heaped up of gold and filver, and excellent horfw,
and cattle, and land, is prepared for men : this is the provifion of the pre-
fent life ; but unto God lhall be the mod excellent return. Say, Shall I de-
clare unto you better things than this ? For thofe who are devout are pre-
fared with their Lord, gardens through which rivers flow; therein /lull
they continue for ever : and they fhall enjoy wives free from impurity, and
the favour of God; for God regardeth his fervants ; who fay, O Lord we
do fincerely believe ; forgive us therefore our fins, and deliver us from tfie
pain of hell fire : the patient, and the lovers of tnirh, and the devout, and the
almfgivers, and thofe who ask pardon early in die morning. God hath born
witnefs that there is no God but he ; and the angels, and thofe who are en-
dowed with wifdom profefs the fame ; who executeth righteoufnels ; there is
no God but he ; the mighty, the wife. Verily the true religion in the fight
of God, is Islam b ; and they who had received the fcriptures diflfented not
therefrom , until after the knowledge of G od* s unity had come unto them,
out of envy among themfelves ;but whofoevcr believetn notin the figns of God,
verily God will be fwift in bringing him to account. If they difpute with thee,

fay,

• Ye have already had a miracle Jbetvn you in wards the enemy in the attack, faying. May their
two armies , &c.] The fign or miracle here facts be confounded ; whereupon they immedi-
meant, was the viftory gained by Mohammed in the ately turned their backs and fled. But, thtf the
fecond year of the Hejra , over the idolatrous prophet feemingly threw the gravel hixnfejj yet
Meccans , headed by Abu Sofian, in the valley of he it told in the Koran i , that it was not he,
Bedr , which is fituate near the fea between but God, who threw it ; that is to fay, by the
Mecca and Medina. Mohammed's forces confided miniftry of his angel, a. The Mohammedan
Of no more than three hundred and nineteen troops feemed to the infidels to be twice as many
men, but the enemies army of near a thoufand ; in number as themfelves, which greatly difeour?
notwithftanding which odds, he put them to aged them. And, 3. God fent down to their
flight, having killed feventy of the principal alfiftance firfl a thoufand, and afterwards three
Korei/h , and taken as many prifoners, with the thoufand angels, led by Gabriel, mounted on
lofs of only fourteen of his own men 1 . This his horfe Haizum ; and according to the Ko~
was the firfl: vi&ory obtained by the prophet, ran 4 , thefe celeftial auxiliaries really did all
and tho’ it may feem no very confiderableattion, the execution, tho’ Mohammed's men imagined
yet it was of great advantage to him, and the themfelves did it, and fought ftoutly at the fame
foundation of all his future power and fuccefs. time.

For which reafon it is famous in the Arabian hif- Ifldm .1 The proper name of the Mobam -
tory, and more than once vaunted in the Ko- medan religion, which fignifiea the refigning or
ran 2 » as an effeft of the divine alfiftance. The devoting one's felf entirely to God and his fer-
miracle, it is laid, confifted in three things ; 1. vice. This they fay is the religion which all
Mobammedy by the direftion of the angel Gq- the prophets were fent to teach, being founded
briel, took a handful of gravel and threw it to- on the unity of God

* See Elm^cin. /. 5. Hottincbr. Hif. Orient. 1. t c . 4. Abulfrd. pit, Mobam. f. 56;

&C. Prideaux’s Life of Mahon, p, 71, &c. 2 See this chap, below , & chap. 8, # 32.

1 Chap. 8. not far from, the beginning. 4 Ibid . * Jallalo'ddin, Al Beidawi.

Chap. 3 . Al KORAN. 37

fay, I have refigned my fclf unto God, and he who folio weth me doth tbt
fame : and fay unto them who have received the feriptures, and to the ignorant 4 .
Do ye profefe the religion of Islam ? now if they embrace Islam, they are
forely directed *, but if they turn their backs, verily unto thee belongeth preach-
ing only % for God regardeth his fervants. And unto thofe who believe not
in rhe figns of God, and flay the prophets without a caufe, and put thofe men
to death who teach juftice ; denounce unto them a painful punifliment. Thefe
are they whofe worlb perifli in this world, and in that which is to come ; and
they (hall have none to help them. Haft thou not obferved thofe unto whomi
part of the feripture was given b ? They were called unto the book of Goo r
that it might judge between them c *, then fome of them turned their backs,
and retired afar off. This they did becaufe they faid, The fire of hell fhall
by no means touch us, but for a certain number of days d : and that which
they had falfly devifed, hath deceived them in their religion. How then
will it be with them y when we fhall gather them together at the day of judg-
ment e , of which there is no doubt ; and every foul fhall be paid that which
it hath gained, neither fhall they be treated unjuftly ? Say, O Goo r whopof-

feffeft

1 The ignorant ;] i. e. The pagan Arabs, who
had no knowledge of the feriptures 1 * .

4 Thofe unto whom part of tbt feripture was
given;] That is, the Jews;

c They wart called unto tbt book of God, &V.]
This paflage was revealed on occanon of a dis-
pute Mohammed had with fome Jews, which is
differently related by the commentators.

Al Eeidswi fays. That Mohammed going one
day into a Jewijh fynagogue, Naim EbnAmru
and al Haretb Ebn Zeid asked him what religion
he was of? To which he anfwering, Of the reli-
gion of Abraham ; they replied, Abraham was a
Jew i bat on Mohammed's propofing that the
Pentateuch might decide the queftion, they
would by no means agree to it.

But Jallalo'ddiu tcDs us. That two perfons of
the jewijh religion having committed adultery,
their punifhment was referred to Mohammed ,
who gave fentence that they ihould be Boned,
according to the law of Mofts. This the Jews
refufed to fubmit to, alledglng there was no fuch
command in the Pentateuch: but on Mohammed's
appealing to the book, the faid law was found
therein. Whereupon the criminals were Boned,
to the great mortification of the Jews »

It is very remarkable that this law of Mefes con-
cerning the Boning of adulterers is mentioned
in the New Teftament * (tho 1 I know fome dif-
pute the authentickne& of that whole pafjage)

but is not now to be found, either in the Hebrew
or Samaritan Pentateuch , or in the Septuagint ; it
being only laid that fuch jball be put to death 3 .
This omiifion is infilled on by the Mohammedans
as one inBance of the corruption of the law of
Mij fa by the Jews .

It is alfo obfervable that there was a verfe once
extant in the Koran , commanding adulterers 10
be Boned ; and the commentators fay the words
only are abrogated, the fenfc or law Bill remain-
ing in force 4 .

4 A certain number of das si) i. e. Forty; the
time their forefathers wermipped the calf * . Al
Beiddm adds, that fome of them pretended their
punifhment was to laft but feven days, that is a
day for every thoufand years which they fuppof-
ed the world was to endure ; and that they
imagined they were to be fo mildly dealt with,
either by reafon of the interce/fion of their fa-
thers the prophets, or becaufe Gop had promtf-
ed Jacob , that his offspring Ihould be punifhed
but {lightly.

• How will it be with them, &c.] The Mo-
hammedans have a tradition, that the firB banner
of the infidels that fhall be fet up, on the day of
judgment, will be that of the Jews ; and that
God will firft reproach them with their wicked-
nefs, over the heads of thofe who axe prefent,
and then order them to hell 6

1 lidem 3 John viii. 5. 3 Lev. xx. to. See Whistons EJfay towards reft or

ing the true text of tie Old TcB, p. 99, too. * See the Prelim* Dill. §• 3. 5 See before p*

11, Not. b. * A/Keidawi.

3** Al KORAN. Chap. 3.

fcfleft the kingdom *, thou giveft the kingdom unto whom thou wilt, and thou
takeft away the kingdom from whom thou wilt: thou exalteft whoaj thou
wilt, and thou humbleft whorfi thou wilt : in thy hand is good, for thou art
almighty. Thou makeft the night to fucceed the day : thou bringeft forth the
living out of the dead, and thou bringeft forth the dead out of the living*;
and provided: food for whom thou wilt without meafurc. Let not the faith-
ful take the infidels for their protedtors, rather than the faithful : he who doth
this, fhall not be protected of God at all ; unlefsye fear any danger from them:
but God warneth you to beware of himfelf ; for unto God muft ye return. Say,
Whether ye conceal that which is in your breads, or whether ye declare it,
■God knowethit; for he knoweth whatever is in heaven, and whatever is on
earth : God is almighty. On the lajt day every foul fhall find the good which
at hath wrought, prefent ; and the evil which it hath wrought, it fhall wilh
that between it felf and that were a wide diftance : but God warneth you to be-
wareof himfelf *, for God is gracious unto his fervants. Say, If ye love God, fol-
low me : then Goo fhall love you, and forgive you your fins i for God is gra-
cious, and merciful. Say, Obey God, and bis apoftle : but if ye go back,
•verily Go d loveth not the unbelievers. God hath furely chofen Adam, and
Noah, and the family of Abraham, and the family of Imran k above the
reft

• Thou bringeft firth the living oat of tbt dead,
and the dead out of the living As a man from
feed, and a bird from an egg ; and vice verfd J -

* Imrdnf] Or Amrdn , is the name of two
fcveral perfons* according to the Mobamnudan
tradition. One was the father of Mofts and
Aaron ; and the other was the father of the virgin
Mary 1 ; but he i s called by fome Chrifttan writ-
ers Joachim . The commentators fuppofethe firft,
or rather both of them to be meant in this phee^
Jiowever the ptrfon intended in the next psSage,
it is agreed, was the latter ; who befides Mary
the mother of Jesus, had alfo a fon named
Aaron 3 , and another daughter, named Jjbd (or
Elizabeth) who married Zacbarias, and was the
mother of John the Baptift ; whence that pro-
phet and Jesus are ufually called by the Moham-
medans, i The two fats of the atm, or the coffin
germans.

From the identity of names it has been gene-
rally imagined by Cbriftum writers * that the
Kor&n here confounds Marynbt mother of Jes*j 8,
with Mary or Miriam, the lifter of Motes and
Aaron j which intolerable anaehroniftn, if it were
certain, is fufiicient of it felf to dtftroy the

retended authority of this book. But tho’ Mo-
named may be fuppofed to have been ignorant
enough in ancient hiftory and chronology, to
have committed fo grofs a blunder ; yet I do not
fee how it can be made out from the word# of
the Koran, For it does not follow, becaufc two
perfons have the fame name, and have each a
father and brother who bear the fame names, that
they muft therefore neceflirily be the fame per-
fon : befidei fuch a miftake is incontinent w ith
a number of other places in the Korda, where-
by it manifeftiy appears, that Mtbansmtd well
knew and averted that Mofss preceded Jesus
fcveral ages. And the commentators according-
ly fail not to tell us, that there had palled about
one thoufcnd eight hundred yean between Am-
the father or Mejes, and Amrh the father
of the virgin Mary : they sdfo make them the
fens of different perfons ; the foft, they fay, was
the fon of Yeftsar , or Izbar (tho’ he was really
his brother) * the fon of Kdbatb, the fon of
Levi ; and the other was the fon of Matbin 6 ,
whofe genealogy they trace, but in a very cor-
rupt and imperfect manner, up to David, and
thence to Adam 7 .

It

* Jallalo^ddin. * ^/Zamakhshari, */Beida\vi. * Kordn, c . IQ. ♦ V Rj.

e J“ * t hi"' Phidbavi .tetter to tbt Dei/t, /.,8c.

8 ’ ^ ZaMAKU ' 7 r. Aei-asd. Ulifif. ITHemelot. Bibl. OrJi,

Chap. 3. Al KORAN. 39

reft of the world ; a race defending the one from the other : God is he who
heareth and knoweth. Remember when the wife of Imran * faid, Lord,
verily I have vowed unto thee that which is in my womb, to be dedicated to
tby fervice b : accept it therefore of me; for thou art he who heareth and
knoweth. And when fhe was delivered of it, fhe faid. Lord, verily I have
brought forth a female, (and God well knew what fhe had brought forth)
and a male is not as a female c : I have called her Mart ; and I commend
her to thy protection, and alfo her iffue, againft Satan driven away with
ftones a . Therefore the Lord accepted her with a gracious acceptance *, and
caufed her to bear an excellent offspring. And Zacharias took care of the
child ; whenever Zacharias went into the chamber to her, he found provi-
fions with her f : and he faid, O Mart, whence hadfl thou this ? fhe anfwered.
This is from God : for God provideth for whom he pleafeth without mea-

fure.

It mud be obferved, that tho’ the virgin Ma-
ry is called in the Koran 1 , the fitter of Aaron,
yet (he is no where called the fitter of Mofes ;
however fome Mohammedan writers have imagin-
ed that the fame individual Mary the fitter of
Mofes, was miraculoufly preferved alive from his
time tHl that of Jesus Christ, purpofcly to
become the mother of the latter

■ The wife of Imran, j The Imran here men-
tioned, was the father of the virgin Mary, and
his wife’s name was Hannah or Ann, the daugh-
ter of Fakadb* This woman, fay the commen-
tators, being aged, and barren, on feeing a bird
feed her young ones, became very demoous of
Blue, and begged a child of God, promiling to
confecratc it to his fervice in the temple ; where-
upon (he had a child, but it proved a daugh-
ter

h Dedicated to thy fervicef] The Arabic word
is free ; bat here fignifies particularly one that is
free or detached from all worldly defires and oc-
cupations, and wholly devoted to God’s fer-
vice 4 .

c A nate is not as a female ;] Becaufe a female
could not minitter in the temple as a male
could .

- Satan driven arjd y with ftones .] This expref-
fion alludes to a tradition, that Abraham, when
the devil tempted him to difobey God in not fa-
crificing hrS fon, drove the fiend away by throw-
ing ftones at him ; in memory of which the Mo -
hamnidans, at the pilgrimage Of Mecca , throw

a certain number of ftones at the devil, with
certain ceremonies, in the talley of Mina 6 .

It is not improbable that die pretended im-
maculate conception of the virgin Mary is inti-
mated in this paflage. For according to a tra-
dition of Mohammed , twtrj per fon that comes
into the world, is touched at his birth by the
devil, and therefore cries out, Mary and her fon
only excepted; between whom, and the evil fpirit
God placed a veil, fo that his touch did not
reach them 7 . And for this reafon they fay,
neither of them were guilty of any fin, like the
reft of the children of Adam 8 ; which peculiar
grace they obtained by virtue of this recom-
mendation of them by Hamah to God’s pro-
tection.

• Tbr Lor d accepted h r n &c.] Though the child
happened not to be a mile, yet her mother pre-
fented hc T to the priefls who had the care of the
temple s as one dedicated to God ; and they hav-
ing received her, file was committed to the care
of Zacharias , as will be obferved by and by, and
he built her an apartment in the temple, and
fuppb'ed her with neceflaries 9 .

f Whenever Zacharias went into the tb T
he found froviftons with her. See J The com-
mentators fay that none went into Mary % s apart-
ment but Zacharias himfelf, and that he locked
feven doors upon her ; yet he found /he had al-
ways winter fruits in fummer, and fummer fruits
in winter ,d .

1 Chap 13. 2 V. Guadacnol. Apidog. pro rcL Cl' rift, contra Abated Ebn Zeis ct Abediu*

p. 279. 1 .//BeIDAWI, ^/ThaLABI, 4 JaLLALO*DDIN, tf/ZAMAKHSHARI. 1 JaLLAL-

o'ddiv 6 See the Prelim. Dtf. $ 4. ? Jallalo'dDin. */Beidawi. 8 Kitada.

9 Jallal -msf. al Beidawi. V, Lud ./< Dieu, in not . ad Hi ft, Chrifti Xa?.*r \ p. 54?

Iw Al Beida. l F. di Dieu, ub . fttpr . fi . 54S*

40 Al KORAN. Chap. 3.

lure \ There Zacharias called on his Lord* and faid, Lord, give me from
thee a good offspring, for thou art the hearer of prayer. And the angels b
called to him, while he flood praying in the chamber, faying* Verily God
.promifeth thee a fin named John, who fhall bear witnefs to the Word'
which comet h from God ; an honourable perfon, chaft 4 , and one of the righ-
teous prophets. He anfwered, Lord, how lha.ll I have a fon, when old age
hath overtaken me % and my wife is barren? i The angel i, aid. So God doth
that which he pleafeth. Zsch^ri^s anfwered. Lord, give me a fign. The
angel faid. Thy fign (hall be, that thou (halt fpeak unto no man f fop three
days, otherwife than by gefture : remember thy Lord often, and praife him
evening and morning. And when the angels faid, O Mary, verily God hath
chofen thee, and hath purified thee, and hath chofen thee above all the wo-
men of the world : O Mary, be devout towards thy Lord, and worfhip,
and bow down with thofe who bow down. This is a fecret hiftory : we reveal
it unto thee, although thou waft not prefent with them when they threw in
their rods to caft lots which of them fliould have the education of Mary * ;
neither waft thou with them, when they ftrove among themfelves. When the
angels faid ; O Mary, verily God fendeth thee good tidings, that thou Jhah
hear the Word, proceeding from himfelf ; his name fhall be Christ Jesus
the fon of Mary, honourable in this world and in the world to come, and
one of thofe who approach near to the prefence of God ; and he fhall fpeak

unto

1 There is a ftory of Fatima '» Mohammed's
daughter, that fhe once brought two loaves and
a piece of flefh to her father, who returned them
to her, and having called for her again, when
Ihe uncovered the difh, it was full of bread and
meat ; and on Mohammed's asking her wJu* s :e fhe
had it ? file anfwered in the words of th piflage.
This is from Gan; for God provided^ r whom
he pleafeth without meafvre. WhereupOT he blefT-
ed God, who .thus Favoured her, as he had the
moft excellent of the daughters of Ifrael 1 * .

b The Angels ;] Tho’ the word be in the pin-
ral, yet the commentators (ay, it was the angel
Gabriel only. The fame is to be underfiood
where it occurs in the following paflages.

* The Word;] That is Jesus; who, al Beidd-
tvi fays, is fo called, becaufe he was conceived
by the word or command of God, without a
father.

41 Cbajll ] The original word fignifies one
-who refrains not only from women, but from all
.other worldly delights and defires. Al Beiddwi
gientions a tradition, that during his childhood
fome boys invited him to play, but he refufed,
(laying that he was not created to play.

• When did age hath overtaken me, &c.] Za-
charias was then ninety nine years old, and his
wife eighty nine a .

f Thou Jbalt fpeak to no man for three days ;]
Though he could not fpeak to any body elfc,
yet his tongue was at liberty to praife God ; as
he is diretted to do by the following word*,

* When they threw in their rods , &c.J When
Mary was firft brought to the temple, the priefls,
becaufe fhe was the daughter of one of their
chiefs, difpnted among themfelves, who fhould
have the education of her. Zacbarm infilled
that he ought to be preferred, becaufe he had
married her aunt; but the others not confcnting
that it fhould be fo, they agreed to decide the
matter by calling of lots : whereupon twenty
feven of them went to the river Jorda% and
threw in their rods (or arrows without heads or
feathers, liich as the Arabs ufed for the fame
purpofe) on which they had written fome paf-
fages of the law, but they all funk, except that
of Zacharias , which floated on the water ; and
he had thereupon the care of the child commit-
ted to him 3 .

* J7Beidawj. * Jim .

* Idem * Jall ALO’DDiit, (Ac .

Chap. 3. Al KORAN. 41

unto men in the cradle*, and when he is grown up h ; and he (hall be one
of the righteous: fhe anfwered. Lord, how (hall 1 have a fon, fince a man hath*
not touched me ? the angel faid, So God createth that which he pleafeth : when
he decreeth a thing, he only faith unto it, Be, and it is: Goo (hall teach him
the fcripture, and wifdom, and the law, and the gofpel ; and Jhall appoint him
his apoftle to the children of Israel ; and be Jhall fay. Verily I come unto you
with a fign from your Lord ; for I will make before you, of clay, as it were
the figure of a bird c i then I will breathe thereon, and it (hall become a
bird, by the permiffibn of God 4 : and I will heal him that hath been blind
from his birth ; and the leper : and I will raife the dead • by the permiflion
of God : and I will prophefy unto you what ye eat, and what ye lay up for
ftore in your houfes. Verily herein will be a fign unto you, if ye believe. And

■ He Jball fpeak unto men in the cradle .] Be-
fides an inftance of this given in the Koran it
felf r , which I fhall notliere anticipate, a Mo-
hammedan writer (of no very great credit indeed)
tells two ftories, one of Jesus’s fpeak ing while
in his mother’s womb, to reprove her coufin Jo-
fefb for his unjuft fufpicions of her 1 2 ; and ano-
ther of his giving an anfwer to the fame perfon
foon after he was born. For Jofepb being fent
by Zacharias to feek Mary (who had gone out of
the city by night to conceal her delivery) and
having found her, began to expoftulate with her,
but fhe made no reply ; whereupon the child
fpoke thefe words ; Rejoice , O Jofeph, and be fi
good e hear s far God bath brought me forth frm
the dartnefs of the womb, to the light of the mrldi
and I Jhall go to the children fi Ifrael, and invite
them to the obedience of God 3 .

Thefe feem all to have been taken from fome
fabulous traditions of the eaftern Chrijtians , one
of which is preferred to us in the fporious gof-
pel of Infancy of Christ; where we read
that Jesus fpoke while yet in the cradle, and
faid to his mother, Verily I am Jesus the fin ’of
God, the word which thou hajl brought forth , as
the angel Gabriel did declare unto thee ; and my
father bath fent me to favi the world

* And when be is grown ufd] The Arabic
word properly Signifies a man in full age, that
is between thirty or thirty four, and fifty one ;
and the paflage may relate to Christ’s preach-
ing here on earth. But as he had fcarce attained
this age when he was taken up into heaven, the
commentators chufe to underftand it of his fe-
cond coming * .

^ /

* l will mate the figure of a bird , &c.] Some
fay it was a bat \ fcho* others fuppofe Jesus
made feveral birds of different forts

This circumlbnce is alfo taken from the fol-
lowing fabulous tradition, which may be found
in the fpurious gofpel abovementioned. Jesus
being (even years old, and at play with feveral
children of his age, they made feveral figures of
birds and beafts, for their diverfion, of day ;
and each preferring his own workmanfhip, Je-
sus told them, that he would make his walk
and leap ; which accordingly, at his command,
they did. He made alfo feveral figures of {par-
rows and other birds, w hich flew about or flood
on his hands as he ordered them, and alo e t
and drank when he offered them meat and drink
The children telling this to their parents, were
forbidden to play any more with Jesus, whom
they held to be a forcerer 3 .

* By the fermijjson of God.] The commen-
tators obferve that thefe words are added here,
and in the next fentence, left it fhould be thought
Jesus did thefe miracles by his own power, or
was God 9 .

* 1 will raife the dead % &c.] JalUh'ddin men-
tions three perfons whom Christ reftored to
life, and who lived feveral years after, and had
children; viz. Lazarus , the widow’s Ton, and the
publican’s (I fuppofe he means the ruler of the fy-
nagogue’s) daughter. He adds that he alfo railed
Stem the fon of Noah, who, as another writes to p
thinking he had been called to judgment, came
out of his grave with his head half grey, where-
as men did not grow grey in his days • *fter
which he immediately died again.

1 C hap. 19* * 2 V. Suet i not as in Evang. Infant. f» 5. 3 ^/Kessai, apud mniem.

+ Evang. Infant, p. c . % Jallalo’ddin, Al Beidawl 6 Jallalo’ddi*. 7 At

Thalabi. - * Evang. Infant, p. hi, (Ac. 9 ^/Beidawi, (Ac ** AIThalabu

42 At KORAN. Chap. 3.

/ come to confirm the Law which was revealed before me, and to allow unto
you as lawful, part of that which hath been forbidden you * : and I come un-
to you with a fign from your Lord *, therefore fear God, and obey me.
Verily God is my Lord, and your Lord : therefore ferve him. This is the
right way. But when Jesus perceived their unbelief, he faid T Who will be
my helpers towards God ? The apoftles b anfwered, We will be the helpers
of God } we believe in God, and do thou bear witnefs that we are true be-
lievers. O Lord, we believe in that which thou haft lent down, and we
Have followed thy apoftle ; write us down therefore with thofe who bear
witnefs of him. And the Jews devifed a ftratagem againft him *; but God de-
vifed a ftratagem againft them * ; and God is the beft devifer of ftratagems.

When

■ And to allow you part of that which bath bun was fent to entrap him ; others that it was one
forbidden youA Such as the eating of fifh that Titian , who by, the dhe&ion of Judas entred in
have neither fibs nor fcales, the cawl and fat of at a window of the houfe where Jesus was, to
animals, and camels flefh, and to work on the kill him > and others that it was 'Judas himfelf,
fabbath. Thefc things, fey the commentators, who agreed with the rulers of th ejixt to betray
being arbitrary inftitutions in the law of Mofts, him for thirty pieces of filver, and led thofe who
were abrogated by Jesus ; as feveral of the fame were fent to take him.
kind inttituted by the Utter, have been fince They add, that Jefus after his crucifixion in
abrogated by Mohammed x , effigie was fent down again to the earth, to com-

*• The apoftles ;] In Arabia al Hatoariyun ; fort his mother and difciples, and acquaint them
which word they derive fiom Jlira 9 to be white , how the Jews were deceived i ana wss then
and fuppofe the apoftles were fo called either taken up a feepnd time into heaven 1 .
from the candor and fncerity of their cbinds, or It is fuppoled by feveral that this ftoiy ws:- n
becaufc they were princes and wore white gar- original invention of i but they ire

ments* or elfe becaufe they were by trade fuU certainly m iftaken : for feveral fe£hries held the
lets According to which laft opinion, their fame opinion, long before his time. T fit B . ih
vocation is thus related ; That as Jesus paffed lidians 6 , in the very beginning of Cbriftfmity 9
by the fea fide, he faw fome fullers at work, and denied that Chrtft himfelf fuflered, but that S; n
accofling them, faid. Ye cleave theft cfoatbs 9 but the Cyrene/m was crucified in his pin to. The C--
cleanfe not your hearts* upon which they believed rinthians before them, and the Carponati&m n tat
on him, But the true etymology feenas to be (to name no more of thofe, w ho afiJraned
from the Ethiofic verb Hazvyra, to go; whence to have been a mere man) did believe the lame
Haw&ya fignifies one that is feni, a mejfenger thing ; that it was not himfelf but one of his tal-
er apoftle 3 . lowers, very like him, that w as crucified, Ph

c The Jews devifed a ftratagem againft him i] tins tells us, that he read a book indtled, Tbe
1 . e. They hid a defign to take a\vay his life. jmmeys tf the ap. files* relating the afb of Peter,

4 But Got) devifed a ftratagem againft them ;] John, Andrew* fb.r&s and Fswfi and among
This ftratagem of God’s was the taking of Jesus other things contained therein, this w^s one,
up into heaven, and ftamping his Jikcnefe on ano- that C hr iff was no£ ermifted hi Another in bis
therperfofa, who was apprelicnded and crucified ftead, and that therefore he laughed bitwi.
in his Head. For it is the conftant dofitrinc of the fters 7 , or tHofe who thought they had crucified
Mohammedans that it was nqt Jesus himfelf who him *.

underwent that ignomMo^s death, but fome- I have in another place 9 mentioned an sp&*
feochr elfe in his fhape ana rcfemblance \ The aryphal gofpel of Bapsaboftt a forgery originiily
jiCrfen crucified fome will have to be a fpy that 01 fome nominal Cbriftiata 9 but

fince

1 ^/Beidawi, jALLALo’DDru. * Ihdm. 3 K Ltjdolfi Lexh- AS thief- cel. 40 W
'Colii notes ad ca p m 61. Kordni, p. 205. + See Kerin, e. 4. ' V. Marracc. in Alc f p- 113,

Tffr. & sn Prodr. part. 3 . p. 63, &c. « Irenaeus, /. 1. c. 13, Epiphav. lUref 24.

vim. 3. 7 Phot i us, BibL Cod. 114 cal. 291. 8 Tola no's Nazartnas , r. 17, &c. 9 Prelim*.
Bift. ilV./. 74.

Chap. 3. Al KORAN. 43

When God faid, O Jesus, verily I *ill caufe thee to die », and I will
take thee up unto me b , and I will deliver thee from the unbelievers ; and
I will place thofe who follow thee, ibtive the unbelievers, until the day of
refurreftion c : then unto me fhall ye return, and I will judge between you
of that concerning which ye di&grip^. Moreover, as for the infidels, I will
punilh them with a grievous punifhmeht in this world, and in that which is
to come 5 and there fhall be none to help them* But they who believe, and
do that which is right, he fhall give them their reward ; for God lerveth not
the wicked doers/ Thefe figns, and this prudent admonition do we rebearfc

G 2 unto

fince by Mohammutns \ which give* this part
of the hiftory of Jefus with circmnftances too
curious to be omitted. It is therein related,
that the moment the Jews were going to appre-
hend Jefus in the garden, he Was (hatched up
into the third heaven, by the mihiftry of* four
angels, Gabriel \ Michael, Raphael and Uriel}
that he will not die till the end of the world,
and that it was Judas who was crucified in his
Head ; God having permitted that traitor to ap-
pear fo like his mailer, in the eyes of the Jews,
that they took and delivered him to Pilate . That
this refemblance was fo great, that it deceived
the Virgin Mary and the apoftles themfelves ; but
that Jefus Cbrift afterwards obtained leave of
God to go and comfort them. That Barnabas
having then asked him, why the divine good-
nef* had differed the mother and difciplcs of fo
hd^ a prophet to believe even for one moment
that he had died in fo ignominious a manner \
Jefus returned the following anfwer. M O Bar -
« ndbas, believe me that every fin, how fmall
€t fo ever, is puuilhed by God with great tor-
ment, becaufe God is offended with fin. My
mother therefore and faithful difciples, having
** loved me with a mixture of earthly love, the
“ juft God has been pleafcd to punilh this love
* with their prefeat grief, that they might not
“ be pundhed for it hereafter in the flames of
« hell. And as for me, tho’ I have my felf
“ been blamelefs in the world, yet other men
* ( having called me God, and the fon of God ;
*« therefore God, that I might not be mocked
** by the devils at the day of judgment, has
«' been pleafcd that in this world I fhould be
** mocked by men with the death of Judas,
94 making every body believe that I died upofc
“ the crofs. And hence it is that this mocking
4 ‘ is ftill to continue till the coming of Moham -
44 med, the meflenger of God ; who, coming
44 into the world, will undeceive every one who

44 who fhall believe in the law of God, from
44 this miftake *.

1 I will taufe thee to di(, &c.] It is the opinion
of a gfeat many Mohammedans, that JeJus was
taken up into heaven without dying : which o-
pinion is confonant to what is delivered in the
fpurious gofpel abovemcntioned. Wherefore fc~
veral of the commentators 6y that there is a
byfieron pfoteron in thefe words, I wilt caufe -thee
to die, and J will tbit thee up unto me} and that the
copulative does not import order, or that he died
before his aflom prion j the meaning being this,
viz, that God would firft take Jefus up to hea-
ven, and deliver him from the infidels, and af-
terwards caufe him to die : which they fuppofe
is to happen when he fhall return into the world
again, before the kft day 1 2 . Some, thinking the
order of the words is not to be changed, inter-
pret them figuratively, and fuppofe their fignifi-
cation to be that Jefus was lifted up whue he
was afleep, or that God caufed him to die a fpt-
ritual death to all worldly defires. But others
acknowledge that hea&ually died a natural deaths
and continued in that ftate three hours, or, ac-
cording to another tradition, feven hours ; after
which he was reftored to l#e, and then taken up
to heaven

* And I will take thee up unto me ;] Some Mo-
hammedans fay this was done by the roiniftry of
Gabriel ; but others that a ftrong whirlwind took
him up from mount Olivet 4 -,

c / will place thofe who follow tbee above the utu-
believers , until the day of refur region.] That is,
they who believe in Jefus (among whom the
Mohammedans reckon them fel yes) (hall be forever
fuperior to the Jews p both in arguments and in
arms. And accordingly, fays alBeiddm , to this
very day the Jews have never prevailed either
againft the Chrtfiians or Mojlems, nor have they
any kingdpm or eftablilhcd government of their
own.

1 See the MetiagiaHa, Tom, 4 : p. 326, 2 Seethe Prelim, Difir. §. IV. f, 81 . } Jl

Biidawi. * JITiiAhMu, See 2 Kings ii. 1, 11.

44 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 3,

unto the_e. Verily the likenefi oT Jesus in the fight of God, is as the
likenefs of Adam : he created him out of the duft, and then faid unto him,
Be ; and he was \ ‘This is the truth from thy Lord > be not therefore one
of thofe who doubt: and .whoever lhall difpute with thee concerning him k ,
after the knowledge which hath been given thee, fay unto tbemf Come, let
us call together our Tons, and your fons, and our wives, and your wives,
and our felves, and your felves *, then let us make imprecations^ and lay
the curie of God on thofe who lie c . Verily this is a true hiftory ; and there
is no God, but God *, and God is moll mighty, and wife. If they turn
back, God well knoweth the evil doers. Say, O ye who have received
the feripture, come to a juft determination between us and you 4 ; that we
worlhip not any except God; and affociate no creature with him 5 and that
the one of us take not the other for' lords®, befide God. But if they turn
back, fay, Bear witnefs that we are true believers. O ye to whom
the feriptures have been given, why do ye difpute concerning Abraham f ,
fince the Law and the Gofpel were not fent down until after him ? Do ye not
therefore underftand ? Behold ye are they who difpute concerning that
which ye have fome knowledge in 5 why therefore do ye difpute concerning
that which ye have no knowledge of i ? God knoweth, but ye know not.
Abraham was neither a Jew, nor a Cbriftian ; but he was al the true reli-
gion, one refigned unto God , and was not of the number of the idolaters.
Verily the men who are the neareft of kin unto Abraham, are they who
follow him ; and this prophet, and they who believe on him : God is the

patron

* J^fus iff the fight of Gpo is as Adam,

He wa$ like to A Jam in refpett of his miraculous
produ&ion by the immediate power of God 1 .
b Him <;] Namely, Jefus.
e Let us call together our fins, &c. and imprecate
the curfi ef God on thofe who lie. ] To explain
this pajfftge the commentators tell the following
floiy. That fome Cbrijfians, with their bifhop
named Abu Haretb, cPmmg to Mohammed as am-
baffadors from the inhabitants .of Najra* ? and en^
tringiftto fome dilputes with him touching religi-
on and the hiftory of Jcfui Chrifi, thfcy agreed the
next morning to abide the trial herb mentioned,
as a quick way of deciding which of them were
5n the wrong. Mohammed met them according-
ly, accompanied by his daughter Fatima , hia fob
in law AU f xn$ hi$ two grandfons, Hajan and
Hofeiti , and detired them to wait till he had faid
his prayers. But when they faw him kned down,
their resolution failed them, and they durft not
Venture to curfe hirh, but fubmitted to pay him
tribute 2 .

4 Let us come to a juft determination between us
and you, &c.] That is, to fuch terms of agree-

ment as are indilputablyconfomnt to the doflxiw
of all the prophets and feriptures, and t herefore
cannot be reiibnably reje&ed 3 .

e And that the one of uptake not the other fir
lords , Betides other charge* of idolatry on
the Jews and Chrifi ions, Mohammed accufed them
of paying too implicit an obedience to their
priefh and monks, who took upon them to pro-
nounce what things were law fid, and what un-
lawful, and to difpenfftwith the laws of God 4 .

i Why do ye difpute tonccrning Abraham ?] viz.
By pretending him to have been of your religion.

8 To difpute ccnttfUipf* that which t\ hai>e time
knowledge in ; why therefore dp ye difputi , . ncerjb
ing that which ye have no hsszuhdge gf ?] i. e. Ye
perverfely difpute even concerning thole things
which ye find in thtlaw and the Gofpel whereby
it appears that they were both fenx down long
after Abraham's time ; why then will ye offer to
difpute concerning fuch point* of Abraham's re-
ligion, of which your fcxipftir&l fay nothing,
and of which yc confeoueathr cm iuveno know-
ledge * ?

l< jALLAJ-o’nfctji, {efr, 2 JallaiVddih, AIBmpawi. 3 lidttn .

* Al Bxjdawi.

4 Ji A-m.

Chap. 3. Al KORAN. 45

patron of the faithful. Some of thofe who have received the fcriptures de-
fire- to feduce you * > but they feduce themfelves only, and they perceive it
not. O ye who have received the fcriptures, why do ye not believe in the
figns of God, fince ye are witnefles of them ? 6 ye who have received the
fcriptures, why do ye clothe truth with vanity, and knowingly hide the truth fc ?
And fome of thofe to whom the fcriptures were given, fay. Believe in that
which hath been fent down unto thofe who believe, in the beginning of
the day ; and deny it in the end thereof ; that they may go back from their
faith c : and believe him only who followeth your religion. Say, Verily the
true direction is the dire&ion ot Goo, that there may be given unto fome Other
a revelation like unto what hath been given unto you. Will they difpute with
you before your Lord ? Say, Surely excellence is in the hand of God, he giv-
eth it unto whom he pleafeth ; God is bounteous and wife : he will confer
peculiar mercy on whom he pleafeth j for God is indued with great bene-
ficence. There is of thofe who have received the fcriptures, unto whom if
thou truft a talent, he will reftore it unto thee * ; and there is alfo of them,
unto whom if thou truft a dinar, he will not reftore it unto thee, unlefs thou
Handover him continually with great urgency *. This they do becaufe they fay.

We

■ Some of tbtfcto whom the fcriptures were given
feek to feduce you* &c.j This paflage was revealed
when the Jews endeavoured to pervert Hodbeifa ,
Ammdr , and Moddh to their religion 1 .

b Why y dot he truth with vanity, and know-
in f i bide the truth The Jews and Cbriftians
are again accufed of corrupting the fcriptures,
and foiling the prophecies concerning Mob am -
mcd.

c The commentators to explain this paflage fay,
that Caab Ebn al Ajbraf and Make Ebn al Seif
{two Jews of Medina) advifed their companions,
when the Ktbla was changed 2 , to make as if
they believed it was done by the divine dire&ion,
and to pray toward* the Caaba in the morning,
but that in the evening they fhould pray as for-
merly towards the temple of Jerusalem ; that
Mohammed* followers, imagining the Jews were
better judges of this matter than themfelves,
might imitate their example. But others fay
thefe were certain JewiJb priefls of Kbaibar ,
who direded fome of their people to pretend
in the morning that they had embraced Mob am'
mdifh r, but in the dofe of the day to fay that
they had looked into their books of feripture*
and coafulted their Rabbins, and could not find
that Mohammed was the perfon deferibed and in-,
tended in the law ; by which trick they hoped
to raife doubts in the minds of the Mobamtne ^
dans 3 .

1 Idem . 2 See before, c. z. p. 17 3

y. 33. ' Al BfiJDAVVl, jALLALo’UDJf*.

4 There is of tbofe who have releived the fcrip-
tures, unto whom if thou truft a talent be will re-
ftore 1/;] As an inftance of this, the commentators
bring Abdallah Ebn Saldm, a Jew, very in-
timate with Mohammed to whom one of the
Koreifb lent 1 200 ounces of gold, which he very
punctually repaid at the time appointed % .

• There is alfo if them unto whom if thou truft
a dinar, be will not reftore it, &c ] Al Beiddwt
produces an example of fuch a piece of injdtice
in one P tineas EbnAzdra,* Jew , who borrowed
a dinar, which is a gold coin worth about ten
fhillings, of a Koreijbifi, and afterwards had the
conference to deny it.

But the perfon more direftly ftruck at in this
paflage, was the above mentioned Caab El a A
Ajbraf, a raoft inveterate enemy of Mohammed
and his religion* of whom JaUa/o'ddin relates
the fame flory as al Beiddwt does of Phineas .
This Caab after the battle of Bedr went to Mecca,
and there, to excite the Koreifb to revenge them-
felves, made and recited verfes lamenting the
death of thofe who were flain in that battle, and
reflefting very feverely op Mohammed ; and he
afterwards returned to and had thebold-

nefs to repeat them publicfclv there alfo; at which
Mohammed was fo exceedingly provoked, that he

E rofcribed him, and fent a party of men to kill
im, and he was circumvented and flain by Mo-
hammed

“ See Pai j>e avx’s Lffi f Mahom.

Al BeipAWi,

46 Al KORAN. Chap. j.

We are not obliged to obferve juftice with the heathen : but they utter a lie a-
gainft God, knowingly. Yea ; whofo keepeth his covenant, andfeareth God,
God furely loveth thofe who fear him. But they who make merchandize of
God's covenant* and of their oaths, for a fmall price, lhall have no portion in
the next life, neither fhall God fpeak to them or regard them on the day of re-
furredion, nor lhall he cleanfe them $, but they lhall fuffer a grievous punifh-
ment. And there are certainly feme of them, who read the feriptures per.
Verflj^, that ye may think zvbat they read to be really in the feriptures, yet
it is not in tne feripture •, and they fay. This is from God ; but it is not
from God : and they fpeak that/which is falfe concerning God, again# their
own knowledge. It is not Jit for a man, that God Ihould give him a book
of Revelations , and wifdom, and prophecy ; and then he Ihouldfay unto men,
Be ye worJhippers of me, belides God % but be ought to fay t Be ye perfect
in knowledge and in works, fmee ye know the feriptures, and exercife your
felves therein*. God hath not commanded you to take the angels and the
prophets for your Lords : Will he command you to become infidels, after
ye have been true believers ? And remember when God accepted the co-
venant of the prtiphets b , faying, , This verily is the feripture and the wifdom
which I have given you : hereafter lhall an apoftle come unto you, con-
firming the truth of thatferipure which is with you ; ye lhall furely believe
on him, and ye lhall amft him. Goo faid. Are ye firmly refolyed, and do
ye accept my covenant on this condition? They anfwcrcd, We are firmly
refolved : God laid. Be ye therefore witnefies ; and I alfo bear witnds with
you : and whofoever turneth back after this, they are furely the tranlgjref-
fors* Do they therefore feek any other religion but God’s, ? fmcc to him
is refigned whofoever is in heaven or on earth, voluntarily, or of force :
and to him lhall they return. Say, We believe in God, and that which
hath been font down unto us, and that which was fent down unto Abrah^iI,

and

bammed Ebn Mejlema in the third year of the
Hejra x - Dr. Prideaux 1 2 has confounded the
tCaab we are bow (peaking of, with another very
different perfon of the fame name, and a famous
poet, but who was the fon of Zabair , and no
Jeto\ as a learned gentleman has already obferv-
ed 3 . In confequenceof which miftake, tnedoftpr
attributes what the Arabian hiftorians write of
the latter, to the former, and wrongly affirms
that he was not put to death by Mohammed.

Some of the commentators however fuppofe
that in the former part of this paflage the Cbri-
fiitws are intended, who* they (ay, ate generally
people of fame honour and juftke ; and in the
latter part the Jem x who they think are more
given to cheating and difhonelty 4 .

• It is Hot fit for a man, This paffage was
revealed, (ay the commentator!, in anfwer to the

Cbrifliansy who infilled that Jefiis had com-
manded them to worflrip him as God. Al Beidatoi
adds that two Cbrifiians , named Abu PA feel
Koradhi and al Seyid at NafAnt, offered to ac-
knowledge Mohammed for their Lord, and to
worlhiphtm; to which he anfwcrd| God /w
bid that toe fbosdd morjbtf any hefijes God.

* When God accepted the covenant of the pro-
phets* &c.J Some commentators interpret this of
the children of JJraei them (elves* of whofe race
the prophets were. But others fay the fouls of all
the prophets, even of thofe who were not then
born, were prefent on mount Sinai, when God
gave the law to Mofes , and that they entred into
the covenant here mentioned with him. A ftory
borrowed by Mohammed from the Talmudifts ,
and therefore moft probably his true meaning in
this place.

1 Ai Jawwaii, Elmacin. 2 Life ofMabom. p. 78, Ac. * F . Gacnier, inNaUai

Abui,fbi>. Fit- Mob. p . 64, ^122. a JIBzidkwsl.

Chap. 3. Al K 0 R A N*. 47:

and Ismael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and that which was de-
livered to Moses, and Jesus, and the prophets, from their Lord ; we make
no diftinttion between any of them ; ana to him are we refigned. Who-
ever followeth any other religion than Islam, it fhall not be accepted of him:
and in the next life he fhall be of thofe who perifh \ How fliall God dire£t
men who have become infidels after they had believed, and bom witnefe
that the apoftle was true, and manifeft declarations ^ the divine will had
come unto them ? for God direfteth not the ungodly people. Their reward
fhall be, that on them jhdlfali thecurfeof God, and of angels, and of all
mankind : they fhall remain under the fame for ever ; their torment fliall
not be mitigated, neither fliall they be regarded ; except thofe who repent
after this, and amend; for God is gracious and merciful. Moreover they
who become infidels after they have believed, and yet increafe in infidelity,
their repentance fhall m no wife be accepted, and they are thofe who go
aftray. Verily they who believe not, *nd die in their unbelief, the world
full of gold fhall in no wife be accepted from any of them, even though he
fhould give it for his ranfom ; they fhall fuffer a grievous pumfhment, and
they fhall have none to help them. * Ye will never attain unto righteoufnefs, IV.
until ye give in alms of that which ye love : and whatever ye give, God
knoweth it. All food was permitted unto the children of Israel, except
what Israel forbad unto himfelf,,, before the Pentateuch was fent down c .

Say unto the Jews.) Bring hither the Fentateuch and read it, if ye fpeak truth.
Whoever therefore contriveth a lye agarnft God after this, they will be evil
doers. Say, God is true : follow ye therefore the religion of Abraham
the orthodox ; for he was no idolater. Verily the firft houfe appointed unto
men to worjhvp in was that which is in Becca * ; blefled, and a direttion to

all

1 Sec before, cK. 2. p. 8, Not. A

* All fitzi was permitted unto the children of
libel, except what Ifrael forbad unto bimfelf ] This
pallage was revealed on the Jews reproaching
Mohammed and his followers with their eating
of the flelh and milk of camels *, which they
feid was forbidden Abraham, whofe religion Mo-
bummed pretended to follow. In anfwer to which
he tells them, thaj God ordained no diftin&ion
of meat* before he gave the law to Mofes, tho’
Jacob voluntarily abftained from the fieflr and
milk of camels ; which fame commentators fay

was the confcquencc of a vow made by that
patriarch* when afflicted with the feiatua, that
if he were cured he would eat no more of that

meat which he liked bell ; and that was ca-

mels fldh : but others foppofe he abftained from

it by the advice of phyficians only

This exposition feems to be taken from the
children of Ijreeh not eating of the fmew on
the hollow of the thigh, becaufe the angel, with
whom Jacob wreftled at Peniel, tonched the hol-
low of his thigh in the finew that fhraxk

c Before the Pentateuch was fix* down;] Where-
in the Ijraslim, becaufe o their wickednefe and
perverfenefs, were forbiddec to cat certain ani-
mals which had been allowed their predecefFora 1 * * 4
d The firfi boufe appointed unto men, was that
which if in Becca.] Mohammed received this paf-
fage, when the Jews faid that their Keble, or
the temple of Jerufalem, was more ancient thin
that of the Mohammedans , or the Caaba f . Becca
is another name of Mecca 6 , Al Beiidwi ob-
ferves that the Arabs ufed the Af and B pro-
mifcuoufly in feveral word*.

x See Lev . xi. 4. Dent, xiv. 7. 2 Al Beidawi, Jallalo'ddin. * Q tn xxxih

3 2 * 4 Koran, c . 4. See the notes there . 5 J^Bjsidawi, jALLALo’DniXr

6 Seethe Prelim. D^jc. 1. p. 3.

48 Al KORAN. Chap. 3.

all creatures*. Therein are manifeft figns b : the place where Abraham
ftood ; and whoever entreth therein, fhall be fafe. And it is a duty toward*
God, incumbent on thofe who are able to go thither*, to vifit this houfe ; but
whofoever difbelieveth, verily God needech not the {entice of any creature.
Say, O ye who have received the fcriptures, why do ye not believe in the figns of
God ? Say, O ye who have received the fcriptures, why do ye keep back from
the way of God, him who believeth? Ye feek to make it crooked, and
yet are witneffes that it is the right: but God will not be unmindful of what
ye do. O true believers, if ye obey fome of thofe who have received the
fcripture, they will render you infidels, after ye have believed 4 : and how
can ye be infidels, when the figns of God are read unto you, and hisapoftle
is among you? But he who cleaveth firmly unto God, is already direfted
into the right way. O believers, fear God with his true fear ; and die not
unlefs ye aJfo be true believers. And cleave all of you unto the covenant *of
God, and depart not from it , and remember the favour of God towards

you:

* A direction to dl creatures Q u e. the 'Kebla,
towards which they are to turn their faces in
prayer.

* Therein are mantftft figns ;] Such as the ftone
wherein they fhew the print of Abraham's feet,
and the inviolable fecurity of the place, imme-
diately mentioned ; that the birds light not on
the roof of the Kadba , and wild beads put off
their fiercenefs there; that none who came
againd it in a hoftile manner ever profpered 1 ,
as appeared particularly in the unfortunate
expedition of Abraha al AJhram 2 ; and other
fables of the feme damp which :he Moham-
medans are taught to believe.

* Thofe who are able to go tbitber\\ According
to an expofition of this pa/fege attributed to Mo-
bammed , he is fuppofed to be a We toperform the
pilgrimage, who can iopply himfelf with pro-
vifions for the journey, and a bead to ride upon.
AlSbdfet has decided that thofe who have money
enough, if they cannot go themfelves, mud hire
fome other to go in their room. Malee Ebn Ans
thinks he is to be reckoned able , who is ftrong
and healthy, andean bear the fatigue of the jour-
ney on foot, if he has no bead to ride, and can
aJfo earn his living by the way, But AbuHanifa is
of opinion that both money fufficient, and heakh
of body are requifite to make the pilgrimage 2
duty 3 .

* * If ye obey fame of thofe %obo have received the
fcriptures ,&c.] This paflage was revealed on oc-
cafion of a quarrel excited between the tribes of
al Aios and al Kbazraj , by one Shds Ebn Kais ,
a few ; who paffing by fome of both tribes as

1 jAtLAtO’DDlH, Al BXIDAWI.

1 Idem*

they were fitting and difeourfing familiarly toge-
ther, and being inwardly vexed at the friendfhip
and harmony which reigned among them on
their embracing Mohammedifm, whereas they had
boen, for 1 20 years before, mod inveterate and
mortal enemies, tho* descendants of two bro-
thers i in order to fet them at variance, fent
a young man to lit down by theta, dire&ing
him to relate ithe dory of the battle of Bodth is
place near hledina) wherein, after a bloody fight,
al Axes had the better of al Kbazraj arid to re-
peat fome verfes on that fubjeft. The young
man executed his orders; whereupon thofe of
each tribe began to magnify themfelveH and
to reded: on and irritate the other, till at
length they called to arms, and great numbers
getting together on each fide, a dangerous bat-
tle had enfued, if Mohammed had not dept in
and reconciled them ; by reprefenting to them
how much they would be to blame if they re-
turned to paganifm, and revived thofe animo-
sities which IJlsm had compofcd ; and telling
them, that what had happened was a trick of
the devil to difturb their prefen t tranquillity 4 .

• Cleave unto the covenant of Gsd, &c.] Literal-
ly, Hold f of by the cord / Gob. That is, Secure
your febes by adhering to Warn, which is here
metaphorically exprdfcd by a cord, b'caufe it
is as fore a means of living thofe who profeft
it from perilhmg hereafter, as holding by a rope
is to prevent one’s falling into a well, or other
like place. It is feid that Mohammed ufed for
the feme reafon to call the Koran, Habl Allah al
matin, i. e. the Juntos d of God %

2 See Koran, c. 105.

3 .-T Be id aw 1 .

4 Idem*

Chap. 3. Al KORAN. 49

you : fince ye were enemies, and he reconciled your hearts, and ye became
companions and brethren by his favour : and ye were on the brink of a pit
of fire, and he delivered you thence. Thus God declareth unto you his
figns, that ye may be directed. Let there be people among you, who in-
vite to the beft rdighn ; and command that which is juft, and forbid that
which is evil ; and they lhall be happy. And be not as they who are di
vided, anddifagree in matters of religion*, after manifeft proofs have been brought
unto them : they fhall fuffer a great torment. On the day of refitrreftion
fome faces lhall become white, and other faces fhall become black b . And
unto them whofe faces fhaH become black, G od will fay. Have ye returned
unto your unbelief, after ye had believed ? therefore tafte the punilhment, for
that ye have been unbelievers : but they whofe feces lhall become white fhall be in
the mercy of God, therein lhall they remain for ever. Thefe are the figns
of God : we recite them unto thee with truth* God will not deal unjuftly
with his creatures. And to God belyngetb whatever is in heaven and on
earth j and to God lhall all things return. Ye are the beft nation that
hath been raifed up unto mankind : ye command that which is juft, and ye
forbid that which is unjuft, and ye believe In God. And if they who have
received the fcriptqres had believed, it had furely been the better for them :
there are believers among them % but the greater part of them are tranf-
greffors. They lhall not hurt you, unlefc with a flight hurt and if they
fight againft you, they lhall turn their backs to you ; and they lhall not
be helped a . They are fmitten with vilenels whereloever they are found ; un-
lefs they obtain featriiy by entering into a treaty with God, and a treaty with
men ' : and they draw on themfelves indignation from God, and they are
afflifted with poverty. This they fttjfer , becaufe they dilbelieved the figns of
God, and flew the prophets unjuftly •, this, becaufe they were rebellious,
and tranfgreffed. Tet they are not aii alike: there are of thofe who have received
the feriptures, upright people f ; they meditate on the figns of God % in the
night feafon, and worlhip j they believe in God, and the laft day ; and com-
mand that which is juft, and forbid that which is unjuft, and zealoufly ftrive
to excel in good works : thefe are of the righteous. And ye lhall not be de-

H nied

* And bt net as tbofe mb* are divided, dyfe.] i e.
As the Jews and Cbriftians , who diipute con-
cerning the unity of God, the future llate,

err. *.

* On the day tftbe refitrreltien tbe faces gf feme
Jball become white. See.] See the Preliminary
Difcourfe, $. IV.

* There are letievers among them ;] As Abd al-
iab Ebn Salim and his companions *, and thofe
of the tribes of at Ams and at Kbazraj who
had embraced Mohaminedifm,

*And they flail not be belied . ] This verie, alBei-
dawi fays, is one of thoie whofe meaning is

myfterious, and relatts to fomething future ; in-
timating the low condition, to which the JewiJb
tribes of Kereidba, Nadir, Bonn Kainska, and
thofe who dwelt at Kbaibar, were afterwards
reduced by Mohammed.

* XJnltfi they obtain feauity by entering into a
treaty with God, and a treaty with men s} L e.
Unlefs they either profeia the Mohammedan reli-
gion, or fubmit to pay tribute.

' There are of thofe who have received tbe fertf
Hires, upright people i] Thofe namely who hav.
embraced Ifiim.

* Tbe figns of God ;] That Is the Koti*.

1 Al Beida” i.

» Idee.

50 Al KORA JV. Chap.

nied the reward of the good which ye do * ; for God knoweth the pious. As
for the unbelievers, their wealth mail not profit them at all, neither their
children, againft God : xhtyjhall be the companions of bell fire ; they (hall
continue therein for ever. The likenefs of chat which they lay out ui this
prefent life, is as a wind wherein there is a fcorchibg cold : it falleth on the
Branding corn of thole men who have injured their own fouls, and deftroyeth
it. And God dealeth not unjuftly with them \ but they injure their own
fouls. O true believers, contract not an intimate friendlhip with any befides
your felves k : they will not fail to corrupt you; They wiffi for that which
may caufe you to perifh : their hatred hath already appeared from out of their
mouths ; but what their breads conceal is yet more inveterate. We have al-
ready lhewn you figns of their ill will towards you , if ye underftand. Behold,,
ye love them, and they do not love you : ye believe in all the fcriprurcs, and
when they meet you, they fay. We believe ; btit when they afiemble private-
ly together, they bite thefr fingers ends out of wrath againft yoffi Say unto
them. Die in your wrath: verify' God knoweth the innerrtioft part of our
breafts. If good happen unto you, it grieveth them 5 and if evil befal you,
they rejoice ac it. But if ye be patient, and fear Goo, their fubtilty fhall
not hurt you at all ; for God comprehendeth whatever they do. Call to mind
when thou wenteft forth early from thy family, that thou mighteft prepart the
faithful a camp for war‘ ; and God heard and knew it ; when two com-
panies of you were anxioufiy thoughtful, fo that ye became faint-hearted 4 ;

but

■ Te /ball not Be denied, &c.J Some copies have
a different reading in this paflage, which they
e*prefs in the third perfon ; ffrey pall not be
denied , &c.

* Befides your felves i\ i. e. Of a different reli-
gion.

'When thou wenttfi forth to prepare a tamf,U c.}
This was at the battle of Obod> 3 mountain a-
bout four miles to the north of Medina . The
Koreifi , to revenge their lofs at Bedr 1 , the next
year, being the third of the Hejra , got together
an army of 3000 men, among whom there were
zoo hcnrfe, and. 700 armed with coats of jrtiaiL
Thefc forces marched under the condaft of Abu
Sofidn and fat down at Bbulboleifa, 4 village a-
bout fix miles from Medina. Mohammed being
much inferior to his enemies in numbers, at firft
determined to keep himfelf within the town, and
receive them their ; bur afterwards, the advice
offome of hi* companions prevailing, he mardv*
ed out againft them at the bead of jooo men
(feme fay hc'had *050 men and others but, 900)
of whom too were arnietf with coats of mail,
but he had no more than one hoffe* befides his
*wn, in his whole army. With thefe forces he
formed a camp in a village near Obod, which

mountain he contrived to have on his back; and
the better to fecure his men from being furronact*
ed, he placed fifty grehers in the rear* with
ftria orders not to quit their poft. When
they came to engage, Mbbdmmed had the better
it nrft, but afterwards by the fault of his archers,
who left their ranks for the fake of the plunder*
and fuffered the enemies horfe to encom pi ft the
Mohammedans and attack them in the rear, he
loft the day, and was very near lofing Ml life;
being ftruck down by a fhower of ftonet* and
wounded in the face with two arrows on pul-
ing out df, which his two foreteeth dropped out.
Of the Mfitru 70 men were flain, ami among
Hamza the uncle of Mthtmed ± and of the
infidels 22 To excufe the ill foccefs of this
battle, and to raifir the drooping courage of his
followers, is M-hamated's drift in the remaining
part of this chapter.

d Wbt t two companies tf yon were anxioufiy
tbaHghi fitl, &c.} Thcfe were fomc of the families
of Basou Salma of the tribe of al Kbazraf and
Banu IHaretb of the tribe of al Abs, who com-
pofed the two wing, of Mubtimwrfd ■ army. Some
ill iropreffion hati‘ been made on them by Ab-
dallah

1 See before , p . 36.
tiff of Mab. p . 80.

* Abvlfeda, in vita Mobam. p. 64, Eimacih /. 1. Pridesux*

Chap. 3 . At K 0 R A N. 51

but God was the fupporter of them both ; and in God let the faithful truft.
And God had already given you the viftory at Bedr*, when ye were in-
ferior in number ; therefore fear God, that ye may be thankful. When thou
faidft unto the faithful. Is it not enough for you, that your Lord fhould
affiftyou with three thoufaod angels, fent down front heaven? Verily if ye
perfevere, and fear God , and your enemies come upon you fuddenly, your
Lord will affift you with five thoufand angels, dillinguilhed by their borfes
and attire \ And this God defigped only as good tidings for you * that your
hearts might reft fecure : for vjdory is from God alone, the mighty, the

wife. That he fhould cut off the uttermoft part of the unbelievers, or call
them down, or that they fhould be overthrown and unfuccefsful, is nothing to
thee . It is no bufinefs of' thine ; whether God be turned unto them, or whe-
ther he punifh them; they are furely unjuft doers *. To God belonseth whatfo-
ever is in heaven and on earth : he fpareth whom he pleafetb, ana he punifh-
eth whom he pleafeth ; for God is merciful. O true believers, devour not
ufury, doubling it twofold; but fear God, that ye may profper : and fear
the fire which is prepared for the unbelievers ; and obey God, and bis
apoftle, that ye may obtain mercy. And run with emulation to obtain re-
mi flion from your Lord, and paradife, whofe breadth equalletb the heavens
and the earth, which is prepared for the godly ; who give alms in profpe-
rity and adverfity ; who bridle their anger, and forgive men : for God
loveth the beneficent*. And who, after they have committed a crime, or
dealt unjuftly with their own fouls, remember God, and ask pardon for their
fins, (for who forgivech fins except God ? ) and perfevere not in what they have
done knowingly : their reward fhall be pardon from their Lord, and gar-
dens wherein rivers flow, they fhall remain therein for ever : and how excel-
lent is the reward of thofe who labour ! There have already been before you
examples of punifhmenc of infidels , therefore go through the earth, and be-
ll 2 hold

da 11 ah Ebn Abi Solbl, then an infidel, who hav- mentioned at the battle of Obod, and cried out,
ing drawn off 300 men, told them that they How fhall that people profptr who hew eft dined their
were going to certain death,and advifed them to prophet's face with bloody tobile be called them to
return back with him ; but he could prevail on their Lord ? The perfon who wounded him
but a few, the others being kept firm by the di- was Otba the fon of Abu Wakkas a .
vine influence, as the following words intimate*. • It is related of Hafan the fon of Alt* that a
• See before, p. 36. Have having once thrown a difh on him

fc Difiinguijbed, iec.J The angels who aflifted boiling hot, as he fit at table, and fearing hi*
the Mohammedans at Bedr , rode, fay the com- matter's refentment, fell immediately on his
mentators, on Mack and white horfes, and had knees, and repeated thefe words, Paradife is for
on their heads white and yellow fifties, the thofe who bridle their anger : Hafan anfwered, J
ends of which hung down between their fhoul- am not angry* The flave proceeded, and fir
■ders. thofe who firgbe men : I forgive you, find Hafan:

* As rood tidings for youi] i.e. As an earned; of The flave however finifhed the yerfe, adding,
future mccefs. for God loveth the beneficent - Since it is ft,

4 It is no bufinefs of thine whether God be replied Hafan , 1 give you your liberty, and four
turned unto them, &c.] This paflage was reveal- hundred pieces of fiber *. A noble mftancc of
cd when Mohammed received the wounds above- moderation and generality.

1 Al Beidawi. * Idem* Abui.f*d. ubi fitfra , 3 V . IFHbrbelot; Bill*

Orient* Art* Hajfan.

52 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 3.

hold what hath been the end of thofe who accufe Gob’s apoftles of Utrpolhire.This
book is a declaration unto men, and a direftion, and an admonition to the pious.
And be not difmayed, neither be ye grieved ; for yelhall be Superior to the unbe-
lievers \i ye believe. If a wound hath happened unto you in war', a lifo,
wound hath already happened unto the unbelieving people b : and we eaufe
thefe days of different fuecefs interchangeably to fucceed each other among
men ; that God may know thofe who believe, and may have martyrs from
among you : (God loveth not the workers of iniauity j) and that God might
prove thofe who believe, and deftroy the infidels. Did ye imagine that ye
fhould enter paradife, when as yet God knew not thofe among you who fought
ftrenuoufly in bis eaufe 5 nor knew thole who perfeveredwith patience ? More-
over ye did fometime wilh for death before that ye met it ' *, but ye hive now
feen it, and ye looked on, but retreated from it. Mohammed is no more than an
apoftle ; the other apoftles have already deceafed before him : if he die therefore
or be flain, will ye turn back on your heels d ? but he who turneth back on
his heels, will not hurt God at all ; and God will furely reward the thank-
ful. No foul can die unlefs by the permifilon of God, according to what is
written in the book containing the determinations of things*. And whofo
choofeth the reward of this world, we will give him thereof : but whofo
choofeth the reward of the world to come, we will give him thereof ; and we
will furely reward the thankful. How many prophets have incountemd thofe
who had many myriads of troops : and yet they defponded not in their mind for
what had befallen them in fighting for the religion of God ; and were not
weakened, neither behaved themfelves in an abjeft manner ? God loveth thofe
who perfeverc patiently. And their fpeech was no other than that they laid,
Our Lord forgive us our offences, and our tranfgreflions in our bufinefs •, and

con-

* If a wtjknd bath happened to you in man] That been a prophet be bed not teen fa. n. It is related
is, by yoyr being worfted at Obod. that a Moflem named Ant Etn at Nadar, unde 10

' A like wound both happened to the infidels j] Am EbnMalte, hearing thefe words, feid aloud
When they were defeated at Redr. It is obferv- to his companfons, My friends, the' Mohammed
able that the number of Mohammedans flain at be flain, Certainty Mohammed's Lord Imib ani
Obod, was equal to that of the idolaters flain at dietb ml j therefore -vsfoe rot your lives dace tie
Bedr ; which was fo ordered by God for a rea- prophet is dead, 'but flgbt for the eaufe hr wbicb
fon to be given eifewhere 1 . be fought : then he cried "out, O God lam ex-

‘Ye wijbedfor death flee.] Several of Mohammed's cufed before the, a nd atfsituJ in thy flgbt of mbit
followers who were not prefent at Bedr, wilh- they fay, and drawing his fword fought Valiantly
ed for an opportunity of obtaining, in another till he was killed 3 .

action, the like honour as thofe had gained who * No foal can die, unit fs by the pemiff.r. of God,
fell martyrs in that battle 8 yet were difeouraged {*■.] lit. bammed, the more effeftually toftili the
on feeing the fopesioi; numbers of the idolaters murmurs of his party on their defeat, reprefents
in the expedition of Obod. On which occafion to them that the time of every man; death is
this piff-ige was revealed *. decreed and predetermined hy Gon.and that thofe

" Mohammed is no more than, an apoflle M kc.] who fell in the battle could not have avoided
Thefe words were revealed whenit was reported their fate, had they flaid at home ; whereas they
in the battle of Obod, that Mohammed was flain; had now obtained the glorious advantage of dv-
w hereupon the idolaters cried out to his followers, ing martyrs for the faith. Of the Mcbammdvt
Since your prophet, is flain, return to your ancient doftrineof abfolute predeftinadon I have fpoken
religion^ end to your friends ; if Mohammed bad in another place A .

1 In not. ad tap. 8.

a Al BeidaWi.

3 Idem.

* Prelim. Difc. J. IV.

Chap. 3. Al KORAN \ 53

confirm our feet, and help us againfl the unbelieving people. And God gave
them the reward of this world, and a glorious reward in the life to come ; for
God loveth the well-doers. O ye who believe, if ye Obey the infidels, they
will caufe you to turn back on your heels, and ye will be turned back and
perilh*: but God is your Lord j and he is the beft helper. We will furely

call: a dread into the hearts of the unbelievers b , becaufe they have affociated
with God that concerning which he fent them down no power : their dwelling
Hull be the fire of bell and the receptacle of the wicked fhall be m'iferablc.
God had already made good unto you his promife, when ye deftroyed them
by his permifliqn % until ye became faint-hearted, and difputed concerning
the command of the Apofile, and were rebellious 4 ; after God had fhewn you what
ye defired. Some of you chofe this prefent world, and others of you chofe the
world to come *. Then he turned you to flight from before them, that he
might make trial of you : (but he hath now pardoned you ; for God is indued
with beneficence towards the faithful ;) when ye went up as ye fled, and
looked not back on any ; while the apoftle called you, in the uttermoft part of
you f . Therefore God rewarded you with affli&ion on affli&ion, that ye be
not grieved hereafter for the [foils which ye fail of, nor for that which befal-
leth you g ; for God is well acquainted with whatever ye do. Then he fent
down upon you after affliction fecurity j a foft deep which fell on fome part

of

* If ye obey the infidels, they will caufe you to the plunder ; whereupon Kbaled Ebn al WaltJ,

turn hack, &c.] This paflage was alfo occakofaed perceiving theif diforder, fell on their rear with
by the endeavours of the Kertifb to feduce the the horfe which he commanded, and turned the
Mohammedans to their old idolatry, as they fled fortune of the day. It is related that tho 1 Ab-
inthe battle of Obod. da'llab Ebnjobair , their captain, did all he could

* We will furely caft a dread into the hearts of to make them keep their ranks, he had not ten
the unbelievers , &c.] To this Mohammed attributed that ftaid with him out of the whole fifty a .
the fudden retreat of Abu Sofidn and his troops, e Some of you chofe this prefent world , and others
without making any farther advantage of their if you chofe the world to com.] The former were
fuccefs j only giving Mohammed a challenge to they who, tempted by the fpoil, quitted their
meet them next year at Bedr, which he accepted, poll ; and the latter they who flood firm by their
Others & y, that as they were on their march leader,

home, they repented they had not utterly extir- f And the apoftle called you, &c.] Crying aloud,
pated the Mohammedans, and began to think of Come hither to me, O fervent s of God ; I am the
going back to Medina for that purpofe; but were apoftle of God : he who returnetb back fhall enter
prevented by a fudden eonfternacion or panic paradtfe< But notwithflanding all his endeavour*
fear, which fell on them from God z . to rally his men, he could not get above thirty of

e God b.-.i flready made good unto you his pro - them about him.
mife. Arc.] i. e, III the beginning of the battle, * Therefore God rewarded you with affliction,
when the Mojlems had the advantage, putting Acc.*] i,e. God punilhed your avarice and
the idolaters to flight, and killing feveral of them, difobediencc by fullering you to be beaten by

4 Till ye became faint-hearted and difputed the yqur enemies, and to be difequraged by the re-
command of the epoftfe, &c.] That is, fill the port of your prophet’s death ; that ye might be
bow- men, who wfesp? placed behind to prevent inured to patience under adverfe fortune, and
their being furrouwJed, feeing the enemy fly, not repine at any Iofs or difappointment for the
quitted their poll, contrary to Mohammed's ex- future,
prefs orders, and difperfed themfelves to feize

1 v//Beidawi.

3 Idem . V % Abulfed. vit* Mob * p, 65, 66. & not*

5^. Al KORAN. Chap. j t

of you \ but other part were troubled by their own fouls * ; falfely thinking
of God a foolilh Imagination, faying. Will any tiling of the matter happen
unto us b ? Say, Verily the matter lelongeth wholly unto God. They conceal-
ed in their minds what they declared not unto thee ; faying *, If any thing of
the matter had happened unto us a , we had not been (lain here. Anfwer, If
ye had been in your houfes, verily they would have gone forth to fight,
w’oofe daughter was decreed, to the places where they died, and this came tt
pafi that God might try what was in your breafts, and might difcern what
was in your hearts i for God knoweth the innermoft parts of the breafts of
men. Verily they among you who turned their backs on the day whereon
the two armies met each other at Ouod, Satan caufed them to flip, f or
fome crime which they had committed* : but now hath God forgiven them;
for God is gracious and merciful. O true believers, be not as they who be-
lieved not, and faid of their brethren, when they had journeyed in the land
or had been at war, If they had been with us, thofe had not died, nor had
thefe been flain whereas what befel them was fit ordained that God might make
it matter of fighing in their hearts. God giveth life, and caufcth to die:
and God feeth that which ye do. Moreover if ye be flain, or die in defence of
the religion of God ; verily pardon from God, and mercy is better than what
they heap together of worldly riches. And if ye die, or be flain, verily unto
God fhaJl ye be gathered. And as to the mercy grunted unto the difobedient
from God, thou O Mohammed haft been mild towards them ; but if thou
hadft been fevere, and hard-hearted, they had furely feparated themfrlves
from about thee. Therefore forgive them, and a(k pardon for them : and
confult them in the affair of war ; and after thou haft deliberated, truft in
God ; for God loveth thole who truft in him. If God help you, none (hall
conquer you ; but if he defqt you, who is it that will help you aftee him ?
Therefore in God Jet the faithral truft. It is not the part of a prophet to
defraud f , for he who defraudeth, fhail bring with him what he hath de-
frauded

• Then be font imn upon you — a f of t fleet. See.]
After the a&ion, thofe who had flood firm in
the battle were n r itv-d>as th*y lay in the field,
by falling an agreeable deep, fo that the
{words fell out of their hands 4 but thofe who
Jiad behaved themfefves ill L/ere troubled in their
mind$, imagining they were now given over to
deftru&ion T .

b Will ;t; 'binv f th . **:ter happen unto usJJ
That is, Is mers appearance of fttccefs, or
of the divine favour and alliance which we
taivc been profnlfed 2 ?

S tying, &c] he. To thsmfelves, or to one
another in private.

4 If an: thing of the matter bad happened unto
us, &c.] 1 God had affifted us according to his
promife ; or, as others interpret the words, if
we had taken the advice of MJalfab Ebn Abi
Soldi, and h d kept within the town of Medina;

J' IlxiDAWi, Ja-llalo'ddi n. 2 Him.
* A * Deidawi.

cur companions h id not loft their lives 3 .

c Tor fome crim which they bad committed;] viz .
For their cOvetoufnefs in quitting their pofl to
feize the plunder.

f It is ru the part f a prtpbet to dfrxjJJcci]
This paffitge W2S rcvultd, as fome £&y, on the
divifion of the fpoil at Be Jr ; when fome of the
foldiers fafpe&ed tttbammcj of having privately
taken a fcarlet err pet made all of filk and my
rich, which was mining 4 . Others fuppofe the
rcher?, who occafioned the lofs of the battle of
Obo left thdr Lb ['on becaufe they imagined
Mohammed would not give them their fhare of
the plunder ; becaufe, as k is related, he once
feat out - pJrty as an advanced guard, and in
the mean time attacking the enemy, took fome
fpoils which he divided among thofe who were
w ith him in the action, and gave nothing to the
party that was abfent on duty 5 .

3 lidem. 4 ^£1Bbidawi # Jallalo* ddui*

Chap. 3. At KORAN.

55

frauded any one of, on the day of the refurrcdkion \ Then fhall every foul
be paid what he hath gained ; and they fhall not be treated uryuftly.
Shall he therefore who followeth that which is wefi-pleafing unto God,
be as he who briftgcth on himfelf wrath from God, and whofe recepta-
cle is hell ? an evil journey (hall it be tbitber. There fhall be degrees
of rewards and -punijhments with God, for God feeth what they do. Now
hath God been gracious unto the believers when he raifed up among them
an apoftle of their own nation \ who fhould recite his figns unto them, and
purify them, and teach them the book of the Kokan and wifdom c ; where-
as they were before in manifeft error. After a misfortune hath befallen you
at Ohod , (ye had already obtained two equal advantages d ) do ye fay. Whence
cometb this? Anfwer, This is from yourfelves 4 : for God is almighty. And
what happened unto you, on the day whereon the two armies met, was
certainly by the petfmiflion of Gcd ; and that he might know the faithful,
and that he might know the ungodly. It was faid unto them, Come, fight
for the religion of God, or drive back the enemy : they anfwered, If we had'
known ye went out to fight, we had certainly followed you f . They were on
that day nearer unto unbelief, than they were to faith ; they fpake with their
mouths, what was not in their hearts : but God perfe&ly knew what they
concealed ; who faid of their brethren, while tbemfelves (laid at home , if they
had obeyed us, they had not been flain. Say, Then keep back death from
yourfelves, if ye fay truth. Thou (halt in no wife reckon thofe who have
been flain at Ohod in the caufe of God, dead ; nay, they are fuftained alive
with their Lord 1 , rejoicing for what God of his favour hath granted them 3
and being glad for thofe, who coming after them, have not as yet overtaken
them ? i becaufe there fhall no fear come on them, neither fhall they be grieved.
They are filled with joy for the favour which they have received from God,
and bis bounty * and for that God fuffereth not tne reward of the faithful to
perifh. They who hearkened unto God and bis apoftle, after a wound had

be-

* He who defraud* th ftmU bring with him what
he hath defrauded any one of, on the day of re fur*
frtfffr*.] According to a tradition of Mohammed,
whoever cheateth another wilt on the day of
judgment carry his fraudulent purchafe publicity
on his neck.

* Of their own nation '] Some copies inftead of
min anfifibifUf h e* of themfedves , read min anfafir
him, i. c. of the nob/ef among them ; for fuch was
the tribe of Kortifh, of which Mohammed was
defeended *.

* And wifehetn ] i. c. The Soma

4 Ye had already obtained two squad advantages {]
f tx. In the battle of Bedr , where ye flew fevea-
ty of the enemy, equalling the number of thofe
who loft their lives at Ohod, and alfo took as.
many prifoners 3 .

4 This is from your fives ;] It was the confe-

quence of your dlfobeying the orders of the pro-
phet, and abandoning your poft for the fake of
plunder.

( If ' we had known ye went out tofgbt,

That k, if we had conceived the feajft hPP£ a of
fuecefs when ye marched out of Medina to en-
counter the infidels, and had not known that ye
went rather to certain deftru&ion, than to bat-
tle, we had gone with you. But this Mohammed
here tells them was only a feigned excafe ; the
true reafon of their flaying behind being their
want of faith and ftrmnefe in their Religion *.

* See before, p. 18.

b Being glad for thofe, who coming *f ter them,
have not as yet overtaken' them 5] i. e. Rejoicing
aifo for fbeir fakes, who are deftined to fuffer
.martyrdom, but have not as yet attained it 1

1 Idem.
*Vi. 1 1,

3 See before, p> 36*

2 Idem \

4 Al Bbidawi.

* T. Revet:

56 Al KORAN* Chap. 3

befallen them at Obod* t ftich of them as do good works, and fear Goo, (hall
have a great reward ; unto whom certain men faid, Verily the men of M&c-
ca have already gathered/orr« againft you, be ye therefore afraid of them b : but
this increafed their faith, and they faid, God is our fupport, and the mod
excellent patron. Wherefore they returned with favour from Goo, and ad-
vantage' ; no evil befel them : and they followed what was well pleafing unto
God ; for God is endowed with great liberality. Verily that devil 4 would
caufe you to fear his friends : but be ye not afraid of them ; but fear me,
if ye be true believers. They (hall not grieve thee, who emuloufly haften
unto infidelity ; for they fhall never hurt God at all. God will not giy e
them a part in the next life, and they fhall fuffer a great punifh merit. Sure-
ly thofe who purchafe infidelity with faith, fhall by no means hurt God at
all, but they fhall fuffer a grievous punifhment. And let not the unbelievers
think, becaufe we grant them lives long and profperous, that tt is better for
their fouls : we grant them long and profperous lives only that their iniqui-
ty may be increafed •, and they fhall fuffer an ignominious punifhment. God
is not difpofed to leave the faithful in the condition which ye are now in e , un-
til

1 They who hearkened to God and his apoftU x kc,]
The commentator* differ a little as to the occa-
lion of this paflage, When news was brought
to Mohammed , after th t battle of Oh , that the
enemy, repenting of their retreat, were return-
ing towards Medina* he called about him thofe
who had flood by him in the battle, and marched
out to meet the en^my as far as Homara al Afad
about eight miles from that town, tiotwithftand-
ing feVeril of his men were fo ill of their wounds
that they were forced to be carried ; but a panic
dear having feized the army of the Kaneiftf, they
changed their refolutlon and continued their
inarch home ; of which Mohammed having re-
ceived intelligence, he alfo went back to Medina:
and according to fome commentators the Koran
here approves the faith and courage of thofe
who attended the prophet on this occahon.
Other* fay the perfttaS intended in this palTage
were thofe who went with Mohammed the next
year, to meet Abu Sofia* and thcKofeifih, accord-
ing to their challenge, at Bedr 1 , where they wait-
ed foraetime for the enemy, and then returned
home ; for the Koreijb tho’ they fet out from
Meeea f yet never came fo far a$ the placie of ap-
pointment, their hearts failing them on their
inarch ; which Mohammed attributed to their be-
ing itruck with a terror from God This ex-
pedition the Arabian hiflories call the feeond, or
itjfer expedition of Bedr.

* Unto whom certain men faid. Verily thofe of
Mecca have already gathered fmes againft you.

&c] The perfon ? whn thus endeavoured to dif-
courage tht Mohammedans, were, according to one
tradition, fome of the tribe of Jhd Km .\ , who
going to Medina were bribed by Abu SvfiJ* with
a earners load of dried raifins; and according to
another tradition, it was No ah* Ebn
AJbjai, who was aHb bribed with a fhe c ■ mel tea
months gone with young, (a valuable preient in
Arabia). This Jfoaim, they fay, finding A/tan-
med and his men preparing for the expedition,
told them that Abu Sofidn, to fpart them the pain*
of forafog fp far as Bedr , would feek them in
their own houfes, and that none of them could
poflibly efcape otherwife than by timely flight.
Upon which Mohammed* feeing his followers a
little dilpiritod, fwore that he would go hknfelf
tho’ not out of them went with him. And ac-
cordingly he fet out with feveuty horfe-mcn,
every one of them crying out Hasbna Allah, i. e.
God ax our fupport 3 .

* Wherefore they returned with advantage i]
While they ftaid at Bedr expe&fog the enemy,
they opened a kind of fair there, and traded to
very confiderable profit 4 „

4 That devil ;] Meaning either Koaim, or Abu
Sofia n himfelf.

e God will not leave the faithful in tb? : j edi-
tion ye are new -'v, Sec ] That is, he will not dif-
fer the good and J&ncere among you to continue
indifcriminatdy mixed with the wicked and hy-
pocriticaL

Sei before, p, 53, not. hi a .<// Biidawi* J Idem, Jallalo’ddcg + Al BEiDAin*

Chap. 3 * Al KORAN. 57

til he fever the wicked from the good ; nor is God difpofed to make you ac-
quainted with what is a hidden fecret, but God chufeth fuch of his apoftles as
he pleafeth, to reveal bis mind unto V believe therefore in God, and his apoftles v
and if ye believe, and fear God , ye (hall receive a great reward. And let
not thofe who are covetous of what God of his bounty hath granted them,
imagine that their avarice is better for them : nay, rather it is worfe for them
That which they have covetoufly referred fhall be bound as a collar about their
neck b , on the day of the refurreftion : unto God belongetb the inheritance
of heaven and earth; and God is well acquainted with what ye do. God
hath already heard the faying of thofe who laid. Verily God is poor, and we
are rich* : we will furely write down what they have faid, and the (laughter which
they have made of the prophets without a caufe ; and we will fay unto them ,
Tafte ye the pain of burning. This Jhall they fuffer for the evil which their
hands have fent before them, and becaule God is not unjuft towards
mankind ; who al/o fay. Surely God hath commanded us, that we Ihould not
give credit to any apoftle, until one Ihould come unto us with a lacrifice, which
ihould be confirmed by fire 4 . Say, Apoftles have already come unto you be-

I fore

% Nor if God difpofed to acquaint you with wbat
is a bidden feet it , but God cbufetb juch if bis a-
feftles as be pie afctb.] This paffage was revealed
on the rebellious and difobedient Mohammedans
telling Mohammed, that if be was a true pro-
phet, he could eaftly diftinguifh thole Tvho~fm-
cerely believed from the diffemblers 1 .

* That which they have covetoufly referved ball
be bound as a collar about their neck , &c.] Moham-
med is faid to have declared, that whoever pays
not his legal contribution of alms duly, fhall
have a ierpent twilled about his neck at the re-
furreftion *.

c Go d bath beard the faying of thofe who faid,
God is poor, and we are rich.'} It is related that
Mohammed, writing to the Jews of the tribe of
Kainokd to invite them to I flam, and exhorting
them, among other things, in the words of the
Koran J , to lend unto Goda* good gfury , PbineasEbn
Azura , on hearing that expreffion, faid. Surely
God is poor, jince they ask to borrow for him-
Whereupon Abu Beery who was the bearer of
ritat letter, flruck him on the face, and told him,
that if it had not been for the truce between them
he would have flruck off his head : and on Phi -
neas's complaining to Mohammed of Abu Beer's
ill ufage, this paffage was revealed 4 .

d The Jews, fay the commentators, infilled
that it was a peculiar proof of the million of all
the prophets fent to them, that they could* by

their prayers, bring down fire from heaven to
confume the facrifice, and therefore they expell-
ed Mohammed fhould do the like. And fome
Mohammedan doctors agree that God appointed
this miracle as the tell of all their prophets, except
only Jesus and Mohammed * 5 tho’ others fay any
other miracle was a proof full as fuff dent as the
bringing down fire from heaven 6 .

The Arabian Jews feem to have drawn a ge-
neral cqnfe^uencc from fome particular inftances
of this miracle in the old Teftament 7 . And the
Jews at this day fay, th%t firfl the fire which fell
from heaven on the altar of the tabernacle, 8 after*
the confecration of Aaron and his fons, and after-
wards that which defeended on the altar of Solo-
mons temple, at the dedication of that ftru&ure 9 ,
was fed and conflantly maintained there by the
priefls, both day and night, without being fuf-
rcred once to go out; till it was extinguilhed, as
fome think, in the reign of ManaJJks lQ , but ac-
cording to the more received opinion, when the
temple was dc&royed by the Chaldeans . Several
Cbriftians 1 1 have given credit to this afftrtion
of the Jews, with what reafon I fhall not here
enquire 5 and the Jews in confequencc of thia
notion, might probably expeft, that a prophet
who came to retlore God’s true religion, ihould
rekindle for them this heavenly fire, which they
have not been favoured with fince the Babylon-
tfb captivity.

1 Idem . 2 Idem , jALLALoVoitf. 3 Cbap*2.p*2g. 4 Al Bbidawi. * Jal-

lalo’ddin. 6 Al Beidawi. 7 Lev, ix. 24. 1 Cbron. xxi. 26. 2 Cbron. vil 1.

I Kings xviii. 38. 8 Levit. ix. 24. 9 2 Cbron, vii. 1, 10 Talmud, Zebaebim, c. 6.

II See Pridzktjx'j Connell, part l* book 3. p. 158.

ij8 Al KORA JV. Chap. 3.

fore me*, with plain proofs, and with the miracle which ye mention : why
therefore have ye (lain them, if yefpeak truth? If they accufis thee pi
pofture, the apoftles before thee have alfo been accounted importers, who
brought evident demonftrations, and the fcriptures, and the book which in.
Iighteneth the under ft anding. Every foul (hall tafte of death, and ye (hall have
your rewards on the day oT refurredtfon ; and he who (hall be far removed
from bell fire, and (hall be admitted into paradife, (hall be happy : by t ^
prefent life is only a deceitful provifion. Ye UtaJl furely be proved i n your
poflefiions, and in your perfons ; and ye (hall hear from thofe unto whom the
fcripture was delivered before you, and from the idolaters, much hurt : but if
ye be patient, and fear God, this is a matter that is abfblutely determined. And
when Gon accepted the covenant of thofe to whom die book of the law was
given, faying, le (hall furely publifh it unto mankind, ye (haji not hide ip
yet they threw it behind their backs, and fold it for a fmall price ; but wofui
is the price for which they have fold it b . Think not that they who rejoice at
what they have done, and expedt to be prailed for what they have not done * •
think not, O prophet, that they (hall efcape from punilhment, for they (hall fuf!
fer a painful punifhment *, and unto God belongetb the kingdom of heaven
and earth: God is almighty. Now in the creation of heaven and earth, and
the viciflitude of night and day, are figns unto thofe who are indued with un-
demanding; who remember Gqd (landing, and fitting, and lying on their fides ;
and meditate on the creation erf - heaven and earth, frying, 6 Cord, thou haft
not created this in vain for be it from thee : therefore deliver us from the tor-
ment of bell fire : O Lord, furely whom thou (halt throw into the fire, thou
wilt alfo cover with lhame: nor (hall the ungodly have any to help them.
O Lord, we have heard a preacher • inviting' us to the fifth, mdfayin Believe
in your Lord : and we believed. O Lord, forgive us therefore our fins, and
expiate our evil deeds from us, and make us to die with the righteous. 0
Lord, give us alfo the reward which thou haft promised by thy apoftles ;
and cover us not with lhame on the day of refurre&ion •, tor thou art not
contrary, to the promife. Their Lord therefore aniwereth them, faying, I
will not fuffer the work of him among you who worketh to be loft, whi-
ther

* Apoftles have dread? come unto you beforemri]
Among chefethe commentators reckon Zacharies
and John the Baptift.

b Wofui is ( he price far which they have fold in']
i e. Dearly fhall they pay hereafter for taking
bribes to ftifle the truth. Whoever concealetb the
knowledge which God has given him, fays Moham-
med, Go d JhsiH put on bm a bridle of fire on the
day of refurrefiion*

* 'Who rejoice at what they have iena, and ex-

pert to be prettied fen what they have tot dene *}i. tn
Who think they have done a commen^bld {feed
in concealing and diflemblmg the tefiiroonies in
the Pentateuch concerning 1 Mobamptf* and in
difob^yjng God’s commands to the contrary. It
is laid ib&lhSebammedx once asking con-

•erning a paffage in their law, they gave him an

aafwer very different from the truth, and were
mightily pleafed that they had* as they thought,,
deceivedhim. Others however thin £; this paf-
fage relates to fome pretended M-ihdWirns.km who
rejoiced in their hypoenfv, and expected to be
commended for their wicked nefs 1 .

4 Who remember GoDjfcrat i&ng, and fitting, tad

tying on tbfir fides;] vi". At times and in all
poftures. At Btidai vi mentions a faying of Me
bwmned to one Ttnr. ht Ebn li fe in % to this purpofe;
pkatfMding, if those err able ; if w?,jhtin£i
anjjftbou canft nst ft ttp f then as thv H ft .f/aijg,
AiShafet diretfts that the fick fhouldpray lyineoa
their right fide.

4 Wc have heard a preacher , &c.l Namely My
hammed, with the Ksiran.

1 Al Be id aw

Chap. 3.

Al K 0 RAN.

59

ther he be male, or female * : the one of you is from the other. They there-
fore who have left their country, and Jbava been turned out of their houfes,
and have differed for my fake, and have. b&A flail in battle ; verily l -will
expiate their evil deeds from them, and I will finely bring them into gardens
watered by rivers; a reward from Goo : and with God is the nooft excellent
reward. Let not the profpefouS dealing of the unbelievers in the land,
deceive thee b : it is but a (lender provifion * ; and then their receptacle (hall
be hell ; an unhappy couch Jhaty it be. But tky who fear thpjr Lord (hall
have gardens through which rivers flow, they (hall continue therein for ever
this is the gift of God ; for what is with God (hall be better for the righte-
ous than Jbort-lived worldly projperity. There are fi>me of thofe who have re-
ceived the fcriptures, who believe in Gqd, and that which hath been fent
down unto you, and that which hath been fent down to them, fubmitcing
themfelves unto God 4 ; they fell not the figns of God for a final! price
thefe (hall have their reward with their Lord ; for God is fwift in taking
an account*. O true believers, be patient, and drive to excel in patience,
and be conftant-minded, and fear God, that ye may be happy.

* Whether be be male or females] Thefe words fcriptures, tobo believe in God, &V.J The per-
were added, as fome relate, on Omm Salma, fons here meant, fome will have to be Abdallah
one of the prophet’s wives, telling him that Ebn Saldm 5 and his companions j others fiip-
ihe had obferved God often made mention of pole tbfy were forty Arabs of Najr&n, or
the men w ho fled their country for the fake of thirty two Ethiopians, or elfe eight Greeks, who
their faith, but took no notice of the women *. were converted from. Cbrijii unity to Mohammed-

* Let not the prvfperous dealing, &c.l 'Hie ori- ifm ; and others fay thispaffage was revealed in

ginal word properly fignifies fnccefa inthcaf- the ninth year of' the Hijra, when Mohammed,
fairs of life, and particularly in trade. It is faid on Gabriel's bringing him the tews of the death
that fome of Mohammed s followers obforving the of Asbama king of Ethiopia, who had embraced
profperity the idolaters enjoyed, exprefled their the Mohammedan religion fome years before 4 ,
regret that thofe enemies pf God fhould live in prayed for the foul of the departed j at which
foch eafe and plenty, while themfelves were fame of his hypocritical followers were dif-
peri filing for hubger and fatigue ; whereupon pleafcd, and Wondred that he ihonld pray for a
this pafTage was revealed *. Chrijlian pfofdyte whom he had never fecn ’ .

e A JtrAtr provifiont) Becaofe of it* fliort * God is fioift in taking an account,] Sec be-
continuance. fore, p.*3, and the Preliminary Difcovr/e, J 4.

* There are fome of thofe who hove received the

* Al Bjupawi. * Idem,

p 4 $. 4 Al Biioawi.

* See btftu, p, 454 * See the Prelim . T>ifcourJe t

I 2

CHAP.

6o

Al KORAN.

Chap,

4 -

CHAR IV.

Intitkdy Women a ; revealed at Medina.
In the name of the moft merciful God,

O Men, fear your Lord, who hath created you out of one man, and
out of him created his wife, and from them two hath multiplied many
men, and women : and fear God by whom ye befeech one another b ; and
refpett women c who have born you 9 for God is watching over you. And give
the orphans when they come to age their fubftance and render them not in
exchange bad for good 41 : and devour not their fubftance, by adding it to
your own fubftance ; for this is a great fin. And if ye fear that ye fliall
not aft with equity towards orphans of the female Jex 9 take in marriage of
fuch other women as pleafe you, two, or three, or four, and not more 4 . But
if ye fear that ye cannot aft equitably towards Jo many , marry one only 9 or
the flaves which ye fhall have acquired f . This will be eafier, that jje fwerve
not from rigbteoufntfi. And give women their dowry freely •, bup if they
voluntarily remit unto you any part of it, enjoy it with farisfaftion and ad-
vantage. And give not unto thofe who are weak of underftanding, the fub-
ftance which God hath appointed you to preferve for them ; but maintain
them thereout, and clothe them, and fpeak kindly unto them* And exa-
mine

■ This title was given to this chapter, becaufe
it chiefly treats of matters relating to women ;
as, marriages, divorces, dower, prohibited de-
grees, t fc.

* J?jf whom ye befeech one anotheri) faying, I
befecck thee for God's fake *.

c Women) Literal Jy, the wombs.

4 Render them not in exchange bad fir good ;]
That is, take not what ye find of value among
their effefts to your own ufc, and give them
worfe in its Head.

* And if ye fear that ye cannot aft with equity
towards orphans of the f emote fix, &c.] The com-
mentators underhand this pillage, differently.
The true meaning feems to be, as it is here
tranflated ; Mohammed advifing his followers that
if they found they fhould wrong the female or-
phan* under their cue, either by marrying
them againft their inclinations, for thedake of
their riches or beauty, or by not ufing or main-
taining them fo- well as they ought, by realon of
their having already feveral wives, they Ihould

rather chufe to marry other women, to avoid all
occafion of fin *. Others fay that when this
paffage was revealed, many of the Arabians,
fearing trouble and temptation, refufed to take
upon diem the charge of orphans, and yet mul-
tiplied wives to a great cxcefs, and ufed them
ill, or, as others write, gave themfelwes up to
fornication ; which occafioncd the paffage.
And according to rbefe, its meaning mull be
either, that if they feared they could not aft jufl-
iy towards orphans, they had as great reafon to
apprehend they could not deal equitably with
fo many wives, and therefore are commanded to
marry but a certain number ; or elfe, that fincc
fornication was a crime as well as wronging of
orphans, they ought to avoid that alfo, by mar-
ry ingaccording to their abilities L

f Or the flaves which ye Jball have acquired]
For flaves requiring not fo large a dower, nor fo
good and plentiful a maintenance as free wo-
men, a man might keep feveral of the former, as
ealily as one of the latter.

3 Idem , Jajll alq’ddin *

1 Al Bsibawj. * Idem.

Chap. 4- Al KORAN. 61

mine the orphans* until they attain tbe age of marriage * : but if ye per-
ceive they are able to manage their affairs well, deliver their fabftance
unto them ; and wafte it not extravagantly, or haftily, becaufe they grow
up c « Let him who is rich abftaiu entirely from the orphans ejlates ; and let
him who is poor take thereof according to what fhall be reafonable 4 . And
when ye deliver their fubftanceunto them, caJl witneffes thereof in their pre-
fence : God taketh fufficient account of your actions. Men ought to have a
part of what their- parents a^d kindred leave behind them when they die : and
women alfo ought to have a part of what their parents and kindred leave*,
whether it be little, or whether it be much ; a determinate part is due to
them. And when they who are of kin are prefent at the dividing of what
is lefty and alfo the orphans, and the poor diftribute unto them fame part
thereof ; and if the eftate be too finally at leajl fpeak comfortably unto
them. And let thofe fear to abufe orphans , who if they leave behind” them a
weak off-fpring, are follicitous for them : let them therefore fear God, and
fpeak that which is convenient f . Surely they who devour the poffeflions of
orphans unjuftly, lhall fwallow down nothing but fire into their bellies, and
lhall broil in raging flames. God hath thus commanded you concerning your
children. A male fliall have as much as the fhare of two females * : but if
they be females only , and above two in number , they fhall have two third
parts of what the deceafed fhall leave 6 ; and if there be but one, fhe fhall
have the half 1 . And the parents of the deceafed fhall have each of them a
fixth part of what he lhall leave, if he have a child : but if he have no

child, and his parents be his heirs, then his mother fhall have the third part \

And

* Examine the erfbans, &c.] i. e. Try whe-
they be well grounded in the principles of reli-
gion, and have fufficient prudence for the ma-
nagement of their affairs. Under this expref-
fion is alfo comprehended the duty of a cura-
tor’s inftrufting his pupDs in thofe refpe&s.

'Until they attain tbe age of Marriage;’] Or age
of maturity, which is generally reckoned to be
fifteen ; a deqifion fupported by a tradition of
their prophet ; though Abu Hanifab thinks eigh-
teen the proper age 1 .

e Becaufe they grow up t ] i. e, Becaufe they will
lhortly be of age, to receive what belongs to
them.

d Accordfag to what fhall be reafonable i] That
is, no more than what fhall make fufficient re-
fcompenfe for the trouble of their education,
t • Women ought t* have tspart of what tbeiv pa-
rents and kindred leave.] This law was given to
abolifh a coftom of the pagan Arabs, who fuf-
fered not women or children to have any part
of their husband’s or father’s inheritance ; on
pretence that they only fhould inherit who were
able to go to war 2 .

1 Let them fpeak that which is convenient ;] viz*
Either to comfort the children, or to allure the
dying father they fhall be juftly dealt by 3 .

* A male fhall have as much as tbe fhare of two
females .] This is the general rule to be follow-
ed in the diftribution of the eftate of the deceaf-
ed, as may be obferved m the following cafes 4 .

• If there be above two in number, they Jball
have two third parts , &c.] Or if there be two and
no more, they will have the fame fhare.

1 And the remaining third part, or the re*
maining moiety of the eftate, which is not here
exprcfly difpofed ofjf the deceafed leaves behind
him no Ion, nor a father, goes to the public trea-
fury. It muft be obferved that Mr. Se/den is cer-
tainly miftaken* when in explaining this paflage
of die Koran , he fays, that where there is a fon
and an only daughter, each of them will have a
mbieiy 1 : for the daughter can have a moiety
but in one cafe only, that is, where there is no
fon ' y for if there be a fon, ihe can have but *
third, according to the abovemenfcioncd rale.

k His mother poll have the third part;} And
his father consequently the other two thirds 6 .

1 Al Beidawi* a Idem. 3 Idem. 4 P. Prelim* Difi * $. VL 1 Sild&n, de tocceffl

leges Ebraory /, i. r. i, 6 Al Beidawi.

6 2 Al KORA JV* C h a p.

And if he have brethren, his mother (hall have a fixth part, after the legacies*
which he fhall bequeath, and his debts be paid. Ye know not whether your
parents or your children be of greater ufe unto you. This is an ordinance
from God, and God is knowing and wife. Moreover ye may claim half of
•what your wives fhall leave, if they have no iflue ; but if they have iffue,
then ye fhall have the fourth part of what they fhall leave, after the legacies
which they fhall bequeath, and the debts bepdd. They alfo fhall have the fourth
part of what ye fhall leave, in cafe ye have no iflue ; but if ye have iffue,
then they fhall have the eighth part of what ye fhall leave, after the legacies
which ye fhall bequeath, and your debts be paid. And if a man or Woman’ j
fiibftance be inherited by a diftant relation b , and h tor [he have a brother or
After \ each of them two fhall have a fixth part of theeftat* c : But if there
be more than this number , they fhall be equal fharers in a third part, after
payment of, the legacies which fhall be bequeathed, and the debts 1 , without pre-
judice to the heirs. This is an ordinance from God : and God is knowing and
gracious. Thefe are the ftatutes of God. And whofo pbeyeth God and his
apoftle, God fhall lead him into gardens wherein rivers flow, they fhall con-
tinue therein forever; and this fhall be great happinefe. Butwhoio difobey-
eth God, and his apoftle, and tranfgreffeth his ftatutes , God fhall call him
into bell fire ; he fhall remain therein for ever, and he fhall fuffer a fhame-
ful punifhment. If any of your women be guilty of whoredom prod Lice
four witnefles from among you againft them, and if they bear witnefs agsinfi
ibem r imprifon them in feparate apartments uhtil death releafe them, or God
affordeth them a way to efcape*. And if two of you commit the like wM-
nefs r , punifh them both % : but if they repent and amend, let them both a-

lone;

%t fbi legacies /] By legacies in this and the fol- with a hundred ftripcs, and ta be bmiflied for x
lowing pajFages are chiefly meant thofebequef tH- full year ; and the married women to be Honed*.
i«d to pious ufes ; for the Mohammedans approve f And If two f yu , * ike Uhwukdmiy
tiot of a performs giving away his fabftance from &c.] The commentators are not r.grced whether
his /amily and near relations on any ocher ac- the text fpeafcs of fornication or lodooiy Al
count. Zamalbjbar', and, from him, al Beidiwi &p*

* For this may happen by contract, or on pofc the former is here meant : but 7 ^ stak'Hia

Tome other fpecial occafion. is of opinion that the crime intended in this paf-

e Each of them pall have a fixth, party &c] fage mull be committed between two men, and
Here, and in the next cafe, the brother and filter not betwe^t a man and a woman ; not only be-
ar* made equal ffiareh, which is an exception to caufe the pronouns are in the mafeuline gender ,
the general rule, bf giving a mate twice as much but becaufe both are ordered to fuffer the fame
as a female; and the reafon is faid tube, becatife flight punifhment, and are both allowed the lame
of the fmallnefs of the portions, which deferve repentance and indulgence ; and efpecially for
not fuch exaflnefs of diftribution ; for in other that a different and much feverer puniflunent is
cafes the rule holds between brother and After, appointed for the women in the preceding words,
as well as other relations 1 . Abu' t Kafir; Uebatallab takes Ample fornication

4 Whoredom] Either adultery or fornication. to be the crime intended, and that this paiDge

* Imprifon them — ttU dtatb releafi them, &c.J is abrogated by tfcst of the 24th chapter r where
Their punifhment in the beginning of Moham- the man and the woman \\ ho fhsli be guilty of
vudtfm was to be immuPeif till they died, but fornication are ordered to be fcourged with a
afterwards this cruel doom was mitigated, and hundred ftripcs each.

they might avoid it by undergoing the punifh- 8 Punifi them both.] The original is, Dr shm
ment ordained in its Head by the Suttna; accord- fame hurt o r by which ibmft unUerJlmd

kg to which the maidens are to be fcourged “ that

* See this chap, near the end. % J ALLAro'nP'iv.

Chap. 4* Al KORAN. 6^

lone*, for G on is eafy to be reecmdkd; and merciful. Verily repenr^re will
be accented with God, from thofe who do evil ignorantly, and then repent
fpeedily ; unto them will God be turned : for God is knowing and wife. But
no repentance Jba!l be accepted from thofe who dd evil umii the time when
death prefenteth it felf unto one of them* ami be foith, Verily I repent now;
nor unto thofe who die unbelievers : for them have we prepared a grievous
punilhment. O true believer, it is not lawful for you to oe heirs of women
againft their will*, nor to hinder them/ftraK tfiafryitig others b , that ye may take
away part of what ye have given them in down ; unlefs they have been guilty
of a manifeft crime": but converfe kindly with them. And if ye hate them,
it may happen that ye may hate a thing wherein Qdo hath £faced mbch good.

If ye be defirous to exchange a wife for tmotber wife 4 , and ye have alrea-
dy given one of them a talent* ; take not away any thing therefrohi r : will
ye take it by flandering ber 9 and eking bir manifeft injuftice ? And how can
ye take it, fince the one of you hath gone in unto the other, and they have re-
ceived from you a firm covenant? Maffy not won\en, whom your fathers
have had to wife; (except what is already paft :) for this is uncleannefs, and
an abomination, and an evil way. Ye are forbidden to marry yoqr mothers,
and your daughters, and your fiftersi and you* aunts both on the fathers and
on die mothers fide, and your brothers daughters, and your fifters daughters,
and your mothers who have given you luck, tfrtd your fbfter-fifters, and your
wives mothers, and your daughters-indaw which are under your tuition, born
of your wives unto whom ye have gone in, (but if ye have not gone in un-
to them, it (hall be no fin in you to marry them 9 ) and the wives of your fons
who proceed out of your loins ; and ye are alfo forbidden to take to wife two
fifters B except What is already paft : for God is gracious and merciful. * Te V*
are alfo forbidden to take to wifi free women who are married , except thofe wo-
men whom your right hands ihall poffds as Jtaves \ "This is ordained you from

God*

that they are Only to reproach them in public r ,
or lirike them on the head with their flippers 2 ,
(a threat indignity in the eaft;) though fame
imagine they may be fcourged 3 .

* It is not tawfulfir you to be heirs of women
againft their toitl.y It was cuftomaiy among the
pagan Arabs, when a man died, for one of his
delations to claim a right to his widow, which
he aflerted by throwing his garment over her ;
and then he either married her himJdf, if he
thought fit, oh affigning her the fame dower that
her former husband had done, or kept her dower
and warned her to another, or elfe refufed to
let her many unlefs fhe redeemed heWclfby
quitting what fhe might claim Of her husband's
good* This unjuft cuftom is abolifhed by
this paHage.

b Nor to hinder them from marry ing others . } So m e
lay thefe words are dire£ted to husbands Who

ufed to imprifon their wives without any juft
caufe, and out of covetoufncf^, meefiy to make
them relinqtiifh their doWer or their inheri-
tance

c A manififi crime. J Suclras difpbedience, ill
behavioiir, im mo deity, and the like

d If ye be defirous to eiclhange a wife fir another
wifi, &c.] That is, by, divorcing one, and mar*
lying another.

c A talent] t e. Ever fo large a dower.

1 See ch*p> ts p. 27.

% Te ate forbidden to take to wife two Merit] The
fame was alfo prohibited by the l*evltual \ aw 7
h Te are forbidden to take to wiftftccwomen vfbo
are married, except thofe women whom ye Jhall pf*
fefias Jluves .] According to this paffage it is not
lawful to marry a free woman that is already
married, be fhe a Mohammedan or not„ unlefs

fhe

1 Jalp*Jlo’ddin, Yahya, AbulKasem Hebatallat*, Al BetDAwr. * Jalla*
lo’&bin, ^/Beidawl. 3 Al Beidawi, * Idem, * Idem. 6 Idem . 7 Vevlt . ateiii.

6* Al KORAN. Chap. 4,

God. Whatever is befide this, is allowed you \ that ye may with your fub-
fiance provide wives for your felves, a fling that which is right,, ancl avoiding
whoredom. And for the advantage which ye receive from them, give diem their
reward*, according to what is ordained : but it fhall be no crime in you to
make any other agreement among your felves \ after the ordinance Jhall
complied with ; for God is knowing and wife. Whofo among you hath not
means fufficient that he may marry free women, who are believers, let him marry
with fuch of your maid-fervants whom your right hands poflefs, as are true be-
lievers v for God well knowedi your faith. Ye are the one from the other':
therefore marry them with the confent of their mafters *, and give them their
dower according to juftice •, fuch as are modeft, not guilty of whoredom* nor
entertaining Jovers. And when they are married, if they be guilty of adul-
tery, they (hall fuffer half the. punirfiment which is appointed for the free wo-
men d . This is allowed unto him among you, who feareth to fin by marrying
free women ; but if ye abftain from marrying flarves, it will he better for you ;
God is gracious and merciful. God is willing to declare theft things unto
you and to direft you according to the ordinances of thofe who have gone
before you ', and to be merciful unto you. God is knowing and wife. God
defireth to be gracious unto you but they who follow their lufts r , defire
that ye fhould turn afide from the truth with great deviation. God is minded
to make bis religion light unto you : for man was created weak 1 '. O true be-
lievers, confume not your wealth among your felves in vanity* •, unlefs there
be merchandizing among you by mutual confent ; neither flay your felves ‘ ;

fhe be legally parted from herhusband by divorce ;
but it is lawful to marry thofe who are (laves, or
taken in war, after they fhall have gone through
the proper purifications, tbo* their husbands be
living. Yet, according to the decifion of Aba
Haififah* it is not lawful to marry fuch whofe
husbands fhall be taken, or in actual Slavery with
them *.

• Give fbem their reward!] That is, affign them
their dower.

* It pall be no trim in yon to make any other
agreement among your felves, &c.] That is, either
to increafe the dower, or to abate fome part or
even the whole of it.

* Tearevne from the other!] Being alike defend-
ed from Adam* and of the fame faith 2 .

4 The Jfavet, if galley of adultery* pall fuffer
Jsalf the punj foment of the free women!] The rea-
son of this is becaufe they are not prefumed to
-have had fo good education. A Have therefore,
in fuch a cafe, is to have fifty ftripes, and to be
hani/hed for half a year ; but Ihe fhall not be
-ftoned, becaufe it is a punlfhmci^ which cannot
be inflicted by halves 3 .

• Cff thofe vfbo isovt been before you ;] viz. Of

the prophets, and other holy and pmdetttj men
of former ages 4 .

f They who follow their lufts* &c.] Some com-
mentators fuppofe that thefe words have a parti-
cular regard to the Magians , who formerly were
frequently guilty of inceftous marriage** their
prophet ZerAupt having allowed them to take
their mothers and fitters to wife ; and alfo to
the Jews , who likewife might marry within
fome of the degrees here prohibited f .

g For man was created weak ;] Being unable to
refrain from women, and too fubjccl to be led
away by carnal appetites 6 .

b Confume not your wealth in vanity!] That
is, employ it not in things prohibited "by God;
fuch as ufury, extortion, rapine, gaining, and
the like 7 .

1 Neither flay your fives!] I4teraljy,/;v not pur
fouls \ i. e. fays J allala Adin* by committing
mortal fins, or fuch ad met as will defboy them.
Others however are of opinion that felf- murder,
which the gentile Indians did, and ttill do, often
pradlife in honour of rheiridols, or elfe the tak-
ing away the life of any true believer, is hereby
forbidden 8 .

“* -^/.Bsidawi. * Idem. 1 Idem. 4 Jallalo’ddin. Al Bxldawi, 1 ^/Beidawl
<s Idem, Jaj.4A2-o'i?i £>ik- j I idem, 3 JIBhdawu

Chap. 4 * Al J5T 0 RA PT. 65

for Gon is merciful towards you : and whoever doth this maficioufly * and
•wickedly, he will furely caft him to be broiled in bell fire ; and this is eafy with
God. If ye turn afide from the grievous fins b , of thofe which ye are forbidden
to commit , we will cleanfe you from your /mailer faults ; and will introduce
you into paradi/e with an honourable entry. Covet not that which God hath
bellowed on fome of you preferably to others'. Unto the men /hall be given
a portion, of what they mail have gained, and unto the women JhaU be given
a portion, of what they Ihall have gained 4 : therefore ask Goo of his boun-
ty ; for God is omnifcient. We have appointed unto every one kindred, to
inherit fart of what their parents and relations Ihall leave at their deaths. And
unto thofe with whom your right hands have made an alliance, give their
part of the inheritance' \ for God iswitnefsof all things. Men Ihall have the
pre-eminence above women, becaufe of thofe advantages wherein God hath
caufed the one of them to excel the other r , and for that which they expend
of their fubftance in maintaining their wives. The honeft women Are obedient,
careful in the abfence 0/ their husbands *, for that God preferveth them, by com-
mitting them to the care and protection 0/ the men. But thofe, whofe perverfe-
nefs ye Ihall be apprehenfive of, rebuke ; and remove them into feparate a-
partments b , and chaftife them 1 . But if they ihall be obedient unto you, feek
notan occafio iu>/ quarrel againft them ; for God is high and great. And if ye

K fear

* See Wifdom xvi. 14. in the vulgate.

b Grievous fins.] Thefe fins al Beldam ,
From a tradition of Mohammed, reckons to be
feven (equalling in number the fins called deadly
by Cbrtfiians) that is to fay* idolatry, murder,
falfly aceufing modeft women of adultery, waft-
ing the fubftance of orphans, taking of ufury,
defertion in a religious expedition, and difob edi-
ence to parents. But Ebn Abbas fays they a-
mount to near feven hundred ; and others fap-
pofe that idolatry only, of different kinds, in
worfhipping idols or any creature, either in op-
pofition to, or jointly with the true Gon, is
here intended ; that fin being generally efteemed
by Mohammedans, and in a few lines after de-
clared by the Koran it felf, to beihe only one
which Gon will not pardon 1 .

* Covet not that which God bath befowed on
fome of you preferably to others j] Such as honour,

E wer, riches, and other worldly advantages.

me however underftand this of the diftribution
of inheritances according to the jprecedmg de-
terminations, whereby fome have a larger fhare
Shan others a .

4 Unto the men pall be given a portion of what
they pall have gained, &c.J That is, they ihall
be bleffed according to their deferts -5 and ought
therefore, inftcad of difpleafing God by envying
of others, to endeavour to merit his favour hy

Idem* $ee before , chap, 2* p. n. * Id
* Idem* 1 Idem , Jah.alo*dimn. 6

good Works, and to apply to him by pr^er.

c Unto thofe with whom ye have made an alliante ,
give their part, &c.] A precept conformable to
an old cuftom of the Arabs , that where perfons
mutually entred into a ftrift friendihip or confe-
deracy, the furviving friend ihould have a fixth
part of the deceafed’s eftate. But this was after-
wards abrogated, according to Jallaldddin and
al Zamakbjbari , at leaft as to models. The paf-
fage may likewife be underftoodof a private con-
tra&, whereby the furvivor is to inherit a certafci
part of the fubftance of him that dies firft
f Becaufe of thofe advantages wherein G op bdtb
caufed throne to excel the other',] Such as fup.erior
underftanding and ftrength, and the other pri-
vileges of the male fex, which enjoy* tlw» digni-
ties in church and ftate, goes to war hi defence
of Goo's true religion, and claims a double (hare
of their deceafed anceftors eftates

* Carefqd in the abfence of their husbands ;] Both
to preferve their husband's fubftance fromlofs or
wafte, and themfclvcs from all degrees of im-
modefty

b Remove them into feparate apartments ;] That
is, banifh them from your bed.

' And ebaftife them ] By this paflage the Mo-
basnmedons are in plain terms allowed to beat
their wives, in cafe of ftubbom difobedience ;
but not in a violent or dangerous manner 6 .

w, Jalvalo'ddin. * J K A/Bmidawi,

Al

66 K 0 RA N. Chap.*.

fear a breach between the hufband and wife, fend a judge * out of his family,
and a judge out of her family : if they fhall defire a reconciliation* God will
caufe them to agree ; for God is knowing and wife. Serve God, and affociate
no creature with him ; and Jhew kindnefs unto parents, and relations, and or-
phans, and the poor, and your neighbour who is of kin to you b , and alfo
your neighbour who is a ftranger, and to your familiar companion, and the
traveller, and the captives whom your right hands (hall pofiefs ; for God loveth
not the proud or vainglorious, who are covetous, and recommend covetoufnefs
unto men, and conceal that which God of his bounty hath given them'; (we
have prepared a flumeful puniihmentfor the unbelievers j) and who beftow their
wealth in charity to be obferved of men, and believe not in God, nor in the laft
day ; and whoever hath Satan for a companion, an evil companion hath be ! And
what harm would hefal them if they fhould believe in God, and the laft day,
and give alms out of that which God hath bellowed on them ? fince God
knoweth them who do this. Verily God will not wrong any one even the
weight of an ant 4 : and if it be a good attion, he will double it, and will
recompenfe it in his fight with a great reward. How will it be with the un-
believers when we (hall bring a wirnefs out of each nation agdnft it/elf,, and
fhall bring thee, O Mohammed , a witnefs againftthefe people f ? In that day
they who have not believed, and have rebelled again ft the apofllL' of God,
fhall wifh the earth was levelled with them ; and they fhall not be able to
hide any matter from God. O true believers, come not to prayers when ve
are drunk*, until ye underftand what ye fay \ nor when ye are polluted by
emiflion of feed, unlefs ye be travelling on the road, until ye wafli your-
felves. But if ye be ficls, or on a journey, or any of you come from ealmg
nature, or have touched women, and find no water ; take fine dean fand
and rub your faces and your hands therewith h ; for Goo is merciful and in-

clined

• Send a Judge* See.'} i. e. Let the magiftrate
flrfliiwrd two arbitrators or mediators, one on
co in pole the diifcrence, and prevent,
ifpoflibtfy the ill confluences of an open rup-
furt.

‘r~ neighbour tab o is ef kin to. yon s] Either
nf yourDwn nation or religion

‘ Jh fme mJ tbatwbieb God of bis immto bath
given them Whether it be wealth, kmmfcdgo,
cr anv ethete talent wheieby they may help their
neighbour.

4 God mU not wring eaty e* : th weight -f an
ant ^Either by dhninifluBg the racomp_uic dot
to his jgood a&ions, or too feverely punishing
bit On the contrary* he will reward the
former in the neat life, fa* above tie if deferxs.
•fhe Jrakfjt 1*qrd dhurry which is United
an aM, ‘ flgrafles x vnty fmail fort ttf that
and & demote A tb io^ that is eaceeeding

fmdh 2$ a mite*

e When tvejbail bring a witnefs out of each na -

- * 1 i • • *** j., | t t

1 See befoftl t: trf*

ms* &c. J When the prophet it ho was fent to
each nation in p-rtetikr, fl.aij on the laft day
be produced to five idence hof

them as refu&d ■ bcJ-cv^: c n hiitt, or tub&rved

not the kws which fee

f Jgriii'i ' \ -V,]

to whom M wui, as be. pretended, more

peculiarly font r *

* C^vr it Jo ffragers sr&ffjf r,

I* is J, tin: hefeie the prohlbitfoiL oi ‘fine,
rfkd'aintbziiLi Min Jrrf made an enterciijjtjjMt,

to w hich he inrilcd * .'rsl of the ^pajticf ■ corn-
pit: kirif; and iftx . r they had eai and drank n cn-
itidJy, the honrol evcniisg pr-ycr heiog
one of the company rofe up to pra^i fefU bdng
overcome wii& m;,ds a thtiDilui bki'der

in renting * the AW#; wtarupyn

to prevwt the dsn^m of wny J uch indKtaty for
the fotnrp, this paSpe was mc-ded s *

b h fand itsd rub tom- U;pi ae t ys.tr h
therewith } See the Prftim. Diji. § I V .

Chap. 4. Al K G R A N. 6f

clin d o forgive. Haft thou not ©bferved chbfe onto Whrirri part «f rite feripc
tun * w is delivered ? they fell error, and defire chat ye may wander ft om
the right way » but God well knoweth ydur enemies. Go fe a luffkiertt
patron, and God is a fufficient helper. Of the Jews there are feme whd per-
vert words from their places " ; and fay, "We have heard, arid hive dif-
obeyed and do thou hear without underftanding our meaning ** and look
upon us d : perplexing with their tongues, and reviling the true religion.
But if they had faid, We have heard, and do obey ; and do thou hear, arid
regard us-': certainly it were better for them, arid more tight. But God'
hath curfed them by reafon of their infidelity therefore a few of them orily
fhall believe. O ye to whom the feriptures- have been given, believe In the
revelation which we have fent down, confirming that which' is with you ; be-
fore we deface jour countenances', and render them as the back parts thereof* 1 ;
or curfe them, as we curfed thofe who tranfgyefled on the fabbath day * ; arid
the command of God was fulfilled. Surely God will not pardon the giving
him an equal b ; but will pardon any other fin, except that, to whom he
pleafeth ‘ : and whofo giveth a companion unto God, hath devifed a great
wickednefs. Haft thou not obferved diofe who juftify themfelves *? But God
juftifieth whomfoever he pleafeth, nor fhall thej be Wronged a hair *. Behold,
how they imagine a lie againftGoD ; and therein is iniquity fufficiently irtanifeft.
Haft thou not confidered thofe to whom part of the feriptore hath been given?
They believe in falfe gods and idols ", and fay of thofe who believe not,

K 2 Thefe

# Thofe unto whom fart of the feripture was de-
livered ;} Meining the Jews, and particularly
their Rabbins

* Who pervert word* from their plates ;] That
is, (according to the commentator*,} who change
the true fenfe of the pentateuch by diflocating
pafl’ages, or by wrefting the words according to
their own fancies and luffs T . * But Mohammed
feems chiefly to intend here the Jews bantering
of hint in their addrefles, by making ufc of equi-
vocal words, Teeming to bear a good fenfe in A-
rabic, but fpoken by them in derifion according
to their acceptation in Hebrew ; an inffance of
which he gives in the following words.

4 Without underftanding i] Literally, without
being made to hear , or apprehend what we fay.

* Look upon us;} The original word is Rdina,
which being a term of reproach in Hebrew > Mo-
hammed forbad their ufing to him 1 .

• And regard *r.] In Arabic * Ondborna j which
having no ill equivocal meaning, the prophet
ordered them to ufe inftead of the former.

f And render them as the back parts thereof; ]
That is, perfe£Uy plain, without eyes, nofe, or
mouth. The original however may alfo be tran-

flated, and turn them behind* by wringing their
necks backward.

• Thofe who tranfgrejfed on the fabbath day ;]
And were therefore changed intp apes

h The giving him an equal ;] That is, idolatry
of all kinds.

1 To whom he pleafeth ; ] viz . To thofe who re-
pent

k Thofe who juftify themfthes ;] i. e. The Chri -
fttanp and Jews , who called themfelves the chil-
dren of God, apd bis beloved people f . *

1 A hair.} The original word fignifies a little
skin in the deft of 4 fete ftone, and is ufed to
exprefe a thing of no value.

" In falje gods and idols;} The Arabic is, in
Jibt and Taghut . The former is fuppofed to
have been the proper name of fome idol ; but
it feems rather to fignify any falfe deity in ge-
neral. The latter we have explained already 6 .

It is faid that this paflage was revealed on the
following occafion. Hoyai Ebn Akbtab and Caab
Ebn A’AJ&raf 7 , two cKicf men among the Jews,
with feveral others of that region, went toAfrr-
<77, and offered to enter into a confederacy with
the Koreijb , and to join their forces againft Mo-

bammed 1

1 Idem , Jallalo’ddin. 2 See before, c. 2, 14. 3 See before* e. z. p,q. 4 ^7Beidawi.

Idem* Jallalo’ddjn. See c~$. not far from the beginning* 6 See ft* 3 1 . note K 7 See befiret

p* 45. not .

68 Al KORAN . Chap. 4,

Thefc are more rightly dire&ed in the way of truth, than they who believe
on Mohammed. Thofe are the men whom God hath curfed ; and unto him
whom God fliall curfe, thou lhalt fureiy find no helper. Shall they h*ve a part of
the kingdom*, fince even then they would not beftow the fmalldr matter b on
men ? Do they envy other men that which God of his bounty hath given
them* ? We formerly gave unto the family of Abraham a book of revela-
tions and wifdom ; and we gave them a great kingdom *. There is of them
who believeth on him and there is of them who turneth afide from him:
but the raging fire of hell is a fufficient puniftsment • Verily thofe who dif.
believe ourfigns, we will fureiy caft to be broiled in bell fire ; fo often as
their skins lha.ll be well burned, we will give them other skins in exchange,
that they may tafte the Jharper torment ; for Gon is mighty and wife. But
thofe who believe and do that which is right, we will bring into gardens water,
ed by rivers, therein lhall they remain for ever, and there fhall they enjoy
wives free from all impurity i and we will lead them into perpetual lhades.
Moreover God commandeth you to rellore what ye are trufted with, to the
owners f ; and when ye judge between men, that ye judge according to equi-
ty : and fureiy an excellent virtue it is to which God exhorteth you ; for God
loth heareth and feeth. O true believers, obey Gop, and obey the apoftle,
and thofe who are in authority among you ; and if ye differ in any thing,
refer it unto God 8 and the apoftle, if ye believe in God, and the laft day ;
this is better, and a fairer method of determination. Haft thou not obferved
thofe who pretend they believe in what hath been revealed unto thee, and

bammed . But the K&reijb , entertaining fome
jraloufy of them, told them, that the yews pre-
tended to have a written revelation from heaven,
as well as Mohammed, and their do&rmes and wor-
fhip approached much nearer to what he taught,
than the religion of their tribe ; wherefore, laid
they* if you would fa tiafy us that you are fincere in
the matter, do as we do, and worfhip our gods.
Which prepofal* if the ftory be true, thefe Jews
coniplied with, out of their inveterate hatred to
Mohammed **

* Shall they have a fart of the kingdom , &c.]
For the Jem* gave out that they ihould be re-
ltored to their ancient power and grandeur 1 2 ;
depending, it is to be prefumed, on the vi&o-
rious MeJJtab whom they expe&ed.

* The fmallejf matter ;] The original word pro-
perly fignifies a fmall dent on the back of a date-
flonc ; and is commonly ufed to exprefa a thing
of little or no value.

* Do they envy other men that which God of
bis bounty bath give* them fy viz. The fpirittul
gifts of prophecy, and divine revelations ; and
the temporal blcffiitgs of victory and fu^cefs, be-
llowed on Mohammed and his followers*

4 We gave them a great kingdom .] Wherefore
God will doubdefs fhew equal favoul to this
prophet, (a defcend&nt alfo of and

thofe who believe on him 3 .

e Who believeth on him ;] Namely, on Moham-
med.

f God commandeth you /?■ ivfaro what ye m
introt/led with , to the owners ;] This paflage, it is
faid, was revealed-on the day of the taking of
Mecca, the primary defign of it being to direft
Mohammed to return the keys of the Caaba to
Othman Ebn Telba Ebn AbAalddr, who had then
the honour to be keeper of that holy place 4 ,
and not to deliver them to his uncle al Abbas ,
who having already the cuftody of the well Z. »*
zem, would fain have had alfo chat of the Caaba.
The prophet obeying the divine order, Qtbmdn
was fo affetted with the juftice of the afiion,uot-
wkhftanding he had at firfl refufed him en-
trance, that he immediately embraced Mobam-
medifml whereupon the guardianfhip of the-
Caaba was confirmed to this Othman and his
heirs for ever * .

8 Unto Go d bo. To the dedfion of the

Koran.

1 Al Bem>awi» 2 Idem. 3 Idim . 4 See PmdbaujV Life of Mahem* /• ^

1 Al Bsidaw*' See EPHirsel. JML Orient, p 220, ztu

Chap. 4-, Al KORAN. 69

what hath been revealed before thee? They defxre to go to judgment before
T a chut*, although thev have been commanded not to believe in him*
and Satan defireth to feaucc them into a wide error. And when it is faid
unto them. Come unttf the hook which God hath fent down, and to the apoftle*
thou feeft the ungodly turn afide from thee, with great aVeifion. But how
will they behave when a misfortune (hall befal them, for that which their hands
have fent before them ? Then will they come unto thee > and fwear by God,
faying* If we intended any other, than to do good, and to reconcile the par-
ties b . God knoweth what is in the hearts of thefe men ; therefore let them a-
lone, and admonifli them, and fpeak unto them a word which may affe£t
their fouls. We have not fent any apoftle, but that he might be obeyed by the
permiflion of God : but if they, after they have injured their own fouls c , come
unto thee, and ask pardon of God, and the apoftle ask pardon for them, they
fhall furely find God eafy to be reconciled and merciful. And by thy Lord
they will not perfectly believe, until they make thee judge of their controver-
fies ; and (hall not afterwards find in their own minds any hardfhip in what
thou (halt determine, but fhall acquiefce therein with entire fubmiflion. And
if we had commanded them, faying, , Slay your felves, or depart from your
houfes d *, they would not have done it* except a few of them. And if they
had done what they were admoniflied, it would certainly have been better for
them, and more efficacious for confirming their faith ; and we fhould then
have furely given them in our fight an exceeding great reward, and we fhould
have direaed them in the right way. Whoever obeyeth God and the apoftle,
they Jhall he with thofe unto whom God hath been gracious, of the pro-
phets, and the fincere, and the martyrs, and the righteous ; and thefe are
the moft excellent company. This is bounty from God ; and God isfufficient-
ly knowing. O true believers, take your necejfary precaution 8 againft your

enemies ,

* They defire to go to judgment before Taghut ;]
That is, before the tribunals of infidels. This
paflage was occafioned by the following remark-
able accident. A certain Jew having a difpute
with a wicked Mohammedan , the latter appealed
to the judgment of Caah Ebn al AJbraf, a prin-
cipal Jew, and the former to Mohammed. But
at length they agreed to refer the matter to the
prophet fingly, who giving it in favour of the
Jew, the Mohammedan refufed to acquiefce in his
fcntence, but would needs have it re-heard by
Omar , afterwards Khali/. When they came to
him, the 7 *w told him that Mohammed had alrea-
dy decided the affair in his favour, but that the
other would not fubmit to his determination ;
and the Mohammedan confeffing this to be true,
O mar bid them day a little, and fetching his
fword, ftruckofF the obftinate Mofiem's head, fay-
ing aloud, This is the reward of him who refufeth
to fubmit to the judgment of God and his apofile.
And from this action Omar had the furname of

al Faruk , which alludes both to his fefarating
that knave’s head from his beefy, and to
tinguijbing between truth and falfhood l . The
name of Taghdt 2 therefore ra this place feeras
to be given to Caah Ebn al AJbraf

k They will /wear they intended no other than td
do good , &c.] For this was the excufe of the
friends of the Mohammedan whom Omar flew,
when they came to demand fatisfa&ion for his
blood 3 .

e After they have injured their own fouls ;] viz*
By acting wickedly, and appealing to the judg-
ment of infidels.

4 Slay your felves, or depart from your boufis ;}
Some underitand thefe words of their venturing
their lives in a religious expedition 5 and others,
of their undergoing the fame punifhments which
the JfraeUtes aid, for their idolatry in worfliip^
ing the golden calf ♦.

• Take your precaution ;] L e. Be vigilant, and
provide your felves with arms and neceflaries.

1 Jallalo’udin, ^/Biidawk S^D’Herbel. Bibl. Orient, f. 688, and OcKtEY’/ Hijt,

of the Sarat, v . i. f. 365, 2 Set before, p,$i. 3 Al Bsidawi. * Idem. See before, p. 7.

7© Al KORAN* C h a p, 4,

enemies , and either go forth to war in feparate -parties, or go forth all r .ge-
ther in a body. There is of you who tarrieth behind • ; and if a misfortune
befal you, he faith. Verily God hath been gracious unto me, that I was not
prefent with them : but if fuccefs attend you from God, he will fay, ^as jf
there was no friendlhip between you and him b ,) Would to God I had been
with them, for I fhould have acquired great merit. Let them therefore fight
for the religion of Gob, who part with the prefent life in exchange for that wnich
is to come * ; for whofoever fighteth for the religion of God, whether he be
flain, or be victorious *, we will furely give him a great reward. And what
ails you, that ye fight not for God’s true religion, and in defence ef the weak
among men, women, and children % who fay, O Lord, bring us forth from
this city, whofe inhabitants are wicked ; grant us from before thee a protector,
and grant us from before thee a defender f . They who believe fight for the
religion of God ; but they who believe not fight for the religion of TaChut*
Fight therefore againft the friends of Satan, for the ftratagem of Satan
is weak. Haft thou not obferved thofe unto whom it was laid, With-hold
your hands from war , and be conftant at prayers, and pay the legal alms h ?
But when war is commanded them, behold, a part of them fear men as they
fhould fear God, or with a greater fear, and fay, OLokd, wherefore haft
thou commanded us to go to war, and haft not fuffered us to wait our ap-
proaching end *? Say unto them . The provifion of this life is but fmall ; but
the future fbatt be better for him who fearith Goo ; and ye fhall nor be in
the leaft injured at the day of judgtnent. Wherefbever ye be, death fcill over-
take you, although ye be in lofty towers. If good befal them, they fav, 1 his
is from God \ but if evil befal them, they fay, This is from thee, O Mo-
hammed k : fay, All is from God i and what aileth thefe people, that they

are

* Who tarrieth behind, Mohammed here
upbraids the hypocritical Mbjfem , who For want
of faith and conftancy in their religion were
backward in going to war for its defence,

* As if there was no fritndjbip between you and
himi\ i e. As one who *ttendeth not to the
public, but his own private inter-eft. Or etfe
thefe may be the wqras of the hypocritical Mo-
hammedan hjmfelf, injinuating that he ftaid not
behind the reft of the army oy his own fault,
but was left by Mohammed , who chofe to let the
others fhare in his good fortune, preferably to
him 1 .

c Who part with the prejhttt lift in exchange for
that which is to come ;] By venturing their lives
and fortunes in defence of' the faith.

4 Whether he be Jlain , or be vifior tops.] For no
man ought to quit the field, till he either fall a
martyr, or gain fome advantage for thecaufe a .

* in defence of the weak. Sec J viz • Thole be-
lievers who ftaid behind at Mecca , being detain-
ed there either forcibly by the idolaters, or for
.want of means to fly for refuge to Medina . Jl
\ "Beiddzai obferves that children are mentioned

here to ihew the inhumanity of the Koreijb, who
persecuted even that tender age.

f 0 Lord bring us forth f-m this city, and
grant f/j fmm thee a fr.srmt. Sec] lid f pe-
tition, the commenmois. t\y, w4i hL-.ud- For
God afforded lever-1 of them an opportunity
and means of clcapjng, and delivered the reft
at the taking of Mviv by Myhammed^ who left
Otab Ebn Qfaid go i ernor A the city : and un-
der his care and protection thoi'e wfio tud fuffer-
ed for their re%io*:u became the mQtt confidera-
ble men in rise place,

* before; p. |i.

h H*$ this \: t v tervrd ehije unaenhem it was
/aid, / tv>t ha iJjfr :n war. See, ] Thefe

were tome of A&hjtvtncTt followers, who rea-
dily petforttied the duties of tficlr religion, lu long
as they were commanded nothing that might
endanger their lives,

1 Our approach *?' en<k\ Thn is, a natural de th.
k df evil bej j them, ihey fiy. This ufromihtei\

As tne Jews in particular, 'who pretended t L iat
their land was grown burm, ;in-l provifionl
fcarce, fince Mubammed came to Medina

1 Al Beidawi.

* Idem,

3 Idem

Chap. 4 * Al K 0 R A N. jx

are fo far fronf underran ding what is faid unto them ? Whatever good be-
falleth thee, O man it is from God \ and whatever evil befalleth thee, it is
from thy felf‘. We have few thee an apoftle unto men, and God is a fuf-
ficient wimtis thereof. Whoever obeyeth the apoftle, obeyeth God ; and who-
ever turns th back, we have not fent thee to be & keeper over them b . They
fay, Obediences yet when they go forth from thee, part of them meditate by
night a matter different from what thou fpeakeft •, but God lhall write down
what they meditate by night : therefore let them alone, and truft in God, for
God is a fufficient prote&or. Do they not attentively confider the Koran ?
if it had been from any befides God, they would certainly have found there-
in many contradiftions. When any news Cometh unto them, either of fecu-
rity or fear, they immediately divulge h ; but if they told it to the apoftle and
to thofe who are in authority among them* fuch of them would underftand
the truth »f the matter, as inform themfedves thereof from the apoftle and bis
ehiefs. And if the favour of God and his mercy bad not been upon you, ye
had followed tire devil, except a few of you . Fight therefore for the religion
of Goo, and oblige not any to what is difficult 4 , except thy felf j however ex-
cite the faithful to war , perhaps God will reftrain the courage of the unbelie-
vers ; for God is ftronger than they, and more able to punifh. He who in-
terceded! between men with a good interceffion ° fhall have a portion thereof ;
and he who intercedeth with an evil interceffion fhall have a portion thereof ;
for God overlooketh all things. When ye are faluted with a falutation, falute
the ptrfon with a better falutation f , or at leaft return the fame ; for God tak-
eth an account of all things. God ! there is no God but he ; he will furely
gather you together on the day of refurrefition; there is no doubt of it : and
who is more true than God in what he faith? Why are ye divided concerning
the ungodly into two parties * s fincc God hath overturned them for what they

have

• Whatever evil befalletb thee, it it from tby to the Iefler expedition of Btdr, fo that he was

ftifi] Theft words are not to be underftood as obliged to fet out withno more than 70*. Some
contrftdiftory to the preceding. That all prmeedt copies vary in this place, and inilead of la to*
from Gop ; fince the evil which befals mankind, kallafo, in the fecond perlon Angular, read la
the’ ordered by Gop, is yet the cgnfequencc of wiaJlafe, in the hill perfon plural. We do not
their own wicked -Elions. oblige, &c. The meaning being, that the pro-

• We have not : ibst to he a keeper over tbemi] phpt only, was under an indifpenfable neceffity of

Or, tij take an account of their afliops > for this obeying Goo’s commands, however difficult,
is God’ pirt. but others might chufe, tho’ at their peril.

* If God’ "'"O' bnd not been upon you, '< -ad * With a good inieneffisn }] i, e. To maintain
followed the devil, cx e, ft a few f you t] That is, the right of a believer, or to prevent his being
if God had not fent hU apt life with the Koran wrgngsdr

to in 11 ad y LI i)i yotrditf)-, yp i-d continued 1 Salute the perfon with a better falutation;] By
in iiiul.it r and beon loom .i todeftru&joDi ex- addipgipmething farther. As when one flutes
cept only thofe who, by Go R’s favour, and their another; by this; form, Peace be upon tbte, he
faporior ufndtjLtftsudmg:, fttould have true notions might not only to return the falutation, but to
of the divinity s iacli, i n example, as 7 .eid Ebn add,, and the mercy f God, and hit blefftng.

Amru Ebn Nofail 1 , and Waraka Ebn Nawfaf *, * Why are ye divided contenting the ungodly into

who left idols, and acknow 1 .cd but one Go u, two parties This paffage was revealed, accord-
before the million of Mohamet 3 * ing to fome, when certain of Mohammed 's fol-

* Oblige " e any .to what it dijfitulh except, tby lowers, pretending not to like Medina, defired

/ ' ;] It is faid this paflage was revealed when leave to go qlff where, and having obtained it,
the Mohammedans refufed to follow their prophet went

1 V. Millium, de M.bamenedifmo ante Mob. p, 311. 2 Sec the Prelim. Difc. p. 4}. 3 Al

Beidawi. * See before , eb. 3 .p. 56.

■7 2 Al KORAN. Chap, 4,,

have committed ? Will ye direfi him whom God hath led aftray ; fince for
him whom God fliall lead aftray, thou (halt find no true path? They de-
fire that ye fhould become infidels, as they are infidels, and that ye fhoukj ix;
equally wicked with thentfelves. Therefore take not friends from among them,
until they fly their country for the religion of God ; and if they turn back from
the faith , take them, and kill them where-ever ye find them ; and take no
friend from among them, nor any helper, except thofe who go unto a people
who are in alliance with you *, or thofe who come unto you, their hearts
forbidding them either to fight againft you, or to fight againft their own peo-
ple . And if God pleafed he would have permitted them to have prevailed
againft you, and they would have fought againft you. But if they depart from
you, and fight not againft you, and offer you peace, God doth not allow
you to take or kill them. Ye fhalj find others who are defirous to enter into a
confidence with you, and at the fame tune to preferve a confidence with their own
people c : fo often as they return to fedition, they lhall be fubverted therein j
and if they depart not from you, and offer you peace, and reftrain their hands
from warring, againft you , take them and kill them wherefoever ye find them ;
over thefe have we granted you a manifeft power. It is not lawful for a be-
liever to kill a believer, unlefs it happen by miftake 4 ; and whofo killeth a
believer by miftake, the penalty /ball be the freeing of a believer from flavery,
and a fine to be paid to the family of the deceafed* , unlefs they remit it as
alms: and if the / lain perfon be of a people at enmity with you, and be a
true believer, the penalty Jhall be the freeing of a believer f ; but if he be of
a people in confederacy with you, a fine to be paid to his family, and the
freeing of a believer. And he who findeth not wherewith to do this , lhall faft
two months confecutively, as a penance injoined from God ; and God is
knowing and wife. But whofo killeth a believer defignedly, his reward Hull
be hell* he lhall remain therein for ever *> and God (hall be angry with

him,

went farther and Farther, till they joined the Ido-
laters ; of, as others fay, on occafion of fome
deferteraat the battle of OWi concerning whom
the Mojlems were divided in opinion whether
they ftiould be flain as infidels, or not.

• A people who are in alliance with yon i] The
people here meant, fay feme, were the tribe of
Kbozdab, or, according to others, the AJlamiens %
whofe chief named Heidi Ebn Owaimar , agreed
with Mohammed , when he fet out againft Mecca ,
to ftand neuter ; or, as others rather think, Banu
Beer Ebn Zeid x .

* Whofe hearts forbiii them to fight either a-
gainfi you, or their own p&pfe ;] Thefe, it is (aid,
were the tribe of Modlaj , who came in to Mo-
bammed, but would not be obliged to ailifl him
in war.

c Who defire to enter into a confidence with you,
&c.] The perfons hinted srt here, were the tribes
of Afad and Gbatfdn , or, as fome fay, Banu Ab-
dalddr, who came to Medina and pretended to

1 ^/BfilDAWI, TALLALO’pDtH*

* He m.

embrace Mvhammeiifin , that they might be trulb
ed by the Mojlems , but when they returned, fell
back to their old idolatry 3 .

4 Unlefs it he by mijltkf ;] That is, by acci-
dent and without deiign. This paftage was re-
vealed to decide the cafe of Aydjb Ebn Ab‘ Ba-
ida, the brother, by the mother's fide, of Abu
Jabl, who meeting Hareth Ebn Zeid on the road,
and not knowing that he had embraced Mobam-
medifm, flew him

* And a fine to be paid to the /amity :f th it-
ceafedi] Which fine is to be dillributed accord-
ing to the Jaws of inheritances given in the be-
ginning of this chapter 1 .

f ^he freeing of a trite btBmr And no fine
fhall be paid* becaufe in fuch cafe his relations,
being infidels and at open war with the Mojlems ,
have no right to inherit what he leaves.

* He Jhall remain therein fir ever ;] That is,
unlefs he repent. Others however underftand

not

3 Jl BeIJPAW*. 3 4-

Chap. 4. At 'KORA if. 73

an<l fhall curie hun* and, ifoU prepay for hita a great punifhment.
O true frpKevers, when ye are on a, n?^r4» ;jn defence of the true religion,
juftly difeern fucb as ye /kail happen to peel, and fay not unto him who &-
iuteth you. Thou art not a true believer a ; feekmg- the accidental goods of
the prefent life b 5 for with God is muchfpoiL Such have ye formerly been;
but God hath been gracious unto ypq c ; therefore nuke a juft djlcernment,
for God is well acquainted with that which, ye do, Thofe believers who fit ftiU
at borne* not ijavmg any hurt d „ and thole who employ thek; fortunes and
thcWiperfons for the religion of God, /hall not be held equal- God hath f>ce T
ferred thofe who employ their fortunes and their perfons in that caufc y to a, de-
gree of honour above thofe who fit at home : God ruth indeed promifed every
one paradife, but God hath prefqrfjed thofe who fight fpr the fmtb before thofe
who fit ftill, by adding unto tbm a great regard, by degrees of honour conferred
on them from him, and by grafting them fopgiyenefs, and mercy ; for Gop is
indulgent and merciful. Moreover unto thojfewjbom the angels put to death,
paving, injured their own fouls \ the angels faid^ Of what reli^mi were ye ?
they anfwered. We were weak in the earth r . fhe angel r replied* Was hot
God’s earth wide enough , that ye might fly therein to a ptyse of refuge 8 ? There-
fore their habitation mall be hell; and an evil journey Jhdl it be thither : ex-
cept the weak among men, and women,and children, wno were not able to find
means, and were not dire&ed in the wy > thefe perad venture God will pardon,
for God is reatjy to fprgive - gracious. Whqfoever flieth from bis country
for the fake of God’s true religion, fhall find in the earth many forced to
do the fame , and plenty of proviftons. And whoever departeth from his houfe^
and flieth unto God and his apoftle, if death overtake him in the way k p

L God

not here an eternity of damnation, ffor It Is the
general doctrine of the Mohammedans that none
who profefs that faith fhall continue in hell for
ever) but only a long fpAee of time *.

! *$ay not unto him mho fahoietb you, Thou art
not a true believer ;] On pretence that he only
feigns to be a* Mojlm, that he might efopefrQtn
you. The commentators mention more inftances
than one, of ptrfong flai ti and plundered by
Mohammed's men under this pretext, fifttwfrh’
Handing they declared themfelves Moflems by
repeating the ufual foxm of words* and fakiting
them 5 for which reafon this paflage was reveal-
ed, to prevent fuch rafh judgments for the fu-
ture.

b Seeking the accidental goods of thi{ life ;] That
is, being willing to judge him an infidel. Only
that ye may kill and plunder him.

c Swh were ye formerly viz- At your firft
proMion of before ye had given any

demonftrations of your finceriey and zeal there-
in.

d Not having any hart i] i. c< Not being dif-
abled from going to war by fipk^efs, or other
juft impediment. It i$ faid that when the j*f-

(age was firft revealed, there was no filch execu-
tion therein, which occafioned Ebn Omm Mae -
tdm, on his hearing it repeated, to objeft. And
tobat if I fimld be blinder Whereupon Moham-
med, filling into a kind of trance, which was
fopceeded by ftrong agitations, pretended he had
received the divine dire&ion to add thefc words
to the text*.

c fkoft whom the angels put to death, j&c] Thefe
were certain inhabitants of Mean, who held
with the hare and ran with the hounds, for tho*
they embraced^ Mohammedifm , yet they would
not leave that city to join the prophet* as the
reft of* the Maflems did, but on the contrary,
went out with the idolaters, and were therefore
flain, with them at the battlnof Bedr 3 .

f We mere weak in the earth i] Being unable Co
fly, and compelled to follow the infidels to war.

A Was not GodV earth wide enough, that ye
might fly to a plate frfuge?] As they did who
fled to Ethiopia and to Medina.

* If death overtake him in the tt>ay ;] This
paffage was revealed, fays al Beiddwi, on account
of Jefidob Ehn Domra. This perfon being fide,
was, in his flight,carried by his Tons on a couch,

mi

$ Idem , jALt'ALo'nniM.-

1 Al Beida wi«

a Idem.

74 Al R 0 RA N. CHAp.4.

Goo will be obliged to reward him* for God -is gracious attd merciful When
ye march to War in the earth, it lhall be no crime to you if ye ihortefl your
prayers, in cafe ye fear the infidels may attack you ; for the infidel* are y 0Ur
open enemy. But when thou, O prophet, lhalt be among them, and fhalt
pray with them, let a party of them arife to prayer with thee, and let them
take their arms ; and when they lhall hare worfhipped, let them feand behind

S ou •, and let another party come that hath not prayed, and let them pray with
we, and let thetn be Carious and take their arm*. The unbeliever* would that
ye fhould hegledt your arms and your baggage 'while ye pray, that they might
turn upon you at once. It lhall be no crime in you, if ye ‘be incommoded
by rain, or be fick, that ye by down your arms ; but take your ntceffan
precaution k : God harii prepared for the unbelievers an ignominf51& punifh.
ment. And whence lhall have ended your prayer, remember Goa, Handing,
and fitting, and tyrng on your fides c . But when ye are fecore/r™ dnnger,com.
plete your prayers ; fbl prayer is commanded the faithful, md appointed to be
[aid at the ftated times. Be not negligent in feektog out the imhdievihg peo-
ple, though ye fuller fome inconvenience-, for they aljb lhall fuffer, as ye fuller, and
ye hope fora reward from God which they cannot hope for ; and God is know-
ing and wife d . We have ferijt down unto thee the book of the Kok-^m with
truth, that thou mhye^^''jay^e , between men through that wifdon which God
fheweth thfee IVerdn ; arid be notan advocate for the fraudulent'; but afk
pardon Of Go o for h&jr wrong 'ityettftofy, linceGoois ifrdnTgent iml nfertifijl,
f)ifpiite not for thofe whfo deceive one another, for God foveth not him who
is a deceiver or orijuft f . Such Cqnceal themfelves from men, bul they con-
ceal not themfelves Ironr God; for he is with them when they -imagine by
Wight a faying which pleafeth him not *, and God comprehenueth what they
do. Behold, ye are^ they who havq disputed for them in this present life ;

but

tnd before he arrivfcd at Medina, perceiving his
end jfppitrfehOE^ fie eloped his right hand on
his left, arid foJSmnty piighong hisfaiHi to God
A nd his apo ftlc, died.

a And let them fiand behind 30a ;] To <Merid
'theft: Whe Are at prifdrsf and to faOe the enemy.

By t<&piiig

c W %, r and fitting^ and lying on year fifth]
That polbSre as ye mall be abJeV

4 'Btrtof'ntgH&n t in fie&ng out tteknMietf&s,
ftc.] This Vi^fe was tfeveafed on occafion df the
nnwilliiigtte6o^ft>5>tif»^^men to aettfn ttfcny
hhW'in the teflerexpedMott of Beit *.

* Xnd'bi Hot Hn aditoWffor tbtfmdu&nt, }
TUna B&n QGeirak of <hd fdns bf Dbafittri'Q he of
i tJOnkpaitteti'i, ftole a Ooat of iftfcil
from his neighbour kfrada Ebn al NOm&n, in
i bag' of ; and hid it at a '^fetAs ,' ‘named
<Z'eid&bn«t$*mn\ fib** feeing the

tfrtt Of men Was demanded t>f> ttfc, tyi* he

fie fcfiew *ny dtfhgW i Ct iW? ftifortfed
Ihe track of the meal, which had ran out thro’

a hole in the big* to the hoafe, attd there
ieiaedlt# aerating him of the theft; bet he
prodnemg tertnfclTcff of hi* own itlitftn that he
- Ittd k of Tima, the fans of frbdfar ? mf ^ ^
hammed , defirbd him to defend r foi$ ootnptd-
onls reputation; And C^bckmothe
he having feme thoughts of dumg, 'this paj%
was revelled, repfehfcndfog him for his wfli in-
febtittny antlcoimn.imUng him ro | ddge not it-
cordin^ to his own prejudice and opinion,, bdi
accordm g to thd merit of the cafe K

* For God loveth not admh'er

Al Beiiimt , *S an l oJbnce of the dime >$Wice,
rfddsi that ¥ bm& t after the fa&sfcoVr tnefttion-
ed, fled to and retuhied to Mohttyj 4rid

thet^ tindfrmming the wall of a houft; in Wder
to commit a i^ibfe^^y, the waH fell ixf upon hitn
and cT^fbed hhn to deaths

* When they imagine by night a faying tobkh
pleafeth hr * Hot * J Tfoffe, when they fecretl^
coritfiVe tneww, by ftlfe evidertOe o^lttewfife,
to fey flflSi* critfiei on Ifuiocenl perlbus.

See before , eh , 3. /. *■ Al Beidawi* 3 Idem , Jallalo’dwn, Yahya.

Chap. 4* At K 0 R A N. 75

blit who (hall difpute with Goo for them on the day of refows^ion, of
who will become their patron^ > ysc he who doth evil, or injured* his own
foul, and afterwards asketh pardon of Goo, fhaU find God gracious and
merciful. Whofo committeth wickednefs, committethk againft his own foul:
God is knowing and wife. And whofo committeth a fin or iniquity, and after?
wards layeth it on the innocent, he &aU rarely bear the gutit s/calumpy and
mamfeft ihjuftice. If the indulgence: and mercy of God had not been upon
these, furely a part of them had ftudied to fcduce thee*; hut they fball foduee
themfelves only, and fhall not hurt thee at all. God hath fent down unto
thee the book oft be Korean and wifoom, and hath taughtthee that which thou
kneweft not b ; for the favour of God hath been greit towards thee. There
is no good in the multitude of their private difcourfes, unkfs in the difcowfe
of him who recommendeth alms, or that which is right, or agreement &-
mongft men : whoever doth this out of a defive to pleafe God, we will finite-
ly give him a great reward. But whofo feparateth himfelf from the apoAfia,
after true direction hath been manifefted unto him, and followeth any other
Way, than that of the true believers, we will caufe him to obtain that to which
he is inclined % and will call him to be burned in hell ; and an unhappy journey
fhall it be thither. Verily- 'God will not pardon the giving him a companion,
but he will pardon any crime befides that, unto whom he pleafeth : and he who
giveth a companion unto Goo» is furely led afide into a wide roiflake : the infi-
dels invoke befide him only female deities d ; and only invoke rebellious Sa-
tan. God curled him ; and he laid. Verily I will take of thy fervants a part
cut off firm* tie reft % and I will feduce them, and will infinuate vain dcfires
into diem, and I will command them and they jhall cut off the ears of cat-
tle f ; and I will command them and they £hall change God’s creature A
But whoever taketh Satan for his patron, befides God h , ffiali furely perifh
with a manifeft: deftruftion. He maketh them promifes, apd infinuateth into
them vain defires ; yet Satan maketh them only deceitful promifes. The
receptacle of thefc lhall be hell, they lhall find no refuge from it. But they
who believe, and do good works, we will furely lead them into gardens,

L 2 through

* Apart of them badfiudied tf fidute tbeei] poga« Araks, See more of this cuftom in the

Meaning the fans of Dbtfar, notes to the 5th chapter.

* And batbjaught thee that tobith thou ktdvejl * And tbey fifil (fisnge Qms's treasure-,] JBi-

vot s] By iriflrufting thee in the knowledge of ther by maiming it, or putting it to ufes not
tight and wrong, and the rules of jufiice. defigned by the Creator. Al Beidawi fuppofes

* We will ciuift him to obtain that towards wbub the text to intend not only the fuperilitjous am-

ir is int lined ;] oix. Error, and falfc notions of potations of the ears and other parts of cattle,
■i*K{ $ion. tot the caftwtion of Paves, the narking their

: 1 fffbe infidels itetcie befiiu him onU ferrylg bodies with fibres* by pricking a qd dying them
ties ;] Namely,. AUdt f al Uz&*> aria Mndf, the with .woad or indie o, (as tip Arabs did and ftili
idobof the Meccans ; or the angeb, whom they d©> the iharpening their teeth fey 4 Kqg$ andal-
called daughters if Gan z * fa fodoroy* and the unnatural amours between

* A fart tut vjfi from the refit ;] Or, as the ori- thofc of the female feti the worship of the fqn,

■ginaL may. be tfanilated, a part deftmed orfude- moon, and other parts of nature, end the like.
Urmined to be feduced by me. b J 'sjuUs Godj] i, e. By leaving the feiyice

* And tbty.faM cutoff the ears effta ttl*s\\ of Gan, and doing the works *>f the devil.
Which waB done out of fuperfUdon by the old

1 Ste tie Prelim* Ptfourjt, #1. /. 1 %

7 6 Al KORAN. Chap. 4;

through which rivers flow, they (hall continue therein for ^ver, according to
the true promile of God ; and who is more true than God in whatj he (kith?
It fhall not be according to your defires, nor according to the defies of thofe
who have received the fcriptures *. Whofo doth evil, fha.ll be rewarded for it v
and fhall not find any patron or helper, befide God ; but whofa doth good
works, whether he be male or female, and is a true believer ; they (hall be
admitted into paradife, and (hall notin the leaft be uojuftlv dealt With. Who
is better in point of rdigiori, than he who rdigneth himfell unto Qop, and
is a worker of righteoufneJfe, aadfolloweth the law of Abraham the ortho-
dox? fince God took Abraham for his friend b : and to Gov belonged} whac-
foever is in heaven and on earth ; God comprehendcth all things, rhey will
confult thee concerning women* ; Anfwer, God inifrufteth you concerning
them *, and that which is read unto you in the book of the Kon.^# concern-
ing female orphans, to whom ye give not that which is ordained them, nei-
ther will ye marry them % and concerning weak infants f , and that ye ob-
ferve juftice towards orphans : whatever good ye do, God knoweth it. If
a woman fear ill ufage, or aVerfion from her husband, it (hall be no
crime in them if they agree the matter amicably between themfelves*;
for a reconciliation is better than a fcp&mion. Mens fouls are natural-

■ It fhall not be nmiriting'toywr defitbi, nor **• of what had kafppenfcd, opening one of the
itrding to tbt dejins ofthbfe who have raceitbd the facka, found good tower in it, end immediate-
feriptures 5 ] That is, the protoifes of God are ly fet out about making of bread. A r^bm a-
not to be gained by a£ing after your own fan- waking and fmelling the new bread, asked her
ties; nor yet after the fancies of the Jem or whence (he had the flower ? Why, fays flie,
Cbrifianr, but by obeying the commands of from your friend in Egypt ; Nay* replied the
Go o. This paffage, they fay, was repealed on Patriarch^ it mfl bwe cme from no otb& ft'an tnj
a difpute which &rpfe between thofe of the three Jfitfd Gop J/pigbif

religions, each preferring his own ^ .and .cqn- c mU. cyyM thee concerning temh ;] i. e.

dcraning the others. Some however fuppofe the As to tfe Ih&re "arc tb have in the diihibu-
perfons here fpokew to in thefecond perfoh,Were tfon 6f the inheritances i>f their deceafed rcla-
not the Mohammedans , but the idolaters x . tions ; for it fee ms the Arabs were not fetisfied

k Since God took Abrahanfr fit bis friind *] with Mahamme£% decifion in this point, againk
Therefore the Mohammedans ufually call that p^- the old coftoms.

triarch, as the feripture alfo does, Kbafil Allah , A God infintdetb you mnseming them, &c.]i.e.
the Friend of God, and fimplfjtf/ Kbatil ; and He hath already made his will Known unto you,
they tell the fblfofwittg ftoty'. - ^That Abrdhamn by rtveahng thepaflager concemihg inheritances
a . time of dearth fent to a friend of his in* Egypt in the beginning of this* thipterc
for a fupply of com ; But the friend denied him, • Neither thill ye marry with tbmi)Or the words

laying in his excufe. That tho’ there was a Jh- may tie rendred in the aifirmative, and wbmjt
roine^ in their country alibi yet had it been for defire to marry. For the pagan Arabs ufed to
Abraham % own family, he would have fent what wrong their female orphans in both inftances ;
he defined, but he knew he wanted it only to obliging them- to .marry agamft their inclinations
entertkm his guefta and give away to the^oor, if they were beautiful or rich ; or elfe not firf-
according to his ufual hbfpkality. The fervants fering them to marry at alt that they might
Ivhom Abraham had fent on this meflage, being keep what' belonged to them
afhamed fo return eittpty* *6 conceal the matter * 'And loniegyringi weak infants ; ] That is,

from their neighbours* ‘filled their facke With fine male children of fendefr years, to whom the Ar
white fand, which in the eaft pretty much re- rabsi in thd Vune of paganifin* ufed to allow no
fembles meah Abrhbam being informed by his fliare in the diflribulion of tl^ar parent! eftate 4 *.
fervants, on their teturn, of their illfucc^ft, the 8 If they agree the matter between tbcnfilvei ;]
concern he was unde* threw him into a >Qc©p ; viz* By the wife’s remitting part of her dower
and in the mean time Sarah, knowing nothing or other dues.

1 Al Beidawi, Jalla^Vdin* Y^iiyA, 2 AJ Brjdawi. S^D’Herbel. Bibl.Orient .
/. 14.tr Mqrc am\t Mabometiffn edpldtrid, F*. t. x 3 2. 5 Aittitswru 4 See before, p*b\. not. t.

Chap. 4 r

ly inclined to covetoufnefs * : But if ye be kind towards women, and fear td
wrong them , Goo is Well acquainted with what ye do. Ye can by no means
carry your felves equally between women in all refpefls, although ye ftudy to
do it therefore turn not frbm a Wife with all manner of ayerfion \ nor leave
her like one in fufpe fe c : if ve agree, and fear to abujc your wives , God is

f tacioua and merciful ; but if they feparatp. Goo will fatisfy them both of
is abundance * ; for Gob is exWiW and wife, and unto Goo belongeth
wharioever rs in fteaVetf add on eafth. We have already commanded thofe
unto whom the fcriptures were given before you, and we corAmand you alfo,
faying , Fear Goo •, but if ye ditbelfeve, "unto God belongetb whatfoever is in
heaven and on earth ; arid Goo lsfelf-fofficient% and to be praifed ; for unto
God beloqgeth whatfoever is in heaven and on earth, and God is a fufficient
prote&or. If he pl&rfeth he will take you away, O men, and will produce
others * in your Jfead •> for God i$ able to do this. Wl;ofo deftreth the re-
ward of this world, verify with Goo is the reward of this world, and alfo of
that which is to come ; Goo both heareth and feeth. O true believers, ob-
ferve juftice when ye bear witnefs before God, although it be againft your
felves, or your parents, or relations ; whether the party be rich, or whether
be be poor ; for God is more worthy than them both : therefore follow not
your own lull in bearing teftmony, fb r that ye fwerve from* juftice. And whe-
ther ye wreft your evidence , or decline giving it v Goo is Well acquainted with
that which ye do. O true believers, believe in God and his apoftle, and
the book which he hath caufed to defeend unto his apoftle, and the book
which he hath formerly fent down B . And whofoever believerh not in
God, and his angels, ana his fcriptures, and his apoftles, and the laft day,
he furely Crreth in a wide miftake. Moreover they who believed, and after-
wards became infidels^ and then believed again, and after that difbelieved, and
increafed in infidelity *, God will by no means forgive them, nor di reft them

into

• Mens finds are naturally inclined to cwttouft
nefi 5] So that the Woman, on the one fide, is un-
willing to part with any of her right, and the
hnsband, on the other, cares not to retain one he
has no affeftion for; or, if he fhould retain her,
fhe can fcarce expert he will ufe her in all re-
fpeftsas he ought *.

b Turn not from a wife with all manner of aver -
font] L e. Tho r you cannot ufe her equally well
with a beloved wife, yet obferve fome meafures
of juftice towards her ; for if a man is not able
pcrfeftly to perform his duty, he ought not, for
ifrat reafon, intircly to negteft it a .

c Nor leave her like one in fujpftf* i] Or like
one that neither has a husband, nor is divorced
and'at liberty to marry elfcwhcre.

- Gap will fatisfy them both , &c.] That is,
either will bfeft them with a better and more
advantageous match, or with peace a^d tranquil-
lity of mind

* God is felf~fajfaunit\ Wanting the fervice
of no Creature.

1 At Beidawu

f And will produce ethers, &c.J 1 . e. Either
another race of men, or a different fpecica of
creatures.

8 Believe in God and bis apoftle, &c,] It !$
faid that Abdallah Ebn Sal dm and his companions
told Mohammed, that they believed in him; and
his Koran , and in Mofes, and the penta teach,
and in Ezra, but no farther; whereupon * this
pafTagc was revealed, declaring that a partial
faith is little better than none at all, and that a
true believer muft believe in all God’s prophets
and revelations without exception 4 *.

h They who believed and afterwards became in -
fideh\ and then believed again, and after that dif-
believed, and again increafed in infidelity ;] Thefe
were the fetus, who firft believed in Mofes, and
afterwards fell into idolatry by worshipping the
golden calf ; and tho* they repented of that, yet
in after ages rejedlcd the prophets who were
fent to them, and particularly Jefits the fon of
Mary, and now filled up the meafure of their
unbelief by rejecting of Mohammed
3 Idem* 4 Idem 1 Idepu

3 Idem .

78 At KORAN. Cha M .

into the right way. Declare unto the ungodly * that they fhall fuffer a pain-
ful punifhment. They who take the unbelievers for their protestors, befides
the faithful, do they feek for power with them ? fince all power belongeth un-
to God. And he hath already revealed unto you, in the book of the Korau 1
the following pajfage, When ye fhall hear the Ogns of God, they fhall not be
believed, but they fhall be laughed to fcorn. Therefore fit not with them who
believe not , until they engage in different difcourfe ; for if ye do ye will certain-
ly become like unto them. God will furely gather the ungodly and the unbe-
lievers together in hell. They who wait/a obferue what befalleth you, if vidfory
be granted you from God, fay. Were we not with you * ? But if any ad-
vantage happen to the infidels, they fay unto ihem y Were we not fuperior
to you 4 , and have we not defended you againft: the believers? God fhall Judge
between you on the day of refurreftioh ; and God will not grant the unbelie-
vers means to prevail over the faithful. The hypocrites aft deceitfully withGon,
but he will deceive them; and when they ftand up to pray, they ftand care-
lefly, affeSling to be feen of men, and remember not God, unleft a little '
wavering between faith and infidelity, and adhering neither unto thefe nor unto
thofe f ; and for him whom God fhall lead aftray, thou fhalt find no true path.
O true believers, take not the unbelievers for your protestors, befides the uith-
ful. Will ye fumifh God with an evident argument of impiety againft you ?
Moreover the hypocrites fhall be in the loweft bottom of hell fire *; and thou
fhalt not find any to help them thence. But they who repent and amend,
and adhere firmly unto God, and approve the fincerity of their religion to
God, they fhall be numbered with the faithful ; and God will furely give the
faithful a great reward. And how fhould God go about to punifh you, if ye
VI. be thankful and believe ? for God is grateful and wife. * God Joveth not the
fpeaktng ill <tf any one in public, unltis he who is injured caH for ajfifance ;
and God heareth and knoweth: whether ye publifh a good afiion, or conceal
it, or forgive evil, verily God is gracious and powerful. They who believe
not in GcJd, and his apo files, and Would make a diftihdlion between God and
his apoftleS h , and fay. We believe in fome of tbepropbett and reject others*/
them, and feek to take a middle way in this matter ; thefe are really unbe-
lievers : and we have prepared for the unbelievers an ignominious pumfhmenr.
But they Who believe in God and Mfc apoftlfes; asd make no dillindbon between
any Of theto, Unto thofe Will we ffthely give their reward ; and God is gra-
cious

V Declare Mtto the unfrdlf, farV.] Mobammd
here means thofe who hypocritically pretended
to WieVe in him but rfcally did oof-, and by
*heir treacWy did great mifehief to his patty J .

* Jn the Koran ;} Chip. 6\

# Were we not with i* e* Didiwe not

ifiift yao f therefore give ni 1 pslrt of the
if oil

d Were we jret ijkpcricii n w**} Would not
oar fcrmy have cut you it hs£ not bain

far dur faitat ohiariat dyhrticnj bf

■

the MojimSi and our them 3 ?

Uniifi a little sj That h, with the tongue,
and not with the heart.

f Jtdberifg neither unto thtj* nor unu itofe;]
Halting b el ween two opinio n.^ and heing
{launch friends abkher to the hU firms > nor the
infidels.

* The 'hypocrites Jbeil be in the lotbefi bottom tf
bell fine i} Set. t%e Prelim haiyr Difcourfe $ IV.
-P* 92.

fc : Seex:hapj a. p. 34. not. b.

* Idem.

B Idem.

Chap. 4* Al KORAN. 79

cious and raercifuj. They who have received the ferippof es a wiJJ demand pf
thee* that thou caofe a book to defcend unto them From heaven : they formerly
aiked of M o s e s a greater thing than this ; for they feid, Shew us God viEbly \
Wherefore a ftorm of fire from heaven deft rayed them, becaufe of their ini^
qiuity. Then tfepy tpok the calf for their Gqp% after that evident proofs
of the divine unity h?4 come unto them : but we forgave them that* ana gave
Mqses a manifeft j>ow$r to _pu*ijb them*. And we lifted the mountain of
Sinai oven hem% when we exaSled fym thetn their covenant-, and faid un-
to them* Enter the £ate tftettiy worfoipping f . . We ajfo faid unto them,
not on the fabbath day. And we received from them a firm co-
venant* that they would afftry# thefe things Therefore for that g they have
made void their covenant, and have not believed in the figps of Goo, and have
(lain the*; prophets pnjuft^y, and have laid, Our hearts are ^(firqjijictfedi (but
God hath f^fe^rhemup* becaufe of their unbelief,; therefore $ey fhaJl not
believe, wc^pt a few of them-;) and for that have not believed on Jaws y
and have i§ 5 pken againft Mary a grievous calumny h ; and have faid. Verily
we have. flam Christ Jesus the fon of Mary, the apoftle of God ; yet
they flew him not, neither crucified him, but he was reprefented by one in.
his likenefs 1 * ; and verily they who difagreed concerning , him k , were in a
doubt as to this matter > and had po forts knowledge thereof, but followed on-
ly an uncertain opium They did not really kill him ; but God took him
up unto himfelf : and Gop is mighty and wife. And there JbaU not be one of
thofe who have received the feriptures, who fball npt believe in him, before
his death* ; and on the day of refurreftion he (hall be a witnefe agaipft

them.

1 They tohqbape received J be ferfaturifr &c,} 1 Yet foryxJUto him not, See fhaj, 3.

That is, the-J/prsi who demanded pf fdobfm- p. 4a. and the notes there.

Bid, as a proof of his nalffion, that they might * 1 Who difogretd concerning bim\] For fotne
fee a book of revelations defcend to hmi from maintained that lie wfcr jbftly -And really ertfei-
heaven, or that he. would produce one written bed ; fome infilled that it was ant Jefxsy who
in a celeftial chatafler, like the two tables of fullered, but another who rcfcmbled him in the
Mofes. face, pretending the other parts of hfs body,

b Shew us Goo r^/y,&c.]See chap. 2. p. 7. by their unlikenefe, plainly difeovered the im-

This ftory feems to be an addition to what pofition 5 fome faid he was taken up into heaven;

Mofes fay* Of the fbventy elders, Who Weiit up and others, that hit manhood only fufiered, and
to the mountain with him, and with Aaron, that hii godhead afeended into heaven 3 ,

Nadab, and Abibuy and faw the God bf If- 1 There jbdil not be one of tbofe who have re-
fuel 1 . reived the fcriptures> who pall not believe in

* See chap. 2. p. 6. bitty before bis death ;) This paflage is ex-

4 See ibid. p. 7. not. a* pounded two ways.

• See ibid. p. 9. Some, referring the r^ktive bis t to the firft

f See ibid. p. 7. - antecedent, tike the meaning tobe, that no Jew

8 Therefore for tbet k &c.] There being no- or GbHjUan lhall die, befort he believes in Je-

thhjgtn the foliowifig^Words bf this fontence, —fits : for they&y, that when one of either of
to fcnfwer to the eaiiftljftr -that, Jallaidddin thofe religions is ready to breathe his laft, and
fuppofes fomething to be undwftood to com- fees the angel bf death before hitn, he lhall
pleat the (etife, as, therefore we hove atrfed fbem, then believe in that prophet as he ought, tho’
or the like. his faith will not then be 6f any avail. Ac-

b And bane ft* n againfl Mary n grievous Cording to a tradition bf '&}&]> when a Jew
calumny ;] By accaftng her -of fbmiefrtfon \ is

1 Exod.xx iv. *9,-10, ti* * Seethe Kbr. eb. f$. wW that vhrtUnb book iiHHkd Xoldoth

Jefu. 3 ^/Beidawx, «*•

8o Al KORAN. Chap. 4,

them*. Becaufeof the iniquity 6f thofe who judaize, we havfc forbidden them
good things, which had been formerly allowed them b ; and becaufe they fbut
out many from the way of God, and have taken ulury, which was forbidden
•them by the law , and devoured men’s fubftance vainly : we have prepared for
fuch of them as are unbelievers a painful punifhment. But thofe among them
who are well grounded in knowledge ',and the faithful, who believe in that which
h&th been fent down unto thee, and that which hath been fent down unto
the prophets before thee, and who obferve the ftated times of prayer, and give
alms, and believe in God and the laft day 5 unto thefe will we give a great
reward. Verily we have revealed our will unto thee, as we have revealed it
unto Noah and the prophet^ who fucceeded him *, and as we revealed it unto
Abraham, and Ismael, ana Isaac, and Jacob, and the tribes, and unto Je-
sus, and Job, and Jonas, and AarOn, and SoloMon ; and we have given tbee the
Korean, as we gave the pfalms unto David : fome apoftles have we fent , whom
we have formerly mentioned unto thee, and other apoftles have we fent , whom
we have not mentioned unto thee ; and God fpake unto Moses, difeourfing
with him ; apoftles declaring good tidings, and denouncing threats, left men
fhould have an argument of excufe againft God, after the apoftle# had been
fent unto them *, God is mighty and wife. God is witnefs of that revelation
which he hath lent down unto thee ; he fent it down with Kvsfpeciat knowledge:
the angels alfo are witneftes thereof ^ but God is a diffident witnefs. They
Who believe not, and turn afide others from the way of God, have erred in
a wide miftake. Verily thofe who believe not, and aft unjuftly, God will by
no means forgive, neither will he direft them into any other way, than the
way of hell *, they fhall remain therein for ever : and this is eafy with God.
O men, now is the apoftle come unto you, with truth from your Lor§ ; be-
lieve therefore, it will be better for you. But if ye disbelieve, verily unto
God belongetb whatfoever is in heaven and on earth ; and God is knowing
and wife. O ye who have received the feriptures, exceed not the juft bounds
in your religion 4 , neither fay of God any other titan the truth. Verily Christ
Jesus the ion of Mary is the apoftle of God, and his Word, which he

is expiring, tfat angdta wHl ftrifce him on the
back and face, and to him, O tbou entmy rf
+God, Jefus was foil as a prophet unto thee, and
tbou diift not believe on him ; to which he will
anfwcr, I now believe him to be the /errant ef
God : and to a dying Cbriftian they will (ay,
ejelfirs was ,/ent as a prophet unto tbee, and tbou
'Jf'd/i maginfd him to be Gad, or the Bon of God ;
Whereupon he will believe him to be the fer-
vant of God only, and his apoftle.

Others, taking jth© abovemeationed relative
to refer to Jefns , foppofe the intent of the
vjwflag© to be, that all Jews and Cbriftians ip ge-
neral, /hall have a right faith in that prophet
before his death, that if, when he defeends from
Jieaven and returns into the world, where he is

con-

to kill Adtkbpift, and to eftablifl* the Moham-
medan religion, and a moft perfect
andfecurily on earth \

• He /ball be a witnefs againft them ;] i. e.
Againft the Jews # for reje&togj him ; and
againft the Cbriftiauf, for calling him God,
and the Son of God

* See chap. 3. p. 42 aad 47, and the notes
there.

c 5 f fyfe i * moifg them robe are well grounded in
buowfedge as Abdallah Ebn Salim, and his
com p#p ions l .

4 Exeeed not the juft hzndt in your religion j]
Either by rejecting ana contemning of Js/uj,
as the Jewo do 5 or railing him to an equality
with Gqoi.as do the Cbriflians

# * jAl 4 ,Af*Q , PtH»t Yahxa, Al Zama*h$hari, and j^/Beidawi. See the Prelim* D ie $

' M . j . fti. * ,^/Beldawj. * Idem . 4 Idem.

CdlF.* 'AJ KORAN. Si

conveyed into Mary, and a fpirit proceeding from him. Believe therefore in
God, and his apoftles, and fay not. There are three Goqs* ; forbear this ; it
will be better for you. God is bat one Goo. iar be it from him that he
ihould have a fon! unto him belongetb Whatfoever is in heaven and on earth;
and Goo is a fufficient protestor. Christ doth not proudly difdain to txL
a fervant unto God ; neither -the angels who approach near to bit prefence ?
and whofo difdaineth his fervice, aRd is puffed up with pride, God will gather
them all to himfelf, on the Idft clay* Unto thofe who believe, and do thac
which is right, he lhall give their rewards, and fhall fuperabundantly add unto
them oif his liberality : but thofe who are difdainful and proud, he will ppniQi
with a grievous punifliment ; and they fhall not find any to protect or to
help them, befides God. O men, now is an evident proof come unto you
from your Lord, and we have fent down unto you manifeft light They
who believe in God and firmly adhere to him, he will lead them into mercy'
from him, and abundance; and he will direct them in the right way to
himfelf*. They will confult thee for thy decifton in certain cafes ; fay unto tbem r
God .giveth you thefe determinations, concerning the more remote degrees
of kindred *. If a man die without ifliie, and have a After *, fhe fhall have
the half of what he fhall leave * : and he fhall be heir to her f , in cafe fhe have
no iffue. But if. there be two ftflers , they fhall have between them two third

{ ?arts of what he fhall leave j and if there be fevered , both brothers and
ifters, a male fhall have as much as the portion of two females. God de-
clared unto you thefe precepts , left ye err : and God knoweth all thihgs.

* Say not, there are thru Gods ;] Namely, knowledge, and by the Holy Ghoil, his life.
God, Jefui, and Mery 1 . For the eaflern * An evident proof and manifeft light ;] That
writers mention a left of Cbriftians, which is, Mohammed and his Korin.
held the Trinity to be compofed of therfe three 3 ; * In the right way to himij viz. Into the

but it i* allowed that this herefy baa been long religion of I flam, in this world, and the way

fince extinft 3 . The paflage however it equal- to paradife in the next *.
ly levelled againft the Holy Trinity, according * See the beginning of this chapter, p. 6a.

to the dottrine of the orthodox Cbriftiani, who, • She flail have the half of what he flail

as Al Beidawi acknowledges, believe the divine leave ij And the other half will go to the pub-
nature to coniift of three perfons, the Father, lie treafury.

the Son, and the Holy Ghoflj by the Father, f And be flail he heir to her ;] That it, he
underftanding God’s effcnce, by the Son, hit fhall inherit her whole fubftance.

'Al Beidawi, Jallalo’ddxh, Yahya. * Elmacin. p. **7. Evrrctt. p. 110. Sft
the Ptelim. Dife . $. II. p. 35. 1 Ahmxd Ebn Abp’al Halim. * ///Beidawi.

M

CHAP.

AIK ORA N.

Chap. 5,

CHAP, V.

Intitled, The Table*; revealed at Medina.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

O True believers, perform your contracts. Ye are allowed to eat the brute
cattle \ other than what ye are commanded to abftain front \ except the game
which y e are allowed at other titnes , but not while ye are on pilgrimage to Mscc^i ;
God ordaineth that which he pleafeth. O true believers, violate not the holy
rites of God c , nor the facred month a , nor the offering, nof the ornaments
hung thereon ', nor thofe who are travelling to the holy houfe, feeking favour
from their Lord, and to pleafe him. But when ye (hall have finilhed -jour
pilgrimage ; then hunt. And lec not the malice of Tome, in that they hindred
you from entrihg the facred temple f , provoke you to tranfgrefs, by taking re-
venge on them in the [acred months. A ffifi: one another according Co juftice and
piety, but affift not one another in injuftice and malice : therefore fear God;
for God is fetfere in puriffhing. Ye are forbidden to eat that which dieth of
it (Hf, and blood, and fwine*s flefh, and that on which the name of any befides
God, hath been irivocatdd* ; and that which hath been ftrangled, or kil-
led by a blow, or by a fall, or by the horns of another leaf , and that
which hath been eaten by a wild bead b , except what ye. fhall kill mr
f elves and that which hath been facrificed unto idols \ It is tikevnfe unlaw-
ful for you to make divifion by cafting lots with arrows'. This is an impie-
ty. On this day ”, wo be unto thofe who have apoftatized from their re-
ligion;

* This tide is taken from the Tabl( r which,
towards the fend of the chapter, is fabled to
have been let down from heaven to JeJhs. It
is fometimes alfo called the ,chap$er of ContraSs,
which word occurs in the firft verfe.

* The brute cattle, &c.] As camels, oxen, and
Iheep 5 and alfo wild cows, antelqgef, kc 1 :
but not fvvifie, nor what is taken in hunting
during the pilgrimage.

c The holy rites of God;} i. e. The cere-
monies ufed in the pilgrimage of Mecca.

4 See the Prelim . Di/e . VII.

* Nor the offering , nor the ornaments hung
thereon ;} The offering hfere meant, is the flieep
led to Metx^ to be: there facrificed ; about the
heck af^which ufe to hang garlands, green
boughs," or Tome other ornament, that it may
he diftinguifiied as a thing facred 2 .

1 In that they hindred you from entering the
/acred tcmple\\ In the expedition of AlHodcitiya* .

* On which the name of any hfidet God hath
been invoeatedf] For the idolatrous Arabs ufed,
in killing any anim 1 for food, to consecrate it,
as it were, to their Idols, by frying, In the name
of AlTiu or al Ozza + .

b Which bath been eaten if a wild beaft ;] Or
by a creature trained up to hunting V

1 Except tihaty* /ball kill youp/elves ;} That
is, unlefs ye come up time enougfc to find life
in the animal, and to cut its throat.

* Idols.] Tks word alfo fignifiet certainftones,
which the pagan Arabs ufed to fet up near their
houfes, and on which they fuperftitfoufly 1 flew
animals, in honour of their gods 6 .

1 See Prelim. Difc. §. V.

“ On this day, See ] This paflage, if is laid,
was revealed on fridav evening, being the day
of the pilgrims \ ifiting mount Arafat, the laft
time Mohammed vifited the temple of Mecca,
therefore called the Pilgrimage of valediction 7 .

1 Jallalo’ddin, Al Beidawi. 2 See the Prelim. Difc. J. IV. 3 See the Prelim .

Difc. $. II. p. * See ch. z. p. 20. 1 Al £ kid awl, 6 jdemt 7 Idem. See

Pud. life of Mahoqa. f. 99,

C h ap. 5 . Al K 0 R A N. 8 ;

ligion ; therefore fear not them, but fear! me. This <Ja 7 have I perfected
your religion for you *, and have compWatdd mv mercy' upon you*; and f
have chofen for you Islam, to be your religion! But whofoever fhall be drived
by neceflity through hunger, to eat of what we have forbidden, not defigning
to fin, furely God will be indulgent arid merciful unto him. They will ask
thee what is allowed them as 'lawful tS eat ? Anfwer, Such things as are good
are allowed you; and what ye lhafi teach animals of prey to catch * , training
them up for hunting after the manner of dogs, and teaching them according to
the skill which God hath taught you. Eat therefore of that which' they mill
catch for you; and commemorate the name of God thereon e ; and fear Got),
for God is fwift in taking an account. This day are ye allowed to eat fuCh
things as are good, and the food of thofe to whom the fcriptutes Were given 1
is alfo allowed as lawful unto you ; and your food is allowed as lawful unto
them. And ye are alfo allowed to marry fyee women that are believers, and
alfo free women of thofe who have received the ffcriptutes before you, when
ye fhall have afligned them their dower ; living chaftly With them, neither
committing fornication, nor taking them for concubines. Whoever fhall re-
nounce the faith, his work fhall be vain, and in the next life he fhall be of
thofe who periih. O true believers, when ye prepare your felves to pray,
walh your races, and your hands unto the elbows ; and rub your heads, and
your feet unto die ancles ; and if ye be polluted by having kin with a woman,
wafh your felves all over. But if ye be fick, or on a journey, or any of you
cometh from the privy, or if ye have touched women, and ye find no water,
take fine clean fand, and rub your faces and your hands therewith ; God
would not put a difficulty upon you ; but he defireth to purify you, and to
compleat his favour upon you, that ye may give thanks. Remember the
favour of God towards you, and his covenant which he hath made with you,
when ye faid, We have heard, and will obey *. Therefore fear God, for God
knoweth the innermoft parts of the breafts of men. O true believers, obferve
juftice when ye appear as witnefies before God, and let not hatred towards any
induce you to do wrong : but aft juftly ; this will approach nearer unto piety;
and fear God, for God is folly acquainted with what ye do. God hath pro-
mifed unto thofe who believe, and do that which is right, that they fhall re-
ceive pardon and a great reward. But they who believe not, and accufe
our figns of falfehood, they fhall be the companions of hell. O true be-
lievers, remember God’s favour towards you, when certain men defigned to
ftretch forth their hands againft you, but he reftrained their hands from
hurting you k ; therefore fear God, and in God let the faithful truft. God

M a formerly

• This day have I perfected your religion for * And commemorate the name of God thereon *]
yen And therefore the commentators fay, that Either when ye let go the hound, hawk, or o-
after this time, no pofitive or negative precept ther animal* after the game ; or when ye kill it,
was given x . f Fiz. Slain or drefled b yfews or Chrifiians.

b And have comfkated my mercy upon you ;] By * We have heard and mitt obey ;] Thefe words

having given you a true and perfefl religion ; are the form ufed at the inauguration of a prince;
or, by the taking of Mecca, and the deftruftion and Mohammed here intends the oath of fidelity
®f idolatry. which his followers had taken to him at alAkaba*.

e Such things as are good 5] Not fuch as are b When certain men defigned to ftretch forth their

filthy, or unWholfome. hands againft you, but be reftraimd tbemi} The

t Animals of prey ;] Whether bcafts or birds, com-.

1 F AauLF*D. vit*Moh.$* 131,

a F ib . /. 43, and the Prtlm . I Vfc. II,/, 48.

84 Al KORAN \ Chap. 5 .

formerly accepted the covenant of the children of Israel, and we appointed
out of them twelve leaders: and God faid. Verily lam with you*: if y c
obferve prayer, and give alms, and believe in my apoftles, and aflift tHein,
and lend unto God on good ufury ", I will furely expiate your evil deeds from
you, and I will lead you into gardens, wherein rivers flow : but he among
you who disbelieve* after this, erreth from the ftrait path. Wherefore bc“
caufe they have broken their covenant, we have curfod them, and hardened
their hearts ; they diflocate the words of the pentateucb from their places, and
have forgotten part of what they were admonilhedi and thou wilt not ceafe to
difeover deceitful practices among them, except a few of them. But forgive
them 0 , and pardon them, for God loveth the beneficent. And from thofe
who fay. We are Chriftians, we have received their covenant ; but they have
forgotten part of what they were admonifhed ; wherefore we Have railed up
enmity and hatred among them, till the day of refurrettion ; and God will then
furely declare unto them what they have been doing. O ye who have received
the leriptures, now is our apoftle come unto you, to make manifeft unto
you many things which ye concealed in the feripeures 4 5 and to pafs over •

many

commentators tell feveral Hones as the occafion
of this paflage. One fays, that Mohammed and
ibme of his followers being at OsfaH (a place not
far from Mecca, in the way to Medina) and per-
forming their noon devotions, a company of i-
dolaters, who were in view, repented they bad
not taken that opportunity of attacking them,
and therefore waited till the hour of evening
prayer, intending to fall upon them then : but
God defeated their deiign, by revealing the
verfe o (fear. Another relates, that the prophet
going to the tribe of Koreidha fwho were Jews)
to levy a fine for the blood of two Mojlems , who
had been killed by mifhkc, by Amru Ebn Om~
meya al Dimri , they defired him to fit down and
eat with them, and they would pay the fine ;
Mohammed complying with their requeft, while
he was fitting, they laid a ddign againft his life,
one Amru Ebn JabaJh Undertaking to throw a
mill-flone upon him ; but God with-held his
hand, and Gabriel immediately defeended to ac-
quaint the prophet with their treachery, upon
which he rofe up and went his way. A third
ftory is, that Mohammed having hung up his
arms on a tree, under which he was retting him-
felf, and his companion* being ditperfed feme
diftance from him, an Arab of the- defarf came
up to him* and drew his- fword, faying, Who
bindretb metfrom killing thee / To which Mo-
hammed anfwered, God : and Gabriel beating
the fword out of the Arab* 5 hand, Mohammed
took it up, and asked him the fame qiieflion.
Who hinders me frm killing thee t the Atab re-

1 Al BltftAWju * Vis . Mob. f. 73
Ste Numb, xiii* and xiv. * Al Biidawu.

plied, Nobody, and immediately profefied Mo-
bammed ifm 1 . A^iifcda 2 tells the fame ftory,
with fbme variation of circumftancetf

* God appointed them twelve leader** and /aid,
Verily I am with you, &c.} After the IJraeMoshii
efcaped from Pharaoh , God ordered th ftfrto go
againft Jericho, which was then inhabited by
giants, of the race of the Canaanites, ptojailinj
to give it into their hands; and Mfts, by the
divine direction, appointed a prince or captain
over each tribe, to lead them in that expediti-
on 3 , and when they came to the bordenf of the
land of Canaan , fenr the captains as fpiea to get
information of the ftate of the country, injein-
ing them fecrecy ; but they being terrified at the
prodigious fize and ftrength of the inhabitants,
difheartned the people by publickly telling what
they had feen, except only Ca&t the Ion of
Tsfamea {Jepbmneb) and JoJbua the fon of Afcr*

* And lend unto God on good ufury ;] By con-
tributing towards this holy war.

c Forgive them, and pardon them ;] That is,
if they repent and believe, or fubmit to pay tri-
bute. Some however think thefe words are ab-
rogated by the verfe of tht fword 5 .

“ c ft> make manifeft mo you many things which
ye concealed in the feriptures Such as die verfe

of ttoning adulterers 6 , the deferiptien of Mo-
Bammed, and CbrtfT s prophecy of him by the
name of Ahmed 7 .

* And to pafs over many things ;] i. e. Thofe
which it was not necefiary to rellorc.

3 See Numb . i. 4, 5. * Al Beidaws.

6 See Chap. i.p, 37. 7 AlBt idawi*

Ch a P t. 5. Al KORAN. 85

many things . Now is light and a perfpicuotis book of revelations come unto you
from God. Thereby will God dlre&him who fhall follow his good p!eafure,into
the paths of peace *, and fhalf lead them out of darknefs into light, by his
will, and fhall direct them in the right way. They are infidels, who fay.
Verily God is Christ the fon of Mary. Say unto them. And who could
obtain any thing from God to the contrary , if he pleafed to deftroy Christ
the fon of Mary, and his mother, and all thofe who are on the earth? For
unto Goo belongeth the kingdom of heaven and earth, and whatfoever is con-
tained between them •, he createth what he pleafeth, and God is almighty.
The Jews and die Chriftians fay. We are the children of God, and his belov-
ed. Anfwer, Why therefore doth he punilh you for your fins? Nay, but ye
are men, of thofe whom he hath created. He forgiveth whom he pleafeth,
and punifheth whom he pleafeth ; and unto God belongeth the kingdom of
heaven and earth, and of what is contained between them both j and unto
him fhall all things return. O ye who have received the feriptures, now is
our apoftle come unto you, declaring unto you. the true religion , during the
cefiation of apoftles *, left ye fhould fay. There came unto us no bearer of
good tidings, nor any Warner : but now is a bearer of good tidings, and a
Warner come unto you ; and God is almighty. Call to mind when Moses
faid unto his people, O my people, jemember the favour of God towards you,
fince he hath appointed prophets among you, and conftituted you kings b , and
beftowed on you what he hath given to no other nation in the world *. O my

a le, enter the holy land, which God Hath decreed you, and turn not your
s, left ye be fubverted and perifh. They anfwered, O Moses, verily
there arc a gigantic people in the land 4 ; and we will by no means enter it,
until they depart thence ; but if they depart thence, then will we enter there-
in. And two men* of thofe who feared God , unto whom God had been gracious,
faid. Enter ye upon them fuddenly by the gate of the city ; and when ye fhall
have entred the fame, ye fhall iurely be vidforious : therefore truft in God,
if ye are true believers. They replied, O Moses, we will never enter the
land , while they remain therein : go therefore thou, and thy Lord, and fight;
for we will fit here. Moses faid, O Lord, furely I am not mafter of any
except my felf, and my brother; therefore make a diftindtion between usand the
ungodly people. God anfwered. Verily the land fhall be forbidden them forty
years ; during which time they fhall wander like men afionijhed in the earth f ;

there-

* During the tejfatien of apoftles »J _ The Arabic
word at Fatri fignifies the intermediate fpaee of
time between two prophets, daring which no
new revelation or difpenfation was given ; as the
interval between Mo/es and -Jesus, and between
Jesus and Mohammed expiration of which
laft, Mohammed pretended to be lent.

* And conftituted you kings ;]Thi's was fulfilled
other by God’s giving them a kingdom, and
a long feries of princes ; or by hir having made
them kings or mafttrs of thcmfclves, by deliver-
ing them from the Egyptian bondage.

* And beftowed on you wbat he bath given to no

other nation ;] Having divided the red fea for
you, and guided you by a cloud, and fed you
with quails and manna, be. 1

* A gigantic peoples] The large!! of thefe gi-
ant*, the commentators fay, was Og the fon of
Anak ; concerning whofe enormous ftature, his
efcaping the flood, and the manner of his being
flain by Mofes, the Mohammedans relate feveral
abfurd fables *.

* Two men i] Namely, Caleb, and Jepua.

( The land Jball be forbidden them forty years',
during which they pall wander in the earth like

men

1 AlBzi DAW I.

* V. Mamacc. in Alter. p. 231, &(. D’Hkabil. Bibl . Orient • p- 336.

86 Al KORAN. Chap. 5 .

therefore be not thou follicitous for the ungodly people. Relate alfo unto
them the hiftoryof the two fons of Adam *, with truth. When they ofiered
their offering b , and it was accepted from one oT them e , and was not accept,
ed from the other, faid to his brother , I will certainly kill thee. Aeel
anfwered, God only acceptetk the offering of the pious *, if thou ftretcheft
forth thy hand againft me, to flay me, I will not ftretch forth m'y hand againft
thee, to flay thee ; for I fear God the Lord of all creatures 4 . I choofe that
thou fbouldeft bear my iniquity and thine own iniquity j and that thou be.
come a companion of hell fire ; for that is the reward of the unjuft But
his foul fuffered him to flay his brother, and he flew him f ; wherefore he
became of the number of thofe who perifh. And God fent a raven, which
fcratched the earth, to fhew him how lie fhould hide the fharne of his brother*,
and he faid. Wo is me ! am I unable to be like this raven, that I may hide
my brother’s ihame ? and he became one of thofe who repent. Wherefore we
commanded the children of Israel, that he who flayeth a foul, without ad-
ding thereto the murder of another foul, or without committing wickednefs

tun aftcnlJbeJ .] The commentators pretend that
the Ijraelites, while they thus wandred in the
defert, were Jcqat within the compa/s of about
eighteen (qr as fome fey twenty feven) miles 5
and that tho* they travelled from morning to
sight, yet they conftaqtfy found themfelves the
next day at the place from whence they (et out 1 .

• The two fons of Adam;] viz Cain and AM,
whom the Mohammedans call Kabtl and Haiti.

* When they offered their offering.} The occa-
sion of their making this offering is thus related,
according to the common tradition in the eaft*.
Each of them being born with a twin -filler,
when they were grown up, Adam, by Gqd\t
direction, ordered Cain to marry Abets twin-
fifter, and that Abel IhouJd marry Cain's ; (for
it being the common opinion that marriage*
ought not to be had in the neareft degrees of
tonfanguinity, fince they muft neceffarily mar-
ry their Afters, it feemed reafonable to fuppofe
they ought to take thofe of the remoter degree)
but this Cain refufmg to agree to, becaufe his
own fifter was the hand feme ft, Adam ordered
them to make their offerings to God, thereby
referring the difpute to his determination 3 .
The commentators fav Cain's offering was a
Iheaf of the very worn of bis corn, but Abets
a fat lamb, of the beft of his flock.

c And it was acceded from one of them;} Name-
ly from Abel ; whofe facrificc God declared his
acceptance of in a vifihJe manner, by capling fire

to defeend from heaven and confume it, with-
out touching that of Cain 4 .

6 I will not flretcb forth my band againft tbeei]
To enhance Abets patience, at Beidami tells U j,
that he was the ftronger of the two, and could
eafily have prevailed againft hi* brother.

* The converfation between the two brother*
is related fome what to the fame purpofe in the
Jerufalem Targum and that of Jonathan ben
UzzieL

f And he flew him ;] Some fey he knocked out
his brains with a done 5 ; and prestnd that as
Cain was considering which way he (hould ef-
fe£t the murther, the devil appeared to him ina
humane Chape, and (hewed him how to do it, by
crufting the head of a bird between two ftooea 6 ,

8 Gon fent a raven which fcratched the earth,
and firmed him how to hide his brother's flam j]
1. e. His dead corps. For Cain , having com-
mitted this fratricide, became exceedingly troub-
led in his mind, and carried the dead body a-
bout on his ihoulders for aconfiderabletime, not
knowing where to conceal it, till it ftank hor-
ridly; and then God taught him to bury it by
the example of a raven, who having killed ano-
ther raven in his prdence, dug a pit with his
claws and beak, and buried him therein 7 . For
this dreumftanee of the raven Mohammed was
beholden to the Jews, who tell the fame ftory,
except only that they make the raven to appear
to Adam, and that he thereupon buried his fon*.

1 Al Bhidawi, Jaxlalod'pin. ^ V \ Abu*lfarac. 6, 7. Eutych. annal.p. 15,
t6. and HI Hcabilqt, Bill Orient . Jrt.Cabil . 3 Al Bbidawi. * Idem, Jalla-

Lo’DdfL s F, EoTrcu. ubi fufra. 6 V. D t Hirbelot, ubi flip. 7 Jalia*-

txo*DDiN, Al Bbidawi. ft Elibzee, Pkke, c. zo*

Chap. 5. Al KORAN. 87

in the earth*, Jball he as if he had flam all mankind *: but he who faveth
a foul alive, jball be as if he had faved the lives of all mankind. Our apoftles
formerly came unto them, with evident miracles ; then were many of them,
after this, tranfgreflbrs on the earth. But the recompenfe of thofe who fight
againft God and his apoftle, and ftudy to aft corruptly in the earth, Jball
be y that they fhall be flain, or crucified, or have their hands and their feet
cut off on the Oppofite fiies y or be baniflied the land e . This fhall be their
difgrace in this world, and in the next world they fhall fuffer a grievous pu-i
nilhment ; except thofe who fhall repent, before ye prevail againft them * for
know that God is inclined to forgive, and merciful. O true believers, fear
God, and eameftly defire a near conjunction with him, and fight for his re-
ligion, that ye may be happy. Moreover they who believe not, although
they had whatever is in the earth, and as much more withal, that they
might therewith redeem themfelves from punifhment on the day of refur-
reftion ; it fhall not be accepted from them, but they fhall fuffer a painful
punifhment. They fhall defire to go forth from the fire, but they fhall not
go forth from it, and their punifliment fhall be permanent. If a man or a
woman fteal, cut off their hands d , in retribution for that which they have
committed •, this is an exemplary punifhment appointed by God ; and God is
mighty and wife. But whoever fhall repent after his iniquity, and amend,
verily God will be turned unto him % for God is inclined to forgive, mi
merciful. Doft thou not know that the kingdom of heaven and earth is
God’s ? He punifheth whom he pleafeth, and he pardonech whom he pleafcth ;
for God is almighty. O apoftle, let not them grieve thee, who haften to
infidelity f , either of thofe who fay. We believe, with their mouths, but
whofe hearts believe not 5 * .or of the Jews, who hearken to a lie, and hearken
to other people 11 5 who come not unto thee: they pervert the words of the

law

■ Without committing wickednefs on the earth ;]
Such as idolatry, or robbing on the high-way *.

b Sba/I he as if be had Jiain all mankind Hav-
ing broken the commandment which forbids the
Ibeddlng of blood.

e The lawyers are not agreed as to the ap-
plying of thefe punifhments. But the commen-
tators fuppofe, that they who commit murder
only, are to be put to death in the ordinary way ;
thofe who murder and rob too, to be crucified ;
thofe who rob without committing murder, to
have their right hand and their left foot cut off;
and they who a {fault perfons and put them in fear,
to be banifhed a . It is alfo a doubt whether
they who are to be crucified fhall be crucified a-
live, or be firft put to death, or whether they
fhall h^ng on the crofs till they die 3 .

4 Cut off their hands ;] But this punifhment,
according to the Sonna , is not to be inflided,
unlefs the value of the thing ftolen amount to four
dinars , or about forty {hillings. For the firft
offence the criminal is to lofe his right hand,
which is to be cut off at the wrift ; i-for the fe-

cond offbice, his left foot, at the ancle ; for the
third, his left hand ; for the fourth, his right foot*
and if he continue to offend, he fhall befcourg-
ed at the diferetion of the judge 4 .

° But whoever floali repent and amend, God
wilt be turned unto him , &c.] That is, God will
notpunHh him for it hereafter; but his repen-
tance does not fuperfede the execution of the
law here, nor excufe him from making refti ra-
tion. Yet, according to al Shdfei, he fhall not
be punifhed if the party wronged forgive him
before he be carried before a tnagiftrate 5 ,

1 Who haften to infidelitji ] i. e. Who take the
firft opportunity ro throw off the mask, and to
join the unbelievers.

* Who fay, We believe, with their mouths, &t?.]
viz* The hypocritical Mohammedans.

b Who hearken to a lie , ana hearken to efther
people ;] Thefe words are capable of two fenfes;
and may either mean that they attended to the
lies and forgeries of their Rabbins, neglecting
the remonflrances of Mohammed i or clie, that

they

1 Al Beidawi, 3 Idem, jAi.LA£o r i>DiN* 3 AlBz idawj, 4 Jallalo’dihk, Al Bbxdaws.
5 lidem.

88 Al KORAN. Chap, 5.

law from their true places 1 , and fay. If this be brought unto you, receive
it \ but if it be not brought unto you, beware of receiving ought elfe * ; and in
behalf of him whom God (hall refblve to feduce, thou (halt not prevail with
God at all. They whofe hearts God (hall not pleafe to cleanfe* fhall f u ff cr
lhame in this world, and a grievous punifhmenc in the next, who hearken to
a lie, and eat that which is forbidden «. But if they come unto thee/w j u i
ment , either judge between them, or leave them d ; and if thou leave them,
they (hall not hurt thee at all. But if thou undertake to judge, judge between
them with equity 5 for God loveth thole who obferve juftice.^ And how will
they fubmit to thy decifion, fince they have the law, containing the judgment
of God'? Then will they turn their backs, after this'; but thole are not true
believers*. We have (urely fentdown the law, containing direction, and light-
thereby did the prophets, who profeffed the true religion, judge thefe who j u l
daized and the doctors and priefts alfo judged by the book of God, which
had been committed to their cuftody ; and they were witnefles thereof*. There-
fore fear not men, but fear me ; neither fell my ligns for a fmall price. And
whofo judgeth not according to what God hath revealed, they are infidels.
We have therein commanded them, that they Jbould give life for life*, and eye

lor

they came to hear Mohammed as fpies only, that
they might report what he faid to their com*
panions, and reprefent him as a liar *.

• See Ch. 4. p. 67. Note b.

* If this be brought unto yen, receive it l but if it be
not brought unto you, beware of receiving ought elfei]
That is, if vihsxMobmmed telkyotf>agree$ with
feripture, as corrupted and diflocatedby us, then
you may accept it aa the word of God, but
if -not, rejed it. Thefe words, it is faid, relate
to the fenteuce pronounced by that prophet, on
-an adulterer and an aduherefs l ,bcth perfons of
fomc figure among th ejews. For they, it feems,
tho’ they referred the matter to Mohammed, yet
direClcd the perfons who carried the criminals
before htra, that if he ordered them tobefcourg-
ed, and to have their faces blackened (by way of
ignominy) they fhould acquiefce in his determi-
nation, but in cafe he condemned them to be
Honed, they fhould not. And Mohammed pro-
nouncing the latter fcntence againft them, they
refufed to execute it, till Ebn Suriya (a Jew)
who was called upon to decide the matter, ac-
knowledged the law to be fo. Whereupon they
were Honed at the door of the mofque 3 .

c And eat that which is forbidden ;] Some un-
derhand this of unlawful meats ; but others of
taking or detmriog f as it is expreffed, of ufury
and bribes

4 Either judge between them , or leave themi ]
i- e. Take thy choice, whether thou wilt de-
termine their differences or not. Hence al Sbiftl
was of opinion that a judge was not obliged to
decide caufes between Jews or Cbrifliaus j, tho’

if one or both of them be tributaries* or under
the protection of the Mohammedans t they are ob-
liged: this verfe not regarding them. Abu Ho-
nifa however thought that the magiftmea were
obliged to judge all tafes which were fubmitted
to them 1 .

• And bow will they fubmit to thy decifimfntt
they have the law, &c.] In the following piflage
Mohammed endeavours to anfwer the objections
of the Jews and Cbrifi/ms, who infilled that
they ought to be judged, the former by thelaw
of Mofes, and the latter by the gofpej. He al-
lows that the law was the proper rule of judg-
ing till the coming of Jefus Cbrijf, after which
the gofpel was die rnlej but pretends that both
are fet afide by the revelation of the Kerin,
which is fo far from being comradi&a^ to ei-
ther of the former, that it is more full and ex-
plicit $ declaring feveral point* which had been
flified, or corrupted therein, and requiring a ri
gorous execution of the precepts in both, which
had been two remifsly obferved, or rather neg-
lected, by the latter profefifors of thofe religions.

1 Then will they turn their backs afttr this ;]
That is, notwithftanding their outward fub-
miffion^they will not abide by thy fentence, tho’
conformable to the law, if it con tradiCl their
own falfe and loofe decifionr.

6 Thefe are not true believer , As gainfaying

thedodrine of the books which they acknow-
ledge for feripture.

* And they were witaejfes thereof ;] That is*
vigilant, to prevent any corruptions therein.

1 Life »] The original word is fust.

1 41, Biidawk 1 Seech, 3 * ^ 37 . not*c. *,Jl Bxioawi.

« L/em'

4 Ue*

Chap. 5* dl KORAN. 89

for eye, and nole for nofe, and ear for ear, and tooth for tooth ; and that
wounds Jbauld alfo be punifhed by retaliation * : but whoever (hould remit it
as alms, it JhouU be accepted as an atonement for him. And whofo judgcth
not according to what God hath revealed, they are unjuft. We alfo caufed
Jesus the fon of Mary to follow the footfteps of the prophets , confirming
the law which was fent down before him *, and we gave him the gofpel, con-
taining direction and light ; confirming alfo the law which was given before
it, and a direction and admonition unto thofe who fear God : that they who
have received the gofpel might judge according to what God hath revealed
therein : and whofo judgeth not according to what God hath revealed,
they are tranlgrelfors. We have alfo lent down unto thee the book of the
Korkin with truth, confirming that feripture which was revealed before it ; and
preferving the lame fafe from corruption. Judge therefore between them accord-
ing to that which God hath revealed ; and follow not their defires, by fwerv-
ing from the truth which hath come unto thee. Unto every of you have we
given a law, and an open path ; and if God had pleafed, he had furely made
you one people b j but be bath thought fit to give you different laws , that he
might try you in that which he hath given you reJpeBively. Therefore drive
to excel each other in good works: unto God lhall ye all return, and then
will he declare unto you that concerning which ye have difagreed. Where-
fore do ibou, O prophet , judgfe between them according to that which God
hath revealed, and follow not their defires ; but beware of them, left they
caufe thee to err* from part of thofe precepts which God hath fent down un-
to thee ; and if they turn back d , know that God is pleafed to punifh them
for fome of their crimes; for a great number of men are tranfgreffors. Do
they therefore defire the judgment of the time of ignorance *? but who is bet-
ter than God, to judge between people who reafon aright ? O true believers,
take not the Jews, or Chriftians for your friends ; they are friends the one
to the other ; but whofo among you taketh them for his friends, he is furely
one of them : verily God direfteth not unjaft people. Thou lhalt fee thofe
in whofe hearts there is an infirmity, to haften unto them, faying. We fear
left fome adverfity befal us'; but it is eafy for God to give vnftory, or a

N com-

• See Exod. rri. 24, &c.

He bad madt you one people 5] i. e. He had
given you the lame laws, which lhould have
continued in force thro’ all ages, without being
abolifhed or changed by new difpenfations 5 or
he could have forced you all to embrace the
Mohammedan religion 1 .

c And follow not their defires, but beware of
them , left they caufe thee to err, &c.] It is re-
lated, that certain of the JemJb priefts came
to Mohammed with a defign to intrap him ; and
having firft reprefen ted to him, that if they ac-
knowledged him for a prophet, the reft of the
Jews would certainly follow . their example,
made this propofalj that if he would give judg-
ment for them in a controverfy of moment
which they pretended to have with fheir own

people, and which was agreed to be referred to
his decision, they would believe on him : but
this Mohammed abfolutely refufed to comply
with*.

4 If the jr turn back ;] Or refufe to be judged
by the Koran .

* The judgment of the time of ignorance ;] That
is, to he judged according to the cuftoms of
paganifm, which indulge the palhons and vici-
ous appetites of mankind ; for this, it feems,
was demanded by the JewiJh tribes of Koreidba
and al Nadir K

f We fear left form adtetfi; befal u* 1] Thefe
were tL * wdrds of Ebn Obba , who, when Obd-
dab r , J public kly renounced the friendU

fhip of the infidels, and profefled that he took

God

x

* Idem .

3 Idem .

go Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 5.

command from him*, that they may repent of that which they concealed i n
theft- minds. And they who believe will fay. Are thefe the men who have fworn
by Goo, with a mod firm oath, that they furely held with you b ? their works
are become vain, and they are of thofe whoperifh. O true believers, whoever of
you apo'ftatizeth from his religion, God will certainly firing other people to
Jupply Ms place c , whom he will love, and who will loye him ; wbojhall be
humble towards the believers, but fevere to die unbelievers : they fhall fight for
the religion of God, and lhall not fear the obloquy of the de trailer. This
is the bouncy of God, he belloweth it on whom he pleafeth : God is ex-
tenfive and wife. Verily your protestor is God, and his apoftle, and thofe
who believe, who obferve the ftated times of prayer, and give alms, and who
bow down to worjhip. And whofo taketh God, and his apoftle, and the
believers for his friends, they are the party of God, and tfh^ey, Jkatl bp vi<%-
rious. O true believers, take not fuch of thofe to whom the fcrlpturfe were
delivered before you, or of the infidels, for your friends, who make a laoghing-
ftock, andajeftof your religion a ; but fear God, if ye be true believers;
nor ttoofe ttfbo, when ye call to prayer, make a laughing-ftock and a jeft of

G6d and his apoftle for his patroAs, faid that whofe leader was Kcrrab Efa Se.'na- 6. Bm
hfe was a man appreheiifivq of the fiekleneffr of SoMm* ^ho followed al Ftjiah Eh AbdY&Ttl.
fortune, and therefore would not throw off his 7. Bonn Turku, whofe captain was Maki Eh

old fViejids, who might be of fenrice to him Noroeirab Ebn Kais. & Part of the tribe of 7*.

hereafter mm, the £rpfelytes of Saja/ the daughter of d

* A command front bimi] To extirpate and Mondbar,viho gave her felf out fora mup]^ic\Y\
banWh the Jean ; or to deteft and punifh the 9. The tribe of Keniab, led by d At./’- Eh

hypocrites! Kdb. xo. Bonn Btcr Ebn ■ . fPa . i in the pro-

^ Are theft the men tube hew [worn* &c.] Thefe vence of Bahrein , headed by* al H r zv: Eh Zc l
words may be .fookep by the Mohammedans d- And, ti Some of the tribe of Gkajja. \ w ho,
thef to one Other, or to the Jews ; fince thefe with their prince Jabalab Eh A.lwsjt, re-
hypocribe* had given their baths to both*. nonneed MobapAtedij-? in the tftne of 0 : r,

L Wbtetitt of. you apdflatikitb from bis religion, and returned to their former profeffion ot Ch>
Goo toil! Certainly bring others to (apply bps ffixe* ftianpty 7 .

&c.] This is one of thofe. accidents whidi, it But as to the perfens who fulfilled the her
is pretended, 1 were foretold by the Koran ldng part of this prophecy, by fupplying the lofs of
before they came to pafs. For in the latter day* fo many renegates, the commentators are not
of Mohammed, and after his death, confiderablc agreed. Some will have them to be the inha-
numbers of the Atabs quitted his religion* and bitants of Taman, and others the Prr/im ; the
returned to Ba^nifm, Judaifm, or-Chriflaaxutjr- authority of Mohammed him felf being vouched
Ai Betidazvi reckons them. Up in the following for both opinions. Others, however, fuppofe
order, 1. Three companies of Barm Modlaj , fe* them to be 2000 of the tribe of al N^hls: *who
duced by Dbdlbamar al Afioad M Anfi, who fet dwelt in 23 ww*) 500G of thofe of Ktnia and Ba-
up fora prophet in Taman* and grew very pow- jihtb, and $000 of unknown dcficent> who were
erful there 3 « 2. Banu Hfaeifa, who followed prefentat the famous battle of Khefia 9 , fought
the famous falfe prophet. Mofeilama 4 . 3. Burnt iniih&KJMdifat of Omar , and which put an end

A/nd* who acknowledge ftohfba Ebn KhewaE to the Petfian empire 9 .

Ld, another pretender to divine revelation 1 , for d Take not thefe fir your frwtdi wh ruh a
their prophet. All thefe fell off in Mohammed's laugbmgfibck of your religion.] This p.uTagc was
life time. The following, except only the laft, primarily intended to forbid the Mojk -. . entring
apoftatized in the reign of Abu Beer. 4. Cer- into a frandfhip with two hypocrites named
tain of the tribe of Fexarab , Headed by Oyeyma Ref da Ebn 1 *eid> and Someid Ebn al Harttb, who
Ebn Hofein . 5; Some t>f the tribe of Lhrt/Sn, tho’

1 Idem . 2 Idem. 3 See the Prelim . Difir. VIII; 4 See ib: * See ib .

* See ib. 7 See ib. I. p. 11. 8 V. D’Herbel, Bibl Orient. p. 226. 9 Al Beidawj*

Chap. 5 . Al KORAN. 91

it *, this they do, becaufe they are people who do not underftand. Say, O ye who
have received the fcriptures, do ye reje# m for any other reef on than becaufe
we believe in God* and that revelation which hath been fent down unto us, and
that which was formerly fent down, and for that the greater part of you are
tranfgreflbrs ? Say, Shall I denounce unto you a worfe thing than this><w to the
reward which ye are to expeft with God ? He whom God hath^urfed, and with
whom he hath been angry, having changed fome of them into apes andfwme*,
and who worfhip Taghut % they are in the worfe condition* and err more
widely from the ftraitnefs of the path. When they came unto you, they {aid.
We believe : yet they entred into your company with infidelity, and went forth
from you with the fame •, but God well knew what they concealed. Thou (halt fee
many of them haftening unto iniquity and malice, and to eat things fprbidden d ,
and woe unto them far what they have done. Unlefc their dodtors and priefts
forbid them uttering wickednefs, and eating .things forbidden; woe unto them
for what they fhall have committed. The Jews fay, The hand of God is
tied qp c . Their hands fhall be tied up f , and they fhall be curfed for that
which they havefaid. Nay, his hands are bothftretched forlh ; he beftoweth as
he pleafeth : that which hath been fent down unto thee from thy Lord g fhall in-
creafe the tranfgreflion and infidelity of many of them •, and we have put
enmity and hatred between them, until the day of refurredtton. So often as
they mall kindle a fire for war, GoDlhallextinguiih.it 11 ; and they fhall ftt
their minds to ad corruptly in the earth, but God lovethnot the corrupt doersi

N 2 Moife-

tho’ they had embraced Mohammtdifm^ yet ri-
diculed it on all occafions, and were notwith-
ftanding greatly beloved among the prophqt’a
followers.

• Nor tbofe who tvbtu ye call to prayer , make a
jeft of it ;] Thefe words were added pnoccafion
of a certain Cbrifiiax* who hearing the Mu-
adbdhin , or cryer, in calling to prayers, repeat
this part of the ufual form, Iprofefs /^/Moham-
med is the apoftle cf Goti, faid aloud, May God
burn the liar: but a few nights after his own
houfe was accidentally fet on fire by a fervant,
and himfelf and his family perilhed in the flames*.

b Having changed fome of them into apes and
fivine ;] The former were the Jews of Ail ah*
who broke the fabbath * ; and the latter thofe
who believed not in the miracle of the Table
which was let down from heaven to Jesus 3 .
Some, however; imagine that the Jews of Ai~
lab only are meant in this place, pretending that
the young men among them, were metamorpho-
fed into apes, and the old men into fwlne *.

e See chap. 2. p. 51.

4 See before, p. 88.

* GodV band is tied up ;] Thtft is, he is be-
come niggardly and clofe-fifLed. Thefe were

1 Idem. % See chap, 2. p. 9. 3 S<

daw 1. < Cbap.fr p . 57. 6 Al Beie

the words of Pbineas Ebn Azxra (another inde-
cent expreffion of whom, almoft to the fame
purpofe, is mentioned eflewhere when the
Jetvs were much iftpoVerilhed fey a dearth,
which the commentators will have to be a judg-
ment on them for their rejecting of Mohammed i
and the other Jettis who heard him, inllead of
reproving him, exprefied tlieir approbation of
what he had laid 6 .

f Their bands pall be tied up j] i.e. They fhall
be punilhed with want and avarice. The words
may alfo allude to the manner wherein the re-
probateslhall appear at the laft day, having their
right hands tied up to their necks 7 ; which ia
the proper iignification of the Arabic word.

* Viz The Korin.

' b So of has they kindle fire for war* God pall
extingutp it 5] Either by railing feuda and quar-
rels among themfclves, or by granting the victo-
ry to the Moffems. Al Beidawi adds, that on
the Jtwi tiegleding the true obfervance of their
law, and corrupting, their religfop, God has fuc-
Cciflvdy delivered theifa int<j fhe hands, firft of
BakbtNdfr or Nebuchadnezzar, then of Titus the
j \man* and afterwards df he Perfiam, and has
now at laft fobje&ed them to the Mohammedans*

t towards the end of tbit chapter. *Al Bei^

aw u 7 See the Prelim . t>ife. IV./-

92 Al KORAN. Chap. 5

Moreover, if they who have received the fcriptures believe, and fear God , we
will furely expiate their fins from them, and we will lead them into gardens
of pleafure ; and if they obferve the law, and thegofpel, and the other fcrip-
tures which have been fentdown unto them from their Lord, they" fhall furely
eat of good things both from above them, and from under their feet*. Among
them there are people who aft uprightly ; but how evil is that which many of
them do work ! O apoftle, publiih the whole of that which hath been fent
down unto thee from thy Lord : for if thou do not, thou doft not in effeSl
publifh any part thereof" ; and God will defend thee Againft wicked men c ;
for God direfteth not the unbelieving people. Say, O ye who have received
the fcriptures, ye are not grounded on any thing, until ye obferve the law and
the gofpcl, and that which hath been fent down unto you from your Lord,
That which hath been fent down unto thee from thy Lord fhall furely increafe
the tranfgrefiion and infidelity of many of them : but be not thou follicitous
for the unbelieving people. Verily they who believe, and thofe who judaize
and the Sabians, and the Chriftians, whoever of them believeth in God and
the laft day, and doth that which is right, there fhall come no fear on them
neither fhall they be grieved 4 . We formerly accepted the covenant of the
children of Israel, and fent apoftles unto them. So often as an apoftle came
unto them with that which their fouls defired not, they accufed fome of them
of impofture, and fome of them they killed ; and they imagined that there
fhould be no punifhment for thofe crimes^ and they became blind, and deaf".
Then was God turned unto them f ; afterwards many of them again became
blind and deaf; but God faw what they did. They are furely infidels, who
fay, Verily God is Christ the fonof Mary ; fince Christ faid, O chil-
dren of Israel, ferveGoo, my Lord and your Lord; whoever fhall <dve
a companion unto God, God fhall exclude him from paradife, and his habitation
fhall be hell fire; and the ungodly fhall have none to help them. They are
certainly infidels, who fay, God is the third of three *: for there is no God
befides one God ; and if they refrain not from what they fay, a painful tor-
ment fhall furely be inflifted on fuch of them as are unbelievers. Will they
not therefore be turned unto God, and ask pardon of him ? fince God is gra-
cious and merciful. Christ the fonof Mar v is no more than an apoftle;
ether apoftles have preceded him ; and his mother was a woman of veracity":

* They pall eat of the good things both from a-
hove them , and from under their feet ;] That is,
they fhall enjoy the bleffings both of heaven and
earth.

b If thou fublijh not the whole , thou doft not, in
tffefiy pu&lijh any part thereof \\ That is, if thou
do noLcompleat the publication of all thy revela-
tions without exception, thou doll not anfwer
the end for which they were revealed; becaufe
the concealing of any part, renders the fyftem
of religion which Gon has thought fit to pub-
lifh to mankind by thy mimftry, lame and im-
perfect 1 .

e God rp'tll defend thee , &c.] Until this verfe
was revealed, Mohammed entertained a guard of

* ^/Bsidawj, Jallalo’ddih.

armed men for his Security \ but on his receiv-
ing this alTurancc of God’s protections he im-
mediately diiiniffed them 3 .

d See chap. 2. p. 8.

* And they became blind and deaf ;] Shutting
their eyes and ears againft conviffioi^sd there-
mo nit ranees of the law ; as when they Wodbip-
ped the calf.

f Then was God turned unto them ;] i. c. Up-
on their repentance.

g See Chap. ^ p. 81.

h His mother was a woman of veracity ;] Never
pretending tp partake of the divine nature, or
to be the mother of Go d .

9 Udem * 3 Jallalq’&din.

Chap. 5. Al KORAN \ 93

they both eat food *. Behold, how we declare unto them thefigns of God’s-
unity -, and then behold, how they turn afide/row the truth. Say unto them*

Will ye worlhip, befides God, that which can caufe you neither harm nor
profit ? God is he who heareth and feeth. Say, O ye who have received the ferip-
tures, exceed not the juft bounds in your religion b , by j peaking befide the truth ;
neither follow the deiires of people who have heretofore erred, and who have
feduced many, and have gone aftray from the ftrait path Thofe among the
children of Israel who believed not, were curfed by the tongue of David*
and of Jesus the fon of Mary*. This brfet them becaufe they were rebellious
and tranfgrefied : they forbade not one another the wickednefs which they com-
mitted j and wo unto them for what they committed. Thou /halt fee many
of them take for their friends, thofe who believe not. Wo unto them for
what their fouls have fent before them % for that God is incenfed againft them,
and they fhall remain in torment for ever. But, if they had believed in God,
and the prophet, and that which hath been revealed unto him, they had not
taken them for their friends ; but many of them are evil doers. Thou malt fure-
ly find the moft violent of all men in enmity againft the true believers, to be
the Jews, and the idolaters : and thou fhalt furely find thofe among them to
be the moft inclinable to entertain friendlhip for the true believers, who fay.

We are Chriftians. This cometh to pafs y becaufe there are priefts and monks
among them *, and becaufe they are not elated with pride r : * And when VII.
they hear that which hath been fent down to the apoftle read unto them •, thou
fhalt fee their eyes overflow with tears, becaufe of the truth which they per-
ceive therein'., faying, O Lord, we believe j write us down therefore with
thofe who bear witnefs to the truth : and what Jbould binder us from believing
in God, and the truth which hath come unto us, and from earneftly defiring
that our Lord would introduce us into paradife with the righteous people?

There-

* They totb eat food ;] Being obliged to ftp- tended in thrs paflage, were, either Aibema,
port their lives by the £ame means, and being king of Ethiopia, and fe veral bifhops and priefts,
fubjeft to the fame neceflities and infirmities as who, being aflembled for that purpofe, heard
the reft of mankind, and therefore no Gods Jaafar Ebn Abi Taleb, who fled to that coua-

* See chap. 4. p. 80. But here the words are try in the firft flight } , read the 29th and 30th,

principally directed to the Chriftiaai. and afterwards the t 8 th, and 1 9th chapters of

* Neither flllow the defires of people who bai’t the Koran ; on hearing of which the king and
heretofore erred, &c.] That is, of their prelates the reft of the company burft into tears, and
and predece flora, who erred in aferibing divini- confefled what was delivered therein to be con-
ty to Cbrtft, before the million of Mohammed J . formable to truth ; that prince himfelf, in par-

d See before, p. 91. not. *>, ticular, becoming a profelyte to Mobammadifm*-.

* See chap. a. p. 1 z. not. h . or elfe, thirty, or as others fay, feventy per-

f And are not elated with pride ;] Having not fons, fent ambafladors to Mohammed by the

that high conceit of themfelves, as th esjews fame king of Ethiopia, to whom the prophet
have i but being humble and well difpofed to himfelf read the thirty fixth chapter, intitled
receive the truth ; qualities, fays al Beidawi, Y. S. Whereupon they began to wetp, faying,
which are to be commended even in infidels. How like if this to that which was revealed unto

s And token they hear that which bath been fent Jefus ! and immediately profeffed themfelves
down to the apoftle, read unto them, their (yes 0- MoJIems 1 * .
verfiow with tears, &c.] Theperfons directly in-

1 Idem, Al Beidawi. * lidesn. 3 See the Prelim. Dife. p. 44,4;. * AIBst

DAW 1, Al Thalabi. V . Abuifed. vit. Mob.p. 25, &c. Marracc. Prodr. M rrfut- Alcor.

part. i . p . 45. 3 Al Beidawi, J al l a loud in. V , Marracc. ttbijhf .

94 Al KORAN, Chap. 5.

Therefore hath God rewarded them, for what they have faid, with gardens
through which rivers flow they lhall continue therein for ever *, and this is
the reward of the righteous. But they who believe not, and accufe our figns
of faHhood, they Jhall be the companions of hell. O true believers, forbid
not the good things which God hath allowed you* ; but trar.fgreis not, for
God loveth not the tranfgreflors. And eat of what God bath given you for
food that which is lawful and good : and fear God, in whom ye believe.
God will not punilh you for an inconfiderate word in y.our oaths b •, but he will
punilh you for what ye folemrvly fwear with deliberation . And the expiation of
fhch cm inconfiderate oath Jhall be the feeding of ten poor men with fuch moderate
food as ye feed your own families withal ; or to cloath them c •, or to free
the neck of a true believer from captivity : but he who fhall not find where-
with M perform one of tbefe three things, lhall faft three days 4 . This is the ex-
piation of your oaths, when ye fwear inadvertently. Therefore keep your
oaths. Thus God declartth unto you his figns, 'that ye may give thanks. Q
true believers; furely wine, and lots', and images f , and divining arrows * are
an abomination of the work of Satan ; therefore avoid them, that ye may
profper. Satan feeketh to fow diffenfion and hatred among you, by means of
wine and lots, and to divert you from remembring God, and from prayer :
will ye not therefore abftain from them ? Obey God* and obey the apoftle,
and take heed to your fitves : but if ye turn bipky know that the' duty pf our
apoftle is only to preach publickly b . In thole who believe and do good
worses; it is no fin that they have tailed wine or gaming before they- tyere for-
bidden } if they fear Goo, and believe, and do good works, and jnall for the
future fear Gov , and believe, and Jhall perfevere Jo fear him, and to do good 1 ;
for God loveth thofe who do good. O true believers, God will furely prove
you in offering you plenty of game, which ye may take with your hands or your

lances,

1 forbid not the gobd tbitigs which God hathaU
lowed you;] Thefe Words were reveled, when
certain of Mohammed s Companions agreed to ob-
lige themfelves to continual falling and watch-
ing, and to abftain from women, eating flefh ,
fleeping on beds, and other lawful enjoyments
of life* in imitation of fome felf-denying Cbri-
ftians 5 but this the prophet difapproved,declar-
ing, that he would have no monks in his religi-
on l .

b See chap. 2. p. 26.

* The commentators give us the different 0-
rpiaions of the doflors, as to the quantity of
food and cloaths to be given in this cafe; which
I think fcarce worth tranfejfbing.

4 Shall faft three days ;J That is, three days
together, fa)r$ Abu Hatty a. But dais is not ot>-
ferved in practice, being neither explicitly com-
manded in the Koran , nor ordered in the Senna 2 ,

t 1 Vine and lots ;]Thatis, all inebriating liquors,
.and games of chance. See the Prelim, Difc.

§. V. and chap. 2. p. 25.

f Images 1] Al Beldam and fome other com-
mentators expound this of idols ; but others,
with more probability, of the carved pieces, or
men, with which the pagan Arabs played at
chefs, being little figures of men, elephants,
horfes and dromedaries ; and this is fuppofed to
be the only thing which Mohammed difiiked in
that game : for which reafon the Sonnitei play
with plain pieces of Wood, or ivory 5 but me
Perfians and Indians , who are not fo fcrupulous,
ftill make ufe of the carved ones 3 4 -
8 See the Prelim. Bifcourfe, V.

6 See ibid. $. II. p. 48, &c.

1 The commentators endeavour to excufe the
tautology of this paffage, by fuppofing the three-
fold repetition of fearing and believing , refer
cither to the three parts of time, paft, prefent
and future, or to the threefold duty of man, to-
wards Got>, himfeif, and his neighbour, &c *.

1 jAJtLALO’DJHKf AlBUVKVn. a ^/BXLDAWI.

3 F.Prel . Difc . f V. + ^/Beidawi.

Chap, 5. Al KORAN, 95

lances*, that God may know who feareth him in fefcret; but whoever tranf-
grefleth after this, fhall fuffer a grievous punifliment. O true believers, kill
no game while ye are on pilgrimage 1 * ; whofoever among you fhall kill any de-
fignedly, fhall reftore the like or what he fhall have killed, in domeftic ani-
mals 0 , accprfmgto the determination of two juft perfons among you, tofoe
brought as an offering to the Caaba ; or in attonement thereof mall feed the
poor ; or inftead thereof (hall faft, that he may taffe the heinoufnefs of his
deed. God hath forgiven what is pafir, but whoever returneth to tranfgrefs ,
God will take vengeance on him •, for God is mighty and able to avenge. It
is lawful for you to filh in the fea 4 , and to eat what ye JbaU catcb 7 as a pro-
vifion for you and for thofe who travel ; but it is unlawful for you to hunt by
land, while ye are performing the rites of* pilgrimage * ; therefore fear God,
before whom ye fhall be aflembled at the loft day. God hath appointed the
Caaba, the holy houfe, an eftablifhment f for mankind; and bath ordained
the facred month 8 , and the offering, and the ornaments hung thereon h . This
hath he done that ye might know that God knoweth whatfoever is in heaven
and on earth, and that God is omnifeient. Know that God is fevere in punilh-
ingV and that God is dfo ready to forgive and merciful. The dqty of our a-
poftle is to preacb 6nly 1 * ana God knoweth that which ye difeover, and that
which ye conceal. Say, Evil and good fhall not be equally efteemed of, though
the abundance of eyil pleafeth thee fc ; therefore fear God, O ye of under*

Hand-

1 God will ’prove you, in offering ou plenty of poor men ; or, if he could not afford that, to
game* &c.] Tfota temptation or trial was* at al fkft a proportionable number of d*ys
Hodeib . where Mohammed- ± men, who had at 4 - d This, tfa/s y<tlWdddin; is tobe umferftood
tended him thither with an intent to perform a of fife that live altogether in the tea; and not
pilgrimage to the Xdaatia, and had initiated them- of thofe that live in the fea and on land both* as
felves with the uW rices, were furrotmded by crabs, Set. The Tttrhs, who are Haiti ftes, never
fo great a number of birds and beafts, thar they eat this fort of fife ; but the fe<ft of Am Ebt
impeded their mateh ; from which unufual acci- Make, and perhaps feme Others, make no feru^
dent, feme of them concluded that God had pie of it.
allowed them to be taken ; but this pillage was 0 See tfboVe note *■-

to convince them of the contrary ’ l . f An eftittbiijhme'nt ;] That is, thO’pfhce where

0 White yt are on pilgrimage*] Literally, while the pmltlde of their relitfbus cetemo&fes b chief-
yeare Molfritois, or have aoukfiy initiated your ly tfftabtlfeefr ; wbe^thofe who are under any
felves as pilgrims/ by patthig on the garment apprehenfidft of d*nge¥ may find : fare tfyhm,
worn at that felemitity. Hunting and fowling and the merchant certain r gafe < , See *.

are hereby abfol tely forbidden to perfons in this * The faeted month Al Reidatoi undetflands

ftate ; tho* they are allowed to kill certain kinds this of the month of Dha'lhkij^ wherem the

of fcoxious animals 2 . ceremonies of the pHgrhhagf are performed ;

c Shall *yh * . the like in domejlic animals. Sec.’} bm JalModdin foppofea ftp the Four facred
That is, he feall bring; an offering to the temple months are here Inlerided f ,
of Mm . \ tobe ilair) there anddiffrlbli^ed among b See before, p. 82.

the poor, of fome domeftte or tame atfirtia!; e- 1 See she Prelim. jWqcrarfei $ IT. p S

qual in ’value to what he feall have killed i as a k Evil and pod not l-f rfnxfh i.bd

feeep, for example, m lieu oF an antelope, a the abttndante of evil pleafeth tbet i] for judgment
pidgeon for a partridge, See. And of this value is to be made of things not from rheir plenty or
two prudent perfons were to be judged; If the fearcity, but from their intrlfldic good or Ud?
offender was not able to do* this, he 1 was to qualities ",
give a certain ijuanti Of food to one or more

1 Idem, Jallalo’ddin. * Seethe Prelim. Difc.\. V, 3 Jalualo’ddi \ t , Al Beid wr,

4 lidem. 1 See the Prelim . Difc. VII. 6 Al Bbidawi.

96 Al KORAN ^hap. 5 .

(landing, that ye may be happy. O true believers, inquire not concerning
things, which, if they be declared unto you, may give you pain ; but if ye
ask concerning them when the Koran is fent down, they will be declared un-
to you: God pardoneth you as to thefe matters; for God is ready to forgive,
Wgracious. People who have been before you formerly enquired concerning
them s and afterwards difoelieved therein. God hath not ordained any thing
concerning Bahira, nor Saiba, nor Wasila, nor Hami ; but the unbelie-
vers have invented a lie againft God : and the greater part of them do not
underftand. And when it was faid unto them. Come unto that which God
hath revealed, and to the apoftle ; they anfwered. That religion which we
found our fathers to follow is fufficient for us. What, though their fathers
knew nothing, and were not rightly direfted ? O true believers, take care of
your fouls. He who erreth lhall not hurt you, while ye are rightly dUffied*:
unto God foall ye all return, and he will tell you that which ye have done.
O true believers, let witneffes be taken between you, when death approaches
apy of you, at the time of making the teftament; let there he two witneffes , juft
men, from among you d ; or two others of a different tribe or faty from your
felves if ye be journeying in the earth, and the accident of death be-
tal you. Ye foall four them both up, after the afternoon prayer f , and they
foall fwear by God, if ye doubt them , and they jhall fay. We will not fell
our evidence for a bribe, although the prfon concerned be one who is related
to us, neither will we conceal the teftimony of God, for then foould we cer-
tainly

Chap.

• Inquire not concerning things which if they he
declared unto you may give you pain, &c.] The A-
rabs continually teasing their prophet withqttef-
tion$, which probably he was not always pre-
pared to anfwec, they are here ordered to wait,
till God ftiould think fit to declare his pleafure,
hy fome farther revelation : and, to abate their
curiofity, they arc told, at the fame time, that
very likely the anfwers would not be agreeable
to their inclination*. A l Beiddwi fays, that
when the pilgrimage was firft commanded. So-
r aka Ebn Malec asked Mohammed whether they
were obliged to perform it every yearf To this
queftion the prophet at firft turned a deaf ear;
hut being asked it a fecond, and a third time,
he at laft faid, Noe but if J bad /aid, yes , it
would have become a duty , and if it were a duty , ye
would not be able to perform it ; therefore give me
no trouble as to things wherein I give you none :
whereupon this paffage was revealed.

b God hath not ordained ajty thing contenting
Bahira, nor Saiba, nor Wasila, not H£mi, &c.j
Thefe were the names given by the pagan A-
rabs to certain camels or (beep which were turn-
ed loofe to feed, and exempted from common
ferVices, in fome particular cafes ; having their
ears flit, or fome other mark, that they might
ije known ; and this they did in honour of their

gods f . Which fuperftitions are here declared
to be no ordinances of God, but the inventions
of foolifh men.

e He who erreth Jball not hurt youjb re. ] This was
revealed when the infidels reproached thofe who
embraced Mobammedifm and renounced their
old idolatry, that by (o doing they arraigned the
wifdom of their forefathers *.

* Two juft men from among you;] That is, of
your kindred, or religion,

e Or two others of a different tribe or faith ;]
They who interpret thefe words of peirfons of
another religion, fay they are abrogated, and
that the teftimony of fuch ought not to be re-
ceived againft a Mojlem 3 .

f Ye Jball Jhut them both up after the afternoon
prayer , &c.j In cafe there was any doubt, the
witnefles were to be kept apart from company,
left they ftiould be corrupted, till they gave their
evidence, which they generaliydid when the af-
ternoon prayer was over ; becaufe that was the
time of peopled aflembiing in public, or, fay feme,
becaufe the guardian angels then relieve each 0-
the*, fo that there would be four angels to wit-
nefs againft them if they gaw falfe evidence.
But others fuppofe they might he examined af-
ter the hour of any other prayer, when there
was a fufficient aflembly

1 See the Prelim, Difc. j, V.

a ^/Beidawj. 3 Idem *

* Idem,

Chap. 5. Al KORAN. 97

tainly be of the number of the wicked. But if it appear that both have been

f uilty of iniquity, two others fliall Hand up in their place, of thofe who
ave convicted them of faljhood, the two neareft in bloody and they (hall fwear
by God, faffing, VerUy our testimony is more true than ^the teftimony ot
thefe two, neither have we prevaricated; for then fliould we become of the
Humber of the unjuft. <This will be eafier, that men may give teftimony
according to the plain intention thereof, or fear leaft a different oath be given,
after their oath. Therefore fear God, and hearken; for God direfteth not
the unjuft people \ On a certain day b fhall God affemble the apoftles, and
lhall Fay unto thepi, What anfwer was returned you, when ye preached unto
ibe people to whom ye were font ? They lhall anfwer. We have no knowledge,
hut thou art the knower of fecrets c . When God fliall fay, O Jesus fon of
Marv, remember my favour towards thee, and towards thy mother; when
I ftrengthened thee with the holy fpirit *, that thou fliouldeft fpeak unto men
in the cradle, and when thou waft grown up e ; and when I taught thee the
fcripture, and wifdom, and the law, and the gofpel ; and when ^thou didft
create of clay as it were the figure of a bird, by my permiffion, and didft
fcreathe thereon, and it became a bird by my permiffion ; and thou didft
‘heal one blind from his birth, and the leper, by my permiffion ; and when
thou didft bring forth the dead from their graves, by rny permiffion 4 ; and
when I wich-held the children of Israel from killing thee*, when thou hadft
come unto them with evident miracles , and fuch of them as believed not, faid,
This is nothing but manifeft forgery. And when I commanded the apoftles
of Jesus faying. Believe in me, and in my meffengerj they anfwered. We do be-

O lieve ;

1 The occafion of the preceding paflage is
faid to have been this. Tamm al Dart and
Addi Ebn Taztd, both Cbrifliam, took a jour-
ney into Syria to trade, m company with Bodeil,
the freed-naan of Arnru Ebn al As, who was a
Mojlem . When they came to Damafats , Bodetl
fell lick, and died s having firft wrote down a
lift of his effects on a piece of paper, which he
hid in his baggage, without acquainting his com-
panions with it, and delired them only to de-
liver what he had to his friends of the tribe of
Sabm . The furvivors however fcarching among
his goods, found a veffel of filver of conlidera-
ble weight, and inlaid with gold, which they
concealed, and on their return, delivered the
reft to the deccafcd’s relations; who finding the
lift of BodeiP s writing, demanded the veffel of
filver of them, but they denied it; and the af-
fair being brought bcforcMebdmmid, thefe words,
viz. 0 true believers take vtitneffes, Sec . were re-
vealed, and he ordered them to be fwom at the
pulpit in the mofque, juft as afternoon prayer
was over, and on their making oath that they
knew frothing of the plate demanded, difmiffed
them. But afterwards the veffd being found in

their hands, the Sabmites , fufpefling it was
BodeiPs, charged them with it, and they con-
feffed it was his, but infilled that they had
bought it of him, and that they had not pro-
duced it, becattfe they had no proof of the bar-
gain, Upon this they went again before Mo-
hammed, to whom thefe words. And if it ap-
pear, &c. were revealed; and thereupon Amru
Ebn al As and al Motalleb Ebn Abi Refaa , both
of the tribe of Sabm, ftood up, and were fworn
againft them ; and judgment was given accord-
ingly i.

1 On a certain day ;3 That is, on the day of
judgment.

• IVe have no knowledge, &c.] That is. We are
ignorant whether our profelytes were fincere,
or whether they apoftatized after our deaths ;but
thou well kuoweft not only what anfwer they
gave us, but the fecrets of their hearts, and whe-
ther they have lince continued firm in their re-
ligion or not.

d See chap. z. p. 12.

• See chap, a, p. 41,

f See ibid.

• Sec ibid. p. 4*.

1 Idem .

9 8 Al KORAN. ' Chap. 5.

lievc *, and do thou bear witnefs that we are refigned unto thee. Remember
when the apoftles faid, O Jesus Ton of Mary, is thy Lord able to caufe a
table to defcend unto us from heaven ‘ ? He anfwered. Fear God, if ye be
true believers. They faid, We defire to eat thereof, and that our hearts
may reft at eafe, and that we may know that thou haft told us the truth,
and that we may be witnefles thereof. Jesus the fon of Mary (aid, O God
our Lord, caufe a table to defcend unto us from heaven, that the day of its
defcent may become a feftival day b unto us, unto the firft of us, and unto the
laft of us, and a fign from theej and do thou provide food for us, for
thou art the beft provider. God faid. Verily I will caufe it to defcend unto
you ; but whoever among you fhall difbelieve hereafter, I will furely punifo
him with a punilhment, wherewith I will not punifti any other creature. And
when God fhall fay unto Je.3vs , at the laft dap O Jesus fon of Mary, haft
thou faid unto men, T ajke me and my mother for two gods, befide God ?
He Iball anfwer, Praife be unto thee ! it is not for me to fay that which I
ought not •, if I had faid fo, thou wouldeft furely have known it: thou knoweft
what is in me, but I know not what is in thee i for thou art the knower of
fecrcts. I have not fpoken to them any other than what thou didft command
me ; namely, Worfhip God, my Lord and your Lord : and I was a witnefs
of their aflions while I ftaid among them ; but fince thou haft taken me to thy

felf,

• Is thy IsptLD able to caufe a table to defcend turn to it ; at which the ftanders by being af-
unto us fiord heaven, &c.] Thi* miracle is thus frighted, he caufed it to become as it was bt-
r elated by the commentators. Jefus having, at? fore : that one thoufand three hundred men and
the rcqueft of his followers, asked it of God, women, all afflifted with bodily infirmitJaor
a red table immediately deice nded, in their fight, poverty, eat ofthefe provisions, and were fatis-
bctween two clouds* an4 was fet before them; £ed; the filh remaining whole as it was at firft.:
whereupon he rofe up, and having made the ab* that then the table flew up to heaven in the fight
Iutioil. pray ed^ud then, took off the cjoth which of all; and every one who had partaken of
coverof the tfofo, faying, fa{btname<f G an* the this food, were delivered from their infirmities
befi provider of food. What the pravifiom were, and misfortune® : and that it continued to dc-
with which this table was furnifhed, is a matter feendfor forty days together, at dinner time, and
wherein the expofitora are not agreed. One flood on the ground till the fun declined, and
will have them tq be nine cakes of bread, and was then taken up into the clouds. Some of the
nine fifhes ; another, bread and fleft 5 anofher, Mohammedan waiters are of opinion that this
all forts of food except fl'elh 1 another, all forts table did not really defcend, but that it was on-
of food, except bread aird flelh; another* all exr ly a parable ; but moll think the words of the
ccpt bread and filh ; another, one iiih which had Koran arc plain to the contrary. A further t ra-
the tafte of all manner of food; and another, fruits dition is, that feveral men were changed, into
of paradife : but the moft received tradition is, fwine for dUbelfoving this miracle, and attribut-
that when the table was uncovered, there ap* ing it to magic art; or, as others pretend, for
peared a fifh ready dreft, without feales or prick- flealine fome of the viftuals from off it l . Sevc-
ly fins, dropping with fat, having fait placed at ral other fabulous circumfbnces are alfo told,
its bead, and vinegar at its tail, and round it all which are fcarce worth tranferibing l .
fort$o£ herbs, except leeks^ajpd fiy* loaves of * A feftival dayi\ Some fay the table defcend-

bread, on one of which there we*eptiyes> on ed on a. fouday, which was the reafon ©f the
the fecond honev, on the third butter, on the CbrijUqfy obforving that day as facred. Others
fourth cheefe 0 and on the fifth dried flefh. They pretend this day isiiill keptamong them as a very
add, that Jefus, at the rcqueft of th^ apcrflles, great foiivaU and it feems as ii the Itory had its
fhewed them another miracle, by reftqring the rife from an imperfect notion of Cbrift'% laft fop-
fifh to life, and caufing its feales and fins to re- per, and the infticution of the Eucharift.

% V \ Mark acc, in AU. 238, OV.

1 Idem , Al Tbalabi.

Chap. 6.

Al KORAN.

99

felf% thou haft been the watcher over them ; for thou art witnefs of all
things. If thou punilh them, they are furely thy fervants ; and if thou for*
give them, thou art mighty and wife. God will lay. This day (hall their ve-
racity be of advantage unto thole who fpeak truth *, they lhall have gardens
wherein rivers flow, they lhall remain therein for ever : God hath been well-
pleafed in them, and they have been well-pleafed in him. This Jball be great
felicity. Unto Gop belongetb the kingdom of heaven and of earth, and of
whatever therein is j and he is almighty.

• Since thou haft taken me to tbyfelfi\Oxy fiiue riginai may be tranflated either way, I have
thou baft caufti me to die : but as it is a dilpute chofen the former expreffion, which leaves the
among the Mohammedans whether Cbrift a£tually matter undecided,
died or not, before his aifamption x , and the o-

Intitledy Cattle 8 ; revealed at Mecca b .

In the name of the mo ft merciful God.

P Raife be unto God, who hath created the heavens and the earth, and
hath ordained the darknefs and the light ; neverthelefs they who believe
not in the Lord, equalize other gods with him. It is he who bath created
you of clay •, and then decreed the term of your lives ; and the prefixed term
is with him * : yet do ye doubt thereof. He is God in heaven and in earth ;
he knoweth what ye keep fecret, and what ye publilh, and knoweth what
ye deferve. There came not unto them any fign, of the figns of their Lord, but
they retired from the fame j and they have gainfaid the truth, after that it hath
come unto them : but a meflage lhall come unto them, concerning that which
they have mocked at d . Do they not confider how many generations we have
deftroyed before them? We had eftablilhed them In the earth in a manner where-
in we have not eftablilhed you'j we lent the heaven to rain abundantly up-

O 2 on

• This chapter is fo in titled, becaufe fome is, they (hall be convinced of the truth which
iqperftitioua cuftoms of the Meccans, as to eer- they have made a jeil of, when they fee the pu~
tain cattle, are therein incidcntaJJy mentioned. nifhment which they Bull fuffer lor fo doing,
b Except only fix verfes, or, faV others, three both in this world and the next j or when they
verfes, which are taken notice of in the notes. lhall fee the glorious fuccefs of Mohammed if m.

* And then decreed the term of their lives ; * We had eftablilhed them in the earth , as toe

and the prefixed term is toith him.} By the lift have not eftablijbed you, &c.J i e. We had bleiTed
term fome underftand the timd of the refqrrec- them with greater power, and length of prof-
tion. Others think that by the firft term is in- perity than we have granted you, O men of
tended the (pace between creation and death, Mecca 1 . Mohammed feems here to mean the
and by the latter, that between death and the ancient and potent tribes of Ad% and Tbamud*

1 See chap. J. f. 43,

CHAP. VI.

4 -efurreflion.

? A mtjfage Jball come unto them, &c.] That

See *.

1 ^Beidawi.

a See the Prelim. Difc. §. I. /. 6 , iAc.

too Al KORAN. Chap. 6;

on them, and we gave them rivers which flowed under their feet : yet we
deftroyed them in their fins, and raifed up other generations after them. Al-
though we had caufed to defcend unto thee a book written on paper, and
they had handled it with their hands, the unbelievers had furely faid. This is
no other than manifeft forcery. They faid, Unlefe an angel be fent down un-
to him, we will not believe. But if we had fent down an angel, verily the
matter had been decreed \ and they fhould not have been born with, by hew-
ing time granted them to repent. And if we had appointed an angel for our
meffenger , we fhould have fent him in the form of a man b , and have cloath-
ed him before them, as they are cloathed. Other apoftles have been laughed
to fcorn, before thee, but the judgment which they made a jeft of, encompaf-
fed thofe who laughed them to fcorn. Say, Go through the earth, and behold
what hath been the end of thofe, who accufed our prophets oftmpofture, Say,
Unto whom belongctb whatfoever is in heaven and earth? Say, Unto God.
He hath prefcribed unto himfelf mercy. He will furely gather you together
on the day of refurredtion •, there is no doubt of it. They who deftroy their
own fouls are thofe who will not believe. Unto him is owing whatfoever hap-

F eneth by night or by day ; it is he who heareth and knoweth. Say, Shall
take any other protedlor than God, the creator of heaven and earth, who
feedeth all and is not fed by any ? Say, Verily I am commanded to be the
firft who profefleth Islam *, and it was fend unto me t Thou fhalt by no means
be one of the idolaters. Say, Verily I fear, if I fhould rebel againft my Lord,
the punifhmcnt of the great day : from whomioever it fhall be averted on
that day, God will have been merciful unto him j this will be manifeft falvatien.
If God afflidt thee with any hurt : there is none who can take it off from
thee , except himfelf j but if he caufe good to befal thee, he is almighty he
is the fupreme Lord over his fervants ; and he is wife and knowing. * Say,
What thing is the ftrongeft in bearing teftimony d ? Say, GoDi he is witnefs
between me and you. And this Koran was revealed unto me, that I fhould
admonilh you thereby, and alfo thofe unto whom it fhall reach. Do ye real-
ly profefs that there are other gods together with God ? Say, I do not pro-
fefs this. Say, Verily he is one God ; and I am guiltlefs of what ye affociate
with him. They unto whom we have given the fcripture know our apofflz,
even as they know their own children e ; but they who deftroy their own fouls]
will not believe. Who is more unjuft than hie who invented! a lie againft

Gdb,

* Ferity the matter bad been decreed, &c.JThat fupport it.
is to fay, As they would not have believed, even • The frfttsbo prcfejfeth Iflam;] That is, the

if an angel had defcended to them from heaven, firft of my nation 1 .

Go d has (hewn his mercy in not complying with * What thing is the ftrmgeft in bearing ttftim •
their demands; for if he had, they would have tiy, &c.] This pafTage was revealed when the
fullered immediate condemnation, and would Ktreifb told Mohammed that they had asked the
have been allowed no time for repentance. Jews and Cbriftians concerning him, who af-
* We fhould have fent him in the form of a fured them they found no mention or defeription
man;] As Gabriel generally appeared to Moham- of him in their books of fcripture, Therefore
medi who, tho’ a prophet, was not able to bear faid they, who bears witnefs to thee , that thou art
the fight of him when he appeared in his pro- the apoflle of God 1 ?
per form, much lefs would others be able to * See chap. 2. p. 1 8.

1 Al Beidaw i.' * Idem, Jallalq’dbik.

Chap. 6. Al KORAN. ioi

God‘, or chargeth his figns *ith impofture? Surely the unjuft lhall not
profper. And on the day of refur region we will aflemble them all •, then will
we lay unto thofewho affociated others with God , Where are your com-
panions b , whom ye imagined to bethofe of God? But they fhall have no other
excufe, than that they (hall fay. By God our Lord, We have not been
idolaters. Behold, how they lye againft themfelvcs, and what they have
blafphemoujly imagined to be the companion of God flieth from them f . There
is of. them who hearkeneth unto thee when thou readefi the Kor^n * ; but we
have call vails over their hearts, chat they fhould not underftand it, and a
deafnefs in their ears : and though they (houldfee all kinds 0/ figns, they will
not believe therein ; and their infidelity will arrive to that height that they will
even come unto thee, to difpute with thee. The unbelievers will fay, Thi»
is nothing but filly fables of ancient times. And they will forbid others from
believing therein , and will retire afar off from it; but they will deftroy
their own fouls only, and they are not fenfible thereof. If thou didft fee, when
they (hall be fet over the fire of hell! and they (hall fay. Would to God we
might be fent back into the world ; we would not charge the figns of our Lord
with impofture, and we would become true believers : nay, but that is become
manifeft unto them, which they formerly concealed* j and though they (hould
be fent back into the world , they would furely return to that which was for-
bidden them ; and they are furely liars. And they faid,. There is no other life
than our prefent life ; neither (ball we be railed 'again. But if thou couldft fee,
when they (hall be fet before their Lord f ! He (hall fay unto them , Is not
this in truth come to pafs ? They (hall anfwer. Yea, by our Lord. God (hall
fay, Tafte therefore the punilhment due unto you, for that ye have difbelieved:
They are loft who reject as a fallhood the meeting of God in the next life,
until the hour g cometh fuddenly upon them. Then will they fay, Alas ! for
that we have behaved our felves negligently in our life time ; and they lhall carry
their burthens on their backs 1 * will it not be evil which they (hall be loaden

with ?

* Who invenmh a lit againft Goo;] Saying
the angels are the daughters of God, andin-
tcrceffors for us with hint, £j ft *.

* Tour Campanians ;] L e. Your idols and falfe
gods.

c And what they have blajphemeujly imagined
JHetb from them ;] Tliat is,, their imaginary dei-
ties prove to be nothing, and disappear like
vain fantoma and chimaeras.

* The per (on* here meant were Abu Sofian , a l
Walid, at Nadar, Otba, Abu Jabl, and. their
comrades, who went to hear Mohammed repeat
fame of the Koran s and Nodar being asked what
he laid, anfwrcred, with an oath, that he. knew
not, only that he moved his tongue, and told a
parcel of foolilh ftories, as he had done to them 2 .

* That is become manifeft unto them which they
formerly concealed ;] viz. Their hypocrify and

vile adtionss nor does their promife proceed
from any fincere intention of amendment, but
from the anguiih and mifcry of their con*
dition J .

1 When they Jball be fet before tbeir Lord,
isle.] viz. In order for judgment,

* The hour,] The. loft day- is here called the
Hour, as it is in, feripture * } and the p^eding
expreffion of meeting Goo on that day is alfo a-
greeable to the lame h

* They Jball carry their burthens on their hacks,
&c ] . When an infidel comes forth from bis
grave, lays Jallak'ddin, his works ihall be re-
prefen ted to him under the uglieft form that
ever he beheld, having a moll deformed coun-
tenance, a filthy fmell, and a difagrecable voice ;
fo that he lhall cry out, God defend me from

. 1 ^Biioawi. * Idem. 3 Jim. 4 1 Jcbtt v. &c. 1 \ Thtft

it. 17.

io2 At KORA K i Chap. 6.

with ? This prefect life is no ocher than a play and a vain amufement ; but
fijrely the future rpanfion Jhall be better for thofe who fear God : will they not
therefore underftand ? Now we know that what they fpeak grieveth thee : yet
they do notaccufe thee of falfehood ; but the ungodly contradidt the fignsof
God *- And apoftfes before thee have been accounted liars : but they patient-
ly bore their being arxoun ted liars, and their being vexed, until our help came
unto them ; for there is none who can change the words of God : and thou haft
received fbtne information concerning thofe who have been formerly fent firm
him*. If their aveFfion to thy admonitions be grievous unto fhee, if thou canft feek
out a denwberdby thou may eji penetrate into the inward parts of the earth, ora
ladder by which thou mayeji afitnd into heaven, that thou mayeft Ihew them a
Ogn, do fo, but thy fearcb *wiU be fruitUfi j for if God pleafed b$ would bring
them ail to the true dire&iou : 'be not therefore one of the ignorant c . He
will give a favourable anfwer unto thofe only who fhall hearken with attention :
and God will raife the dead \ then unto him fhall they return. The infidels
fay, Unlefe fome figp be fent down unto him from his Lord, we will not be -
Uev * : anfwer, Verjjy God is able to fend down a fign: but the greater part
of them know it not*. There is no kind of beaft on earth, nor fowl which
flieth with its win^> but the fame is a people like unto you • ; we have not o-
micted any thing in the book x of our de&rtes : then unto their JLoitO fhall they
return*. They who accufe our fjgns of falfhood, are deaf and dumb, walking
in darknefs : God will lead into error whom he pteafeth, and whom he plea-

feth

thee, what art tfyp* I never faw apy thing more his unalterable proroife *.
deteftafk ? To which the figure will anfwer r Why e In this pillage Mohammed is reproved for
ddft thou wonder at my uglinejsf I am thy evil his impatience, in not bearing with the obftiua-
wothi 1 ; thou didft rim upon me, while thou waft cy of hts countrymen, and for his indifereet de-
in tba would, hut now will 1 ride upon then and fire of effecting what Go d hath not decreed,
thou fitylt cArtry me. And HpmedfcteJy it ftiafi mraofy, the converfion and faivatiorc of all
get upon him ; and whatever he (hall meet fhall men i .

-terrify him, and fay. Hail , thou enemy of God, 4 We greater part of them know it not',] Being
thou art he who was meant by (thefe words of the both ignorant of God's almighty power, and
Koran l and they Jbeil carry their burthens. See of the ccnfequence of what they ask, which

• They do not accufe thee of fadfbood , hut the might prove their otter deilra&ion.

ungodly contradift the figns of Godi] That is, k e A people like unto yok ;J Being created and
is not thou bat God whom they injure by their preferved by the 'dune omnipotence and £rovi-
impious gainfayiqg 6f what has been revealed dence as ye are.

to thee. It is laid that Abu Jaht once told Mo - 1 We have not omitted anything in the book. See.]

'hammed, that they did not accafehim of fal&ood, That is, in the preferved table, wherein Goo’s
becaufe he was known to be a man of veracity, decrees are written, and all things which come to
but only they did not believe the revelations pafc in the world, as well the moft minute as the
which he brought them* which occafioned this more momentous, are exaftly regiftred 6 .
■paffage L ^ * ‘Ibcn unto their Lord Jball they return; ]

* And thou haft received Jmf information con - For, according to the Mohammedan belief, the
eerning thbfe who have bed formerly fent from him f] irrational animals will alfo be reflored to life at
X.e. Thou haft been aeqqain^eif with the Tories the rcfnrrefHon, that they may be bronght
of Several of the preceding prophets ; what perfe- to judgment, and have vengeance taken on them
outions they fuflfered from thofe to whom they for the inhirie* they did one another while in
were fent, and in what manner God fupported this worM* 7 .

them and punilhed their enemies, according to

1 See Miltons Paradifehfti book II. v. 757, &c. 3 See alfo ch'. 3. p. 33. 3 ^/Betdawl

4 Idem. * Idem. 6 See the Prelim. J)ifc. §. TV. p. 103. 7 See, ib. p. 86.

Chap. 6. Al K 0 R A N. 103

fcth he will pat in the right way. Say, What think ye ? if the punilhment of
God come upon you, or the hour of the refurrefifon come upon you, will ye call
upon any other than God, if ye fpeak truth ? yea, him lhall ye call upon, and
he lhall free you from that which ye lhall ask him to deliver you from., if he plea-
feth j and ye lhall forget that which ye aflociated with him \ We have al-
ready fent mejfengers unto fundry nations before thee, and we afflicted them
with trouble and adverfity that they might humble themfelves : yet when the
affliction which we fent came upon them, they did not humble themfelves ;
but their hearts became hardened, and Satan prepared for them that which
they committed. And when they had forgotten that concerning which they
had been admonilhed, we opened unto them the gates of all things b ; until,
while they were rejoicing for that which had been given them, we fuddenly laid
hold on them, and behold, they were feized with defpair; and the utmoft part
of the people which had afted wickedly, was cut off : praife be onto God,
the Lord of all creatures ! Say, What think ye ? if God Ihould take away
your hearing and your fight, and Ihould feal up your hearts ; What god be-
fides God, will reftore them unto you ? See how varioully we Ihew forth the
figns of God-s unity c *, yet do they turn afid efrom them. Say unto them , What
think ye ? if the punilhment of Goo come upon you fuddenly, or in open view* 1 ;
will any perilh, except the ungodly people? We fend not our melfengers o-
therwile than bearing good tidings and denouncing threats. Whofo therefore
lhall believe and amend, On them lhall no fear come, neither lhall they be
grieved : but whofo lhall accufe our figns of falfhodd, a punilhment lhall
fell on them, becaufe they have done wickedly. Say, I fay net unto you. The
treafures of God are in my power : neither do I fay , I know the fecrets of
Goo : neither do I fay unto you. Verily I am an angel : I follow only that
which is revealed unto me. Say, Shall f&d blind and the feeing be held equal ?
do ye not therefore confider ? Preach it unto thofe who fear that they lhall be
affembled before their Lord : they lhall have no patronnor Intercefibr, except
him ; that peradventure they may take heed to themfelves. Drive not away
thofe who call upon their Lord morning and evening, defiling ro_/«his face e ;

it

* Ye jhtrfl flrget that which ynaJjUciattd with
bint t] That is. Ye (hall then forfake your
falfe gdett, vihen ye fhall be effc&ually convinced
that Gdn alone is able to deliver you from eter-
nal pijnlffiriwrr. But others rather think that
this forgetting will be the effeft of the diffrefs 1
and terror which 1 they Win then be in 1 .

* We Ppextft unto them the §<ttto tf alt thing/ ;J
That is/ We gave them aU manner of j^enty j
that fince they took no warning by their afflic-
tion's, their pfofjtajitir might become a finte to
them, and they might bmg down upon them-
felves fwifter ritftruftiorr.

* How varnttjh toe flMo firth the figns, Jcp.J.
Laying them before yon in different views',' and
making ufe of arguments and motives drawn
from various condonations.

4 Stirfdthly or V> c/pett view ;] That ik, fays at
Berdattrii either without any privions notice,
or after Tortle waril Big' given.

* Drive not atony (Sift who roll upon their
L o R o, fs’r ] Theft words were occafioned
\vhert the Kortijb defi red 1 Mohinr.tnei not to ad-
mit the poor dr thore inferior people, fuch as
ArhmSr, Sdbiih, Rbobbab, and S/tfrrtSfi, into his
company, pteferidihg that then tECy would
come and difctnrrle with him ; but he re-
filling to turn away any believers, they in filled
at leaft that he Ihould order therb to'rife up and
Withdraw w hen tijey came, winch' i^eagreed to do.
Others lay, that the chief men of Mecca expelled
all the poor out of their city, bidding them go
to Mohamttd ; which they did, and offered to

embrace

1 Al Beidawi.

iO'nj. ^ K.O'Rj&N* Chap. 6.

it belonged not unto thee to pafs any judgment on them *, nor doth it be-
long unto them to pafs any judgment on thee : therefore if thou drive
them away, thou wilt become one of the unjuft. Thus have we proved feme
part of them by other part, that they may fay, Are thefe the people among
us unto whom God hath been gracious b r Doth not God moft truly know
thofe who are thankful? And when they who believe in our figrts fha.ll come
unto thee, fay, Peace be upon you. Your Lord hath prefcribed unto lliin-
felf mercy ; fo that whoever among you workethevil through ignorance, and
afterwards repencech, and amendeth *, unto him will he furely be gracious and
merciful. Thus have we diftindtly propounded our figns, that the path of the
wicked might be made known. Say, Verily I am forbidden to worlhip the
falft deities which ye invoke, befides God. Say, I will not follow your de-
fires ; for then fhould I err, neither ftiould I be one of thofe who are rightly
directed. Say, I behave according to the plain declaration which I have re-
ceived from my Loan ; but ye have forged lies concerning him. That which
ye defire (hotfld -be haftened, is not in my power': judgment belongetb only
unto God ; he will determine the truth ; and he is the beft difcerner. Say, If
-what ye defire fhould be haftened were in my power, the matter had been de-
termined between me and you 4 : but God well knoweth the unjuft. With
him are the keys of the fecret things j none knoweth them befides himfelf : he
knoweth that which is on the dry land and in the fea; there fallethno leaij
but he knoweth it i neither is there a fingle grain in the dark parts of
the earth, neither a green thing* nor a dry thing, but it is written in the
perfpicuous book*. It is he who caufeth you to fleep by night* and
knoweth what ye merit by day; he alfoawaketh you therein, that the prefix-
ed term of your lives may be fulfilled ; then unto him fhall ye return, and
he fhall declare unto you that which ye have wrought. He is fupreme over
his fervants, and fendeth the guardian angels to watch over you f , until, Vhen
death overtaketh one of you, our meffengers ■* caufe him to die j and they will
mot neglect our commands. Afterwards mall they return unto God, their true
Lord : doth not judgment belong unto him ? he is the moft quick in taking

an

embrace his religion ; but he made fome diffi-
culty to receive them, fu(pedUng their motive to
be neceffity, and not real .convidUon 1 ; where-
upon this paflage was revealed.

* It belongetb not unto thee to pafs am judgment

on them, i e. Ralhly to decide whether

their intentions be fincere or not $ fince thou
canfl not know their heart, and their faith may
poffibly be more firm than that of thofe who
would perfuade thee to difeard them.

* Thus have we proved fime part of them by
other part , &c.] That is to lay, the noble by
thofe of mean extrattion* ancl tne rich by the
poor j in that Go b chofe to call the latter to the
faith before the former 2 .

* That which ye defire fhould be haftened , is not

1 Idem , Jallalo\d®ik*

¥relim. Difc . J. IV. p . 72.

in my power, &c.] This palTage is an anfwer to
the audacious defiances of the infidels, who
bid Mohammed, if he were a true prophet, to
call for a fliower of flones from heaven, or fome
other fudden and miraculous punifhment, to
deftroy them 3 .

* The matter bad been determined j] For I
fhould e’re now have deflroyed you, out
of zeal for God’s honour, had U been in my
power

* In the ptrfpicuttus book;] L e. The prefervei
table, ,or regilter of God’s decrees.

f See the Prelim. Difc. Sedt. IV. p. 88, 89.

* Our meJhtgersQ That Is, the angel of death
and his affiilants * .

2 Iidem.

3 A1 Beidawi.

4 Idem. 5 See the

Chap. 6. Al KORAN. 105

an account*. Say, Who deliyereth you from the darknefs b of the land, and
of the fea, when ye call upon him humbly and in private, faying , Verily if
thou deliver us c from thefe dangers , we will furely be thankful ? Say, God
delivereth you from them, and from every grief of mind ; yet afterwards ye
give him companions d . Say, He is able to fend on you a punilhment from
above you*, or from under your feet f , or to ingage you in difienfion, and
to make fome of you tafte the violence of others. Obferve how varioufly
we fhew forth our figns, that peradventure they may underftand. This peo-
ple hath accufcd the revelation which thou baft brought of falfhood, although
it be the truth. Say, I am not a guardian over you : every prophecy hath
its fixed time of accomplifhment ; and ye will hereafter know it. When thou
feed: thofe who are ingaged in cavilling at , or ridiculing our figns ; depart from
them, until they be ingaged in fome other difcourfe :and if Sat an caufe thee to
forget this precept , do not fit with the ungodly people, after recolledlion. They
who fear God are not at all accountable for them, but their duty is to remem-
ber, that they may take heed to themfelves ®. Abandon thofe who make their
religion a fport and a jeft ; and whom theprefent life hath deceived: and ad-
monifh them by the Kon^ttf, that a foul becometh liable to deftru&ion for
that which it committeth: it fhall have no patron nor interceflor befides God;
and if it could pay the utmoft price of redemption, it would not be accepted
from it. They who are delivered over to perdition for that which they have
committed, fhall have boiling water to drink, and fhall fuffer a grievous
punilhment, becaufe they have difbelieved. Say, Shall we call upon that, be-
fides God, which can neither profit us nor hurt us ? and fhall we turn back
on our heels, after that God hath dire&ed us *, like him whom the devils have
infatuated, wandring amazedly in the earth, and yet having companions who
call him to the true direction, faying. , Come unto us ? Say, The direftion of
God is the true direction : we are commanded to refign ourfelves unto the
Lord of all creatures; and it is alfo commanded us, faying , Obferve the ftated
times of prayer, and fear him ; for it is he before whom ye fhall be aflembled.
It is he who hath created the heavens and the earth in truth ; and whenever
he faith unto a thing. Be, it is. His word is the truth ; and his will be the
kingdom on the day whereon the trumpet fhall be founded b : he knoweth

P what-

* See the Prelim. Difc. Se£t. IV. p. 88. 89.

b The darknefs ;J That is, the dangers and
diftrelles.

* If tbou deliver us i] The Cuftc copies read
it in the third perfon, if he deliver us, &c.

* Yet afterwards it give him torpfanions ;] Re-
turning to your old idolatry.

* A iunijkment from above yw}] That is. by
ftorms from heaven, as he deftroyed the unbe-
lieving people of Noah, and of Lot, and the ar-
ray of Air aba, the lord of the elephant 1 .

f Or from under your feeti ] Either by drown-
ing you, as he did Pharaoh and his hdft, or
cauling the earth to open and fwallow you up.

as happened to Ktrab, or (as the Mohammedans
name ljira) Karan *.

* Thofe who fear God are not accountable for
them, &c.j And therefore need not be troubled
at the indecent and impious talk of the infidels i
provided they take care not to be infefled by
them. When the preceding palfage was re-
vealed, the Mojlemt told their prophet, that if
they were obliged to rife up whenever the ido-
laters fpoke irreverently of the Koran, they
could never fit quietly in the temple, nor per-
form their devotions there ; Whereupon thefe
words were added 3 .

“ See the Prelim. Difc. Seft. IV. p. ~ 2 , and
82, (sic.

1 Al Beidawi.

* Idem.

3 Idem, Jailai.o’pbin.

io6 At KORAN. Chap. 6,

whatever is fecret, and whatever is public v he is the wife, the knowing. Call
to mind when Abraham faid unto his father Azer *, Doft thou take images for
gods b ? Verily I perceive that thou and thy people are in a man.feft error.
And thus did we fhew unto Abraham the kingdom of heaven and earth, that
he might become one of thofe who firmly believe And when the night over-
lhadowed him, he fawa ffar, and he fad, This is my Lord d ; but when it
fct, he faid, I like not gods which fet. And when he law the moon cifing,
he faid, This is my Lord ; but when hefawit fet, he faid, Verify if my Lord
direft me not, I lhall become one of the people who go aftrav. And when he faw
the fun riling, hefaid. This is mv Lord, this is thegreateft •, but when it fet,
he faid, O my people, verily I am clear of that which ye aifociate with God : I
diredt my face unto him who hath created the heavens and the earth ; 1 am or-
thodox, and am not one of the idolaters. And his people difpcrtfeU with hum
and he faid. Will ye difpute with me concerning God ? mice he hath now
directed me, and I fear not that which ye aifociate with him , unlefs
that my Lord willeth a thing ; for my Lord comprehendeth all things by

bis

• Azer , J This is the name which the Mo-
hammedans give to Abraham father, named in
fcriptare Trrab, However foipe of their writers
pretend that Azer was the fon of Terab x , and
D'Herbebt fays that the Arabs always diftinguifh
them in thfir gepealpgies as different perfons ;
but that becaufe Abraham was the fon of Terab
according to tAefes, it is therefore fuppafed [by
Biropen? writers} that Terab ia the fame with
the Azer of the Arabs % , How true this ok,
femtion may be in fdatipn to fome 'authors,
I cannot foy* but I am fare it cannot be' true
of ail; for ftwral Arab and Tttrkifik writers ex-
prefly make Azer and Terab the Perfon 3 .
Azer , in ancient times, was the name of the
planet Mars , abd the monrh of March was fo
called by the moft ancient Verjtam^ for the
word originally fignifying fin (as’h ftill does)
it was therefore given by them and the Chalde-
ans to that planet 4 , which partaking, as was
fuppofed, Qf a. fiery nature, was acknowledged
by rhe 'Chaldeans and Adrians as a god or
planetary deity, whom in old times they wor-
shipped under the farm of a pillar: whence
Azer became a name among the nobility, who
efteemed if honourable to be denominated from
their gotft 1 , and is found in the tbmpofition
of feverd Bnbylohiflf names. For thefe reafocs
learned author fuppMth AZet to have been the
heathen name of Terab, and that the other was

given him on his converfion 6 . Al Beidatvi
confirms this coirjetftoire, faying that Azer was
the name of the idol which he Worflijpped. It
may be obfenned that Abraham's father it alfo
call odZarab in the Talmud , and At bar by Sufebius.

b Do ye take images fir gcdtf\ That Azer or
Terab was an idolater, is allowed on aH hands
nor can it be denied, fince he is exptefly fiid in
feripture to have fcrvpd ftcaage god# " . Tie
eaftera authors ujwnimoufly agree that he was
a fUtoary, or carver of idols ; arid he is renre-
fented at the firft Who matffc iringej of my t
piftares otity been in oft before * , arid

taught that they were to be adored as gods
However we are told his employment was a
vety honourable one 1 and that he was a great
lord, and m high favour with Nimrod, whofe
ftn-indaw he was 1 x , hecaale he made his idols
for him, and was excellent in his art. Some
of the Rabbins fay Terab was a prieft, and chief
of the order IZ .

c And thus roe firmed Abrahint the kingdom of
beavtir and earth, That is, we gave him a

right apprehenfion of the government of the
world and of the heavenly bodiet, that he
might know them ail to be ruled by God,
by putting him on nuking the following reflec-
tions,

d He faw a ft or, and be faii, This ts my Lor d»
&r 7 .} Since Abraham's patents were idolaters,

it

1 TaiUb Menfakbab, apod D’Herbev. Bib!. Orient, f, i*. * D’Hbrbel. ibid, 5 Al

Beidawi, Jallalo ddih , Yahya, Ebn Shown ah, Mirat Kainat t &e, V, etiam Pbar*
bm Jehmgbiri, apud Hyde dt rel. vet. ftrfar. p. 68 , «■ Hyde* ibid, p. 6 ^, 1 Idem *h

p, 64. 6 Idem , tbilp, 62. 7 J ^ x*iv. *, 1+- s Epiphan. adv, Har, l, 1. p . 7* 8*

9 Suioas in Lexieoy voce £#f ifc V . Hyde, ubifupra, p. * x D’Herbeu nbi

ftp. 1 % Sbaljbff bakkabs p, 94 ^

Chap. 6. ^ K 0 io*"

Wj knowledge*: will ye not therefore confider ? And how fliould I Fear that
which ye aflociate with God, fince ye fear not to have aflbciated wifh God
that concerning which he hath fent down unto you no authority ? which there-
fore of the two parties is the more fafe, if ye underftand aright ? They who
believe, and clothe not their faith with injuftice b , they fhalf enjoy fecurity,
and they are tightly directed. And this is our argument wherewith we fur-
nifhed Abraham that he might make ufe of it againft his people : we exalt un-
to degrees of wifdom and knowledge whom we pleafe; for thy Lord is wife and
knowing. And we gave unto him Isaac and Jacob ; we directed them both,
and Noah had we before diredted, and of his poftcrity c David and Solomon j
and Job 4 , and Joseph, and Moses, and Aaron: thus do we reward the
righteous : and Zacharias, and John, and Je 6US, and Elias * ; all Of them were
upright men: and Ismael, and ElishA f , and Jonas*, and Lot h $ all thefe
have we favoured above the reft of the world j and alfo divers of their fathers,

P 2 and

it feems to be a neeeflary eonlequence that him- thanks are due 9 . The ftory it felf ia certainly
felf was one alfo in his younger years; the taken from the Talmud Some of the com-
fcripture not obfcurely intimates as much 1 ; and mentators however fuppofe this reafoning of
the yews thejnfelves acknowledge it a . At Abraham with himfelf was not the firft means of
what age he came to the knowledge of the true his coavcrfion, but that he ufed it only by way of
God and ldft idolatry, opinions are various, argument to convince the idolaters among
Some JetttiJh writers tells us, he was then but whom he then lived.

three years old *, and the Mohammedans likewife • I fiOr not what ye officiate with him ; unis fir

fuppofe him very young, and that he asked his that my Lord willeth a thing, &c.] That w*
father and mother feveral Ihrewd queftionswhe* I am not afraid of your falfe gods, which can-
a child 4 . Others however allow him to have not hurt me, except God permitteth it, or is
been a middle-aged man at that time 1 . Mai- pleafed to affiift me himfelf.
monides , in particular! and R. Abraham Zacutb b Injuftice ;] By injuftice, in this place, the
think him to have -been forty years old, which commentators tmderftaad idolatry, or open re-
age is alfo mentioned in the KorJn, Bui the bellion againft God.

general opinion of the Mohammedans is, that he c Of his poftcrity ;] Some refer the relative

was about fifteen or fixteen As the religion bh> to Abraham, the perfon cliefly fpoken of

wherein Abraham was educated, was the Sahian , in this paffage ? fome to Noah , the next antece-

which confifted chiefly in the worfhrp of the dent, becaufc Jonas and Lot were not (fa y they)

heavenly bodies y , he its introduced examining of Abraham's feed : and others fuppofe the per-

their nature and properties, to fee whether they Tons named in this and the next verfe are to be

had a right to the worfhip which was paid underftood as the defendants of Abrabrn , and

them or not ; and the firft which he obferved thofein the following verfe, as thofcof Noah 1 x m

was the planet Venus, or, as others will have it, 4 Job.] The Mohammedans fey he was of the

Jupiter*. This method of Abraband s a ruin- race of Efau. See chap, 21, and 38*

ing to the knowledge of the fupreme Creator * Eliot.} See chap: 37.

of all things, is conformable to what Jofephts f EJljha.] This prophet was the fuccefTor of

mites, viz. That he drew his notions from the Elias , ami as the commentators will have it,

changes which he had obferved in the earth and the (bn Of Obht&b ; tbo* the fctfipture makes him

the fca, and in the fan and the moon, and the the fon of Staph at.

reft of the celefttai bodies; cOrtcfcidiag that * Jonas.} 8ee chap, 10, 21, and 37.

they were fubjcft to the command of a fo- b lUf.] Sec chap. 7, fcfV.

perior power, to whom alone all honour and

1 V. JoJb. xxiv. 2, 14. and Hyde, ubi fiep.p. 59. 31 Joseph. Ant . I 1. c. 7. Maimon. More
Nev. part 3. c. 29. & Tad Hazzat. de Id. c. 1, &(. 3 Tan chum a, Talmud, Nedarim, 32, 1.

apud Maimon. tadhazz . ubi fup. 4 V. D’HerbeL. Bibi. Orient . Art . Abraham. 1 Mai-
mon. ubi jup . R. Abr. Zacvth in Sefer Juchafin, Shaljhel hajkhab, fcfr. 6 V. Hyde, vbijup K p.

60, 61. csf Hotting. Smegma Orient, p. 290, &c. Genebr. in Chron. 7 Sea Jb e Prelim *
Dift. §. I. p. 14. 9 ^/Beidawi. 9 Joseph. Ant. 1 . 1. c. 7. Ib R. Bachai,

in Mtdrajh . V . Bartolocc. BibL Robb, putt. 1. p. 640* 1 1 Al Be id.

108 Al KORAN. Chap. 6.

and their iflue, and their brethren ; and we chofe them, and directed them into
the right way. This is the direction of God, he direfteth thereby: luch of his
fervants as he pleafeth ; but if they had been guilty of idolatry, that which
they wrOught would have become utterly fruitlefs unto them. I hofe were the
perfons unto whom we gave the fcripture, and wifdom, and prophecy ; but
if thefe ‘ believe not therein, we will commit the care of them to a peo-
ple who fhall not dilbelieve the fame. Thofe were the perfpds whom God
hath directed, therefore follow their direction. Say unto the inhabitants of
At ec c I ask of you no recompenfe for preaching the Kor^h it is no o-
ther than an admonition unto all creatures. They make not a due eftimati-
on of God \ when they fay, God hath not fent down unto man any thing at
all* 2 : Say, Who fent down the book which Moses brought, a light and a
diredion unto men ; which ye tranfcribe on papers, whereof ye publifh fome
part, and great part whereof ye conceal? and ye have been taugh^ by Moham-
med What ye knew not, neither your fathers. Say, God fent it down : then leave
them to amufe themfelves with their vain difcouFfe, This book which we have
lent down, is blefled ; confirming that which was revealed before it j and is de-
livered unto thee that thou roayeft preach it unto the metropolis of Mecc\a and
to thofe who are round about it. And they who believe in the next life, will
believe therein, and they will diligently obferve their times of prayer. Who is
more wicked than he who forgeth a he concerning God d r or faith, Tins was
revealed unto me ; when nothing hath been revealed unto him*? and who
faith, I will produce a revelation like unto that which God hath fent down f ?

If

• Thefe;) That is, the Koretjb x .
fc They make not a due tftimtm ^ God,
fcfr.] That is, they know him not truejy, nor
have juft notions of his goodnefs and mercy
towards man. The perfons here meant, accord-
ing to fome commentators, are the Jews, and
according to others, the idolaters a .

This verfe and the two next, as Jallalo'ddin
thinks, were revealed at Medina.

f God hath not fent down unto man any thing.
By thefe words the Jem (if they were
the perfons mdant) chiefly intended to deny
the Koran to be of divine revelation : tho 7 they
might in ftri&nefs infift that God never re-
vealed, or fent down, as the Koran exprefle? it,
any real compofttion or material writing from
heaven, in the manner that Mohammed pre-
tended his revelations were delivered 3 , if we
except only, the decalogue; God having left to
the infpired. pen-mei;, not only the labour of
writing, but the liberty, in a great meafure at
kaft, of putting the truths into their own words
and manner of exprefliom

- Who is more unjuft than he who forgeth a lie

tmeeming Gob, Isle.) Falfely pretendh^l to
have received revelations from him; rfldid
Mojeilama , alAJpiad al Anfi, and other*
e Or faith , This was revealed unto me; when
nothing bath been revealed unto him ;] As did.
Abdallah Ebn Saad Ebn Abi Sarah, who for
fome time was the prophet’s ajiunuenfis, and
when thefe words were diftated to him as re-
vealed, viz. We created man of a purer hind of
clay, Sec. 4 , cried out, by way of adrraration,
BUjfed be God, the heft' Creator f and being
ordered by Mohammed to write thefe words
down alfo, as part of the infpired pafiage, be-
gan to think himfelf as great a prophet as his
mailer *. Whereupon he took upon himfelf
to corrupt and alter the Koran according to his
own fancy, and at length apofta tiding, was one
of the ten who were proferibed at the taking of
Mecca 6 , and narrowly efeapCd with life on his
recantation, by the inter pofitfon of Oibmdn Ebn
Ajfdn, whofq fofter- brother ho was 7 *

c And who faith, I will produce a revelation,
&c.] For feme Arabs, it feems, had the vanity

to

1 Idem.

4 Al Biibaws,

2 Mm- 1 Seethe Prelim. Dife. $. III. p. 64, &c, 4 Koran, chap . 23.

6 See the Prelim, Dift. p,jj, ? y Abu’lfed. Vit. Mof.p. 109.

Chap. 6, Al KORAN. 109

If thou didft fee when the ungodly are in the pangs of death, and the angels*
reach out their hands, faying, Caft forth your fouls; this day fhall ye receive
an ignominious punilhment for that which ye have falfely fpoken concerning
God ; and becaufe ye have proudly reje&ed his %ns. And now are ye come
unto us alone”, as we created you acjirft ' , and ye have left that which we.
had beftowed on you, behind your backs ; neither do we fee with you your
intercelfors **, whom ye thought to have been partners with Gao among you :
now is the relation between you cut offhand what ye imagined hathdeceivedyou*.
God caufeth the grain, and the date -done to put forth : he bringeth forth
the living from the dead, and he bringeth forth the dead from the living f .
This is God. Why therefore are ye turned away from him ? He caufeth the
morning to appear ; and hath ordained the night For reft, and the fun and
the moon for the computing of time. This is che difpofition of the mighty,
the wife God. It is ke who hath ordained the ftars for you, that ye may be
direded thereby in the darknefs of the land and of the fea. We have dearly
fliewn forth our figns, unto people who underftand. It is he who hath pro<-
duced you from one foul *, and hath provided for you a fure receptacle and a.
repofitory*. We have clearly fhewn forth our figns, unto people who are
wife. It is he who fendeth down water from heaven, and we have thereby
produced the fpringing . buds of all things, and have thereout produced the
green thing, from which we produce the grain growing in rows, and palm-trees,
from whofe branches proceed clutters of dates hanging dofe together ; and gardens
of grapes, and olives, and pomegranates, botbuke and unlike to one another.
Look on their fruits, when they bear fruit, and their growing to maturity..
Verily herein are figns, unto people who believe, let they have fet up the
genii h as partners with. Gp d, although he created them and they have falfc-
ly attributed unto him fons and daughters', without knowledge. Praife be
unto him ; and far be that from him which thejt attribute unto, him! He is the
maker of heaven and earth : how fhould he have xfiue fince he hath no confort?
he hath created all things, and he is omnifcient. This is God your Lord; there
is no God but he, the creator of all things : therefore ferve him ; for he taketK
care of all things. The fight comprehendeth him not, but he comprehendeth.

the

to imagine, and gave out, that if they pleafed,
they could write a book nothing inforior to the
Koran.

* See before, p. 104. not. .?

* Alone ;] That is, without your wealth,
your children, or your friend*, which ye fo
touch depended on in your life tinie.

* Ai ive create I you at firfli\ i. e. Naked and
helplefs.

* Your intercelfors ;] Or falfegods,

* What ye Imagine J, &c.] Concerning the
iutercethon of your idols, or the disbelief of
future rewards and punifhroenta.

1 See chap. 3. p. 38.

* A fure receptacle and a repofittsry ;] Namely,

in the loins of your fathers, and the wombs of
your mothers *.

11 Genii}] This word iignifies properly the
genus of rational, invi/We beings, whether an*
gels, devils, or that intermediate fpecies ufu-
ally called £/v/r. Some of the commentators
therefore, in this place, underftand the angels,
whom the pagan Arabs. wprffupped ; and others
the devils, either becaufe they became their
fervants by adoring idols at their mitigation,
or elfe becaufe, according to the Magi an fyf-
tem, they looked on the devil as a fort of
creator, making him the author and principle,
of all evil, and God the author of good only*.

‘ See the Prelim. Difcourle, p. 17, and 39,

1 Al Beidawi. * Idem,

no K 0 R-j4 Chap, 6,

the fight i he is the gracious % the Wife. Now have evident demonfttationa
come Onto you froth your Lord } whofo feeth sbern, the advantage thereof will
re bund to his own foul: and whofo is wilfully blind, the cskfbpence will be
to himfelf. I am not a keeper over you. Thus do we variously explain our
figfisj that they may fay. Thou haft ftudied diligently b ; and that we may
d elate them unto t^opre of underftanding. Follow that which hath been
regaled Unto Rom thy Loko ; there is no God but he : retire therefore
frdih the idolatfere. If God had fa pleafed; they had not been guilty of ido'-
llfrry, We liave not appointed thee a keeper over them ; neither art thou a
guardian over them! Revile not the idols which they invoke befides God, left
tiiey maficioufly revile God, without knowledge. Thus have we prepared for
every natron their works : hereafter unto God ihall thfey return, and he lhall
declare unto them that which they* have done. They have fworri tfy God, by
the moff fotemn oath, that if a figft came unto them, thdy would certainly
believe therein: Say, Verily figns are in the power of God alone ; and heper-
rtflttethyou not to urtdditand that wheh they come, they will not believfc'. And
we will turn afide their hearts and their hsftfrmtbe tiSttb, as they believed
not therein 4 the firft rime; and we will leave them to wander in their error.

VIII. *And though we had fefit down angels unto thcm> and the dead had fpoken
unto thejn, arid we had gathered together before them all iih?ngs in one view' j
tfifey would not have believed, unlefa God hadfo pleafed: but the greater
part of them know it not. Thus have we appointed unto every prophet an
enemy •, the deVUs of men, and of genii : who privately fuggeft the one to
the other fpCckms difeourfes to deceive ; but if thy Lord pleafed, they would
not have done it. Therefore leave them, and that which they have falfely ima-
gined ; and let the hearts of thofe be inclined thereto, who believe not in the
life to come ; and let them pleafe themfelves therein, and let them gaiq that
which they are gaining. Shall I feek after any other judge befides God to
judge between us? It is he who hath fent down unto you the book of tbe
Korkin diftinguifhing between good and evil ; and they to whom we gave the
feripture know that it is fent down from thy Lord, with truth. Be not
therefore one of thofe who doubt thereof. The words of thy Lord are per-

feft

• The graetitls ;3 Or, as the word may be tran- did not think fit to comply with their defires ;

fi«ed, the ittccmprebenfiilf •*. and that if he had fo thought fit, yet it had

• wit they may fay. Them hajl ftudied diligently, >] been in vain, becaufe if they were not convin-
That is. Thou haft been inftrofted by the Jews ced by the Karin , they would not be convinced
-and Chriftlansm thefe matters, and only retail- by the greateft tniracle *.

eft to us what thou haft learned of them. For * Therein \\ L e. In the Korin.

this the infidels objefled to Mohammed, thinking • And though tot had fent doton angels unto thm.

it impoffible (or him tbdlfcouffe on fubjefts of &c.]For the Meet one retired that Mohamad
fo High a hature, and in fo clear and pertinent ihould either fhew them an angel descending
a manner, without beib^ Well verfed in the from heaven in their fight, or raife their dead
doftrines and fared writings of thofe people. father*, that they might difeoutft with them, or
c In this pallage Mohammed endeavours to ex- prevail on Goo and his angels to appear to
eufe his inability of working a miracle, as had them in a body,
been demanded of him i declaring that Goo

1 Idem.

* Confer Luke avi, 31.

C hap. 6. At KORAN \ in

fed, in crurh and piftice ; there h none who can change his words a : he both
heareth and knowerh. But if thou obey the greater part of them who are
in the earth, they will lead thee afide from the path of God : they follow
an uncertain opinion 4&nly b , and fpeak nothing but lies ; verily thy Lord
well knowerh thofe who go aftray from his path, and well knoweth thofe who
are rightly direfted. Ear of that whereon Sit name of God hath been com-
memorated % if ye believe in his figns : and why do ye not eat of rhat whereon
the name of God hath been commemorated ? fince he hath plainly declared unto
you what he hath forbidden you ; except that which ye be compelled to by
neceffity eattf: many lead others into error, becaufe of their appetites, being
void of knowledge ; but thy Lord well knoweth who are the tranlgrefTors.
Leave both the outfide of iniquity, and the infide thereof * : for they who
commit iniquity fhali receive the reward of that which they fball have gained-
Eat not therefore of chat whereon the name of God hath not been commemo-
rated •, for this is certainly wickednefs: but the devils will fugged unto their
friends, that they difpute with you concerning this precept ; but if ye obey
them, ye are furely idolaters. Shall he who hath been dead, and whom we
have reftored unto life, and unto whom we have ordained a light, whereby he
may walk among men, be as he whofe fimilifude is in darknds, from whence
he fhali not come fotth c ? Thus was that which the infidels are doing, pre-
pared for them. And thus have we placed in every city chief leaders of the
Wicked men thereof f , that they may aft deceitfully therein 5 but they fhali aft
deceitfully agaiftft their own fouls Only * and they know it not. And when
a fign 1 cometh unto them, they fay, We will by no means believe until <t
nvehtion be brought unto us, like unto that Which Hath been delivered un-
to the meflengdrs of God h . God beft knoweth whom he will appointfor his
mefienger *. VMenefs in the fight of God fhali fell upon thofe who deal wicked-
ly, and a grievous punilhment, for that they have dealt deceitfully. And whom-

foever

* There is none tohd AM changf his p/erds.'] Some
interpret this of thfc immutability of God’s de-
cree, and (he cArtaih'fy.of his threats and pro-
mi fes ; others, of his particular promife to pre-
f^e the Koran from any fuch alterations or cor-
ruptions as they imagine td have happened, to
the Pentateuch and the Gofoel 1 ; and Qthers, of
the unalterable duration of the Mohammedan law,
which they hold is to laft till the end of thte
World, there being no other prpphetjlaWj or dif-
penfation to be expected after it.

b They follow an uncertain opinion only ;] Ima j
fining that the true religion was that which their
idolatrous anceftprs profeiTed.

c See chap. 2. p. 20. arid chap. j. p. 82.
d Leave the outfide of iniquity x and the infide
thereof ;] That is. Both open and fecret fins.

• The perfons primarily intended in this paf-
&ge, were Hamxa* Mohammed's wide, and

1 See the Prelim . Difc .

Abu JahVi others inllead of Hamza name Omar ,
or Ammdr.

i And thus have we placed .'ft every city* chief
deaden of the mclei men thereof In the fame
manner as we have done in, Mecca.

g AfigH\\ i. e. Any verfe or pafoge of the
Koran.

b We toll l not belt be until a revelation he brought'
unto us % &c.] Thefe were the words of the Ko -
reijb , who thought there were ^perfifns among
themfelves more worthy of t^e honour of beipg
God’s rocfleijigei'thin Mohammed.

1 Gom le/? knoweth whom he will appoint fir
bis 'rkejfetigeh ;] Literally," Where h will face
bis coifmijfam. Goo, fty* al JSfi^awi, bellows
not the gift of prophecy qn any one on account
of his nobility or riches, but for their fpiri-
tual qualifications; making choice of fuch of hit
fervants as he pleales, and who he fcnow$ will
execute them commiffions faithfully.

fi>. 7$. and Kor. c. 15#

no, Al KQRA1V. Chap. 6.

foever God fhall pleafe to direft, he will open his breaft to receive the faith of
Islam : but whomfoever he fhall pleafe to lead into error, he will render his
bread: ftrait and narrow, as though he were climbing up to heaven \ Thus
doth God inflift a terrible punifhment on thole who believe not. This is the
fight way of thy Lord. Now have we plainly declared our fig ns unto
thofe people who will confider. They fhall have a dwelling of peace with
their Lord, and he fhall be their patron, becaufe of that which they -have
■wrought. Think on the day whereon God fhall gather them all together, and
fhall fay, O company of genii \ ye have beat much concerned with man-
kind c ; and their friends from among mankind fhall fey, O Lord, the one
of us hath received advantage from the other 11 , and we are arrived at our
limited term e which thou haft appointed us. God will fey, Hell fire fhall be
your habitation, therein fhall ye remain for. ever ; unlefs as Got) fhall pleafe
to mitigate your pains f , for thy Lord is wife and knowing. Thus do we fet
fome of the unjuft over others of them, becaufe cf that which they have de-
fierved. O company of genii and men, did not meffengers from among, your felves
come unto you E , rehearfing ray figns unto you, and forewarning you of
,the meeting of this your day ? They fhall anfwer, We bear witndsi againft
our felves : the prefent life deceived them : and they fhall bear witnefs againft
themfelves that they were unbelievers. This bath been the method of God',
dealing with his creatures, becaufe thy Lord would not deftroy the cities in
their iniquity, while their inhabitants were carelefs* . Every one fhall have
degrees of recompenfe of that which they fhall do ; for thy .Lord is not re-
gardlefs of that which they do, and thy Lord is felf-fufficient and indued with
mercy. If he pleafeth he can deftroy you, and caufe fuch as he pleafeth to
fucceed you, in like manner as he produced you from the poftericy of other
people. Verily that which is threatened you, fhall furely come to pais $ nei-
ther

3 As though he were climbing up to heaven ;] cold, called *1 Zamharir 9 which is to be one
Or had undertaken the mofl impoffible thing in part of their punilhment ; but others think the
the world. In like manner fhall the heart of refpit which God wifi grant to fome before they
Juch a man be incapable of receiving the truth, are thrown into hell, is here intended 4 . Ac-

b O company of genii ;] That is, of devils x . cording to the cxpofition of Ebn Abbas t thefe

* Ye have been much concerned with mankind }] words may be rendred, Unlefs him whom God
I n tempting and feducing them to An. JbaH pleafe to deliver thence M #

4 Tbe one of us hath received advantage from g Did notmejfengers freon among your felves come

the other ;] The advantage which men received unto you, See.} It is the Mohammedan belief that
from the evil fpirits, was their railing and fatis- apofUes were lent by God for the converfion
Tying their lufb and appetites i and that which both of genii and of men; being generally of
the latter received in return, was the obedience humane race (as Mohammed , in particular, who
paid them by the former. See a . pretended to have a commiflion to preach to

e Our limited term 3 Sec.} viz . The day of re- both kinds); according to this paflage, it feems
furre&ion, which we believed not in the other there mull have been prophets of the race of
World. genii alib, though their million be a fecret to

f ZJnlefs as God JbdU pleafe to mitigate your us.
pains ;) The commentators tell us that this al- h While their inhabitants were carelefsi] Or

leviation of the pains of the damned, wiD be confidercd not their danger ; but God firft
when they fhall be taken out of the fire to drink fent fome prophet to them to warn them of
the boiling water 3 , or to fuffer the extreme It, and to invite them to repentance^

1 AIBxidav/u 2 Idem, Jalx,alo’dj>J5. 3 Jallald’ddin. 4 Al Beidawi.
* £ee the Prelim . Difc, J. IV. /. 92, tfc.

Chap. 6. Al KORAN. n 3

ther fhall y c caufc it to fail. Say unto thofe of Mzccu , O my people, a& ac-
cording to your power ; verily I will adt according to my duty a : and here-
after (hall ye know whofe will be the reward of paraaile. The ungodly
(hall not profper* Thofe of Mecc ^ fet apart unto God a portion of that
which he hath produced of the fruits of the earth, and of cattle ; and fay. This
belongetb unto God, (according to their imagination,) and this unto our com-
panions b . And that which is defined for their companions cometh not unto
God ; jyet that which is jet apart unto God cometh unto their companions c .
How ill do they judge ! In like manner have their companions induced many
of the idolaters to flay their children d , that they might bring them to per-
dition, and that they might render their religion obicure and confuted unto
them e . But if God had pleafed, they had not done this: therefore leavd
them, and that which they falfely imagine. They alfb fay, Thefe cattle and
fruits of the earth are facred •» none (hall eat thereof but who we pleafe f , (ac-
cording to their imagination ;) and there are cattle whofe backs are forbid-
den to be rode on , or loaden with burthens e ; and there are cattle on which they
commemorate not the name of God when they flay them \ deviling a lie againn:
him : Goo (hall reward them for that which they falfely devife. And they fay.
That which is in the bellies of thefe cattle 1 , is allowed our males to eat , and
is forbidden to our wives : but if it prove abortive, then they are both par-
takers thereof k . God fhall give them the reward of their attributing (fcefe things
to him: he is knowing and wife. They are utterly loft who have {lain their chil-
dren foolilhly l , without knowledge ra * and have forbidden that which God

Q ^ hath

• All according to your power ; and twill aB • And render their religion obfeure and confuted,
according to my duty That is. Ye may pro- &c,] By corrupting with horrid fuperftitions
ceed in your rebellion againft God and your that religion which Ifmael had left tohispo-
malice towards me, and be confirmed in your ftcrity

infidelity ; but I will perfeve e to bear your in- f But who toe plea/e }] That is, Thofe who
Jolts with patience, and to publifh thofe revela- ferve our idols, and are of the male (ex ; for
tions which God has commanded me T , the women were not allowed to eat of them 6 .

6 Our companions ;] L e. Our idols. In which g And there are cattle whofe backs are forbidden
fenfe this word is to be taken thro’ the whole to be rode on , $cc.] Which they fuperftitioufly e*-
yaflage. empted from fuch fervices, in fome particular

* As to this cuftom of the pagan Arabs, fee cafes 5 as they did the JBaKCa, the Baiba, and the
the Prelim. Difc. $. I. p. 16. To what is there Hdmi 7 .

faid we may add, that the fhare fet apart for * See cHap. g. 8a.

God was employed chiefly in relieving the ' I hat which is in the bellies of thefe cattle ;]
poor, and ftrangers ; and the lhare of the idola^, That is, the fertUs or embryo^ of the Bahtra
for paying their priefts, and providing facrifices and the Baiba, which (hall be brought forth a-
for them a . live.

4 To Jlay their children;'] Either by that inhu- 4 But if it prove abortive, they both partake
man piftom, which prevailed among thofe of thepfoff] For If thofe cattle caft their young,
Ktfttdah and fome other, tribes, of burying their the women might eat thereof as well as the
daughters alive* fo foon as they were borti, if men.
they apprehended they could not maintain them 3 5 ' See tibove, note

or elfe by offering them to their idols, at the 80 Without knowledge i\ Not having a due fenfe

inftigation of thofe who had the cuftody df of God’s provident;,
their temples

x Al Bbidawi. 2 Idem, jAiiLXLb*bDiN\ 3 Sei'&qjKBi. + AIBzusaM*

4 Jdem. 6 ifo mM 7 Set chap, j 96. andBiefijn. pife. $. V.

1 14 Al KORA IV. Chap. 6,

hath given them fot food, deviling a lieagainft God- They have erred, and
were not rightly directed. He it is who producerh gardens of vines, brrl- tbofe
which are (uppoTted on trails of woody and tbofewbtth are not fupportcd and
palm-trees, and the corn afforamg various food, and olives, and pomegranates,
alike and unlike unto one another. Eat of their fruit, when they war fruit, smd
pay the due thereof on the day whereon ye fliall gather it 4 ; .btft be not pro-
file c , for Got> loveth not thofe who are too profufe. And Go hath given you
fome cattle fit for bearing of btfrthens, and feme fit for flaughtpr^ only. Eat of
what God hath given you for food ; and follow not the fteps of Satan, for he
is your declared enemy. Four pair d of cattle hath Gov given you ; of fheep one
pair, and of goats one pair. Say unto them , Hath Got) forbidden the two males
of Jheep and of goats , or the two females; or that which the wornb* of the two
females contain? Tell me with certainty, if ye fpeak truth. And of camels
bath Gov given you one parr, and bfoxen one pair. Say, Hath he forbidden the
two males of thefe 7 or the two females ; or mat which the wombs of the two
females contain e ? Were ye prelent when God commanded you this ? And
who is more unjuft than he who devifeth a lie againft God*, that he may
feduce men without underftanding? Verily God diretteth not unjuft people.
SAy, I find not in that which hath been revealed unto me, any thing forbidden
unto the eater, that he eat it not, except it be that which dieth of it ielf, or
blood pburedforth g , or fwine’s flefh : fbT this is an abomination: or that which
is piophane/havfag'been flain in the name of fome other than of God- But who-
fo fhall'be compelled by neceflity to eat ofthefe things, not lofting, nor wilfully
trailfgreffing, verily thy Lord will be gracious unto him and merciful; Unto
the Jews did we forbid every beqft having an undivided hoof ; and of bullocks
£nd mcep, we forbade them the fat of both ; except that which fhould be off their
backs, or their inwards S or which lhould be intermixed with the bone 1 * . This
have we rewarded them with, becaufe of their iniquity; and we are furcly fpeakers

of

* Supported on trails of wood, aninot ftrppartedi]
Or, as fome chafe to interpret the words, trees
or plants which are planted by the labour of man ,
and thofe which grow naturally in the defarts and
on me* Mains.

k And pay the due thereof^ &c] That is* give
alms thereof to the poor. Ana thefe alms* as
alBeiddm obfbrves, were what they ufed to give
before the Zacdt, or legal alms, was inflituted ;
which was done after Mohammed had retired from
Mecca, where this veife was revealed. Yet fome
axe of another opinion, and for this very reafon
will have the verfe. to have been revealed at Me-
dina.

c Be not trofufe ;] i. e. Give not fo much
thereof in alms, ai to leave your own families
in want; for charity begimiat home.

4 Four pair{] Or, literally, eight males and
females paired together ; that is, four of each
fex, and two of every diftinft kind.

e In this paflage Mohammed endeavours to con-
vince the Arabs of their fuperftitiop^ folly, in
making it unlawful, one while, to eat, the males
of thefe four kmdsjpf. cattle ; another while, the
females; and at another tijne, their young l .

f Who is mre unfed than he who devifetb a He
againft fsfr.j The perfon particularly, in-
tended here, fome fay, was 4 mru Ebn Label,
king of Hefez, a great introducer of idolatry and
fuj>crfUtion among the Arabs *.

6 Blood poured forth ;] That is, fluid blood; in
oppofuion to what the Arabs fuppofe to be alfo
blood, but not fluid ; as the liver and the fpleen 3 .

“ We forbad them the fat ; &c.] See Levit. vii.
23, ana iii. 16.

1 Or that which ts intermix edtotth the bone;] viz.
The fat of the rumps or tails of lheep, which
are very large in the eaft ; a fmall one weighing
ten or twelve pounds, and fome no lefs than
threefcorc*

1 Al Bvidawi. 2 Idem. See Prelim, Dife p, 20 ^ and Poccck. Spec. p. 80. 3 At

Beidawi, Ja l l Al. o' dpi n.

Chap. 6. Al KO RAN. 115

of truth. If they accufe thee of impofture, fay. Your Lord is indued with
extenfive mercy ; but his feverity fhall not be averted from wicked people.
The idolaters will fay. If God nad plcafed, we had not been guilty or idola-
try, neither our fathers ; and pretend that we have not forbidden them any
thing. Thus did they who were before them accufe the prophets of impofture,
until they tafted our fevete purilfhmmfci Say, Is there with you any certain
knowledge of what -ye alledge, that ye may produce it unto us ? Ye follow only a
falfe imagination ; and ye duly utter lies. Say, Therefore untoGoD iekngeih
the moft evident demonftration •, for if he had plcafed, he had dire died you
all. Say, Produce your witneffes; who can bear teftimony that God hath for-
bidden this. But if they bear teftimony of this, do not thou bear teftimony
with them, nor do thou Follow the defires of thole who aCcufe our figns of
falfhood, and who believe not in the life to come, and equalize idols with their
Lord. Say, Come* $ I will rehearfe that which your Lord hath forbidden
you ; that is to fay, that ye be not guilty of idolatry, and that ye Jbew kind-
nefs to your parents, and that ye murder not your children'/or fear left ye be
reduced to poverty : we will provide for you and ahem 5 and draw not near
unto hainous crimes b , neither openly nor in fecrec ; and flay not the foul
which God hath forbidden you to flay, unlefs for a juft caufe This hath
he injoined you that ye may underftarid. And meddle not with the fubftance
of the orphan, otherwife than for the improving thereof , until he attain his
age of ftrength ; and ufe a foil meafure, and a juft balance. We will not im-
pofe a task on any foul, beyond its ability. And when ye pronounce judgment
obferve juftice, although it be for or againft one who is near of kin, and ful-
fill the covenant of God. This hath God commanded you, that ye may be
admonifhed •, and that ye may know that this is Jfty right way : therefore fol-
low it, and follow not the paths of others, left ye be fcattered from the path
of God. This hath he commanded you that ye may. take heed. We gave
alfo unto Moses the book of the haw ; a perfed rule unto him who fhould do
right, and a determination concerning all things needful, and a direction, and
mercy ; that the children of Is rue l might befieve the meeting of their Lord.
And this book which we have now fentdown, is blefledj therefore follow it and
fear God that ye may obtain mercy : left ye fhould fey, The foriptures were
only fent down unto two people d .before us ; and we neglected to perufe them
with attention e : or left ye ftiould fay. If a book of divine revelatioitt had
been fent down unto us, we would fofely have been better direded than
they { . And now hath a manifeft declaration come unto you from your Lord,

0^2 and

* This and the two following verfes Ja/lelo'd- beeauft we krtew nothing of them, or did not

Ain fuppofes to have been revealed at Medina: nnderflsnd the language wherein they were writ-

* Hainous crimes ;] The original word fignifics ten.

peculiarly fornication, and avarice. * We mould fur eh have been better directed than

* Unkf for a juji caufe ;] As for murder, a- tbty’ij. Became icif- the aeutenefs of our wit,

poltafy, or adultery 1 . the clearnefs of our nnderlUnding, and our fa-

11 Unto tm» people ;] That is, the Jews and the cility of learning fcicnces ; as appears from our
Cbriftians. excelling in hiftory, poetry, and oratory, not-

‘ And we neglected tojeruje them, &c ] Either withllandtng we are an illiterate people *.

* Al Bbidawi.

* Idem.

n6 Al KORAN. Chap. 6.

and a di reft ion and mercy i and who is more unjuft than he who devifeth
ties againft the figns of God, and turneth alide from them ? We will reward
thofe who turn afide from our figns with a grievous punifhmajtj, becaufe
they have turned afide. Do they wait for any other than that the angfiils (hould
come unto them, to part their fouls from their bodies •» or that thy Lord Ihould
come to punifh them ; or that fome of the figns of thy Lord ihould come
to pafs , /hewing the day of judgment to be at band • ? On the day whereon fome
of thy Lord’s figns ihall come to pafs, its faith ihall not profit a foul which
believed not before, or wrought not good in its faith b . Say, Wait ye for
this day ; we furely do wait for it. They who make a diviuon in their re-
ligion % and become feftaries, have thou nothing to do with them *, their af-
fair belongetb only unto God. Hereafter ihall he declare unto them that which
they have done. He who ihall appear with good works, ihall receive a
tenfold recompenfe for the fame ; but he who ihall appear with evil works,
ihall receive only an equal pumfhment for the fame ; and they ihall not be
treated unjuftly. Say, Verily my Lord hath directed me into a right way,
a true religion, the led of Abraham the orthodox ; and he was no idolater.
Say, Verily my prayers, and my worftiip, and my life, and my death are ie.
cheated unto God, the Lord or all creatures : he hath no companion. This
have I been commanded : I am the firft Modem Say, Shall I defire any other
Lord befides God ? fince he is the Lord of all things y and no foul ihall
acquire any merits or demerits but for itfelf * and no burthened foul ihall bear
the burthen of another \ Moreover unto your Lord fhall ye. return ; and
he ihall declare unto you that concerning which ye now diipute. It is he
who hath appointed you to fucceed your predeceffors in the earth, and hath
raifed fome of you above others by various degrees of worldly advantages, that
he might prove you by that which he hath bellowed on you. Thy Lq*ji
is fwift in punifhing y and he is alfo gracious and merciful.

CHAP.

• A! Bcidawi, front a tradition of Mohammed,
(ays that ten figns will precede the laft day ;
viz. the fmoke, the beaftof the earth, an eclipfe
in the eaft, another in the weft, and a third in
the peninfyla of Arabia , the appearance of An -
Uchrift, the fun’s riling in the weft, the: eruption
of Gog and Magog> the defeent of Jefuson earth,
and fire which Ihall break forth from Aden *.

b Its faith foall not profit- a foul which believed
not , &c.] For faith in the next life will be of no
advantage to thofe who have not believed in tins;
nor yet faith in this life, without good works*
e they who make a divifion in their religion}]
That is, who believe in part of it, and disbe-

1 Seethe Prelim , Wfc §. IV. 79, tic*

lieve other part of it; or who form fchifms
therein* Mohammed is reported to have declared,
that the Jews were divided into feventy one
f efts, and the CbfijHam into feventy two: and
that his own followers would be fplit into feven-
ty three fe£ts ; and that all of them would be
damned, except only one of each 2 .

d See before, p. 100.

• No burthened foul foall bear the burthen ef
another This was revealed in anfwer to the
prefling in fiances of the idolaters, who offered
to take the crime, upon themfehres, if Mobaer
med would conform to their worifiip 3 .

2 Al Beulawu

* Idem.

Chap. 7.

Al KORAN.

CHAP. VH.

Infilled , AIAraf*; revealed at Mecca \
In the name of the moft merciful God.

A L. M. S. ' A book hath been fent down unto thee : and therefore for.

there be no doubt in thy breaft concerning it ; that thou mayeft
|>reach the fame, and that it may be an admonition unto the faithful. Fol-
low that which hath been fent down unto you from your Lord ; and follow-
no guides befides fiim: how little will ye be warned ! How many cities have
we deftroyed ; which our vengeance overcook by night d , or while they were
repoling themfelves at noon-day *! And their Application, when ourpunilh-
ment came upon them, was no other than that they faid, Verily we have
been unjuflr. We will furely call thofe to an account, unto whom a prophet
hath been lent ; and we will alfo call thofe to account who have been fent
unto them. And we will declare their actions unto them with knowledge i
for we are not abfent from them. The weighing of mens affioys on that
day Jhall be juft f •, and they whofe balances laden with their good works lhall be
heavy, are thofe who Jhall be happy •, but they whofe balances lhall be light, are
thofe who have loft their fouls, becaufe they injured our ligns. And now have we
placed you on the earth, and have provided you food therein: but how little are
ye thankful ! We created you, ana afterwards formed you-; and then faid unto
the angels, Worlhip Adam j and they all worlhipped him, except Eblis,
who was not one of thofe who worlhipped.*. God faid unto him. What hindred
thee from worlhipping fince I! had commanded thee? He anfwered,

T am more excellent than he : thou haft created me of fire, and haft created
him of clay. Goo faid. Get thee dawn therefore from paradife ; for it is
not// that thou behave thy felf proudly therein : get thee hence ; thou lhalt
be one of the contemptible. He anfwered. Give me refpite until the day of
refurreftion. God laid. Verily thou lhalt be one of thofe who are
refpited The devil faid, Becaufe thou haft depraved me, I will lay wait

for

• Al Arif fignifies the partition between pa- whom Let was fent.
radife and hell, which is mentioned in this * Or while they were retofingtbemjebts at #«*;]
(chapter 1 . A* happened to the Midmitu, to whom Shoaib

* Some however except five 0 r eight verfes, preached,
begin at thefe words, And asi them concerning ‘ See the Prelim. Difc. Seft. IV. p. 89.
the city , See. * See chap. 2 p. A. &c.

* The fignification of thofe letters the more b Verily thou fait be one tf tboie who are ref
fober Mohammedans confefs God alone knows, pited 5] As the time till wltich the devil is repriev-
Some however imagine they Hand for, Allah, ed, is not particularly expreffed, the commen-
Gabriel, Mohammed, en whom be peace. tators fuppofe his requelt was not wholly grant-

* tVbiclf our punijbment overtook bj.nigbti\ As ed ; but agree that he lhall dye, as well as other
ft did the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrpb, to creatures, at the fecond found of the trumpet *.

1 See the Prel. Difc. §. IV. p. 94- * Al Beidawi. See the Prelim. Difc. J. IV. f. 83. and

D’He r.qkiot. Bib/. Orient. Art. Bbl'a.

Al K 0 RA H. Chap. 7 .

for men in thy ftrait way ; then will I come upon them from before, and from be.
hind, and from their right Jupd% and. from their left* ; and thou lhalt not find
the greater part of theiri thankful. Gop laid unto him. Get thee hence, de-
fpifed, and driven far away, verily whoever of them lhall follow thee, I will
furely fill hell wich 'you all' : but as. for thee % O Adam, dwell thou and thy
wife in paradife; and eat of the fruit ibehof where-everye will ; but approach
not this tree, led ye become of floe number of the unjuft. And Satan fug.
gelled to them both, that he would difcover unto them their nakednds, which
was hidden from them ; and he faid. Your Lord hath not forbidden you this
tree, for any other reafon but left ye fhould become angels, or left ye become
imiriortal. And he fware unto them, faying , Verily I am one of thofe who
coiinfel you aright. And he caufed them to fall through deceit b . And when
they had rafted of the tree, their hakednefs appeared unto them*; and they
began conjoin together the leaves of paradife d , to cover themfelveS, And their
Lord -called to them, faying. Did I hot forbid you this tree ; and did I not
fay unto you. Verily Satan is your declared enemy? They anfwered, O
Lord, we have dealt unjuftly with our own fouls ; ana if thou forgive us not,
and be not merciful unto US; we Avail ftrely be of thole who perilh. God
fai'd. Get ye down; the 1 one of you an, enemy, unto the Other ; and ye lhall
Jbave a dwelling |Aadd upon earth, and a provifion for a feafon. He faid. There-
in lhall ye live, and therein lhall ye dfe, and from thence lhall ye be taken
forth at the refurreSHon. O children of Adam, we have fait down unto you
apparel % to conceal your nakedneis, and fair garments ; but the cloathing
of piety Is better. This is one of the figns of God ; that peradventure ye may
confider. O children of Adam, let not Satan feduce you, as he expdled
your patents out of paradife, by ftrippipg them of their clbathing, thRt he
might Ihew them their nakednefs: verily he feeth you, both he and his com-
panions, whereas ye fee not them f. We have appointed the devils to be the

patrons

• 7 mil com* upon them from before* and from ecbnla la primera del parayfi* y cortak las piemas,
behind* and from their right hands* and from their yfi quifiere eaminar, arrofttar* la vida por tierra.
left , &c.] i. e. I will attack them on every fide / Harm d Sat*nas, el qual vino rieruk* y iixok*
that I lhall he able. The other two ways, viz. Porqui tu 'rtfrobp has engtikdo a wuefhs, j hs bet
from aboVe,and from under their feet, are omitted, fabC immundos? 25 auuro qut toit mmundici*
fay the commentators, to Ihew that the devil's fuja, y & tides fiubynfn Jdundo de Jus cturfot
power is limited 1 . entre per tu hoc a* porque en verdad elks baranpeni-

b The Mohammedan gofpelof Barnabas teHs os, tend a t y tu quedaras harto de immunises*.
that the fentencc which Gqi> pronounced on the * Tbeit nakednefs appeared nnt them{] Which
ferpetat for introducing the devil into paradife 2 , they had not perceived before; being ebathed, as
was, that he fhould not only be turned out of fome lay* with light* or garments of pafradife,
paradife, but that he fhould have his legs cut off which- Sell from them on their difobedichce.
by the angel Michael , with the fword of God; Tahya mttigmes their nakednefs was hidden by
and that the devil himfel£ fince he had tender- their hair.

ed our firft parents unebah, was condemned to 4 The leaves of fatadifi i\ Which it is faid were
eat the excrements of them and all their pofteri- fig-leaves 3 .

ty; which two laft circumftances I do not * We bant font down unto you apparel 5 Noton-
TememHer to have read elfewhere. The words Jy proper materials, but afro ingenuity of mind
of the manufeript are thefe : T /lah&TDios] and dexterity oFharid to make ufe of them 4 -

a iafetfknui y a M&hiel,' aquel qut tiewrfo Ilf f Where** ye fee not them;] Becatffeof the fol- tiity

pada de Dios , y It dixo ; Aquefiqjterpe es cutler ado* of their bodies, and their beiijg yoid of all colour \

1 Al Beidawi. % Bee the notes to chap . II. p. 3 Idem . 4 Idem. 1 Jallalo’dih?t.

Chap. 7. Al KORAN \ 119

patrons of thofe who believe not : and when tfrey commit a filthy aft ion,
they lay. We found our fathers prqtfifing the fame ; and God hath com-
manded us to do it. Say, Verily God commaridetH not filthy aftions. Do ye
(peak concerning God that which ye know not ? Say, My Lord hath com-
manded me to obferve jufticc ; therefore fet your faces' to pray at every place of
worlhip, and call upon him, approving unto him the fincerity of your re-
ligion. As he produced you at firft, fo unto him lhall ye return. A part of
mankind hath he direfted ; and a part hath been juftly led into error, be-
caufe,, they have taken the devils for their patrons befides God, and imagine
that they are rightly direfted. O children of Adam, take your decent ap-
parel at every place of worlhip *, and eat and drink b , but be not guilty of
excels ; for he loveth not thofe who are guilty of excefs. Say, Who hath -
farhidden the decent apparel of God* which he hath produced for his fer-
vants, and the good things which be hath provided for food ? Say, Thefe
tbing9 are for thole who believe, in this prefent life, but peculiarly on the
day of refurreftion c . Thus do we diftinftly explain our figns unto people who
underftand. Say, Verily my Lord hath forbidden filthy aftions* both that
which is difcovered thereof, and that which is concealed, and alfo iniquity, and
unjuft violence ; and bath forbidden you to affociate with God that concerning
which he hath fent you down no authority, or to fpeak of God that which
ye know not. Unto every nation there is a prefixed term ; therefore when
their term is expired, they lhall not have refpite for an hour, neither lhalj they
be anticipated. O children of Adam, verily apoftles from among you lhall
come unto you, who lhall expound my figns unto you : whofoever therefore
lhall fear God and amend, there lhall come no fear on them, neither lhall
they be grieved* But $b e y who lhall accufe our figns of fallhood, and lhall
proudly rejeft them, tfidy lhall be the companions of bell fire j they lhall
remain therein for ever. And who is mpre unjuft than he who devifeth a lie
concerning God, or accufeth his figns of Impofture? Unto thefe lhall be given
their portion of worldly bappinefs , according to what is- written in the book of
Gods decrees , until our melTengers d come unto them, and lhall caufe them
to die ; faying. Where are the idols which ye called upon, befides God?
They lhaU aidwer, They have difappeared from us. And they lhall bear wit-

nefs

* Take jour decent apparel at every ptaee bfvsor*
Jfsip, &c. j This paffage was revealed to reprove
alt im model! cuftom of die pagan Arabs, who
ufed to encompafs the Caaba naked, becaofe
deaths, they faty, were the figns of their dif-
obedience to God 1 . The Sonna orders that
When a man goes to prayers, he fhould put pn his
better jpparel, out of retpeft to the divine ma-
jefty before whom he is to appear. But as the
Mohammedans think it indecent, on the one hand,
to come into God’s prefence in a llovenly manner;
fo they imagine, on the other, that they ought
not to appear before him in habits too rich or
fump.tiwus, and particularly in deaths adorned

with gold or iilver, left they fhould feem proud.

* And eat and drink >J The fons of Amer, it
is faid, when they performed the pilgrimage to
Mecca, ufed to eat no more than was abfolutcly
neceffary, and that not of the more delicious fort
of food neither ; which abftinehce they looked
•upon as a peicd of merit, but they we hero told
the contrary *.

' But pecaiiatly on ibc day- of ftJurteCHm ;] Wfc-
caafe then the wicked, who alfo partook of the
bleffings of this life, will have no fhare in th*
injoymentsof the next.

* Oar Meffengcrs ;] viz The angel of death
and his afiiftants.

1 14cm. 41 Beidawi.

3 Idem .

120 Al KORAN. Chap. 7.

nfefs againft themfelves, that they were unbelievers. God fhall fay unto them
at the. refurreftion , Enter ye with the nations which have preceded you, of
genii and of men, into hell fire: fo often as one nation fhall enter, itlhall
curfe its fitter \ until they fhall all have fucceffively entred therein. The lat-
ter of them fhall fay of the former of them, O Lord, thefe have feduced us 9
therefore infiift on them a double punifhment of the fire of hell . God fhall
anfwer, ft fhall be doubled unto all* 5 but yt know it not. And the former
of them fhall fay unto the latter of them, Ye have not therefore any favour
above us 9 tafte the punifhment for that which ye have gained. Verily they
-who fhall charge our figns with falfhood, and fhall proudly rejedt them, the
gates of heaven fhall not be opened unto them*, neither fhall they enter into
paradife, until a camel pafs through the eye of a needle d 9 and thus will we
reward the wicked doers. Their couch fhall be in hell, and over them fhall
be coverings of fire 9 and thus will we reward the unjutt. But they who believe,
and do that which is right, (we will not load any foul but accort!faj| to its
ability,) they fhall be the companions of paradile 9 they fhall remain there-
in for ever. And we will remove all grudges from their minds c 9 rivers
fhall run at their feet, and they fhall fay, Praifed be God, who hath dire&cd
us unto this felicity ! for we fhould not have been rightly direfted, if Gop had
not directed us : now are we convinced by dmoHftration that the apoftles
of our Lord came unto us with truth. And it fhall be proclaimed unto them.
This is paradife, whereof ye are made heirs, as a reward for that which ye
have wrought. And the inhabitants f of paradife fhall call out to the inha-
bitants of bell fire, faying. , Now have we found that which our Lord promifed
us, to £etrue: have ye alfo found that which your Lord promifed yotr f to be
true? They fhall anfwer, Yea. And a cryer 8 fhall proclaim between them.
The curfe of God fhall be on the wicked 9 who turn men afide from the way
of God, and feek to render it crooked , and who deny the life to come. And
between the bleffed and the damned there fhall be a vaR 9 and men fhall ft and
.on Al Araf*, who fhall know every one of them by their marks ^ and fhall

call

* It JbaUcUrfi its fifter ;] That is, the nation
whofe example betrayed them into their idolatry
and other wickednefs.

t It is doubled unto you alli\ Unto thofe who
fet the example, becaufc they not only tranfgrcf-
fed themfelves, but were alfo the occafion of the
others tranfgrdfion ; and unto thofe who follow-
ed them, becaufe of their own infidelity, and
their imitating an ill example z .

* The gates of heaven (boll not be opened unto
them;] That is, when their fouls fhall, after
deith, afeend to heaven, they (hall not be ad-
mitted , but fhall be thrown dbwn into the dun-
geon under the feventh earth 2 .

d This expreflion was probably taken from our
Saviour’s words in the gofpcl 3 j iho’ it be pro-
verbial in the eafl.

* And toe mil remove all grudges front tbeir

minds i) So that whatever differences oranimo-
fities there had been between them in their life-
time, they fhall now be forgotten* and give
place to fincere loye jyjd amity, jjhis Mi is
feid to have hoped would prove true j himfelf
and his inveterate enemies, Opimdn^ Telba , and
al Zobeir + .

f The inhabitants ;] Literally the companions.
g This cryer, fome fey, will be the angel If
rjifil

b And men (ball Jlnnd on al Araf ;] Al Arafii
the name of the wall or partition which, «
Mohammed taugp, will Separate paradife from
hell * . But as fo the perfons who are to be pla-
ced thereon, the commentators differ, as has
been elfe where obferved 6 -

* Who Jbad knm every one of them by tbeir

marls j]

1 Idem . 3 Jallalo’ddjn. See the Prelim. Difc, ubi ftp. ^78. 3 Match, xix , 24. 4 M

&XIDAWJ. 1 See the Prelim. Dijc. J. IV. f. 94. 4 See ibid.

Chap. 7. Al KORAN. 121

tall unto the inhabitants of paradife , faying. Peace be upon you : yet they
Ihall not enter therein, although they eameftly defire it*. And when they (hall
turn their eyes towards the companions of bell fire, they fhall fay, O Lord,
place us not with the ungodly people ! And thofe who ftand on At Araf fhall
Call unto certain men' 1 , whom they fhall know by their marks, and fhall fay.
What hath your gathering of riches availed you, and that ye were puffed up
with pride ? Are thefe the men on whom ye fware that God would not beftow
mercy c ? Enter ye into paradife ; there fhall come no fear on you, neither fhall
ye be grieved \ And the inhabitants of bell fire fhall call unto the inhabitants
of paradife, faying. Pour upon us fome watef, or of thofe refreshments whifch
God hath beftowea on you'. They fhall anfwer, Verily God hath forbidden them
unto the unbelievers ; who made a laughing- (lock and a fport of their religion,
and whom the life of the world hath deceived : therefore this day will we forget
them, as they did forget the meeting of this day, and for that they denied our
figns to be from God. And now have we brought unto thofe of Mecca a book
vf divine revelations: we have explained it with knowledge ; a dire<5lion and
mercy unto people who fhall believe. Do they wait for any other than the
Interpretation thereof* ? On the day whereon the interpretation thereof fhall
come, they who had forgotten the lame before, fhall fay. Now are we con-
vinced by detnonf ration that the mefiengers of our Lord came unto us with
truth : Ihall we therefore have any intercefiors, who will intercede for us ?
or fhall we be fent back into tbe world, that we may do other works than
what we did in our life-time ? But now have they loft their fouls j and that
which they impioufly imagined, hath fled from them*. Verily your Lord
is God, who created the heavens and the earth in fix days ; and then afeend-
cd his throne : he caufeth the night to cover the day ; it fucceedeth the fame
fwifdy : he alfb created the fun and the moon, and the ftars, which are abfo-
lutely fubjeft unto his command. Is not the whole creation, and the empire
thereof his ? Blefied be God, the Lord of all creatures ! Call upon your

R Lord

marks i. e. Who ihall diflinguiih the blefled
from the damned by their proper chajafterifUcs *
filch as the whitenefs and fplendor of the faces
of the former, and the blacknefs of thofe of the
latter r .

a Yet they fhall not enter therein, although they ear -
neflly defire if;] From this drcumftance it feems
that their opinion is the moil probable, who make
this intermediate partition a fort of purgatory for
thofe, who tho* they deferve not to be fent to
hell, yet have not merits fufficient to gain them
immediate admittance into paradife, and will be
tantalized here for a certain time with a bare
view of the felicity of that place.

# Certain men i] That is, the chiefs and ring-
leaders of the infidels 2 .

‘ On whom ye /ware that God would not beftow
mercy ;] Thefe were the inferior and poorer a-
mong the believers, whom they defpifed in their

1 -4/BEIDAWt.

life-times as unworthy of God’s favour.

4 Enter ye into paradife. See. ] Thefe words
are direflea, by an apoftrophe, to the poor and
defpifed believers above mentioned. Some com-
mentators boweverimagine thefe and the next pre-
ceding words are to be undcrflood of thofe who
will be confined in al Araf \ and that the dam*
ned will, in return for their reproachful fpeech,
fwear that they fhall never enter paradife them-
felves; whereupon God of his mercy fhall or-
der them to be admitted by thefe words 3 .

*Orcf that which God bath beftowedonyou Q J. e.
Of the other liquors or fruits of paradife. Com-
pare this paflage with the parable of Dives and
Lazarus.

* The interpretation thereof ;] That is, the e-
vent of the promifes and menaces therein.

* See Chap. 6 . p. 101. not. c.

2 Idem.

? Idem.

i22 AI K 0 R A N. Chap. j m

Loro humbly and in fecret ; for he loveth not thofe who tranfgreg ». And
aft not corruptly in the earth, after its reformation b ; and call upon him with
fear and defire : for the mercy of God is near unto the righteous* It i s h e
who fendeth the winds, fpread abroad c before his mercy 4, until they bring a
cloud heavy with raio , which we drive unto a dead country ' ; and we caufe
water todefcend thereon, by which we caufe all forts of fruits to fpring forth.
Thus will we bring forth the dead from their graves* i that peradventure ye
may confider. From a good country Ihall its fruit fpring forth abundantly,
by the permiflion of its Lord } but from the land which is bad, it fhall not
fpring forth otherwife than fcarccly. Thus do we explain the figns of divine
providence unto people who are thankful. We formerly fent Noah 8 unto his
people : and he faid, O my people, worlhip God : ye have no other God
than him \ Verily I fear for you the punilhment of the great day . The
chiefs of his people anfwered him , We furely perceive thee to be in a manifeft
error. He replied, O my people, there is no error in me •, but I am a mef-
fenger from the Lord of all creatures. I bring unto you the meflages of my
Lord ; and I counfel you aright : for I know from God, that which ye know
not. Do ye wonder that an admonition hath come unto you from your Lord
by a man k from among you, to warn you, that ye may take heed to yourfelves,

and

4 Who tranfgrefs >} Behaving themfclves ar-
rogantly while they pray ; or praying with an
obftreperou 9 voice, or a multitude of words and
vain repetitions 1 .

k After its reformation;] i. e. After that Goo
hath rent his prophets, and revealed his laws, for
the reformation and amendment of mankind.

* Spread abroad ;) Or ranging over a large ex-
tent of land. Some copies inftead of tnift>ran %
which is the reading I have here followed, have
bojbron $ which, fignifies good tidings ; the riling
of the wind in fuch a manner being the forerun-
ner of rain.

4 Before his mercy »] That is, rain. For the
eaft-wind*. fays ai Beidawi, raifes the clonds,
the norttaw ind drives them together, the ioQth-
wind agitates them, fo as to make the rain fall,
and the fouth-wind difperfcs them again 2

* A dead country Or a dry and parched land.

f See the Pxelkru Difc, §. IV.^fL. 79, 83, &c.

* Noab the fon of Lantech , according to the
Mohammedan writers* was one of the fix princi-
pal prophets 3 , tho' he had no written revelations
delivered to him atid the firft who appeared
after his great grandfather Edris or Enoch .
They ajfo lay he was by tcade a carpenter, which
they infer from his building the ark, and that
the year of his million was the fiftieth, or, as o-
thers fay, the fortieth of his age * ,

That Noah was a preacher of righteoufhefs unto

1 Idem. 2 Idem . 3 See the Prelim,

p. 34. * ^/Zamakhsharl 6 zPet.M

BEL. BiU. Orient; p. 675. 9 See chap. 71. and

the wicked antediluvians, is tefiified by ferip-
ture 6 . The eaftern Cbriftian* fay, that when
Gon ordered Noab to build the ark*, he alfo i-
rented him to make an inftrumefht of wood, fuch
as they make ufe of, at this day, in the eaft, in-
ftead ofbelfe, to call the people to thufiefc, and
named in Arabic Ndkus> and in modenj Greek,
Smandra; on which he was to ftrrke three times
every day, not only to call together the workmen
that were building the ark, but to give him an
opportunity of daily admoniihing his peopleofthe
impending danger of the deluge, which would
certainly deftroy them if they did not repent 7 .

Some Mohammedan authors pretend Noab was
fent to convert Zobak , one of the Perfian kings
of the firft race, who refofed to hearken to him j
and that he afterwards preached; God’s unity
publickly 9 .

h Serve Goo, ye have no other God but him]
From thefe words, and other pafiageaof the Koran
where NoaF s preaching is mentioned, it appears
that, according to Mohammed's opinion, a princi-
pal crime of the antediluvians was idolatry^.

‘ The great day;] vi$. Fither the day ofreiiir-
reElion, or that whereon the flood was to begin.

* By a man ;]For, faid they, if God had pleafed,
he would have fent an angel, and not a man j
fince we never heard of fuch an inftance in the
times of our fathers 10 .

Difc. p. 7jj. 4 V. Re land, de relig . Mob.
5. ^ EtXTtcfir. Anna/. p> 37. * r.D 1 Hbr-

' the Prelim « Hi ft. p. 19. 10 AIB& idawl

Chap. 7. Al KORAN. 123

and that peradventure ye may obtain mercy ? And they accufed him of im-
pofture : but we delivered him and thofe who were with him in the ark % and

we drowned thofe who charged our figns with falfliood ; for they were a
blind people. And unto the tribe of Ad b we fent their brother Hud . He
faid, O my people worfhip God : ye have no ooher God than him 5 will ye
not fear him? The chiefs of thofe among his people who believed not d , an-
fwered. Verily we perceive that thou art guided by folly ; and we certainly e-
fteem thee to he one of the liars. He replied, O my people, lam not guided by
folly 5 but I am a meflengejr unto you from the Lord of all creatures : I bring
unto you the meflages of my Lord > and lama faithful counfellor unto you. Do
ye wonder that an admonition hath come unto you from your Lord, by a man
from among you, that he may warn you ? Call to mind how he hath appointed
you fucceffors unto the people of Noah % and hath added unto you in feature
largely *, Remember the benefits of God, that ye may profper. They faid. Art
thou come unto us, that we fhould worfhip God alone, and leave the deities which
our fathers worfhipped ? Now bring down that judgment upon us, with which •
thou threatened us, if thou fpeakeft truth. Hud anfwered. Now lhall there
fuddenly fall upon you from your Lord vengeance and indignation. Will
ye difpute with me concerning the names which ye have named *, and your
fathers ; as to which God hath not revealed unto you any authority? Dove
wait therefore, and I will be one of thofe who wait with you. And we de-
livered him, and them who believed with him, by our mercy ; and we cut
off the uttermoft part of thofe who charged our figns with falfhood, and were

R 2 not

■ And thofe that mere with him in the ark ;]
That is, thofe who believed on him, and entered
into that veflel with him. Tho’ there be a tradi-
tion among the Mohammedans, faid to have been
received from the prophet himfelf, and conforma-
ble to the fcripture, that eight per fons and no more
were faved in the ark, yet fomc of them report
the number varioufly. One lays they were but
fix, another ten, another twelve, another feven-
ty eight, and another fourfcore, half men and
half women 1 * * ; and that one of them was the ci-
der Jarham a , the preferver, as fome pretend,
of the Arabian language

h Advn% an ancient and potent tribe of Arabs 4 ,
and zealous idolaters *. They chiefly worihippcd
four deities, Bahia, Hifedha, Rdzeka, and Sd~
Jma; the firft, as they imagined, fupplying them
with rain, the fecond prefcrving them from all
dangers abroad, the third providing food for
their foftenance, and the fourth refioring them
to health when affiidted with ficknefs 6 i accor-
ding to the fignilkation of the feveral names.

c H£d,] Generally fuppofed to be the fame
perfon with Heber 7 ; but others fay he was the fon
of Abda'llab, the fon of Ribdb , the fon of Kbol&d,
the fon of Ai, the fon oCAws or Uz, the fon of
Aram , the fon of Sem 8 .

4 Who believed not}] Thefe words were added
becaufe fome of the principal men among them
believed on H£d, one of whom was Morthed Ebn
Saad 9 .

• The fucceffors of the people ^Noah ;] Dwel-
ling in the habitations of the antediluvians, who
preceded them not many centuries; or having
the chief fway in the earth after them. For the
kingdom of Bbeiad the fon of Ad is faid to have
extended from the fands of Alaj, to the trees
of Oman 10 .

f See the Prelim. Difc. p. y.

* Concerning the names which ye have named, See. ]
That is, concerning the idols ind imaginary ob-
jefts of your worlhip, to which ye wickedly
give the names, attributes, and honour due to the
only true God.

1 JZZamajchshari, Jallalo’ddin, Ebn Shohnah. * Idem . See the Prelim.

Difc. §. L p. 8. * V. Pocqck. Orau Pf*fi*- Carm . Tograi. + See the Prelim . Difc. $. L

p. 6, 7. 1 An ulfeba. 6 V. D'Herbbl. Bibl. Orient . Art . Hwd, 7 Seem PreL

Dijc.p. 6 . 8 AIBniDAWi. 9 Idem . 10 Idem.

124 Al KORAN. Chap. ^

not believers*. And unto the tribe of THAMUD b wefent their brother Saleh®.
He faid, O my people, worlhip God : ye have no God befides him. Now
hath a manifeft proof come unto you from your Lord. This Ihe-camel
of God is a fign unto you *: therefore difmifs her freely, that fhe may feed
in God’s earth ; and do her no hurt, left a painful puniftiment feize you. And
call to mind how he hath appointed you fucceffors unto the tribe of Ad, and
hath given you a habitation on earth ; ye build yourfelves caftfe on the
plains thereof, and cut out the mountains onto houfes . Remember therefore
rhe benefits of God, and commit not violence in the earth, afting corrupt-
ly. Ths chiefs among his people who were puffed up with pride, faid unto

thofe

• The dreadful definition of the Adites we • Saleh . ] Al Beiddm deduct his geneaFogy
have mentioned in another place *, and fhall on- thus* Saleh, the fon of Obeii, the fon ot Afaf
ly add here feme further circumiwnces of that the fon of Mafekb, the fon of Qbeid, the fon of
calamity, and which differ a little from what is Hddber , the Ion of Tbamud

there faid; for the Arab writers acknowledge many 4 This jbe-em*l of G od is a fign unto

inconfiftencics in the hiftorits of thefe ancient The Tbamudites infixing on a mirade, propofed
tribes a . to Sdleb that he fhould go with them to their

The tribe of ^havingbeen for their incredulity feftival, and that they fhould call on their gods,
previoufljr chaftifed with a three years drought, ai^d he on his, promiiing to follow that deity
font Kail Ebn Tthar and Mortised Ebn Sand which fhould anfweis Bdt after they had called
with feventy other principal n?en to the temple on their idols a long time to no purpofife Jmda
of Mecca to obtain rain. Mecca was then in the Ebn Amru , their prince, pointed to a rock ftand-
hands of the tribe of Amalek , whofc printee was ing by itfelf, and bid Saleb caufe a flic-camel
Modwtyab Ebn Beer ; and he being without the big with young to come forth from it, fokmnly
city when the embafTadors arrived, entertained engaging that if he did, he would believe ; and
them there fbj a month in fo hofpitable a. manner his people promifed the fame. Whereupon Saleh
that they had forgotten the bufinefs they came asked It of God, amfp^efenrf)rthe rock, i^crfo-
about,had not the kfogreminded them of it, not as veral throws as if inlabour, was delivered uf a ftc-
from himfelf, left they fhould think he wanted camel anfweritfg the defeription of Jwdit, which
to be rid pf them, but by fome verfes which he immediately brought forth a young otit ready
put into the mouth of a ffnging- woman. At weaned, and, as fome fay, as big as her fijf.
which being roufed from their lethargy, Mortbed da, feeing this miracle, believed on the prophet,
told them the only way they had to obtain what and fome few with him ; but the greater partof
they wanted, would be to repent and pbey the Tkamudites remained notwithftarKftng incre-
their prophet : but this difpleaftng the reft, they dulous. Of this camel the commentators tell fe-
defired M«awiy$b to imprifon him, left he fhould veral very abfurd ftories ; as that when fhe went
go with them ; which being done, Kail with the to drink fhe never raifed her head from the well
reft cntringJ^w, begged of God that he would or river till fhe had drank up all the water
fend rain to the people of Ad . Whereupon three in it, and then fhe offered hcrfelf <o be milked,
clouds appeared, a white one, a red one, and a the people drawing from her as much milk as
black one; and a voice from heaven ordered Kail they pleafed; and fome fay that fhe went about
to chufe which he would. Kail failed not to the town crying aloud, If any wants milk kt
make choice of the laft, thinking it to be loaden him come forth 1 * .

with the moft rain ; but when this cloud came • The tribe of Tbamud dwelt firft in the country
over them, it proved to be fraught with the di- of the Adites, but tbeir number* incrcafing, they
vine vengeance, and a tempeft broke forth from removed to the territory of Hejr for the fake of
it which deftroyed them all 3 . the mountains, where they cut themfelvcs

• Tbamud was another tribe of the ancient habitations in the rocks* to he feen at this
Arabs who fell into idolatry. See the Prelim, day,

Difc. S- I. p. 7.

1 Prelim . Difc.p. 6. 4 Al Beidawi* K D’Herbiutt, Bib/: Orient . Alt. Hotel . 3 Set

the Prelim . Difc . p. 7. 4 Abu l fed a, Al Zamakbshau. V; D’Herbei. BibJ. Orient . Art.

$aleb. ' See the Prel Difc . p 7,

Chap. 7. Al KORAN \ 125

thofe who were efteemed weak, namely, unto thofe who believed among them.
Do ye know that Saleh hath been fent from his Lord ? They anfwered.
We do furely believe in that wherewith he hath been fent. Thofe who were
elated with pride replied. Verily we believe not in that wherein ye believe.
And they cut off the feet of the camel *, and infolently franigreffed the com-
mand of their Lor d b , and faid, O Saleh, cauie that to come upon us, with
which thou haft threatened us, if thou art one of thofe who have been fent
by God. Whereupon a terrible noife from heaven * affailed them ; and in
the morning they were found in their dwellings proftrate on their breafts
and dead d . And Saleh departed from them, and faid', G my people, now
have I delivered unto you the meflage of my Lord ; and l advifed you well, but
ye love not thole who advife you weft. And remember Lot f , when he faid

un-

• And they tnt off the fut of the This * Mohammed in the expedition of Tahue, which

jstraordi&ary camd frighting the other cattlefrom he undertook againft the Greeks in the ninth year
their pafture, a certain rich woman named Ondza of the Hejra , piling by Hejr, where this ancient
Omm Ganem , having four daughters, dreft them out tribe had dwelt, forbad his army, tho’ much dtf-
and offered one Keddr his choice of them, if he treffed with heat and third, to draw any water
would kill the camel. Whereupon he chofe one, there, but ordered them if they bad drank of
and with the affiftance of eight other men, ham- that water to bring it up again, or if they had
ftrong and killed the dam, and purfuing the kneaded any* meal with it, to give it their cam-
young one, which fled to the mountain, killed els 7 ; and wrapping up his face in his garment,
that alfo* and divided his flefh among them *. he fet fptirs to hia mule, crying out. Enter not
Others tell the dory fomewhat differently, ad- the boufes of thofe wicked men, but rather weep ,
ding Sadaka Bint ai Mokhtdr as a joint confpira- left that happen unto you, which befel them , and
trefs with Oneiza, and pretending that the young having fo (aid, he continued galloping full fpeed
one was not killed; for they (ay that having Bed with his face muffled up, till hc had pafTea the
to a certain ftjountain named Kara, Ke tfttTe valley 8 . ?

cryed three times, and Saleh bid them catch him * Whctherthis fpeech was made by Saleh to
if they coal'd; for then there might be hopes bf them at parting, as feems moft probable, or after
their avoiding the divine vengeance ; but this the judgment had fallen on them* the commen-
they were not abfe to do, the rock opening after tators are not agreed.

he had cried, and receiving him within it *. f Loti] The commentators fay, conforma^y

fc And infolently tranfgrejfed the command of to the feripture, that Lot was the fon of Haran,
their Lord, &c.J Defying the vengeance with the fon of Azer or Ter ah, and confequently A-
which they were threatened ; becaufe they trull- hraham s nephew, who brought him with him
ed in their ftrong dwellings hewn in the rocks , from Chaldea into Paleftine , where, they fay, he
laying that the tribe of Ad perifhed only becaufe was fent by God to reclaim the inhabitants of
their houfes were not built with fufficient Sodom and the other neighbouring cities which
ftrtngth 1 * 3 . were overthrown with it, from the unnatural

* A terrible noife from hearten ;] Jdke violent vice to which they were addifted 9 . And this
and repeated^ claps of thunder; which fome fay Mohammedan tradition feems to be coun-
was no other than the voice of the enge] Gabriel 4 ^ tenanced by the words of the apofik, that this
and which rent their hearts 5 . It is faid that righteous man dwelling among them* in feeing and
after they had killed the camel, Saleh told them hearing vexed his righteous foul from day to day
that on the morrow their faces (hould become with their unlawful deeds 10 ; whence it is proba-
yellow, the next day red, and the third day black, ble thathe omitted no opportunity of endeavour-
and that on the fourth God’s vengeance fhould ing their reformation; The (lory of Lot is told
light on them ; and that the firft three figns hap- with further circumftances in the eleventh chap
pening accordingly, they fought to put him to ter.

death, but God delivered him, by fending him
into Paleftine 6 .

1 Abulfeda. * Al Beidawi. V , D'Her bed. ubifapra , 3 Al Krssak 4 See

the Prelim. Difc. p. 7. 1 Abulfeda, ^/Beidawi. 6 ^Beidawi. 7 Abut,-

fed. Fit . Mob* p, 124, s Al Bqkhari. 9 V \ D’Herbelot. BibLQsim, Art , Loth .

10 zPet. ii. 8.

126 KORAN. Chap. 7.

unto his people. Do ye commit a wickednefs, wherein no creature hath fee you
an example ? Do ye approach luftfully unto men, leaving the women ? Cer-
tainly ye are people who tranlgrefs all modefty. But the anfwer of his people
was no other than that they faid the one to the other , Expel them * your city;
for they are men who preferve themfelvcs pure from the crimes which ye com-
mU Therefore we delivered him and his family, except his wife ; fhe was
one of thofe who ftaid behind b : and we rained a fhower of Jlonef upon them c .
Behold therefore what was the end of the wicked. And unto Madian d we fent
their brother Shoaib * He faid unto them, O my people, worfliijp God ; y e
have no God befides him. Now hath an evident demonftration f come unto
you from your Lord. Therefore give full meafure and juft weight, and di-
mini fh not unto men ought of their matters * i neither aft corruptly in the
earth, after its reformation b . This will be better for you, if ye believe. And
befet not every way, threatening the pajfengen ; and turning afide from the path
of God him who believeth in him, and feeking to make it crooked. And
remember, when ye were few, and God multiplied you : and behold, what
hath been the end of thofe who afted corruptly. And if part of you believe
in thac wherewith I am font, and part believe not, wait patiently until God

judge

■ Expel them, &c.] Viz. Lot, and thofe who afterward* Shoaib ; and adds that he was a come-
believe on him. ly perfon, but fpare and lean, very thoughtful

b See chap. it. and of few words. Do&or Prideaux writes this

e See ibid. name, after the French tranflariori, Cbaib

4 Madian ,] or Midian, was a city of HejaZ, f An evident demonftration ;JThia dcmonilmi-
and the habitation of a tribe of the fame name, on the commentators fuppofe to have been a
the defendants of Midian , the fon of Abraham power of working miracles, tho* the Koran men-
by Keturab 1 * , who afterwards coalefced with the tions none in particular. However they {ay {after
Afmaelites , as it feems ; Mofes naming the fame the Jews) that he gave his fon-in-law that won-
merchants who fold Jofepb to Potiphar , in one der- working rod 9 , with which he performed all
place Ifmaelites 2 , and in another Midianites 3 . thofe miracles in Egypt and the defart, and alfo
This city was fituated on the red Tea, fouth- excellent advice and inftrudlions JO ; whence he
eaft of mount Sinai , and is doubtlefs the fame had the furnrme of Kbafik al anbija. , or the
with the Modiana of Ptolemy ; what was remain- preacher to the prophets 1 *.
dng of it in Mohammed *8 time, was fooa after g Give full meafure and juft weight , &c.] For
demolilhed in the fucceeding wars and it re- one of the great crimes which the Midianites
mains dfefolate to this day. The people of the were guilty of, was the ufing of diverfe meafures
country pretend to fhew the well whence Mofes and weights, a great and a Snail, buying by one
watered Jethro 'a flocks * . and felling by another 1 2 .

0 Shoaib .] Some Mohammedan writers make h See before, p. 122. not. b.

him the fon of Mi kail, the fon of Yajbjar, the 1 Befet not every way, tbreatenin&tbe pafftngtri\

fon of Madian 6 ; and_ they generally fuppofehim Robbing on the high way, it feems, was ano-
to be the fame perfon with the father-in-law of ther crying fin, Sequent among thefe people.
Mofes , who is named in fcripture Rjuel or Ra- But fome of the commentators interpret this paf-
guei, and Jethro 7 . But Ahmed Ebn Abcfalhalim fage figuratively, of their befetting the way of
charges thofe who entertain this opinion with ig- truth, and threatening thofe who gave ear to the
norance. AlKeffdi fays that his father’s name was remonftrances of Shoaib 1 3 .

Sanun, and that he was iiril called Boyun , and

1 Gen . xxv. 2. 2 Gen. xxxix. 1. 3 Gen. xxxvii. 36. 4 * V '. Gom not. in Alfrag . p . 143*

* Abu l fed a Dejcr. Arab. p .\ z . Geogr.Nub. /. 109. 6 Al Bbidawi, Tarixh Montakhab.

7 Exod. ii. \ 8, ill 1. * Life of Mab . p. 24. 9 Al Beidawi. V . ShaJJbel hakkab . p. 12.

10 Exod. xviii. 13, &c. 1 1 V. D’Herbelot, Bib/. Orient , Art. Schoaib. 12 F. ii.

-d/B&iDAWL See Dent. xxv. 13, 14. 33 Idem .

Chap. 7.

Al K 0 R A N.

127

judge between us ; for he is the beft judge. * The chiefs of his people, who IX.
were elated with pride, anfwered. We will furely caft thee, O Shoaib, and
thofe who believe with thee, out of our city ; or elfe thou (halt certainly re-
turn unto our religion. He laid. What, though we be averle thereto ? We (hall
furely imagine a lie againft God, if we return unto your religion, after that God
hath delivered us from the fame : and we have no reafon to return unto it,
unlefs God our Lord (hall pleafe to abandon us. Our Lord comprehendcth
every thing by his knowledge. In God do we put our truft. O Lord, do
thou judge between us and our nation with truth ; for thou art the beft judge.
And the chiefs of his people, who believed not, (aid. If ye follow Shoaib,
ye (hall furely peri(h. Therefore a ftorm from heaven * afiailed them, and
in the morning they were found in their dwellings dead and proftrate. They
who accufed Shoaib of impofture became as though they had never dwelt there-
in ; they who accufed Shoaib of impofture perifhed themfelves. And he de-
parted from them, and faid, O my people, now have I performed unto you the
meflages of my Lord ; and I adviied you aright : but why (hould I be grieved
for an unbelieving people ? We have never lent any prophet unto a city, but
we afflidled the inhabitants thereof with calamity and adverfity, that they
might humble themfelves. Then we gave them in exchange good in lieu of
evil, until they abounded, and faid, Adverfity and profperity formerly hap-
pened unto our fathers, as unto us. Therefore we took vengeance on them
foddenly, and they perceived it not befOre-band. But if the inhabitants of
thofe cities had believed and feared God, we Would furely have opened to
them bleflings both from heaven and earth. But they charged our apoftles
with fallhood ; wherefore we took vengeance on them, for that which they
had been guilty of. Were the inhabitants therefore of thofe cities fecure, that
our punifoment Ihould not fall on them by night, while they Qcpt? Or were the
inhabitants of thofe cities fecure that our pumfhment Ihould not fall on them by
day, while they (ported ? Were they therefore fecure from the ftratagem of
God fc ? But none will think himfelf fecure from the ftratagem of God, ex-
cept the people who perifti. And hath it not manifeftly appeared unto thofe

ner inhabitants thereof, that, if we

and they lhall not hearken. We will relate unto thee fome ftories of thefe
cities. Their apoftles had come unto them with evident miracles, but they were
not difpofed to believe in that which they had before gainfaid. Thus will Gop
feal up the hearts of the unbelievers. And we found not in the greater part
of them any obfervance of their covenant •, but we found the greater part of

, * J ftormfrm btavtn i] Like that which de- ly.expreffed the manner of Gon’j dealing with
ftNjicd the Tbamuditeu S pine fuppofe it to have pro^d and ungrateful men, by fullering them to
been an ^irthquakc, for the original word figni- fill op the meafure qf their iniquity, without
fies either,, or both ; and both thefe dreadful ca- vouchfafing to bring them to a fenfe of their
lamities may well be fuppofed to have jointly cppditioh by chaftifements and affliflions till they
executed the divine vengeance. find themfelves Utterly loft, when they lcaffc

f The firatigm tfG 0 d j] Hereby is figurative- exped it r .

But we will feal up their hearts;

them

1 Al Bhidawi,

128 Al KORAN. Chap. 7.

them wicked doers. Then we fent, after the abovenamei apoftles * Moses
with our figns unto Pharaoh a and his princes ; who treated them unjuftly 1 *:
but behold what was the end of the corrupt doers. And Moses faid, 0
Pharaoh, verily I am an apoftle fent from the Lord of all creatures. It
juft that I fliould not fpeak of God other than the truth. Now am I come unto
you with an evident fign from your Lord : fend therefore the children of Israel
away with me. Pharaoh anfwered. If thou comeft with a fign, produce
it, if thou fpeakeft truth. Wherefore be caft down his rod ; and behold, it
became a vifible ferpent \ And he drew forth his hand oat of his bofom ; and
behold it appeared white unto the fpeftators*. The chiefs of the people of
Pharaoh faid. This man is certainly an expert magician : he feeketh to dif-
poflefe you of your land ; what therefore do ye direft ? They anfwered, Put
off him and his brother by fair promifes for fame time , and in the mean while
fend unto the cities, and affemhle the inhabitants , that they may bring unto
thee every expert magician. So the magicians c came unto Pharaoh ; and

they

a TbaraobJ] This was the common title or his jaw& were fourfcore cubits afunder, and
name of the kings of Egypt , (fignifying king when he laid his lower jaw on the ground, his
in the Coptic tongue,) as Ptolemy was in upper reached to the top of the palace; that
after times ; and as Gafar was that of the Pbardob feeing this monfter make towards him,
Roman emperors, and iCbofri that of the kings fled from it, and was fo terribly frightened, that
of Perfia. But which of the kings of Egypt, he befouled himfelf ; and that the whole affem-
this Pbaraob of Mofes was, is uncertain. Not to bly alfo betaking thcmfelvcs to their heels, no left
mention the opinions of the European writers, than twenty five thoufand of them loft their lives
thofe of the eaft generally fuppofe him to have in the prefs. They add that Pbaraob upon this
been al Walid, who, according to feme, was an adjured Mofeshy God who had fent him, to take
Araboi the tribe of Ad, or, according to others, away the ferpent, and promifed he would be-
the fon of Mafab, the fon of Riydn, the fon of lieveonhim, and let the Jfraelites go; but when
Walid 1 the Amalekite 2 . There are hiftorians Mofes had done what he requefted, he reJapfe<j,
however who fuppofe Habus the brother and pre- and grew as hardened as before 4 .
decefforof alWaftdwzs the prince we are fpeak- 4 He drew forth bis band and it became white;]
ing of ; and pretend he lived fix hundred and There is a tradition that Mofes was a very fwar-
twenty years, and reigned four hundred. Which thy man; and that when he put his hand into
is more reafonable, at leaft, than the opinion of his bofom, and drew it out again, it became ex-
thofe who imagine it was his father Mafab, or tremely white and fplendid, furpaffing the bright-
grandfather Riydn 3 . Abulfeda fays, that Mafab nefs of the fun 1 . Marracci 6 fays we do not
being one hundred and feventy years old, and read in fcript^re that Mofes ihewed this fign be-
having no child, while he kept the herds faw fore Pbaraob . It is true, the feriptus^ does not
a cow calve, and heard her fay, at the ferae time, exprefsly fay fo, but it feems to be no more than
O Mafab, be not grieved, for tbou Jbalt have a aneceffary inference from that paflage, where
wicked fon, who will be at length caft into bell. God tells Mofes thfat if they will not hearken to
And he accordingly had this Walid , who after- the firft fign, they will believe the latter fign,
wards coming to be king of Egypt, proved an and if they will not believe thefe two figns,
Impious tyrant then diredls him to turn the water into blood 7 .

• Who treated them unjnftly ;] By not believing • The magicians The Arabian writers name
therein. feveral of thefe magicians, befides their chief

c A vifible ferpent ;] the Arab writers tell e- prieft Simeon , viz. Sadur, and Gbaddr, Jaatb ,
normous fables of this ferpent or dragon. For and Mosfa , Wardn and Zamdn, each of whom
they fay that he was hairy, and of fo prodigi- came attended with their difciples, amounting
ous a fize, that when the opened his mouth, in all to feveral thoufands 8 .

1 See the Prelim . Difc. p. 8. 2 Abulfeda, fcfr. 3 Kitab tapir lebdb, fcf al Ktfbaf

4 ^/Beidawi. 1 Idem. 6 In Ale. p. 284. 7 Exod. iv. 8,9. 8 F . D Herbelot,-2M/.

Orient. art. Moufa,p,befi, £sfc. Al Kessai.

Chap. 7 . Al KORAN \ 129

they faid, Shall we furely receive a reward, if we do overcome ? He anfwer-
ed, Yea ; and ye lhall certainly be of thofe who approach near unto my throng
They faid, O Moses, either do thou call down thy rod firft , or we will caft
down ours . Moses anfwered, Do ye caft down your rods JirJi . And when
they had caft them down, they inchanted the eyes of the men who wereprefent*
and terrified them; and they performed a great inchantment *. And we fpake
by revelation unto Moses, faying* Throw down thy rod. And behold, it wal-
lowed up the rods which they had caufed falfsly to appear changed into fer~
pents b . Wherefore the truth was confirmed, and that which they had
wrought, vanifhed. And Pharaoh and bfs magicians were overcome there,
and were rendred contemptible. And the magicians proftratecjl them-
felves, worfhipping ; and they faid, We believe in the Lord of all crea-
tures, the Lord of Moses and Aaron c . Pharaoh faid. Have yc believed
on him, before I have given you perm iffion? Verily this is a plot which ye
have contrived in the city, that ye might caft forth from thence the inhabi-
tants thereof d . But ye fhall furely know that I am yourmafter ; for I will
caufe your hands and your feet to be cut off on the oppofite Tides e , then will
I caufe you all to be crucified The magicians anfwered. We fhall certainly
return unto our Lord, in the next life ; for thou takeft vengeance on us only
becaufe we have believed in the figns of our Lord, when they have come un-
to us. O Lord, pour on us patience; and caufe us to die Moflems * And

S the

11 And they performed a great inchantment . ]
They primed themfelves with a great number
of thick ropes and long pieces of wood which
they contrived, by fomc means, to move, and
make them twift themfehrea one over the other ;
and fo impofed on the beholders, who at a dis-
tance took them to be true ferpents* 1 * .

b Behold, it fivallowed tip the rods , &c.] The
expofitors add, that when this ferpent had fwal-
lowed up all the rods and cords, he made direftly
towards the aflcmbly, and put them into fo great
a terror, that they fled, and a confiderable num-
ber were killed in the croud : then Mefes took it
up, and it became a rod in his hand as before.
Whereupon ’the magicians declared that it could
be no enchantment, becaufe in ftrch cafe their
rods and cords would -not have diftppeared a .

c And the magicians prof rated themfelves xvorjbif-
ping , &c.] ft feems probable that all the magicians
were not converted by this miracle, for fome
writers introduce Saddr and Gbadur only, ac-
knowledging miracle to bewroughtoy the
power of God. Thefe two, they fty, were
brothers, and the fons of a famous magician, then
dead ; but on their being fent for to court on this
occaflon, their mother perfuaded them to go to
their father’s tomb, to ask his advice. Being
come to the tomb, the father anfwered their call,
and when tfiey had j^guainted him with the af-

fair, he told them, that they fhonld inform them-
felves whether the rod of which they fpoke
became a ferpent while its mailers flept, or oiv-
ly when they were awake ; for, laid he, in-
chantments have no efFeft while the enchanter is
afleep, and therefore if it be other wife in this
cafe, you may be aflured that they aft by a di-
vine power. Thefe two magicians then, wri-
ving at the capital of Egypt, on enquiry found,
to their great aftoniftiment, that when Mofes and
Aaron went to reft, their rod became a ferpent,
and guarded them while they flept 3 . And this
was the firft ftep towards their converfion.

d Ibis is a pht which ye have contrived \
&c.]i.e. This is a confederacy between you and
Moj fa, entered into before ye left the city to go
to the place of appointment, to turn out the
Copts f or native Egyptians , and eftablifh the Israe-
lites in their ftead 4 .

‘ On the oppofite Jidef] That is, your right
hands, and your left feet.

* And I will caufe you all to be crucified.] Some
fay Pharaoh was the firft inventor ofthis ignomi-
nious and painful putiifhment.

8 Some think thefe converted magicians were
executed accordingly: but others deny it, and
fay that the king was not able to put them to
death 5 infiftlng.on thefe words of the Koran * ,
You two, and they who follow you , Jball overcome .

1 ^/Beida\vi. V. D’Herbblot, ubifup. and Koran, c. xo. % Al Beidawi. 3 /'D’He*-

*el. tibifap. 4 Al Beidawi. i Chap. 28.

I JO 1 * ^ K 0 R A N> Chap. ^

the chiefs of Fharaoh’j people faid, Wilt thou let Moses and his peoplego,
that they may aft corruptly in the earth, and leave thee and thy gods »f
Pharaoh anfwered, We will caule their male children to be (lain, and we will
fiiffer their females to live b 'j and by that means we lhall prevail over them.
Moses faid unto his people, Afk afliftance of God, and fuffer patiently : for
the earth is Goo’i, he giveth it for an inheritance unto fuch of his fervants
as he pleafeth ; and the fro/ptrous^ end Jhdl be unto thofe who fear him.
They anfwered. We have been afflifted by having our male children /lain, be-
fore thou camelt unto us, and alfb fince thou haft come unto us. Moses
faid; Perad venture it may happen that your Lord will deftroy your enemy,
and will caufe you to fucceed him in the earth, that he may foe how ye will
aft therein. And we formerly punifhed the people of Pharaoh with dearth
and fcarcity of fruits, that they might be warned.. Yet when good happened
unto them, they laid,. This is owing unto us : but if evil betel them, they
attributed the fame to the ill luck of Moses, and dhole who were with him c .
Was not their ill luck with God but rnoft of them knew it not. And they
laid unto Mosks, Whatever fign thou fhew unto us, to inchant us therewith,
we will not believe on thee. Wherefore we font upon them a flood*, and lo-
cufts, and lice f , and frogs, and blood; diftinft miracles: but they behaved
proudly, and became a wicked people. And when the plague* fell on them,
they faid, O Moses, intreat thy Lord for us, according to that which he hath
covenanted with thee : verily if thou take the plague from ofl us, we will fure-
ly believe thee, and we will let the children of Israel go with thee. But
when we had taken the plague from off them, until the term which God Bed
granted them, was expired, behold, they broke their promife. Whe&fen:

we

• 72 y gods;] Which were the ftare, or other ment for their wickednefs,

idols. Bat fome of the commentators, from cer- * A flood This inundatiotr, city f v. wis
rain impious expreflkmt of this prince, recordedin occafioncd qy unufual rains which continued
the Koran 1 , whereby he fets up himfelf as the eight days together, and the overflowing of the
only god of his fubje&s, fappofe that he was the Nile; and not only covered their lands* bat came
objeft of their worfhip, and therefore inftead of into their houfes, androfe as high as their backs
4 libdtaca, tfo gods, read ilabataca, thy worihip and necks; but the children of Ifraei had no rain

b We tv caufe, their malt children to Sejain , in their quarters \ As there is no mention of
&c.] That is. We will continue to make isfe of any fuch miraculous inundation in the Mofaic
the fame cruel policy to keep the Ifraelites in writings, fome have imagined this plague 7 to
fubjc&ion, as we have hitherto done. The have been either a pellilencc, or the fmall por,
commentators fey that Pharaoh came to this re- or fome other ejpidemical diftemper For the
folution beciufe he had either been admonifbed m word Jufdn 9 which is ufed in this place, and is ge-
a dream, or by the aflrologers or diviners, that nerally rendered a deluge > may alfo fignify any
one of that nation Ihould fubvert his kingdom 3 • other univerfal deflrudion or mortality.

* <Ts the ill luck of Moles* &c.l Looking on him f lice;] Some will have thefe infe&s to have

and his followers as the occahon of thofe cab- been a larger fort of tick; others* the young lo*
mities. The original word properly figniiies to culls before they have wings 6 ,

take an ominous and fluffier prejage of any future * TbafUguei] viz . Any of the calamities already

event, from the flight of birds, or the like. mentioned, or the peftilence which God fenc

4 Was not their ill luck with God By whofe upon them afterwards,
will and decree they were fo affli&ed,as a punilh-

1 Ibid . and chap . 26, &c. * Al Beidawi. 3 Jallalo’dmh. *■ A,

nxiLFED, 1 6 Idem.

Chap. 7. At KORAN. 13 , ‘

we took vengeance on them, and drowned them in the red fea 1 { becaufe they
charged our figns with falfhood, and negle&ed them. And we caufed the peo-
ple who had been rendred weak, to inherit the eaftern parts of the earth and
the weftern parts thereof 1 *, which we blefled with fertility ; and the gracious
word of thy Lord was fulfilled on the children of Israel, for that they had
endured with patience: and we deftroyed the JlruSlures which Pharaoh and
his people had made, and that which they had erected c . And we caufed
the children of Israel to pals through the fea, and they came unto a people
who gave themfelves up to the worjhip of their idols' 1 , and they faid, O Moses,
make us a god, in like manner as thefe feople have gods. Moses anfwered,
Verily ye are an ignorant people: for the religion which thefe follow will be
deftroyed, and that which they do is vain. He faid, Shall I feek for you any
other god than God ; fince he hath preferred you to the reft of the world? And
remember when we delivered you from the people of Pharaoh, who griev-
oufly opprefied you * they flew your male children, and let your females live :
therein was a great trial from your Lord. And we appointed unto Moses
a faft of thirty nights before we gave him the law e , and we completed them by
adding of ten more 5 and the ftated time of his Lord was fulfilled in forty
nights. And Moses faid unto his brother Aaron, Be thou my deputy among
my people during my ab fence-, and behave uprightly, and follow not the way
of the corrupt doers. And when Moses came at our appointed time, and
his Lord fpakc unto him r , he faid, O Lord, Shew me thy glory, that I may
behold thee. God anfwered, Thou fhalt in no wife behold me *, but look
towards the mountain *, and if it ftand firm in its place, then fhalt thou fee
me. But when his Lord appeared with glory in foe mount h , he reduced it

S 2 to

a See this wonderful event more particularly
deferibed in the tenth and twentieth chapters,
b The eaftern parts the earth and the weftem
farts thereof ;] That is, the land of SyHa, of
which the eaftern geographers reckon 'Pale fine
« part, and wherein the commentators fay the
children of Ifrdel fucceeded the kings of Egypt
and the Amalekites 1 .

e And toe deftroyed the ftruBum lobuh Pha-
raoh and his people bad made, Particularly
the lofty tower whic kPbaraob caufed to be built*
that he might attack the God of Mofes

- And they came unto a people who worshipped l-
dels.'] Thefe people fome will have* to be of the
tribe of Amalek, whom Mofes was commanded to
deftroy, and others of the tribe of Lakhm,
Their idols, it is faid, were images of oxen,
which gave the firft hint to the making of the
golden calf*.

e We' appointed unto Mofes a faft of thirty
nights , and we compleated them by adding vf ten
more, &c.] The commentators fay that God* ha-
ving promifed Mofes to give him the law, direc-
ted him to prepare hhnfelf for the high favour of

fpeaking with God in perfon, by a faft of thirty
days : and that Mofes accordingly iafted the whole
month of Dhtdlkaada , but not liking the favour
of his breath, he rubbed hia teeth with a denti-
frice, upon which the angels told him, that hit
breath before had the odour of musk but that
his rubbing his teeth had taken it away. Where-
fore God ordered him to fail ten days more,
Which he did \ and thefe were the firft ten days
of the fueceeding month Dhu'lhajja* Others
however fuppofe that Mofes was commanded to
faft and pray thirty days only, and that during
the other ten God difeourfed with him

i And bis Lord Jpake unto him ;J Without the
mediation of any other, and face to face, as he
ijpeaks unto the angels 6 .

■ The mountains] This mountain the Moham-
medans name al Zabir.

* When his Lord appeared with glory in tht
mount i] Or* as it is literally, unto the mount .
For fome of the expoiitors pretend that God en-
dued the mountain with life and the fenfe of fec-
ing.

1 Idem . 2 V . Kor.cb. 28, and 3 Al Beidawt. * See the Prelim . Difc. §. IV.

p. 109. 1 AIBeidavu, Jai,lalo*dpin« 6 Jl$z idawi. V . D'Herbbl,^/, Orient.p . 650,

1 2 i Al K 0 R A N. Chap, j,

to duft. And Moses fell down in a fwoon. And when he came to him-
felf, he faid, Praife be unto thee! I turn unto thee with repentance, and
I am the firft of true believers*. God faid unto him, O Moses, I have chofen
thee above all men, by honouring thee with my commiffions, and by my fpeak-
ing unto thee : receive therefore that which I have brought thee, and be one
of thofe who give thanks b . And we wrote for him on the tables c an admo-
nition concerning every matter, and a decifion in .every cafe d , and /aid. Re-
ceive this with reverence *, and command thy people that they live according
to the molt excellent precepts thereof. I will lhew you the dwelling of the
wicked'. I will turn afide from my figns thofe who behave themfelves proud-
ly in the earth, without juftice : and although they fee every fign, yet they
fhall not believe therein i and although they fee the way of nghteoilfeefi yet
they fhall not take that way •, but if they fee the way of error they fhall take
that way. Thi %./hall come to pa/s becaufe they accufe our figns* of impofture,
and negleft the feme. But as for them who deny the truth of our figns and the
meeting of the life to come, their works fhall be vaift : fhall they be reward-
ed otherwife than according to what they fhall have wrought ? And the people
of Moses after his departure , took a Corporeal calf f , made of their ornaments 8 ,
which lowed h . Did they not fee that it fpake not unto them, neither directed
them in the way ? yet they took it for their god, and adted wickedly. But
when they repented with forrow 1 , and few that they had gone aftray, they faid.
Verily if our Lord have not mercy upon us, and forgiye us not, we fhall cer-
tainly become 0/ the number of thofe who perifh. And when Moses return-
ed unto his people, full of wrath and indignation, he laid, An evil thing is it
that ye have committed after my departure •, have ye haftened the command

of

* I am the firfi of true believers.] This is not
to be taken ftri&Iy. See the like espreilion in
chap. 6. p. 100.

* The Mohammedans have a tradition, that
Mofes asked to fee God on the day of Arafat » and
that he received the law on the day they flay the
viftims at the pilgrimage of Mecca , which days
are the ninth and tenth of Dbu'lhajja .

c The tables;] Thefe cable*, according to ibmc,
were feven in number, and according to others
ten. Nor are the commentators agreed whe-
ther they were cut out of a kind of lote-tree in
paradife called al Sedra, or whether they were
chryfolites, emeralds, rubies, or common
ftone 1 , But they lay that they were each ten or
twelve cubits long; for they fuppofe that not on-
ly the ten commandments but the whole law was
written thereon; and fome add that the letters
were cut quite through the tables fo that they
might be read on both fides 2 ; which is a fable
of the Jews.

4 An admonition eoncermng every matter , and a

decifion in every cafe;] That is, aperfoft law,
comprehending all ijeceftajy inftnaftiiXw as Well
in regard to religious and moral duties, as the
adminiftration of juftice.

* I will Jhew you the dwelling of the wicked;]
Fits- the defolate habitations of the Egyptian s t
or^ thofe of the impious tribes of Ad and Tba-
mud % or perhaps hell, the dwelling of the ungod-
ly in the other world.

f A corporeal calf;] That is, as fome underftand
it, confining of flefh and blood ; or, as others
being a mere body or mafs of metal, without .
foul 3 .

* Of their ornaments ;] Such as their rings and
bracelets of gold and filver 4 .

* Which lowed;] See chap. 20. and the notes
to chap. 2. p. 6, 7,

1 F ather Marracci feems not to have underftood
the meaning of this phiafe, having literally trans-
lated the Arabic words, zva lamma fokita fi eidi-
bin 9 without any manner of fenie, Ei cum cadsu
fadus fuiffet in manibus eornnu

1 Al Beidawi. * V. D’Hbubei* ubifupreb * AIBi idawj. See chap. 2o x and A'

Wes to chap . 2. p. 6, 7. 4 V. ibid .

Chap. 7. Al KORAN. 133

of your Lord* ? -And he threw down the tables b , and took his brother by the
bair of the head, and dragged him unto him. And Aaron faid unto him.
Son of my mother, Verily the people prevailed againft me % and it wanted
little but they had (lain me : make not my enemies therefore to rejoice over
me, neither place me with the wicked people. Moses faid, O Loud, for-
give me and my brother, and receive us into thy mercy j for thou art the moft
merciful of thofe who exercife mercy. Verily as for them who took the calf for
their god, indignation (hall overtake them from their LouD d , and ignominy in
this life : thus will we reward thofe who imagine falfhood. But unto them who
do evil, and afterwards repent, and believe in Goo, verily thy Lord will
thereafter bo clement and merciful. And when the anger of Moses was ap-
pealed, he took the tables* 5 and in what was written thereon was a direction
and mercy, unto thofe who feared their Lord. And Moses chofe out of his
people feventy men, to go up with him to the mountain at the time appointed
by us : and when a fform of thunder and lightening had taken them away f ,
he faid, O Lord, if thou hadft pleafed, thou hadlt deftroyed them before,
and me alfo ; wilt thou deftroy us for that which the foolifh men among us
have committed ? This is only thy trial ; thou wilt thereby lead into error
whom thou pleafeft, and thou wilt dire<5t whom thou pleafed. Thou art our
protestor, therefore forgive us, and be merciful unto us ; for thou art the beft
of thofe who forgive. And write down for us good in this world, and in
the life to come •, for unto thee are we directed. Gov anfwered, I will in-
flift my punilhment on whom I pleafe j and my mercy extendeth over all
things : and I will write down good unto thofe who fhall fear me, and give aims,
and who lhall believe in our figns ; who fhall follow the apoftle, the illiterate
prophet E , whom they fhall find written down h with them in the law and
the gofpel : he will command them that which is juft, and will forbid them
that which is evil ; and will allow unto them as lawful the good things which
were before forbidden 1 , and will prohibit thofe which are bad k ; and he Will
eafe them of their heavy burthen, and of the yokes which were upon them ".
And thofe who believe on him, and honour him, and aflift him, and follow
the light, which hath been fent down with him, fall be happy. Say, Omen,
Verily I am the mefienger of God untoyou.all “ : unto him belongetb r.be, king

dom

* Have ft baftenti the command of your Loud ?]
By neglecting his precepts, and bringing down
his fwift vengeance on yon.

b And be threw down the tables i\ Which were
all broken and taken up to heaven, except one
only ; and thisy they fay, contained the. threats
and judicial ordinances, and was afterwards put
into the ark 1 .

* Prevailed agalnjl me ;] Literally, rendred me
weak.

d See chap. 2. p. 7.

* The tables ;] Or the fragments of that which
was left.

f See chap. 2. p. 7. and chap. 4. p. 79.

8 The illiterate prophet;] That is Msh.wsr.ci.
See the Prelim. Difc. 5 - U. p. 42.

6 Written down ;] i. e. Both foretold by name
and certain defeription.

1 See chap. J. p. 42.

“ And will Prohibit thofe which are bad 5} As
the eating of blood and fwinea flc% and the ta-
king of ufury, (Ac.

1 See chap. 2. p. 34.

” Unto you alii} That is, to all mankind in
general, and not to one particular nation, as the
former prophets were fent.

Al Beidawi. V. D’Herbel. ubl fup. p, 649.

1 34 Al H 0 R A N. Chap,^

dom 6f heaven and earth *, there is no God but he ; he giveth life, and he
caufeth to die. Believe therefore in God and his apoftle, the illiterate pro.
phet, who believeth in God and his word ; and follow him, that ye may be
rightly directed. Of the people of Moses there is a party * who direft others
with truth, and aft juftly according to the fame. And we divided them into
twelves tribes, as into fo many nations. And we fpake by revelation unto
Moses, when his people asked drink of him, and we faid, Strike the rock
with thy rod and there gulhed thereout twelve fountains b , and men knew
their refpeilive drinking place. And we caufed clouds to overlhadow them
and manna and quails * todefcend upon them, faying , Eat of the good things
which we have given you for food : and they injured not us, but they injured
their own fouls. And call to mind when it was faid unto them, Dwell in this
city d , and eat of the provifions thereof where-ever ye will, and fay. Forgive*
nefe ! and enter the gate worfhipping : we will pardon you your flns, and
will give encreafe unto the well-doers. But they who were ungodly among them
changed the expreffion into another', which had not been fpoken unto them.
Wherefore we fent down upon them indignation from heaven, becaufe they
had tranfgrefied. And aik them concerning the city f , which was fituate on
the fea, when they tranfgrefied on the fabbath day : when their filh came
unto them on their fabbath day, appearing openly on the water ; but on the
day whereon they celebrated no fabbath, they came not unto them. Thus did
we prove them, becaufe they were wicked doers. And when a party of
them * faid unto the others , Why do ye warn a people whom God will deftroy,
or will puniih with a grievous punifhment ? They anfwered. This is an excufe
for us unto your Lord h *, and peradventure they will beware. But when they

had

• Of tin people e/\t ofe* there is a party tvbo H-
reft others with truth, &e.] Viz, thofe Jems who
feemed better dilpofed than the reft of their bre-
rthren to receive Mohammed's law; or perhaps
fuch of them as had aflually received it Some
imagine they were a Jevtifb nation dwelling
fomewhere beyond China, which Mohammd faw
die night he made his journey to heaven, and
who believed on him 1 .

h And there gufbed thereout twelve fountains ,
& cj See chap. z. p. 8.

To what isiaid in the notes there we may add,
.'that, according- to a certain tradition, the ftone,on
which this miracle was wrought, was thrown
down from paradife by Adam, and came into the
©ofieffion of Sboaib , who gaveit with the rod to
9 Mtfer; and that, according to another, the wa-
4 er ifttied thence by three orifices on each <Jf
«the four fides of the ftone, making tWlve in all,
and that it ran, in fo many rivulets, to the quar-
ter of each tribe in the camp
c See chap. 2. p. 7.

4 See this pafTage explained, ibid.

*! Changed the expreffion into another, &c.] Pro*

feffor Sike&yt, that being prone to leave fpiritnal
for worldly matters, inftead of Hittaton they
faid Hintatm, which iignihes wheat 3 , and corner
much nearer the true word than the expreffion I
have in the place laft quoted, fet down from
Jallatiddin. Whether he took this from the
famecommentator or not, does not certainly ap-
pear, tho* he mentions him juft before; but if he
did, his copy muft differ from that which I have
followed.

t ' And ask them concerning the city, &c.] This
city was Allah or Elatb, on the red fea ; tho’ fome
pretend it was Midian, and others Tiberias .
The whole (lory is already given in the notes to
clm>. 2. p. 9. Some fuppofe the following five or
eight verfes to have been revealed at Medina,

* A party cf them;] viz The religions perfons
among them, who ftri&ly obferved the fabbath,
and endeavoured to reclaim the others, till they
defpaired of fuccef&. But fome think thefe worcs
were Ipoken by the offenders, in anfwer to the
admonition* of the others.

h An excufe for us, &c.J That we have done
our duty in diffua^ng them from their wickednefa.

1 Al Beidawi.

3 Sjkje, in not . ad Evassg. Infant, p, 71.

a Idem,

Chap. y. A 1 KORAN. 135

had forgotten the admonitions which had been given thebi, we delivered thofe
who forbade them to do evil ; and we infli&ed on thofe who had tranlgrcffed,
a fevere punifhment, becaufe they had afted wickedly. And when they
proudly refufed to defift from what had been forbidden them, we faid unto
them, Be ye transformed into apes, driven away from the fociety of men. And
remember when thy Lord declared that he would furely fend againft the Jews*
until the day of refurred ion, fame nation who Ihould afflift them with a
grievous opprefiion a : for thy Lord is fwift inpuniiliing, and he is alfb ready
to forgive and merciful : and we difperfed them among the nations in the earth.
Some of them are upright perfons, and fome of them are otherwife. And we
proved them with profperity and with adverfity, that they might return from
their difobedience -, and a fucceflion of their pofterity hath fucceeded after them,
who have inherited the book of the lavs, who receive the temporal goods of this
world b , and fay. It will furely be forgiven us: and if a temporal advantage
like the former be offered them, they accept it alfo. Is not the covenant of the
book of the lain eftablifhed with them, that they fhould not fpeak of Goo
ought but the truth'? Yet they diligently read that which is therein. But
die injoyment of the next life will be better for thofe who fear God than the
wicked gains of thefe people ; (Do ye not therefore underftand ?) and for thofe
who hold faft the book of the law, and are conftant at prayer: for we will by
no means fuffer the reward of the righteous to perifh. And when we fhook
the mountain^ Sinai over them 4 , as though it had been a covering, and
they imagined that it was falling upon them; and we faid. Receive the law
which we have brought you, with reverence ; and remember that which , is
contained therein, that ye may take heed. And when thy Lord drew forth
their pofterity from the loins of the fonsof Adam*, and took them to wit-
nefs againft themfelve3 r faying. Am not I your Lord ? They anfwered. Yea :
we do bear witnefs. This was done left ye fhould fay, at tire day of refur-
re&ion. Verily we were negligent as to this matter, becattfe we were not apprized
thereof: or left ye fhould fay, Verily our fathers were formerly guilty of idbr
latry, and we are their pofterity who have fucceeded them ; wilt thou there-
fore deftroy us for that which vain men have committed? Thus do we ex-
plain

»• See chap. g. p. 91. not. h.

k And received the temporal goods of this world i]
By accepting of bribes for wrefting judgment,
and for corrupting the eopiea of the Pentateuch ;
and by extorting of tiftjry, (sfc 1 .

* That they jbattJd not Jpeak of God slight but
the truth ;] Particularly by givingjout that God
will forgive their corruption without fineere re-
pentance and amendment.

* See chap. 2. p. 9. not. a.

* And cvben tby Lord drew forth their foflerity
pom the Joint of the font of Adam, £sV.] Thts
was done in the plain of Dabia in India, or* as
others imagine, in a valley near Mecca. T he
commentators teil us that God ftroked Adam's

back, _ and extracted from his loins his whole
pofterity, which ihould come into the world un-
til the rcfurredlion, one generation after ano-
ther; that thefe men were afluaUy afleinbled
all together in the fhape of fmall ants, which were
endued with underftanding ; and that after they
had, in the prefence of The angels, confeffed
their dependence on God, they were again
caufed to return into the loins of their great an-
ceftor 2 . From this fiftion it appears that the
doftrine of pre-exiftence is not unknown to the
Mohammedans i and there is fome little confor-
mity between it and the modern theory of gene-
ration ex animalcttlii tn/emine marium.

^IBcidawi.

3 Idem , J.ALiAi.o’DDiH, Yahva V. D’Herbej ot, Bibi. Orient, f. 5^.;

1 36 Al KORAN. Chap. 7.

plain our figns, that they may return from their vanities. And relate unto the
Jews the hiftory of him unto whom we brought our figns *, and he departed
from them ; wherefore Satan followed him, and he became one of thofe wbo
were feduced. And if we had pleafed, we had furely raifed him thereby unto
wijSom •, but he inclined unto the earth, and followed his own defire b . Where-
fore his likenefs is as the likenefs of a dog, which, if thou drive him away,
putteth forth his tongue, or, if thou let him alone, putteth forth his tongue
Mfo. This is the likenefs of the people, who accufe our figns of falfehood. R e -
hcarfe therefore this hiftory unto them , that they may confider. Evil is the fi-
militude of thofe people who accufe our figns of falfehood and injure their
own fouls. Whomfoever God fhall direct, he will he rightly directed ; and
whomfoever he (hall lead aftray, they fhall perilh. Moreover we have created
for hell many of the genii and of men ; they have hearts by which they un-
derftand not, and they have eyes by which they fee not, and they have
ears by which they hear not. Thefe are like the brute beafts ; yea they go more
aftray : thefe are the negligent. God hath moft excellent names' : therefore
call on him by the fame *, and withdraw from thofe who ufe his names per-
verfely 4 : they fhall be rewarded for that which they fhall have wrought.
And of thofe whom we have created there are a people who dired others
with truth, and ad juftly according thereto*. But thofe who devife lies a-
gainft our figns, we will fuffer them to fall gradually into ruin, by a method
which they know not f : and I will grant them to enjoy a long and prof-
perous life *, for my ftratagern is effedual. Do they not confider that there
is*no devil in their companion*? He is no other than a public p readier. Or

do

• And relate unto the Jews the hiftory f him
' unto whom we brought our figns, &c.] Some fup-
jx>fe the per Ion here intended to be a JewiJb rab-
bi, or one Ommeya Ebn AbVlfalt , who read the
■fcriptures and found thereby that God would
fend a prophet about that time, and was in hopes
that he might be the man ; but when Mohammed
declared his tniffion, believed not on him thro*
envy. But according to the more genersd opini-
on* it was Balaam the fon of Beor , of the Cana-
anitifb race. Well acquainted withpart, at leaft, of
the.icripture, having even been favoured with
lome revelations from God , who being requeued
by his nation to curfe Mofes and the children of
Ifrael, refufed it at firft, faying, How can 2 curfe
tbofe who are prottBed by the angels? But afterwards
he was prevailed onty gifts ; and he had no fpon-
er done it, than he began to put out his tongue
like a dog, and it hung down upon his breaft 1 .

* But be inclined unto the earth , and followed
his own defire ;] Loving the wages of unrighte-
trafnefs, and running greedily after error for re-
ward 2 .

c God hath moft excellent names ; ] Expr effing
his glorious attributes. Of thefe the Moham-

medan Arabs have no lefs than ninety niaf, which
are reckoned up by Marracci

- Who ufe bis name perverfi/yf] As did Wal'd
Ebn al Mogbeira ; who h tax mg Mthamrstl give
God the tide of a l Rahman, or the merciful, laugh-
ed aloud, faying that he kndw none of that name,
except a certain man who dwelt in Yamama*:
or as the idolatrous Meccans did, who deduced
the names of their idols from thofe of the true
God; deriving, for example, AUdt from Allah ;
al Uzza from al Aziz, the mighty, and Manat
from al Manndn, the bountiful 1 .

* Of thofe whom we have created thefe are ay?z-
ple who direB others with truth, dec.] As it is laid
a little above, that God hath created many to c-
ternal mifory, fo here he is laid to have created
others to eternal happinefs 6 .

f We will fuffer them to fall gradually istortdn,
&c.] By flattering them with profperity in itm
life, and permitting them to fin in an omntenpt-
ed fecurity; till they find themfelve* unexped-
ly ruined 7 .

8 Ho they not confider thn tl m is no drvii in
their companion *] Viz. in Mohammed* ivhom

they

1 Al Beidawi, Jall alo*ddin, Al Zamarhshari. V. D’Herbel, Bib/. Orient Art

/Balaam. 2 2 Pet. ii. v. Jude 1 1. 3 In Ale. p. 414. 4 Marrac. vit. Mab. p. 19. 5 Al

JttLDAWi, Jalladq’ddin. See the Prelim. Difc.p . 18. 6 Al Bhjdawi. < Mg*

Chap. 7. Al KORAN. 137

do they not contemplate the kingdom of heaven arid earth, and the things which
God hath created •, and confider that peradventure it may be that their end
draweth nigh? And in what riew declaration will they believe, after this 1 * ?
He whom God ftiall caufe to err, lhall have no dire&or •, and he fhall kavc
them in their impiety, wandring in confufion. They will aik thee conterning
the laft hour; at what time its coming is fixed ? Anfwer, Verily the know*
ledge thereof is with my Lord » none IhaJl declare the fixed time thereof, exr
cept he. The expectation thereof is grievous in heaven and on earth * : it lhall
come upon you no otherwise than fuddenly. They will alk thee, as though
thou waft well acquainted therewith. Anfwer, Verily the knowledge therer
of is with God alone : but the greater part of men know in not. Say, I am
able neither to procure advantage unto my fejf, nor to avert mifchief from me ,
but as God pleafeth. If I knew the fecrets of God, I Ihould furely enjoy a-
bundanceof good, neither (hould evil befal me. Verily I am no other than
a denouncer of threats, and a mefienger of good tidings unto people who be-
lieve. It is he who hath created you from one perfon, and out of him pro
duced his wife, that he might dwell with her; and when he had known her,
Ihe carried a light burthen for a time , wherefore Ihe walked eajily therewith.
But when it became more heavy', they called upon God their Lord, faying ,
If thou give us a child rightly fhaped, we will furely be thankful. Yet when
he had given them a child rightly lhaped, they attributed companions unto
fiim, for that which he had given them d . But far be that from God, which

T they

they gave out to be poflefTed when he went up
to mount Safa , and from thence called to the fe-
veral families of each refpeftive tribe in order,
to warn them of God’s vengeance if they conti-
nued in their idolatry 1 .

* After tbit;] i. e. After they have rejected the
Karan. For what more evident revelation can
they hereafter expeft * ?

■ • The expeftat i on thereof is grievous, in heaven
and on earth j] Not only to men and genii, but
to the angels alfo.

e But when it befame more heavy, &c.] That
is, when the child grew bigger in her wombs

d They attributed companions unto him, &c ]
For the Explaining of this whole pafiage the
commentators tell the following ftory.

They fay that ^hen Eve was big with her firft
child, the devil came to her and asked her whe-
ther fhe knew what fhe carried within her, and
which way fhe fhould be delivered of it ; fug-
gdting that pofllbly it might be a beaft. She,
being unable to give an anfwer to this queflion,
went in a fright to Adam , and acquainted him
with the matter, who not knowing what to
think of it, grew fad and penfive. Whereupon
the devil appeared to her again, (or, as others
fay, to Adam,) and pretended that he by his

prayers would obtain of God that fhe might be
fafely delivered of a fon in Adam's likenefs, provid-
ed they would promife to name him Abdo'lbaretb ,
or the fervent tf al Haretb , (which was the de-
vil’s name among the angels) irtted of Abdallah,
or the fervent of God, as Adam had defigned.
This propofal was agreed to, and accordingly,
when the child was born, they cave it that
name ; upon which it immediately died 3 . And
with this Adam and Eve are here taxed, as an
aft of idolatry. The ftory looks like a rabbini-
cal fiftion, and feems to have no other founda-
tion than Cain's being called by Mofes Obed add-
mab , that is, a tiller of the ground, which might
be tranfbted into Arabic hy Abfalhartth.

But al Betdatoi , thinking it unlikely that a
prophet, (as Adam is by the Mohammedans fup-
pofed to have been,) fhould be guilty of fuch
an aftion, imagines the Koran in this place
means Kofai, one of Mohammed's anceftors, and
his wife, who begged iflue of God, and having
four fons granted them, called their names Abd
Mendf Abd Shams , AbtPal Uzza, and Abd'al
Ddr, after Ae names of four principal idols of
the Koreifb. And the following words alfo he
fuppofes to relate to their idolatrous pofterity.

1 Al Beidawi. % Idem . 3 Idem , Yahya. V. D’Herbelot, Bibl. Orient. p. 438

fcf Selden. dejurt nat.Jcc . Hcbn lib . 5. c . 8.

1 38 Al KORAN. Ch^p. y,

they affociated with him ! Will they affociate with him falft g&fewhich create
nothing, but are themfelves created •, and can neither give them afilftantev nor
help themfelves ? And if ye invite them to the true dircdtion, they will not
follcxw you: it will be equal unto you, whether ye invite them, ik whether
ye hold your peace. Verily the falfe deities whom ye invoke befidet Goo, are
fervants like unto you *. Call therefore upon them, and let them give you
an anfwer, if ye fpeak truth. Have they feet, to walk with ? Or have they
hands, to lay hold with ? Or have they eyes, to fee with ? Or have they
ears, to hear with ? Say, Call upon your companions, and them lay a foare
for me, and defer it not* for Goo is my protestor, who lent down the book
of' the KoR^t&i and he protetfteth the righteous. But they whom ye invoke
belides him, cannot afllft you, neither do they help themfelves ; and If ye call
on them to direct you, they will not hear. Thou feed: them look towards
thee, but they fee not. Ufe indulgence 1 , and command that which is juft, and
withdraw far from the ignotant. And if an evil fbggeftion from Satan be
fuggefted unto thee, to divert thee from fby duty, have reooUrfe unto Goo } for
he heareth and knoweeh. Verily they who fear Gdo, when a temptation from
Satan affaileth them, remember the divine commands, and behold, they dear-
ly fee the danger of fin , and the wiles of. the devil. But as for the brethren of
the devils, they fhall continue them in error j and afterwards they lhall not
preferve themfelves therefrom. And when thou bringeft not a verft of the
Koa^n unto them they 1 fay, Haft thou not put it together*? AnfwOf, I fol-
low that only which is revealed unto me from my Lord. This book contained
evident proofs from your Lord, and is a direction and mercy unto people
who believe. And when the Koran is rtrid, attend thereto, and keep fileneej
that ye may obtain mercy. And meditate on thy Lord in thine own mind,
writh humility and fear, and without laud fpeaking, evening and morim }
and be not one of the negligent. Moreover the angels who are with my Lord,
do not proudly difdain his fervice, but they celebrate his pralfe and worftip
him.

CHAP.

• An fitments like unto you f] Being fabjeft to Iuntary alms from the people as they could (pare,
the abfolate command of God. For the chief But the paffage, if taken in this fenfe, was abm-
iads of the Arabs were the fun, moon, and gated by the precept of legal abo», which was

1 given at Me Jim.

* Ufe iuMgeuee.') Or, as the words may alfo c Haft thou M put it HgUher i. e. HafF
be tranfiated. Take tb* fuberabundunt overplus-, thou not yet contrived what to fay} or canft

"ear. .Tig that Mobanmed mould accept fuch to- thou obtain no revelation from ^ob *

1 See the Prelim. Dife. p. 15, kc.

Chap. 8,

Al KORAN.

*39

CHAR VIII.

Inti tied. The Spoils 4 ; t'evealed ^Medina 1 *.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T Hey will alk thee eottcCfnirtg th£ fpolli : Artfwti*, The dfaijihh bf the
fpoils belongetb unta God and the apollle c * Therefore felr God, and
compofe the matter amicably among you ; and obey God and his apoftle,
if ye are true believers. Verily the true believers are tbofe whofe hearts fear
when God is mentioned, and vphoft feith enereaftth when hh figns are rehfcarf-
ed unto them, and nvho truft in their L6 Rd *, who obferve the ftated times of
prayer, and give alms out of that which we have beftowed on them. Thefe
are really believers : they (hall have fuperihr degrees of felicity with their Lord,
and forgivenefs, and an honourable pfovifion. As tlty Lord brought thee
forth from thy houfe \ with truth ; and part of the Believers were averfe to
thy directions c : they difputed with thee concerning the truth, after it had

T 2 been

1 This chap ter was occafioned by the high
difptrtes which happened about the divifion
of the fpoils taken at the battle of Bedr x ,
between the young men, who had fought,
and the old men who hid ftaid under the
enfigns; the former infilling they Ought to
have the whole, and the htter, that they de-
served a fhare*. To end the contention, Mo-
hammed pretended to have received orders from
heaven to divide the booty among them equally,
having taken thertfout a fifth part for the
nttfpofrs which Will be mentioned hereafter.

* Except feven verfcs, beginning at thefe
words, And cell td mind toben the unbeliever! plot-
ted againft thee, &c. Which feme think Were
revealed at Mecca.

c The dwlfion of the folk belongeth unto God
.etnd the apoftle;^ is related that Saad Ebn Abi
Wakkds, one of the Companions, whofe brother
Ortlair was Gain in this battle, having killed Said
Ebn al As, took his (Word, and carrying It to
Mohammed, defired that he might be permitted
to keep it i but the prophet told him, that it
was not his to give away, and Ordered him to
lay it With the other fpc&s, At this rCpdfie,
and the lofs of his brother, Saad Was greatly
difturbed ; but in a very little while this chapter
was revealed, and thereupon Mohammed gave
him thefword, laying. You asked thisfwOfdof

me when I had no power to difpofe of it, but
now I have received authority from God to di-
ftribute the fpoils, you may take It 3 .

* As thy Lord brought thee forth from thf
houfe ;} i. fe. Prom Medusa. The particle as hav-
ing nothing in the following Words to anfwer ft,
Al Beidaiut fuppofes the connexion to be, that
the divifion Of the fpoils belonged to the prophet,
notwithftandlng his followers were averfe to it,
as they had been a vfcrfe to the expedition Stfelt

• And part of the Believers were averfe to thy
diretlionsi ] For the better Underfhftding of this
patfage, it will be necelfary to mention fome
fatther particulars relating to the expedition of
Bedr .

Mohatntrted Having received private informati-
on (for which he pretended he was obliged to
the angel Gabriel } of the approach of a caravan
belonging to the Kotelfb, which was on its re-
turn Com Syria with a large quantity of valuable
merchandize, and was guarded by no more than
thirty, or, as others fay. Forty men, fet out with
a party to intercept it. Abu Sofian , who com-
manded the little convoy, having notice of Mo -
bammefs motions, fent to Mecca for fuecours ;
upon which ABu Jabl* and all the principal
men of the city, except only Abu Label, march-
ed to his afiiffance, with a body of nine hundred.

1 See chap. 3./. j6+

* At BsjlDAWl, J&J.L A|* 0 *£>DIN. 3 ^7Be1DAWJ,

140 Al KORAN. Chap. g.

been made known unto them* ; no otherwife than as if they had been led
forth to death, and had feen it with their eyes b . And call to mind when God
promifed you one of the fwq parties, that it fhould be delivered unto you' ; anc j
ye defired that the party which was not furnifhed with arms * fhould be delivered
unto you : but God purpofed to make known the truth in his words, and to
cut off the uttermoft part of the unbelievers * ; that he might verify the
truth, and deftroy falfhood, although the wicked were averfe thereto. When
ye afked affiftance of your Lord 1 * * , and he anfwered yoi|. Verify I will aflift
you with a thoufand e angels, following one another in order. And this God
defigned onfy as good tidings “ for you, and that your hearts might thereby
reft fecure : for vidlory is from God alone i and God is mighty and wife

When'

and fifty men* Mohammed had no fooner re-
ceived advice of this, than Gabriel defeended
with a proniife that he fhoul^ either take the ca-
ravan, or beat the fuccours ; whereupon he con-
fulted with his companions which of the two he
fhould attack. Some oF them were for fetting
upon the caravan, faying that they were not
prepared to fight fuch a body of trodps as were
coming with Abu Jabl 1 but this propofol Mo-
hammd rejected, telling them that the caravan
was at a confiderable diftance by the fea-fide,
whereas Abu Jabl was juft upon them. The
others however infilled fo. obftinately on purfuing
the firft defign of falling on the caravan* that the
pwyphet grew angry, but by the interpQfijion of
Abu Seer, Omar , Saad Ebn Ohadqh, and 'Mok-
dad Ebn Amru , they at length* acinic feed to his
opinion. Mokdad in particular, allured him
they were all ready to obey his orders, and would
not fay to him, as the children of Ifrael did to
Mafes, Go thou and thy JjOrd to fight, for we will
fit here r ; but, Go thou and thy Lord to fight
and we will fight with you* At this Mohammed
fmfled, and again fat down to confuU With them,
applying htefclf chiefly to the Anjars or helper* i
becaufe they were the greater part of his forces,
and he had forae apprehenfion left |}jc y lhould
not think themfelves obliged by the oath they
had taken to him at alAkaba i, to aflift him a-
gainft any other than fuch as fhould attack him
in Medina. But Saad Ebn Moddh, in the name
of the reft, told him that they had received him
as the apoftle of God, and had* promifed him o-
bedience, and were therefore dll to a man ready
to follow him where he pl&ifed, though it were
into the fea. Upon which the prophet ordered
them in God's name to attack the fuccours, af-
furing them of the victory L
• They diffuted with thee concerning the truth ,
&c.] That is, concerning their fuccefs againft

Abu Jabl and the Korei/hi noti’ititftaridLng they
had God’s prpmife to encourage thf&L 7

* As if they had been led forth tflkath, & C T
The reafon of this great backwardneli was the
fmallnefs of their number, in coropariftm of the
enemy, and their being unprepared ; for they
were all frot, having but two horfes among
them', whtffeas ihE Koreijb had no left than
a hundred horfe 4 .

'When Go* promifed you one tf the two parties^

That is, either the caravan, or the fuccours from
Mecca. Father Marracct miftaking al fr and al
naftr, which are appellatives and figiufy the ca-
ravan and the trpop or body of fuceours„j^pro-
per names, has thence coined two famflh&Qf the
Koreijh never hpard of before, which he calls
Airenfe * and Napbircnfes K
m d aJr p fir ty. which wot net^fiurmjbed with ■ j]
viz. The caravan, which was guarded by
no more than forty horfe; whereas the other
party was ftrong and well appointod*

* But God would make known the truth, &c.j
As If he had laid, Vour View was onlf to gain
the fpoils of the caravan, to avoid danger ;
but Gop defigneq to exalt his true religion by
extirpating its adyerfarfes

f 1 When ye asted ajjtfiance of your Lord, &c ]
When Mohammed'* men faw tIjc could not a-
void fighting, they recomm^ndi: . themfclves
to God’s protection ; and their prophet prayed
with great earneftne{s> crying qut, O Goj>, ful-
fil that which thou haft promifed me: O God, if
this party he cut off, thou wilt he no more rjbip-
ed qn e/irtb « And he continued to repeat thefe
wg'rds till his cloak fell frota ofF his back 7

1 A thoufand (t§gels ;] Which were afterwards
reinforced With three thoufand more 8 . Where-
fore fome copies inftead of a thoufauj read thou-
fanis in the plural

‘ See chap, 3 p. 5 1.

1 Karan, chap. 5 .p. 85. * See the Preltm. Qifc+tf. 3 Al Bejdawi. + Idem.

V. Abulfed. Pit. Mob. p. j 6: 1 Markacc. in Ale. p . 297. < ^/Beidawj. 7 Idem.

P . Abvlfed. vit. Mob. p. 58. s See chap . 3. p . 36, and ji

Chap. 8. Al KORAN \ 141

When a deep fell on you as a fecurity from him, and he fent down upon
you water from heaven, that he might thereby purify you, and take from
you the abomination of Satan % and that he might confirm your hearts,
and eftablilh your feet thereby. Alfo when thy Lord fpake unto the angels,
faying, Verily I am with you ; wherefore confirm thofe who believe. I will
caft a dread into the hearts of the unbelievers. Therefore ftrike off their
heads, and ftrike off all the ends of their fingers b . This Jball they fuffer , be-
caufe thqy have refilled God and his apoftle : and whofoever /hall oppofe
God and his apoftle, verily God will be fevere in punifhing him . This Jball

be your pimfhtnent ; tafte it therefore : and the infidels (hall alfo fuffer the tor-
ment of bell fire. O true believers, when ye meet the unbelievers marching
in great numbers againft you, turn not your backs unto them : for whofo lhall
turn his back unto them on that day, unlefs he turneth afide to fight, or re-
trcateth to another party of the faithful % lhall draw on himfelf the indignation
of God* and his abode lhall be hell ; an ill journey Jball it be thither ! And
ye flew not thofe who were Jlain at Bedr your J elves , but God flew them d .
Neither didft thou, O Mohammed , call the gravel into their eyes, when thou
didftyfcf* to caft it ; but God caft it*, that he might prove the true believers
by a gracious trial from himfelf; for God heareth J knoweth. This was
done that God might alfo weaken the Crafty devices of the unbelievers. If ye
defire a decifion of the matter between us, now hath a decifion come unto
you f : and if ye defift from oppoftng the apofile, it will be better for you.
But if ye return to attack him, we will alfo return to hit qffifiance ; and your
forces lhall not be of advantage unto you at all, although they be numerous;
for God is with the faithful. O true believers, obey God and his apoftle,
and turn not back from him, ffnce ye hear the admonitions of the And

be not as thofe who fay. We bear, when pfiey do not hear. Verily the worft
fort of beads in the fight of God, are the dea f and the dumb, whounderftand
not. If God had known any good in them, he would certainly have caufed

them

• When a fleet fell <cn you, &cj It is related,
that the fppt wnere Mohammed* little army lay,
was a dry and deep fand, into Which their feet
funk as they walked, the enemy having the com-
mand of the water; and that having fallen afleep,
the greater pa _ L of them were diflurbed with
dreams, whe in be devil fuggefted to them,
that they conl^ never expedl God’s affilhnee in.
the battle, fiqce they were cut fiom wa ~
tef, and befidei guttering the ipeonvenipney^of]
third, mult be obliged to pray without wafhmg,
tho' they imagined themfelvcs to be the favou-
rites of God, and that they had his apoftle a-
mong them. But in the night rain fell fo plenti-
fully, that it formed a little brook, and not on-
ly fupplyed them with water for all their ufes,
but made the fand between them and the infidel
army firm enough to bear them ; whereupon the
diabolical fuggefiions ceafed r .

b Therefore ftrike off thrir his,iu &c.] This
is the; puni&ment expref$]y affigned the enemies
of the Mohammedan religion ; tho’ the Moflem
did not inflid it on the prifoners they took at
Bedr, for which they are reprehended in thi^
chapter.

* Vhlefs he turneth afide to fight , or retreateth
to another party, &c.J That is, if it be not down-
right running away, bofe done either withdefiga
to rally and, attack the enemy again, or by way
qf feint or ftratagem, or to (uccour a party which
is hard preiTed, {jjV *.

6 See chap. 3 p. 36? not, a.

• See ibid.

J If ye defire a decifion, &c.] Thefe words are
direded to the people of Mecca ; whom Moham *
med derides, becaufe the Klreijb, when they were
ready to fet out from Mecca , took hold of the cur-
tains

1 Al Beidawi.

* Idem

i^,2 Al KORA N. Chap. 8.

them to hear * : and if he had caufed them co hear, they would furely have
turned back, and have retired afar off. O true believer*, anfwer God and
bis apoftle, when he inviteth you unto that which giveth you life •, and know
that God goeth between a man and his heart b » and that before him ye fhall
be aflembled. .Beware of fedition c ; it will not affeft thofe who are ungodly
among you, particularly, but all «f you in general ; and know that God is fe-
vere in punifliiog. And remember when ye were few, and reputed weak in
the land 4 1 ye feared left men fhould fnatch you away j but Goo provided
y ou a place of refuge, and he ftrrngthened you with his afliftance, and be-
ftowed on you good things, that ye might give dunks. O true believers,
deceive not God and bis apoftle • •, neither violate your faith, againft your
own knowledge. And know that your wealth, and your children art a temp,
tation unto you f ; and that with God is a great reward. O true believers, if ye
fear God* he will grant you a diftinfltioh*, and will expiate your fins from you,
and will forgive you ; for God is indued with great liberality. And coil h
tnind when the unbelievers plotted againft thee, that they might either detain
thee in bonds* or put thee to death, or expel thee the tUy * and they plotted
agsinjl

tMM df the C&tha, faying, O God gran the
vitfory to the juperisr army, the party that it mofi
rt&btU dir sited, and the mofi honour able r *
k fit bear;] That is, to hearken to the remon-
flnnces of fthtf Korin. Some far that the infi-
dels demanded of M/bammed that he fhould laife
Kofai, one of his anceftors, to life, to bear wit-
ndfs to the truth of his miffion, faying, he was
a man of honour and veracity, and they would
believe his teftfthohy: but they are here told
that k would have been in vain •.

God goeth between a man and bit heart ;] Not
only knowing the innermoft fecrets of his heart,
but over-ruling a man's deligns, and difpofmg
him either to belief or infidelity,

c Sedition;] The original word fignifies any
epidemical crime, which involves a number of
people in its guilt; and the commentators are
divided as to its particular meaning in this place.

- In the land;] Vi*, it Mecca. The perfbna
here fpoken to are the Mobdjertn , or refugee*
who fied from thence to Media*.

* Deceive toot God and bit apoftle, &c.] At
Bet d am i mentions an inftance of fhch treacherous
dealing in Abu LobAba* who was fent by Moham-
med to the tribe of KfreMbdj then befieged by
that prophet for having broken their league with
him and perfidioufly gfmi over to the enemies
at the war of the ditch to perfuadC them to
furrender at fihe diferedon of Sand Ebn Moadb
prince of the tribe of Aw* their eonteddrates,
which propotel they had refuted. But Aba Lo-
b&bds family *nd effe&s feeing ifr \he hands of
thofe of Koretdba, he a&ed dire&ly- contrary to

his cftinmif&oti, and inAead of perfuaiing them
to accept Saad as their judge, when they asked
his advice about it, drew his hand erdfs his throat,
fignifying that he wouM put them all to death.
However he had no fo (mtt done this than he
was fcnfihlf of tffttrime, and going into a mofqut
tied himfelf to a pillar, and remained there feven
days without meat or drink, rill Mobammtd for-
gave him.

r Thar wealth and your children an a temptati-
on unto you ;] As they were to Abu LobAba.

* DiftiniHan ;] i. e. A direction that you may
diftfngoifh between truth and falfehood; orfuc-
cefs in batde to diflinguifh the believers from
the infidels ; or the like.

b And call to mind when the unbelievers plotted a-
gainft tb&, ke.] When the Meccans heard of the
league entered into by Mohammed with thdfeof Afe-
dina, being apprehenfivO of the confequetiefe, they
held a council, Whereatthey fay the devil aflifted
in the likenefs of an old man of N The point
under eonfideration being Wh>r they fhould do
with Mohammed, Abu'tbakbtOri was of opinion
that he fhould be imprifbfced, and the room wal-
led up, except a little hole, thro’ which he fhould
have neceflarres given him, till he died. This
the devil eppofed, Ikying that he might probably
be rtleafed fey fome of his own party. Hejbdm
EbiAmta was for banifhing info'; but his advice
alfb the devil rejected, infilling that Mohammed
might engage rome other tribes in his intereft,
and make war on them. At length Abu fall
gave his Opinion for putting him to death ; and

pro-

1 Idem. 1 2 Idem. See eftsp. 6. p. no.

vit. Mob. p. 76. and the notes to chap. 33.

3 See Pwd* life of Mdb. p. 85. ABUtF.

Chap. 8 . Al KORAN. 143

againft thee : but God laid a plot againft them * ; and God is the bcft layer of
plots. And when our figns are repeated unto them, they fay, We have
heard ; if we pleafed we could certainly pronounce a compofition like unto this:
this is nothing but fables of the ancients b . And when they faid, O God, if
this be the truth from thee, rain down Hones upon us from heaven, or in-
flift on us fome ether grievous punifhmenc *. But God was not diftofed to
puhifti them, while thou waft with them j nor was God dtfpofed to punifh them
when they aflted pardon d . But they have nothing to offer in excufe why God
fhould not punifh them, fince they hindred the believers from vi/tting the holy-
temple®, although they are not tne guardians thereof r . The guardians there-
of are thofe only who fear God * but the greater part of them know it not.
And their prayer at the houfe of God is no other than whiftling and clapping
of the hands*. Tafte therefore the punifhment, for that ye have been unbe-
lievers. They who believe not, expend their wealth to obftrutt the way of
God h : they fhall expend if, but afterwards it fhall become matter of fighing
and regret unto them, and at length they fhall be overcome *, and the unbelie-
vers fhall be gathered together into hell ; that God may diftinguifh the wicked
from the good, and may throw the wicked one upon the other, and may
gather them all in a heap, and caft them into hell. Thefe are they who
fhall perifh. Say unto the unbelievers, that if they defift front oppoftng thee ,
what is already paft fhall be forgiven them ; but if they return to attack thee,
the exemplary punilhment of the former oppofers of the prophets is already
paft, and the like fhall be inflicted on them. Therefore fight againft them un-
til

propofed the manner; which was unanimou/ly
appro vecf 1 .

* But God bid a plot againft them Revea-
ling their confpiracy to Mohammed, and mir*-
cnjonfly affixing him to deceive them and make
his f fcape 2 1 and afterwards drawing them to
the battle of Bad**

‘ See thap. 6 . pu toi.

e This was the fpeech of Al Nedar Etn al
Haretb **

4 When tty asked Pardm’] Saying, God fir-
girt si ! Some of the commentators however
iuppofe the perfpo# who asked paflion were cer-
tain believer#, who flayed among the infidels;
and others think the meaning to be, that Gap
would not puniih them, provided tty asked par-
din*

e Since they hindered the believer* film nifiting
the holy temple ;} Obliging them to fly from
Mecca* and not permitting them fe much as to
approach the temple, in the expedition of al
Hdmhipt 4 ‘.

f Although they were not the gitandw* thereof ; J
Becaufe of their idolatry, ana indecent deport-
ment there. For otherwife the Koreijb had a

1 ^/Bsidawi. See the Prelim. Difc. p. 50.

the Prelim. Difc. p. 52. * See chap, a? p. 68. ,

BAWI, 8 IijtlTK

right to the guardian£hip of the Caaba* and it
was continued in their tribe and in the fame fa-
Jpfly even after the taking of Mecca 5 .

Their prayet at ifa biufi pf God if no other
than whiffing and cbppifttg of tin bands.'} It is hid
that they uled to go round the Caaba naked 6 ,
both men and women, whittling at the fame
time through their finger*, md trapping their
bands. Or, as others fay, they made this noife
on purpofe to difturb Mibamme when at his
prayer#, preceding to be at prayers alia them-
iblves 7 .

b Jty who betieve non expend their wealth to
cbftw# the way if Go 9, &£.] The perfons par-
ticularly meant in this pWIage were twelve ot
the Koreijb , who gave each of them ten camels
every day to be killed for pravifiaxw for their ar-
ray in the expedition of Bedr * or, according to
others, the owners of the effefls brought by the
caravafn, who gave great part of i hem to the flip-
port of thefixreours from Mecca. ItieaHaiaid that
Abu Sofidn* in the expedition of Ob id, hired two
thou faiwl Afabs who toft him a eonfiderabje fura,
betides the auxiliaries which he had obtained
gratis 8 .

2 See ibid^ 3 «#Bbidawl 4 See

\ot.U 6 See chap y.p. 119, r Al fist-

144 Al KORAN. Chap. 8.

iil there be no oppofition in favour of idolatry , and the religion be wholly
God’j. If they defift, verily God feeth that which they do: but if they turn
back, know that God is your patron ; be is the beft patron, and the belt
X. helper. * And know that whenever ye gain any fpoils, a fifth part thereof
belongeth unto God, and to the apoftle, and bis kuiared, and the orphans, and
the poor, and the traveller* ; if ye believe in God, and that which we have
fent down unto our fervant on the day of diftindtion b , on the day whereon
the two armies met : and God is almighty. When ye were incamped on the
hithernjoft fide of the valley % and they were incamped on the further fide, and
the caravan was below you A and if ye had mutually appointed to come to a
battle , ye would certainly have declined the appointment* ; but yt were brought
to an engagement without any previous appointment , that God might accomplifh
the thing which was decreed to be done f , that he who perilheth hqrecrfter nay
perifli after demonftrative evidence, and that he who hveth may live by the
fame evidence God both hearetha#^ knoweth. When thy Lord caufed
enemy to appear unto thee in thy fleep, few in number 1 ; and if he had caufed
them to appear numerous unto thee, ye would have been difheartened and
would have difputcd concerning the matter h : but God prderved you from
this i for he knoweth the innermoft parts of the breafts of men. And when he
caufed them to appear untcyou, when ye met, to be few in your eyes 1 ; and
diminilhed your numbers in their eyes* that God might accomplifh the thing

which

* A fifth part of the fpoils belongeth unto God,
and bis apoftle , &c.] According to this law, a fifth
part of the fpoils is appropriated to the particu-
lar ufes here mentioned, and the other four fifths
are to be equally divided among thofe who were
prefent at the aftion : but in what manner or to
whom the firft fifth is to be diftributed, the Mo-
hammedan doctors differ, as we haye elfewhere
obferved 1 , Tho* it be the general opinion that
this verfe was revealed at Bedr , yet there are
fome who fuppofe k was revealed in the expe-
dition agamft the JewiJb tribe of Kainokd , which
.happened a little above a month after 2 .

* The day of diftxuRum ;] i. «. Of the battle of
Bedr ; which is fo called becaufe it diftinguijbed
the true believers from the infidels.

e On the hithermoft ftdei] Which was much
more inconvenient than the other, becaufe of the
deep fand and want of water.

4 And the caravan was below you ;] viz. By
the fea fide, making the beft of their way to
Mecca.

* Ye would have declined the appointment ;] Be-
caufe of the great fuperiority of the enemy, and
the difadvantages ye lay under.

f That God might fulfil the thing that was de-
creed 9 &c] By granting a miraculous ndory to

1 See the Prelim. Difc. $. VI. 2 Al Be id awl

* Al B^idawi, Ja^lalo’ddih, Yahya.

the faithful, and overthrowing their enemies;
for the convi&ion of the latter, and the confir-
mationof the former 3 .

• With which vifion Mohammed acquainted
his companions for their encouragementti

b And would have difputedj] Whether j&fe Jhotold
attack the enemy or fly.

1 And when he caufed them to appear fern in your
eyes ;] It is faid that Ebn Majid asked the man
who was next him, whether he did not fee them
to be about feventy; to which he replycd that he
took them to be an hundred 4 .

* And iiminijbed your numbers in their eyes ;]
This feeming contradklory to a paflage in the
third chapter f , where it is faid that the Mojlems
appeared to the infidels to be twice their own
number, the commentators reconcile the matter,
by telling us that juft before the battle began,
the prophet* s party feemed fewer than they really
were, to draw the enemy to an engagement;
but that fo foon as the armies were fully engaged,
they appeared fuperior, to terrify and Sfmay
their adverfaxies. It is related that Abujabl
at firft thought them fo inconliderable a handful,
that he laid one camel would be as much as
they could all eat

1 Idem . 4 Idem. 1 Pag. 36.

Chap. 8. Al KORAN. 145

which was decreed to be done : and unto God lhall all things return. O true
believers, when ye meet a party of the infidels , ftand firm, and remember
God frequently, that ye may profper : and obey God and his apoftle, and be
not refractory, left ye be difeouraged, and your fuccefs depart from you •, but
perfeverc with patience, for God is with thofe who perfevere. And be not as
thofe who went out of their hoitfes in an infolent manner, and to appear with
oftentation unto men 1 * , and turned afide from the way of God ; for God com-
prehendeth that which they do. And remember when Satan prepared their
works for them b , and faid, No man lhall prevail againft you to day ; and I
will furely be near to ajfift you. But when the two armies appeared in fight
of each other, fee turned back on his heels, and faid. Verily I am clear of
you : I certainly fee that which ye fee not ; I fear God, for God is fevere in
punilhing*. When the hypocrites, and thofe in whofe hearts there was an in-
firmity, faid, Their religion hath deceived thefe men d ; but whofoever con-
fideth in God cannot be deceived s for God is mighty and wife. And if thou
didft behold when the angels caufe the unbelievers to die: they ftrike their
faces and their backs*, and fay unto them., Tafte ye the pain of burning :
this /ball ye fuffer for that which your hands have fent before you f s and be-

U caufe

a Who went cut of their houfei with infolence and not be m defied, and that himfelf would go with
Mentation, &c.l Thefe were the Meecans , who them. But when they came to join battle, and
marching to the affiftance of the caravan, and the devil faw the angels defeending to the aflif-
being come as far as Jebfa, were there met bv a tance of the Moflems, he retired ; and al Haretb
ineffenger from Abu Sofian, to acquaint them that Ebn Hejbam t who had him then by the hand, ask-
he thought himfelf out of danger, and therefore ing him whither he was going, and if he in-
they might return home ; upon which Abu Jabl , tended to betray them at fuch a juncture, he an-
to give the greater opinion of the courage ofhim- fwered, in the words of this paflage, lam cleat
fel f and his comcrades, and of their readinefs to of you, for 1 fee that which ye fee not\ meaning
aflift their friends, fyvore that they would not re- the celeftial fuccours, T^ey »y fuither, that
turn till they had been at Redr, and had there when th* Koreijh * on their return* laid the blame
drank wine, and entertained thofe who fhould be of their overthrow on Sordia, he fwore that he
prefent, and diverted themfelves with fipging- did not fo much as know of their march till he
women 1 . The event of which bravado was heard they were routed : and afterwards, when
very fetal, feveral of the principal Koreijh, and they embraced Mobammedifm , they were fatisfi-
Jbit Jabl in particular, lofing their lives in the cd it was the devil a .

expedition. d Their religion bath deceived thefe men ;] In

* When Satan prefared their works for them 5] tempting them to fo great a piece of folly, as to
By inciting them to oppofe the prophet. attack fo large a body of men with fuch a hand-

c Some under ftand this paflage figuratively, ful.
of the private inftigation of the devil, and of e When the angels caufed the unbelievers to die ,
the defeating of his defigns and the hopes with See.} This paflage is generally underftood of the
which he had infpired the idolaters. But others angels who (lew the infidels at Bedr, and who
take the whole literally, and tell us that when the fought (as the commentators pretend) with iron
Koreijh , on their march, bethought themfelves maces, which (hot forth flames of fire at every
of the enmity between them and the tribe of Ke- ftroke 3 . Some however imagine that the words
ndna t who were mafters of the country about hint, at |caft, at the examination: of the (epulchre,
Bedr, that confideratioft would have prevailed on which the Mohammedans believe every man muft
them to return, had not the deVil appeared in the undergo after death, and will be very terrible to
likenefs of Sordia EbnMalec , a principal perfon of the unbelievers 4 .
that tribe, and promifed them that they (hould f See chap. 2. p 12. not. h.

1 ^/Beidawi. * Idem, Jallalo’ddxn, 3 Idem. 4 See the Prelim Dili. 4

IV. p. 76, See.

1 4.6 Al KORA IV . . C h a p, 8.

caufe God is not unjuft towards his fervants. The/e have afled according to
the wont of the people of Pharaoh, and of thofe before them, who difbeliev-
ed in the figns of God : therefore God took them away in their iniquity ; f or
God is mighty, and fevere in punilhing. This hath come to pafi becaufe God
changeth not his grace, wherewith he hath favoured any people, until they
change that which is in their fouls ; and for that God both heareth and feeth.
According to the wont of the people of Pharaoh, and of thofe before them,
who charged the figns of their Lord with Impofture, have they aEled : where-
fore we deftroyed them in their fins, and we drowned the people of Pharaoh;
for they were all unjuft perfons. Verily the worft cattle in the fight of God
are thofe who are obftinate infidels, and will not believe. As to thole who
enter into a league with thee, and afterwards violate their league at every con-
venient opportunity*, and fear not God j if thou take them in war, dilperfe,
by making them an (xaniple, thofe who {hail come after them, that they may
be warned} or if thou apprehend treachery from any people, throw back their
league unto them, with like treatment ; for Gob loveth not the treacherous.
And think not b that the unbelievers haveefcaped Goo * s vengeance % for they
fhall not weaken ibe power of God-. Therefore prepare again ft them what
force ye are able, and troops of horfe, whereby ye may ftrike a terror into
the enemy of God, and your enemy, and into other infidels befides them,
whom ye know not, but God knoweth them. And whatfoever ye fhall ex-
pend in the defence of the religion of Gqd, it fhall be repaid unto you, and
ye fhall not be treated unjullly. And if they incline unto peace, do thou dfo
incline thereto ; and put thy confidence in God, for it is he who heareth and
knoweth. But if they feek to deceive dice, verily God will be thy fupport.
It is he who hath ftrengthened thee with his help, and with that of the faith-
ful *, and hath united their hearts. If thou hadft expended whatever riches
are in the earth, thou couldeft not have united their hearts d , but God uni-
ted them *, for he is mighty and wife. O prophet, God is thy fupport, and
foch of the true believers who followeth thee *. O prophet, ftir up the faith-
ful to war : if twenty of you perfevere with confiancy , they fhall overcome
two hundred, and if there be one hundred of you, they fhall overcome a
thoufand of thofe who believe not } becaufethey are a people which do not un-
derftand. Now hath God eafed you, for he knew that ye were weak. If
there be an hundred of you who perfevere with confiancy , they fhall overcome
two hundred ; and if there be a thoufand of you, they fhall overcome two

thoufand

* Who enter into a league with thee, and aflqr- among many of the Arab tribes ; and therefore

tonrdi violate their league, &c.] As did the tribe this reconciliation is reckoned by the commenta-
of Koreidba *. J tors as no inconfiderable miracfe, andallrong

6 Think not, &c.J Some copies read it in the proof of their prophet’s million,
third perfon. Lit net the unbelievers think. See. e This palTage, as fome fay, was revealed in

* 'that the unbelievers have ejeaped Goo's ven- a plain called al Beiia, between Mecca and Mc-

geance i]viz. Thofe who made their efcape from dix a, daring the expedition of Bedr ; and, as 0-
Bedr. there, in the fixth year of the the prophet's milfi*

* Thou eouldtfl not have united their hearts ;] on, on the occafion of Omar's, embracing Mebom-
Beoaufe of the inveterate enmity which reigned medijht,

1 See before p. 142. and chap. 33.

Chap. 8. Al KORAN. 147

thoufand *, by the permi/Tion of GOd ; for God is with thofe who perfevere.
It hath not been granted unto any prophet, that he ftiould poflefs captives,
until he had made a great daughter of the infidels in the earth b . Yefeekthe
accidental goods of this world, but God regardeth the life to come ; and God
is mighty and wife. Unlefs a revelation had been previoufly delivered from
God, verily a fevere punilhment had been inflicted on you, for the ranfom which
ye took from the captives at Bed r e . Eat therefore of what ye have acquir-
ed 4 , that which is lawful, and good ; for God is gracious and merciful. O
prophet, fay unto the captives who are in your hands. If God (hall know any
good to be in your hearts, he will give you better than what hath been taken
from you • j and he will forgive you, for God is gracious and merciful. But

U 2 if

“ See Leviti xxvi. 8. Jofh. xxiii. io.

b Until be had made a great (laughter of infidels ,
&c.] Becaufe feventy ought to be ufed where
circumftances require it, tho’ clemency be more
preferable where it may be exercifed with fafety.
While the Mohammedans therefore were weak,
and their religion in its ipfoncy, God's pleafure
was that the oppofcrs of it Ihould be cut off, as
is particularly directed in this chapter. For
which reafon they are here upbraided with their
preferring the lucre of the ranfom to their duty.

c Unlefs a revelation had previoufly keen deliver*
ei f a great funijbment had been infixed on you for
the ranfom which ye took, &c.] That is, had not
the ranfom been, in flri&nefs, lawful for you
to accept, by God’s having in general terms al-
lowed you the fpoil and the captives, ye had been
feverely punilhed.

Among the feventy prifoners which the Mofi
lems took in this battle, were Al Abbas, one of
Mohammed's uncles, and Okail the fon of Abu
Tdleb and brother of Alt : when they were brought
before Mohammed , he asking the advice of his
companions what fhould be done with them,
Abu Beer was for ndeafing them on their paying
ranfom, faying, that they were near relations to
the prophet, and God might poffibly forgive
them on their repentance ; but Omar was for
linking off their heads, as profefled patrons of
infidelity. Mohammed did not approve of the lat-
ter advice, but obferved that Abu Beer refembled
Abraham , who interceded for offenders, and that
O mar was like Noah, who prayed for the utter
extirpation of the; wicked antediluvians ; and
thereupon it was agreed to accept a ranfom from
them and their fellow captives. Soon after
which, Omar t go'mg into the prophet's tent, found
him and Aba Beer weeping, and asking them
the reafon of their tears, Mohammed acquainted
him that this verfe had been revealed, condem-

ning their ill-timed jtenity towtfds their prHoners,
and that they had narrowly efcaped the divine
vengeance for it, adding, that if God had not
palTed the matter over, they had certainly been
deftroyed to a man, excepting only Omar , and
Saad Ebn Moadh , a pcrlon of as great fe verity,
and who was alfo for putting the prifoners to
death 1 . Yet did not this crime go absolutely
unpuniihed neither : for in the battle of Ohod the
Moflems loft feventy men, equal to the number
of prifoners taken at Bedr 2 ; which was fo or-
dered by God, as a retaliation or attonement for
the fame.

d Of what ye have acquired j] i. e. Of the
ranfom which ye have received at your prifoners.
For, it feems, on this rebuke, they had fome
fcruple of eonfcience whether they might con-
vert it to their own ufe or not 3 .

c IfGo* Jball know any good to be in your hearts 9
he will give you better than what bath been taken
firm you;] That is. If ye repent and believe,
God will taiake'’ y^u abundant retribution for the
raJtfom ye hav* now paid. It is faid that this
paflage was revealed on the particular account of
al Abbth, who being obliged by Mohammed, tho*
his uncle, to ranfom both himfelf and his two
nephews, Okail, and Nattfal Ebn al Haretb ,
complained that he Ihould be reduced to beg
alms of the Kore'tfh as long as he lived. Where-
upon Mohammed asked him whsrt was become of
the gold which he delivered to OmmalFadl when
he left Mecct* telling her that he knew not what
might bqfal him in tho expedition, and therefore
if he loft hk life, Ihe might keep it hcrfelf for the
uie of her and hen children ? Al Abbas de-
manded who told him this j to which Mohammed
replied, that God had revealed it to him. And
upon this al Abbas immediately profefled IJhmijm,
declaring that none could know of that affair ex
v 1 cepi-

1 Jdem.

2 See chap* 3.^. 52.

3 Al BktDAwa .

14S KORAN* Chap, g,

if they feek to deceive thee *, verily they have deceived God before ; where-
fore he hath given thee power over them : and God is knowing and wife.
Moreover they who have believed, and have fled their country, ana employed
their fubftance and their perfons in fighting for the religion of God, and they
who have given the prophet a refuge among them , and have affifted him, thefe fkall
be deemed the one neareft of kin to the other b . But they who have believed, but
have not fled their country, lhall have no right of kindred at all with you,
until they alfo fly. Yet if they afk affiftanceof you on account of religion*
it belongeth unto you to give them affiftance; except againft a people between
whom and yourfelves there J hall be a league fubftfting : and God feeth that
which ye do. And as to the infidels, let them be deemed of kin the one to the
other. Unlefs ye do this, there will be a fedition in the earth, and griev-
ous corruption. But as for them who have believed, and left their country, and
have fought for God’s true religion, and who have allowed the prophet a
retreat among them, and have affifted him , thefe are reajly believers ; they lhall
receive mercy, and an honourable provifion. And they who have believed
fince, and have fled their country, and have fought with you, thefe alfo are
of you. And thofe who are related by confanguinity Jhall be deemed the
neareft of kin to each other, preferably to ft rangers, according to the book of
God i God knoweth all things.

cept God, becaufe he gave her the money * They Jbeil bt deemed tbe neareft of kin to tub
at midnight. Some year* after, el Abbas re- liber j] And {hall confequently inherit one ano-
Hefting on this paflage, confefled it to be fulfil- ther’a fubftance, preferably to their relation* by
ed ; for he was then not only poflfeffed of a large blood. And this, they fay, was praftifed for
fubftance, but had the cuftody of the well Zem- fome time, the Mobdjerun and Anf&rt being judg-
zrm, which, he faid, he preferred to all the rich- ed heirs to one another, exclnlive of the deceaf-
es of Mecca r . ed’* other kindred, till this paflage wasabroga-

* To deceive thee;] By not paying the ranfom ted by the following } 3fto/etabo are related, bj bind
agreed on. JbaJi be itemed the neareft of kin to each other .

1 Idem. V. D’Heubex.. Bibl. Orient. Art. Abbot.

CHAP. IX.

Intitled, The Declaration of immunity a 5 revealed at

Medina.

A Declaration of immunity from God and his apoftle, unto the idolaters

with

a The reafon why the chapter had this tide timej wherefore fome have called it the chap-
appears from the firft verfe. Some, however, ter of Punijbment : others Iky that Mohammed
give it other titles, and particularly that ofRepeie (who died foon after he had received this chap-
tance, which is mentioned immediately after, ter) having given no direftion where itfhould
It is obfervable that this chapter alone has not be placed, nor for the prefixing the Bifmillab to
the anfpicatory form, In the name of tbe moft mer- it, as had been done to the other chapters j and
etful God, prefixed to it; the reafon of which the argument of this chapter bearing a near re-
omiffion, as fome think, was, becaufe thefe femblance to that of the preceding, his compa-
ny , imply a conceffion of fecurity, which is nions differed about it ; fome faying thatbothehap-
utteily taken away by this chapter, after a fixed ters were but one, and together made the fcventh *

Chap. 9. Al KORAN . 149

with whom ye have entred into league \ Go to and fro in the earth
fecurely four months k ; and know that ye fhall not weaken God, and that
God will difgrace the unbelievers. And a declaration from God and his a-
poftle unto the people, on the day of the greater pilgrimage % that God is
clear of the idolaters, and his apoftle alfi. Wherefore if ye repent, this will be
better for you % but if ye turn back, know that ye fhall not weaken God : and
denounce unto thofe who believe not, a painful punifhment. Except fuch of
the idolaters with whom ye fhall have entred into a league, and who after-
wards fhall not fail you in any inftance, nor a flirt: any other againrt you 4 .
Wherefore perform the covenant which ye Jball have made with them, until
their time Jhall be elapfed ; for God loveth thofe who fear him. And when the
months wherein ye are not allowed to attack them fhall be paft, kill the idola-
ters wherefocver ye fhall find them % and take them pr fitters, and befiege

them,

of the feven long ones, and others that they expire on the tenth of the former Ralti \
were two diftinft chapters ; whereupon to ac* c On tbs day of the greater pilgrimage ;] viz
commodate the difpute, they left a fpace between The tenth ot Dbu'lbana, when they flay the
them, but did not interpofe the diftin&ion of vidims at Mina i which day is their great feaft,
the Bifmillab 1 . and completes the ceremonies of the pilgrimage.

It is agreed that this chapter was the laft which Some fuppofe the adje£Uye greater is added here
was revealed ; and the only one, as Mohammed todiftinguifli the pilgrimage made at the appoint-
declared, which was revealed entire and at once, ed time, from lefer pilgrimages , as they may be
except the hundred and tenth. called, or vifitations ot the Caaba , which may

Some will have the two laft verfes to have be performed at any time of the year ; or elfc
been revealed at Mecca. becaufe the concourfe at the pilgrimage this year

a A declaration of immunity frm God and was greater than ordinary, both Mojlems and Ido-
bis apoftle, &c.] Some underftand this fentence of laters being prefent at it.

th« immunity or fecurih therein granted to the The promulgation of this chapter was com-
infidels, for the lpa?e of four months} but others mitted by Mohammed to Alt , who rode for that
think that the words properly fignify, that Mob am- purpofc on the prophet’s flit-cared camel from Me -
md is here declared by Go», to be absolutely free dina to Mecca, and, on the day abovementioned,
and dif charg'd from all truce or league with them, Handing, up before the whole aflcmbly at al
after the expiration of that time a : and this laft Ababa, told them, that he was the meflenger
feems to be the trueft interpretation. of the apoftle of God unto them; whereupon

Mohammed's thus renouncing all league with they aikmg him what was his errand, he read
thofe who would not receive him as the apoftle twenty or thirty verfes of the chapter to thfsmy
of Goo, -or fubruit to become tributary, was and then faid, l am commanded to acquaint you with
the coniequeoce of the great power to which f ur tbihgs , 1 . That no idolater is to come near the
he was now arrived* But the pretext he made temple of Mecca afier this year ; 2. That no man
ufe of, was the treachery he had met with among prefume to compafs the Caaba naked for the future 1 »
the Jeruiib and idolatrous Arabs j fcarce any keep- 3 . That none but true believers ball enter pfitadifn
big faith with him, except Banu Damra , Banu and , 4. That public faith is to be kept 6 .

Kendna , and a few others J . d Except fuch of the idolaters mho Jball not

b Goto end ffein the earth fecurely four month s\\ fnj you, &c>] So that aotwithftanding Mobam -
Thefe months were Shacudl, Dbu'fkaada, t>bu'l~ med renounces all league with thofe who had de-
hajiat and Mobarrm i ths chapter being revealed ceived him, he declares himielf ready to perform
i x^kbawdl. Yet others compute them from the his engagements to fuch as had been true to him,
tenth of Dbu'lbajja , when the chapter was pub- * Wherever ye find them, ) Either within ov
liftied at Mecca , and confequently make them without the facred territory.

1 Idem , Jallalo’ddin, Yahya, WV- * Al Beidawi. 3 Idem. f Idem , At

Zamaksh. Jallalo’ddin. 'See before, ebap+p. 119. 6 ^Beidawi. V. Abulfer.

vit. Mob. p. 127 , £sV.

i^o Al K 0 RA N. Chap.^,

thera, and lay wait for them in every convenient place. But if they lhall re-
pent, and obferve the appointed times of prayer, and pay the legal alms, dif.
mifs them freely ; for God is gracious and merciful. And if any of the ido-
laters fhall demand protection of thee, grant him protection, that he may
hear the word of God* and afterwards let him reach the place of his fecurity*.
This /bait thou do, becaufe they are people which know not the excellency of the
religion thou preacheft. How lhall the idolaters be admitted into a league with
God and with his apoftle; except thofe with whom ye entred into a league at
the holy temple b ? So long as they behave with fidelity towards you, do ye
alfo behave with fidelity towards them ; for God loveth thofe who fear him.
How can they be admitted into a league with you , fince, if they prevail againft
you, they will not regard in you either confanguinity or faith ? They will
pleafe you with their mouths, but their hearts will be averfe from you ; for
the greater part of them are wicked doers. They fell the figns of God for
a fmall price, and obftruCt his way ; it is certainly evil which they do. They
regard not in a believer either confanguinity or faith ; and thefe are the tranf-
grelfors. Yet if they repent, and obferve the appointed times of prayer, and
give alms, they j hall be deemed your brethren in religion. We diftinCtly pro-
pound our figns unto people who underftand. But if they violate their oaths,
after their league, and revile your religion, oppofe the leaders of infidelity, (for
there is no truft in them,) that they may defift from their treachery. Will ye
not fight againft people who have violated their oaths, and confpired to expel tne
apoftle of God *, and who of their own accord aflaulted^you thefirft time*? Will
ye fear them ? But it is more juft that ye Ihould fear God, if ye are true be-
lievers. Attack them therefore ; God lhall punifli them by your hands, and
will cover them with lhame, and will give you the viCfory over them ; and
he will heal the breafts of the people who believe d , and will take awaj the
indignation of their hearts : for God will be turned unto whom he pleafeth;
and God is knowing and wife. Didye imagine that ye fhould be abandoned,
whereas God did not yet know thole among you who fought for his religion,
and took not any befides God, and his apoftle, and the faithful for their friends?
God is well acquainted with that which ye do. It is not fitting that the idola-
ters fhould vifit the temples of God, being witnefies againft their own fouls
wof their infidelity. The works of thefe men are vain •, and they lhall remain

in

1 And afterwards let him reach ibe placet/ bis
fecurity ,*] That is, you fhall give him a fafe con-
du 6 k, that he may return home again fecurdy,
m cafe he fhall nat think fit to embrace Msiam-
rHediftn.

b Except thofe with whom ye entred into a league,
,&c.] Thefe are the perfozts before excepted.

c Will ye not fight againft people who have vio-
lated their oaths , &c.] As did the Koreifb in affifb-
ing the tribe of Beer againft thofe of Khozdah r *
and laying a defign to ruin Mohammed, without
any juftjJmvocadon ; and as feveral of the Jevtifb

tribes did, by aiding the enemy, and endeavouring
to oblige the prophet to leave Medina , as he had
been obliged to leave Mecca *.

d And he will heal the breafts of the people who
believe, kc.] vi*. Thofe of Khozadh j or, aso-
thers %, certain families of Taman and Saba, who
went to Mecca , and there profefTed Mohammedifm,
but were very injurioufly treated by the inhabi-
tants ; whereupon they complained to Mohammed ,
who bid them take comfort, for that joy was ap-
proaching 1 * 3 .

See the Prelim . Bifc, f. 54.

* Al Budawi.

3 Idem.

Chap. 9. Al K 0 R A N. 151

in hell fire for ever. Bathe only (ball vifit the tdmples of God, who believeth
in God and the laft day, and is conftant at prayer, and payeth the legal alms,
and feareth God alone. Thefe perhaps may become of the number of thofe
who are rightly dire&ed a . Do ye reckon the giving drink to the pilgrims, and
the vifiting of the holy temple to be actions as meritorious as thofe performed by
him who believeth in God and the laft day, and fighteth for the religion of
God b ? They (hall not be held equal with God : for God direftech not the
unrighteous people. They who have believed, and fled their country, and
employed their fubftance and tReir perfons in the defence of God’s true reli-
gion, fhall be in the higheft degree of honour with God ; and thefe are they
who ftlall be happy. Their Lord fendeth them good tidings of mercy from
him, and good will, and of gardens wherein they fhall enjoy lading pleafure;
they fhall continue therein for ever : for with God is a great reward. O true
believers, take not your fathers or your brethren for friends, if they love in-
fidelity above faith ; and whofoever among you fhall take them for bis friends,
they will be unjuft doers. Say, If your fathers, and your fons, and your bre-
thren, artd your wives, and your relations, and your fubftance which ye have
acquired, and your merchandize which ye apprehend may not be fold off, and

S our dwellings wherein ye delight, be more dear unto you than God, and
iis apoftle, and the advancement of his religion ; wait, until God (hall lend
his command 0 : for God direfteth not the ungodly people Now hath God
afiifted you in many engagements, and particularly *X the battle of Honein^
when ye pleafed your felves in your multicu4e y but it was no manner of advan-
tage

a Thefe perhaps may beeme of the number of
thofe who are rightly directed**} Thefe Wow
are to warn the believer* from having too great
a confidence in their own merits, and like wife
to deter the unbelievers ; for if the faithful will
but perhaps be laved, whit can the others hope
fbt^

b Do ye reckon the gibing drink to the pilgrims >
&C.*] This paflhge was TCvealed on occafion of
fome Words of at Abba$> Mohammed's uncle ;
who, when he was taken pi’ifoner, being bitter-
ly! reproached by the Mfietns 9 atul particularly
by his nephew Ait, ahfwered, You rip up our iU
actions , but tdke no notice tf our good ones ; we
Vifit the temple of Mecca, and adotn the Caaba
with hangings and gibe drink to the pilgrim* (tif
Zemzem water, I fhppofe,) and fret captives *.

c Till God Jbatb feAd bis command 1} Or fhall
punifh you. Some fuppofe the taking of Mecca
to be here intended 1 * 3 .

d The battle of Hottcin.] This battle was
fought in the eighth year of the Hejrn, in the
valley of Uonein , which lies about three miles
from Mecca towards Tdyef between Mohammed

Who had an army of twelve thoufand men, and
the ttibfcs of Hawdten attd Thakif whofe forces
did not exceed four thoufand 5 . The Moham-
medans (being theihfelVes fo greatly fuperior to
their enemies, mtade fure of the victory’? a cer-
tain perftrtij whom forne fupp^ft tii have been
the prophet HimfelfJ cdylng out, Thefe can never
be overcome by fo few. But God was fo highly
difpleifed with this confidence, that in the firft
encounter the Mofitms were put to flight 4 , fome
of them running away <juite to Mecca, fo that
none flood their ground except Mohammed
himfrlf, and fome few of hie family ; and they
fay the prophet’s courage was fo great, that hU
uncle dl Abbas y and his coufin Abu Sofia n Ebn
al Harethy had much ado to prevent his fpurring
his mule into the midfl of the enemy, by laying
hold of the bridle and ftirrup. Then he ordered
al Abbdsy who had the voice of a Stent of, to
recal his flying troops ; upon which they rallied,
and the prophet throwing a handful of dull
again# the enemy, they attacked them a fecond
time, and by the divine aififtance gained the
Viflbry*. ^

1 Idem. % Idem . 3 Idem. 4 See? life of Mob. p. 96. &c. Hotting. Hi/}.

Orient, p. 271. fcf/. D’Herbbl. BibL Orient . p. 601.. 1 Al Beidawi, JallaVq’dd*'.,

Abulfbda* vit% Mob. p . nay

152 Al KORAN. Chap. 9,

tage unto you, and the earth became too ftrait for you \ notwithftanding it
was fpacious ; then did ye retreat and turn your back*. Afterwards God
fent down his fecurity b upon his apoftle and upon the faithful, and lent down
troops of angels * which ye faw not and he punifhed thofe who dilbelieved :
and this was the reward of the unbelievers. Neverthelefs God will hereafter
be turned unto whom he pleafeth 4 i for God is gracious and merciful. Otrue
believers, verily the idolaters are unclean * let them not therefore come near
unto the holy temple after this year *. And if ye fear want, by the cutting off
trade and communication with t hem, God will Enrich you of his abundance f ,
if he pleafeth ; for God is knowing and wife. Fight againft them who believe
not in God, nor in the laft day », and forbid not that which God and his
apoftle have forbidden, and profefs not the true religion, of thofe unto whom
the fcriptures have been delivered, until they pay tribute by right of fab-
je&ion *, and they be reduced low. The Jews fay, Ezra is the fon

8 And the earth became too ftrait for you j]
For the valley being very deep, and encompafTed
by craggy mountains, the enemy placed them-
felves in ambufh on every fide, attacking them
in the llraits and narrow paflages^md fromhehind
the rocks, with great advantage l .

b His fecurity J The original word is S akin at ,
which the commentators interpret in this fenfe ;
but it Teems rather to fignify the divine prtfenre
or Sbecbinab , appearing to aid the Mflems
c Troops of angels ;] As to the number of thefe
celeftial auxiliaries, the commentators diffefr:
Tome fay they were five thoufand ; Tome, eight
thoufand ; and others, fix teen thoufand
d Neverthelefs God will hereafter turn unto
whom be pleafes\\ Befides a great number of
profelytes, who were gained by this battle. Mo-
bammed^ on their requeft, was fo generous as
to reftore the captives (which were no lefs than
fix thoufand) to their friends, and offered to
make amends himfelf to any of his men who
fhould not be willing to part with his priioners ;
but they all confcnted to it * .

c After this year ;] Which was the ninth
year of the Hejra . In confequence of this pro-
hibition, neither Jews, nor Cbrijlians, nor thofe
of any other religion, are fuffered to come near
Mecca to this day.

f God will enrich you of bis abundance ;]
This promife, lays al Bciddwi, was fulfilled by
God’s fending plenty of ram, and difpofing the
inhabitants of Tebala and JoraJb , two towns in
Taman, to embrace IJldm, who thereupon
brought fufEcient proVifiops to Mohammed's
men ; fcnd alfo by rhe fubfequent coming in of
the Arabs , from all quarters, to him.

8 Who believe not in God, nor in the laft

Of

day j] That is> who have not a juft and true
faith in thefe matters ; but either believe a plu-
rality of gods, or deny the eternity of hell tor-
ments or the delights of paradife as deferibed
in the Korin* For, as it appear® by the follow-
ing words, the Jews and Cbriftiam^ are the per-
fons here chiefly meant.

h By right of fuljeBion ;] This I think the
true meaning of the words an jad&i which lite-
rally fignify by or out of hand , and are variouily
interpreted ; fome fuppofing they mean that the
tribute is to be paid readily , or by their own hands
and not by another ; or that tribute is to be er-
ased of the rich onfy> or thofe who are able to
pay it, and not of the poor ; or elfe that it is to
be taken as a favour that the Mohammedans are
fatisfied with fo fmall an impofirion* &c 6 .

That the Jews and Cbriftians arc, according to
this law, to be admitted to protection, on pay-
ment of tribute, there is no doubt ; tho* the
Mohammedan doctors differ as to thofe of other
religions. It is faid tha‘ Omar at firft refilled to
accept tribute from a Magian, till Abd'alrabmdn
EbnAwf a Hared him that Mohammed himfelf had
granted protection to a Marian, tod ordered that
the profeffors of that religion Arnold be included
among the people <f the book , or thofe who
found their religion on fame book which they
foppofc to be of divine original. And it k the
more received opinion that thefe three religions
only ought to be tolerated on the condition of
paying tribute : others, however, admit the 8 a-
bians alfo. Aba Han if a fuppofed people of any
religion might he fuffered, except the idolatrous
Arabs ; and Make excepted only apoftafes from
Mohatnmedifm .

The

* Bbn Ishak. 2 See chap, 2, p. 29. not. 4 * * ^/Bbidaw*. a Ikm* 4 Set

akap. z. p . 11 . and chap. 3. p . 37. * Y. ^/Beibawj.

Chap. 9. Al KOREAN. 153

of God 1 : and the Chriftians fay, Christ is the fon of God- This is their
faying in their mouths : they imitate the faying of thofe who were unbelievers
in former times. May God refift them. How are they infatuated ? They
take their prieftsand their monks for their lords, befides God*, and Christ
the fon of Mary ; although they are commanded to worfhip one God only :
there is no' God but he far be that from him, which they afifociate with
him / Thiy feek to extmguifh the light of God with their mouths-, but God
\yilleth no other than to perfcuft his light, although the infidels be a-
verfe thereto. It is he who hath fent his apoffle with the diredUon, and
true religion : that he may caufe it to appear fuperior to every other re-
ligion 5 although the idolaters be averfe thereto . O true believers, veri-

ly many of the priefts and monks devour the fubftance of men in vanity
and obftruft the way of God. But unto thofe who nreafure up gold and
fiiver, and employ it not for the advancement of God’s true religion, de-
nounce a grievous punifibiiifcnt. On the day of ftdgkt'M their treafures fhall

X be

The leaft ^bute that can be taken from every met, by divine revelation* was the opinion of
fuch perfon, agreed to btf a dinqx, federal of the Ckrj/lianfnhers, who are quoted

or about ten llujlyjg;^ 3 yepr ; nor can he be by Djr. Rrideaux * , and of fome other writers 6 ;
dbtfged to, pay 'more, unlds he coiifent to* it: Which they feem to have firfl: borrowed from a
aijd thfc, they fey,-eu|$t to be liid as well on in that very; a ncierit apdcfcyphal hook,

l^e poor as on the rich r . But Abu Hanifa de- called (in our Englijb Bible) the fecond book of Ef-
cided that the rich Ihouldpay forty eight dirhems dras 7 . Dr. Prtdeaux 8 tells us, that herein the
{twenty, and fometimes twfeqty five, of which fathers attributed more to Ezra, than the Jews
made a dinar) a year; one in J middling qircuni- thejnfelves, who fuppofe that he only colle&ed
fiances Half that lum ; and a poor ipp, who and fet forth a cocreft edition of the feriptures,
was able to get his lining, a quarter of it: bur which he laboured inuch ip, and went a great
that he who was not able to fupport himfclffhould way in the perfecting of it. It is not improba-
pay nothing *. ble, However* that the fidtion came originally

a The Jews fay, z Ezra U the fon of God;} from the Jew** tho’ they be now of another
This grievous charge againlt the Jem the com- q?feion, and I cannot fix it upon them by any
xocntators endeavour to fupport by telling ns, that diredt proof: For, not to infife on the tellimohy
h is meant of fome ancient heterodox Jews, or of. the Mohammedans, (which yet I cannot but
elfe of fome Jews of Medline* who faid fo for think of fome little weight in a point of this
no other reafon, than for that the law being ut- nature,) ‘it is allowed by the moil lagacious cri-
terly loft and forgotten cfrxripg the Babylpmjh tics, that the fecond book of Ezra was written
captivity, Ezra, having been raifed to'life after by a QhrWan Indeed 9 , but yet one who had
He had been dead one hundred years, 3 , didlated been bred a Jew, and was intimately acquainted
the whole anew to the feribes, out of his own with the fables of the Rabbins 10 ; and the ftory
memory ; at which they greatly marvelled, and it felf is perfedtly in the tafie and way of think-
declared that he could not have done it, unlefs iag of thofe men.
he were the fon of God 4 . Al Beidawi ^dds, b See chap. 3, p. 44. not. e.
that the impOtatlop muft be true* becaufc this e Hbjt priefts and monks devour the fubftance of
verfe was read to thk Jews, and they did not men vainly ;] By taking of bribes, fays al Bei -
contradifl it; which they were ready enough to daws $ meaning, probably, the money they
do in other infiances. 1 took for difpenfing with the commandaof God,

That Ezra did thus reilore not only the Pen- and by way of commutation.
tateucb , but alfo the other books of the Old Heft a-

1 F. Re land, de jure vsiliiari Mohammedanor. p. ij,(A 50. 2 Al Beidawi. 3 See

ebap^z.p.zi. 4 Al Beidawi, Zamakhsharj, &e. 1 Conn eft. part 1. L 5. p. 329.

6 Athanasius' junior, it Synopft $. Script. H 2. p- 86. Leontius Byzantin. de ftftij, p . 428.

7 Chap. xiv. 30, (Ac* 8 Loco dtat. 9 See 2 Efdras ii. 43^—47. and vii. 28, (Ac. 10 V. Dod-

welli Differ t. Cyprian . Differ U 4. 2 . Whiston’j EJfay on the Apoftolical Conftit . p . 34, 76, and

304, (Ac . (A Fab rich Codic. Apocryph . Novi Heft . part. 2 . p . 936, fi fc .

154 'AS KORAN. Chap. 9,

be intenfely heated in the fire of hell, and their foreheads* and their ITdes;
and their backs (hall be ftigmatized therewith ; and thtir tormentors jhtdl fay.
This is what ye have treafured up for your fouls; tafte therefore that which
ye have treafured up. Moreover, the complete number of months with God,
is twelve months % which were ordained in the book of God b , on the day
whereon he created the heavens and the earth 2 of tfaefe, four are (acred .
This is the right religion r therefore deal not unjoftly with yoiffi felvet there-
in. But attack the idolaters in all the months, as they attack you in all d ; an d
know that God is with thofe who fear him Verily the transferring of a fa~
cred month to another month, is an additional infidelity *. The unbelievers are
led into an error thereby : they allow a month to be violated one year-, and
declare it facred another yean that they may agree in the number of months
which God hath commanded to be kept facred ; and tb$y allow that which
God hath forbidden. The evil of their, actions hath been prepared for them ;
for God direfteth not the unbelieving pebble. O true believers^. what ailed
you, that, when it was faid unto you. Go forth to fight for the religion of
God, ye inclined heavily towards the earth 8 ? Do ye prefer the prefent life
to that which is to come ? But the provifion of this life, in refpeSt of that which
is to come, is but (lender. Unleft. ye gp forth Inhttt ye are fimmoned to war
God will punifli you with a grievous punifhffient ; and : he will place another
people in your dead h , and ye fhall not hurt him at all > For God is almighty.

If

a The number of months with God is twelve
months ;J According to this paflage, the inter-
calation of a month every third of fecood year,
which the Arabs had learned of the Jem, in
order to reduce their lunar years to Itukr years,
is ablbfntel^ unlawful. Ftfr by this means they
fixed the time of the pilgririiage and of the faft
of Ramad&n to certain feafons of the year; which
ought to be ambulatory r .
b Itl the boob ofG on vte/The pretefv)?dtable.
c See the Prelim. Difcourfe, §, VIII.
d Attach the idolaters in all the months , as they
attach you in alii ] For it is not reafonable that
you Ihould obferve the facred mouthy with re-
gard to thofe who do not acknowledge them to
be facred, but mate war againfl/ou therein *.

e Verily the transferring of a /acted niopth to
another month ts an additional infidelity
was an invention or innovation of the idolatrous
Arabs , whereby they avoided keeping a facred
taojith, when if fuited not their convenldncy.
by keeping a prophanempnth in its Head ; tranl-
ferring, for example, the obfervance of Mobar-
ram to the fucceedirig month Safari The firft
man who put this in ^prafticc, they lay, was
Jonada Ebn Azof of the tribe of Kenana i .

Thefe ordinances relating to the months were
promulgated by Mohammed himfelf at the pil,
grlmage.of vatidihioil \

ihey allow a month to be violated, one war* and
detldfe ft /hired another year ;] A$ did Josioda.
who made public* proclamation at the affembly
of pilgrirh s, that their ’gods had allowed, itoh
harram to fie prophahe, whereupon (hey obferv-
ed it not ; but the next year he told them, that
the gods hid ordered it to he kept, facred ' .

8 yp>tnit was /aid mto you. Gjt firth /,:■
fir the religion o/ XS ob, je inclined heavily i-~
wards the earth, viz. In the cjtpecliliQD ,of
tfabuci a town fituate about half way between
Medina afcd pamafcpjj wh^ch J Shammed under,
took ajgainft the 'Greeks, with an army, of thirty
thoufand men, in the ninth ye*r of the Hejre.
On this eSped^tion the Mdhnv fgp out with
great unwillingnhfs, fiecaufe it stas undertaken
in the midlt of the fumcaer heats, and at a time
of great drought and fhrcUy i, whereby the
ioldlers fufibred lo much, that this, awny was
called the difi^ejfed army ; their fruits

were ripe, and they, bad much rather have
{laid to have gathered them 6 .

h See chap. 5. p, 90.

' S^PR'O. fife ofMab . f>. 6 $, {*. and the Prelim. Dtfe. f IV. andVU. * Seethe, z p. 22.
A Be ! D , A f W ,'’ J ALLA1,0 M>«*. r. Poc. Sjec. f. 3 2.3. and the Prelim Difc. $, Vli ‘ + A-

MvL P - >3 2 - 1 dl Bejdawi. 6 , Idem, Ja^alo-dd™, V. Abulfed. mt

BU

Mob. p

123,

Chap. 9* Al K 0 R A N. 155

If ye affift not the prophet, verily God will affijl him, as he a (lifted him for-
merly, when the unbelievers drove him out of Mecca, the fecond of two*-
when they were both in the cave; when he faid unto hk companion,' Be
not grieved, for God is with us b . And God fent down his fecurity c upon
him, and ftrengchened him with armies angels , whom ye faw not . And

he made the word of thofe who believed not, to be ahafed, and the word of
God was exalted ; for God is mighty and wile. Go forth to battle, both light*
and heavy*, and employ your fubftance and your pet loos for the advancement
of God’s religion. Thi§ will be better fbr you if ye know it. If it had
been a near advantage, and a moderate journey, they hid furely followed
thee f j but the way Teemed tedious unto them : and yet they will fwear by
Goty-Jhyirig, If we had been able, we had forely gone forth with you. They
deftroy their own fouls 5 for God knoweth that they are liars. God forgive
thee ! why didft thou give them leave to flay at home*, until they who
fpeak the truth, when they exenfe tbmfelves , had become manifefted unto thee,
and thou hadft known the liars ? They who believe in God and the laft day, will
not alk leave of thee, to be excufed from employing their fubftance and their
perfons for the advancement of God’s true religion } and God knoweth thofe
who fear him. Verify they only will alk leave of thee to flay behind, who be-
lieve not in God and the laft day, and whole lieatts doubt concerning the
faith : wherefore they are tolled to and fro in their doubting. If they had
been willing to go forth with thedi they had certainly prepared for that pur~
pofe a provifio'n of arms and necejfaries : but God was averfe to their going
forth -, wherefore he rendred them flpthful} and it was faid unto them. Sit ye
ftill with thofe who fit ftill **. If they had gone forth with you, they had
only been a burthen unto you, and had run to and fro between youy ftirring
you up to fedition and there would have 'been feme among you, who would
have given ear unto them : and God knoweth the wicked. They formerly
fbught to raife a fedition and they difturbed thy affairs, until the truth
came, and the decree of God was made manifeft j although they were averfe
thereto. There is of them who faith unto ibeel Give me leave to flay behind,

X 2 and

* The femi of two ;] That is, having only
Abu Beer with him*

b See fhe Prelim. Difc. $. II. p* 5*.
c See before* p. 152.001. b.
d And he Strengthened him with armies of angels,
&c.] Who, as fome imagine, guarded him ini
the cave. Or the words may relate to the fuc*
cours from heaven which Mohammed pretended
to have received in federal incounters { as at
Bed?, the war of the ditch, and the battle of
Honein.

e Both light and heavy ;] i. e. Whether the ex-
pedition be agreeable or not; or whether ye
have fufficient arms and provifilo|i 9 or not ; or
whether ye be on horfeback qr on foot, fefr.
f If it bad been a near advantage and a mode-

rate journey K &c.] That is, had there been no
difficulties to furmount in (the expedition of Ta-
bSc * and the march thither had been ftiort and
cafy„ fo that the plunder might have cofl them
little or no trouble, they would not have been
fo backward.

* Why didft thou give them leave io firm at home ,
&cj For Mohammed excufed feveral of his men,
on their requeft, from going on this expeditipn ;
as Abddllab Ebn Obba , and his hypocritical ad-
herents, and alfo three of the efnfdrsi for which
he is here reprehended.

h With thofe mho fit ftill ;] i. e. With the
women and children, and other impotent people.

1 They formerly fought to raife a /edition, &c]
As they did at the battle of Oiw/V

1 $e&*bap. 3. p. 50, £$rV*

156 Al KORAN 1 Chap, g,

and expofa me not to temptation *. Have tihley not fallen into temptation at

home b ? But hell will furely encompafs the unbelievers. If good happen un-
to thee, it grieveth them : but if a misfortune befal thee, they fay. We or-
dered our bufinefs before c ; and they turn their backs, and rejoice at tby
mjhap. Say, Nothing (hall befal us, but what God hath decreed for us :
he is our patron ; and on God let the faithful truft. Say, Do ye expedt any
other Jbould befal us, than one of the two moft excellent things ; either vifto/y
or martyrdom ? But we expedt concerning you, that Gop inflift a punifliment
on you, either from himfelf, or by our hands' 1 . Wait therefore to fee what
will be the end of both \ for we will wait with you. Say, Expend your money
in pious ufes, either voluntarily, or by conftraint, it fha.ll not be accepted of
you •, becaufe ye are wicked people. And nothing hindreth their contribu-
tions from being accepted of them, but that they believe not in Goo and
his apoftle, and perform not the duty of prayer, otherwife than fluggifhly j
and expend not their money for God , s fervice, otherwife than unwillingly. Let
not therefore their riches, or their children caufe thee to marvel. Verily God
intendeth only to punifh them by thefe things in this world j and that their
fouls may depart while they are unbelievers. They fwear by God that they
are of you e yet' they are not of you, but are people who Band in fear f . If
they find a place of refuge, or caves, or a retreating hole, they furely turn
towards the fame, and in a headllrong manner hafte thereto. There is cf them
alfo who fpreadeth ill reports of thee, in relation to tby dijlrtbutiott of the alms:
yet if they receive part thereof, they are well pleafed ; but if they receive
not a part thereof, behold, they are angry*. But if they had been plealed
with that which God and his apoftle had given them, and had faid, God is
our fupport *, God will give unto us of his abundance and his prophet alfo ;
verily unto God do we make our fupplications : it would have been mre de-
cent. Alms are to be difiribuied * only unto the poor, and the needy *, and

thole

» Expoft me not to temptation jJ By obliging
me to go, againft my will, on an expedition, the
hardfhips of which may tempt me to rebel or to
defert. It is related that one Jadd Ebn Kais
laid that the Anf&rs well knew he was much
gifren to women, and he dar*d not truft htmfelf
with the Greek girjs ? whefrefore he defired he
might be left behind,* and he would affift them
with his pUrfe *.

b Have they not fallen into temptation at home P]
Difcovertng their hypocrify by their backward-
nefs to go to war for the promotion of the true
jjdlgioir.

c We ordered our biifnefi before ;] That is, we
took care to keep out of harms way by Maying
at home.

d Either from himfelf or by our bands 5} z. e.
Either by fome fignal judgment from heaven*
•r by remitting their punifh men t to the true be-
liever*.

e Thaithey are tf you ;] viz. SatwchMfems,
f Who ftand in feari] Hy politically conceal-
ing their infidelity, left ye ihould cfeafitfc them,
as ye have done the profeffed infidels and apof-
tatesj and yet ready to avow their infidelity,
when they think they may do it with fafety.

g There 1) alfo of them toho fpreadab ill reports of
thee in relation to the difiributiott of the alms , &c.\
This perfon was Abitl fowddh the hypocrite,
who faid Mobamrhed gave them away among the
keepers of flieep only ; or, as others fuppofe,
Ebn DbP/kbotoaifara , who found fault with the
prophet’s diftribution of the fpoiis taken at H<r
nim 9 becaufe he gave them all among the Mec-
eons, to reconcile and gain them over to his re-
ligion and intereft *.

11 See whatrte &id as to this point in the Pre-
lim. Difc. §. IV.

1 The poor and the needy The commenta-
tors make a diftin&ion between thefe two words

in

\

3 Idem • F ; AzUivi viu Mob . p. 1 18 , 119 -

1 JlBllVAYTi.

Chap. 9. Al KORAN* 157

thofe who are employed in collefting and diftribitting the fame, and unto thofe
whofe hearts are reconciled % and for the redemption of captives, and unto
thofe who are in debt and infolvent , and for the advancement of God’s
religion, and unto the traveller. This is an ordinance from God : and God
is knowing and wife. There are fome of them who injure the prophet, and
fay. He is an ear b : Anfwer, He is an ear of good unto you c ; he believeth in
God, and giveth credit to the faithful, and is a mercy unto fuch of you who
believe. But they who injure the apoftle of God, (hall fuffer a painful punifh-
ment. They fwear unto you by God, that they may pleafe you ; but it is
more juft that they fhould pleafe God and his apoftle, if they are true be-
lievers. Do they not know that he who oppofeth God and his apoftle, fhall
without doubt be punifhed with the fire of hell; and fhall retfiain therein for
ever ? This will be great ignominy. The hypocrites are apprehenfive left a
Sura d fhould be revealed concerning them, to declare unto them that which
is in their hearts. Say unto them , Scoff ye ; but God will furely bring to light
that ‘which ye fear fhould be difcovered . And if thou afk them the reafon of
this fcoffing , they fay. Verily we were only engaged in difcourfe, and jefting
among ourfelves \ Say, Do ye feoff at God and his figns, and at his apoftle ?
offer not an excufe : now are ye become infidels, after your faith. If wc
forgive a part of you, we will punifh a part, for that they have been wick-
ed doers. Hypocritical men and women are the one of them of the other r
they command that which is evil, and forbid that which is juft, and fhut their
hands from riving alms . They have forgotten God ; wherefore he hath forgotten
them : verily the hypocrites are thofe who ad wickedly. God denounceth un-
to the hypocrites, both men and women, and to the unoelievers, the fire of hell;,
they fhall remain therein for ever : this will be their fufficient reward ; God hath
curfed them, and they fhall endure a Lifting torment. As they who have*
been before you* fo are ye . They were fuperior to you in ftrength, and had
more abundance of wealth and of children ; and they enjoyed their portion

in

in the origin*!, fatir and matin; one they fay,
fignifies hint who is utterly deftitate both of mo-
ney and means of livelihood; the other,one who
is in want indeed, but is able to get fomething
towards his own fupport. But to which of the
two words either of thefe different fignifications
properly belongs, the critics differ.

a Whofe hearts arp reconciled ; J That is, who
Were lately enemies to the faithful, but have
now embraced Mebammedifm, and entred into
amity with them. For Mohammed , ,to ; gain their
hearts and confirm them in his religion, made
large presents to the chief of the Koreijh our of
the fpoils at Honein , as has been juft now men-
tioned 1 . But this Jaw they fay, became of no
obligation when the Mohammedan faith was efta-
blifhed, and flood not in need of fuch methods
for its fupport.

b He is an ear ;] L e. He hears every thing

1 AbvIiFED. ibid.

that we fay ; and gives credit to all the ftoriea
that are carried to him.

c He is an ear of good unto you ;] Giving cre-
dit to nothing that may do you hurt.

d A Surad] So the Mohammedans call a chapter
of the Koran a .

e They fay, We were only engaged in dtjeettrfe,&c.]
It is related that in the expedition Af Tabiic, a
company of hypocrites, palling near Mohammed ,
faid to one another, Behold that man ; he would
take the ftfong holds of Syria : away t away 7
which bektg told the prophet, he called them
to him, and asked them why they had faid fo ?
whereto they replied with an oath, that they
were not talking of what related to him or his
companions, but were only diverting tbem-
felves with indifferent difcourfe, to beguile the
tedioufnefs of the way

2 See the Prelim . Difi, J. III. f. 57. 3 Al Beidaw

158 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 9.

in this world ; and ye alfo enjoy your portion here, as they who have pre-
ceded you, enjoyed their portion. And ye engage your felves in vain difcourfes,
like unto thofe wherein they engaged themfelves. The works of thefe are
vain both in this world, and in that which is to come ; and thefe are they who
periflv Have they not been acquainted with the hiftory of thofe who have
been before them? of the people of Noah, and of Ad, and of Thamvd
and of the people of Abraham, and of the inhabitants of Madian, and of
the cities which were overthrown * ? Their qpoftles came unto them with evi-
dent demonftrations : and God was not difpofed to treat them unjuftly ; but
they dealt unjuftly with their own fouls. Ajid the faithful men, ahd the faith-
ful women are friends one to another: they command that which is juft, an( j
they forbid that which is evil ; and they are conftant at prayer, and pay their
appointed alms *, and they obey God, and his apoftle : unto thefe will God
be merciful ; for he is mighty and wife. God promifeth unto the true be-
lievers, both men and women, gardens through .which rivers flow, wherein
they fhall remain for ever ; and delicious dwellings in gardens of per-
petual abode . b : but good will from God Jhalt. be their raoft excellent reward.
This will be great felicity. O prophet, wage war againft the unbelievers and
the hypocrites, and be feverc unto them : for their dwelling fhall be hell •,
an unhappy journey fiatl it be thither l They fwear by God that they faid
not what they are charged with : yet they fpake the word of infidelity, and
became unbelievers, after they had embraced Islam c . And they defigned
that which they could not etfe£t d ; and they did not difapprove the dejignfor
any other reafon, than becaufe God and his apoftle had inriched them* of his
bounty *. If they repent, it will be better for them j but if they relapfe,

God

* the cities which were overthrown}] Namely,
Sodom and Gomorrah , and the other cities which
lhared their fate, and are thence called al Mota-
kijtt , or the fubvertei *.

6 Gardens of perpetual abode ;] Literally, gar-
dens of Eden ; but the commentators do not
take the word Eden in the fenfe which it hears
in Hebrew ; as has been elfe where obferved
c they fwear by God that they faid not what
they are charged with, See ] It is relaxed, that al
Jallas Ebn Soweid, hearing fome paflages of
this chapter, which lharply reprehend thofe
who refufed to go on the abovementioned ex-
pedition of Tabuc, declared, that if what Mo-
hammed faid of his brethren was true, they
were worfe than aflea* Which coming to the
prophet’s ear, he fent for him ; and he denied
the words upon oath. But on the immediate
revelation of this paflage, he confeffed his
fault, and his repentance was accepted K

* they defigned what they could not effeB, &c.]
The commentators tells us, that fifteen men
confpired to kill Mohammed in his return from

Tabue, by pulhing him from his camel into a
precipice, as he rode by night over the higheft
part of al Ahaba. Bur when they were going to
execute their defign, Hodbeifa, who followed and
drove^ the prophet’s camel, which was led by
Ammdr Ebn TXfer, hearing the tread of camels
and the dafbing of arms, gave the alarm, upon
which they fled. Some however fuppofe the
defign here meant was a plot to expel Moham-
med from Medina + .

e Becaufe God and his apofil& had inricbei
them ;J For Mohammed's refiding at Medina was
of great advantage to the place, the inhabitants
being generally poor, and in want of moll con-
veniencies of life ; but on the prophtfft coming
among tneor, they became poflefled of large
herds of- cattle, and money alfo. AtBeidatoi
fiyv that the above named al Jallas, in parti-
cular, having a fervant killed, received, by Mo-
hammed* order, no lefs thin ten thoufand dir -
hems, or about three hundred pounds^ as a fine
for the redemption of his blood*

1 See chap. u.

* See the Prelim. Difc . f. 97.

3 JlBztmvfi. 4 idem.

Chap. 9. Al K 0 RA N. 159

God will punifli them with a grievous tqrment, in this world and in the
next \ and they fhall have no patron on earth, nor any pyoteftor. There
are fome of them who made a covenant with God, faying , Verily if he give
us of his abundance, we will give alms, and become righteous people*. Yet
when he had given unto them of his abundance, they became covetous there-
of, and turned baci*, and retired afar off. Wherefore he hath caufed hypocri-
fy to fucceed in their hearts, until the day whereon they fhall meet him t
for that the£ failed to perform unto God that which they had promiled him, and
for that they prevaricated. Do they not know that God krtoweth whatever
they conceal, and their private difeourfes-, and that God is the knower of fecrecs?
They who traduce fuch of the believers as are liberal in giving alms beyond
what they are obliged, and thofe who find nothing to give, but what they gain
ly their induftry b > and therefore feoff at them : God mall feoff at them, and
they (hall fuffer a grievous punifhment. Aik forgivenefs for them, or do not
alk forgivenefs for them 5 it will be equal. If thou afk forgivenefc for them feven ty
times, God will by no means forgive them 0 . This is the divine pleafure, for that
they believe not in God, and his apoftle \ and God dire&eth not the ungodly
people. They who were left at home in the expedition of Tawc^ were glad of

their

1 There are feme of them who made a covenant loads of dates 5 and Abu Okail a $aa 3 which is
with Gon, &c. 1 An inftance of this is given no more than a lifctfech part of a load, of the
in Tbdlaba Ebn Hateb, who came to Mobatomed, fame ffule, but was the haK of what he had
and defired him to beg of Goo, that he would earned by a night’s hard wofrk. This Mo*
bellow riches on him. The prophet at firft bammed accepted': whereupon the hypocrite!
advifed him rather to be thankful lor the little faid that Abie? brahmin and Afem g^ve what they
he had, than to covet more, which might be- did out of oftcntation r and that Goo and his
come a temptation to him ; but on Thalabfo re- apoftle* might well have excufed Abu OhalPn
peated reqpeftand fojemn pjowife that he would mite; Which oecafioncd thin paffege.'
ttlfcea good ufedfhis riches, he was at length I fuppofe this colle&ion was made to defray
wevailed on, and preferred the petition to the charge of the expedition of Tabuci towards
God. Thaldba in a fhort time grew vaftly rich, wjuch, as another writer tells us, Abu Beer con-
Which Mobammtd being acquainted with, fent tribnted all thkt he had, and Othmdn very large*
two fcolletfors CO 'gather the alms ; other people }y, as it is faid, three hundred camels for
fcadhy park* thefrtj bu< when they came to Ton- flanghtdf, and a thoufaiid dinars of gold *_
laba, and read the inj un&idh to him out of the c Askfofi$vtlfefs f<jt them , &cVjf lo the lift
iford#, he told them that it was not alnts^ bat ffcknfcft of Abddltab Ebn Obba the hypocrite
tribute* or next kin* to tribute; and bid them go (who died in the ninth year of the tujra) his
back till he had better confldered of it*. Upon fon, narhed alfb Abda'lldb, came and a$ked* JJfs-
whifch this paflkge was revealed ; and when hmtoed to beg pa'rtiofc of God for him ; which
Tkaiaba came afterwards and 1 brbug&t hie alms, he did, and r tn£retfpb'f\ the former part of this
Mohammed told him that God had' commanded verfe was revealed. But the prqphet, not taking
him not to aeecpf Si, and threw duft upon his that for a repulfe, (aid he would prat frventy times
htod, &yrhp> ''fbit is tvbat tbou baft deferpyh fdr him ; upon Which the latter part of the verfe
He then offered His aims to Aba Bfcr, wha ? r£- was revealfed, declaring it would be abfolutely
fbfed to accept them; as tMOninr fdme years in vain. It miy be otffervcd that the numbers
aftet, when he was KBafif 1 . fiven x [events, and [even hundred, are he.

b Who traduce filth tf the beHtvtti as are iibe j quently ufed by‘ the eifterp writers to iignjfy,
rah &c.] Al Beidamt relates, that tyohammed not fo many precifefy, but onfy an indefinite
escorting his followers to votontajfy alms, among number, either greater or lefler 3 ; feveral ex
others, AbdaTrahm&n Ebn Atof gave four thou- amples of which are to be met with in the (crip*
fand dirhems , which was one half of what h6 ture 4 .
had ; Afem Ebu Adda gave an hundred beaft’s

1 Idem . a Abulfed. vih Mob. f. 123* 3 Al Beidawj, + Mattb.xv in. 2a.

160 Al KORAN. Chap. 9,

their (laying behind the apoftle of God, and were unwilling to employ their
fubftance and their perfons for the advancement of God’s true religion ; and
they faid. Go not forth in the heat*. Say, The fire of hell will be hotter ; if they
underftood this. Wherefore let them laugh little, and weep much, as a re-
ward for that which they have done. If God bring thee back unto fome of
them b , and they a(k thee leave to go forth to war with thee ,' fay, Y e (hall
not go forth with me for the future, neither (hall ye fight an enemy with me ;
ye were pleafed with fitting at home the firft time fit ye at home therefore
with thofe who flay behind. Neither do thou ever pray oyer any of them
who (hall die*, neither (land at his grave d ; for that they believed not in God
and his apoftle, and die in their wickednefs. Let not their riches or their
children caufe thee to marvel : for God intendeth only to punilfi them there-
with in this world; and that their fouls may depart, while they are infidels.
When a Sura* is fent down, wherein it is faid. Believe in Gqd, and go forth
to war with his apoftle ; thofe who are in plentiful circumftances among them
a(k leave of thee to ft ay behind, and fay. Suffer us to be of the number of
thofe who fit at home. They are well pleafed to be with thofe who day be-
hind, and their hearts are fealed up ; wherefore they do not underftanch But
the apoftle, and thofe who have believed with him, expofe their fortunes
and their lives for God’s fervife ; they (hall enjov the good things of either
life , and they (hall be happy. God Hath prepared for them gardens through
which rivers flow ; they (hall remain therein for ever. This will be great fe-
licity. And certain Arabs of the defert came to excufe themfelveS f , praying
that they might be permitted to ft ay behind ; and they fat at home who had re-
nounced God and his apoftle. But a painful punifliment (hall be inflifted on
fuch of them as believe not. In thofe who are weak, or are afflided with
ficknefi, or in thofe who find not wherewith to contribute to the war 1 , it (hall

be

3 Go not forth in the heat ;] This they fpoke
in a fcofBng manner to one another; beeaufe,
as has been obfervcd, the expedition of TabAc
was undertaken in a very hot and dry feafon.

b If God bring thee back unto forqe of them*
&c.] That is, if thou return in fafety to Medi-
na to the hypocrites ; who are here called fme
of them who (laid behind, beeaufe they were
not all hypocrires. The whole number is faid
to have been twelve *.

c Neither do thou ever fray over any of them
toho Jball die.] This piflage was alfo revealed
on account of Abda'llab Ebn Qbba . In his lafl
illnefs he defxred to fee Mohammed % and when
he was come, asked him to beg forgivenefs of
God for him, and requelled that his corps
might be wrapped up in the garment that was
next his body, (which might have the fame ef-
ficacy with the habit of a Trancifcofc^iA that he
would pray over him when dead. Accordingly
when he was dead, the prophet fent his ihirt, or

inner vdlment, to Ihroud the corps, and was
going to pray over it, but was forbidden by
thefe words. Some fay they were not revealed
till he had a£hially prayed for him a .

d Neither ft and at bis grave ;] fit her by af-
fixing at his funeral, or vifiting his fepulchre.
c See before, p. 157. not. <L
f Certain Arabs of the defart tame to extuft
themfeb&s, &cj Thefe were the tribes of Jfad
and Ghatfdn % wRo taccufod themfelves on ac-
count of the necelfities of their families, which
their induftry only maintained. But fome write
they were the family of Amer Ebn al Tofail, who
laid that if they went with the army, the tribe
of Tay would take advantage; of their abfence,
and fall upon their wives and children, and their
cattle 3 .

E Who find not wherewith to contribute}] By
reafon of their extream poverty ; as thofe of
heina, Mozeina , and Banu Odhra

1 Al Beibawi.

1 Idem.

* Idem .

'Idem.

Chap. 9. Al KORAN. 161

be no crime if they ft ay at home ; provided they behave themfelves faithfully
towards God and his apoftle. There is no room to lay blame on the righteous
for God is gracious and merciful : nor on thofe, unto whpm, when they came
unto thee, requefting that thou wouldeft fupply them with neceflaries for tra
veiling, thou didft anfwer, I find not wherewith to fupply you, returned,
their eyes fhedding tears for grief, that they found not wherewith to contribute
to the expedition \ But there is reafon to blame thole who alk leave of thee
to fit at home , when they are rich. They are pleafed to be with thofe who
ftay behind, and God hath fealed up their hearts ; wherefore they do not un-
demand. *They will excufe themfelves unto you, when ye are returned XI
unto them. Say, Excufe not your felves ; we will by no means believe you :
God hath acquainted us with your behaviour j and God will obferve your
actions, and his apoftle alfo : and hereafter lhall ye be brought before him
who knoweth that which is hidden, and that which is manifeft •, and he will
declare unto you that which ye have done. They will fwear unto you by
God, when ye are returned unto them, that ye may let them alone \ Let
them alone therefore, for they are an abomination, and their dwelling Jhall be
hell, a reward for that which they have deferved. They will fwear unto you,
that ye may be well plealed with them j but if ye be well pleafed with them,
verily God will not be well plealed with people who prevaricate. The
Arabs of the defart are more obftinate in their unbelief and hypocrify ; and
it is eafier for them to be ignorant of the ordinances of that which God hath
fent down unto his apoftle c : and God is knowing and wife. Of the Arabs of the
defart there is who reckoneth that which he expendeth for the feruice of Goo, to
be as tribute * \ and waiteth that fome change of fortune * may befal you. A
change for evil Jhall happen unto them j for God both heareth and knpweth.
And of the Arabs of the defart there is who believeth in God, and in the
laft day ; and efteemeth that which he layeth out for the feruice of God to be
the means of bringing him near unto God, and the prayers of the apoftle. Is
it not unto them the means of a near approach ? God lhall lead them into his
mercy ; for God is gracious and merciful f . As far the leaders and the firft

Y of

a Who requefted thee to fupply them with necef- knowledge, and the few opportunities they have
furies for travelling, &c.] The.pcrfons here in- of being inftrufted *.

tended were feven men of the Anfirs, who came d As tribute i] Or a contribution exafied by
to Mohammed and begged he would give them force, the payment of which he can in no wife
fome patched boots and foled ffioes, it being hn- avoid.

pofhble for them to march fo far barefoot, in fuch * And waiteth that fome change of fortune may
a feafon, but he told them he could not fupply befal you ;] Hoping that fome reverie may afford
them 5 whereupon they went away weeping, a convenient opportunity of throwing off the
Some however fay thefe were the Bam Matron, burden.

and Others, Abu Mufa and his companions ’. f The Arabs meant in the former of thefe two

6 That ye may let them alone,] And not chaf- paffages, are faid to have been the tribes of Afad,
tife them. Ghatfan, and Bans Tamim ; and thofe intended

c The Arabs of the defart are more nbjlinate , &c.l in the latter, Abdallah, furnamed DM'lbajadin,
Becaufe of their wild way of life, the hardnels and his people J .
of their hearts, their not frequenting people of

1 Idem.

1 Idem. See the Prelim. Difc. p. 25, and 30.

s Al Beidawi

1 62 Al KORA IV. Chap, g,

of the Mohajerin, and the Ansars 1 , and thofe who have followed them i n
well doing ; Goo is well pleafed with them, and they are well pleafcd in him :
and he hath prepared for them gardens watered by rivers •, they fhall remain
therein for ever. This fhall be great felicity. And of the Arabs of the de-
fart who dwell round about you, there are hypocritical perions b : and of the in-
habitants of Medina there are fame .who are obftinate in hypocrify. Thou
knoweft them not, O prophet , but we know them: we will furely punifh
them twice c i afterwards fhall they be fent to a grievous torment. And o-
thers have acknowledged their crimes d . They have mixed a good aftion with
another which is bad *: peradventure Goo will be turned unto them •, for
God is gracious and merciful. Take alms of their fubftance, that thou mayeft
cleanfe them, and purify them thereby f > and pray for them : for thy pray,
ers fhall be a fequrity of mind unto them j and God both heareth and knoweth.
Do they not know that God acceptcth repentance from his fervants, and ac-
cepteth alms ; and that God is eafy to be reconciled, and merciful ? Say unto
them , Work as ye will •, but God will behold your work, and his apoftle alfo,
and the true believers : and ye fhall be brought before him who knoweth that
which is kept fecret, and that which is made public ; and he will declare un-
to you whatever ye have done. And there are others who wait with fufpenfe
the decree of God ; whether he will punifh them, or whether he will be
turned unto them 8 : but Goo is knowing wife. There are fome who have
built a temple to hurt the faithful, and to propagate infidelity, and to foment

divifion

* The leaders and the firfi of the Mohajerin and
the Anfars ;] The Mobdjertn, or refugees , were
thofe of Mecca, who fled thence on account
of theii' religion ; and the Anfars , or helpers ,
were thofe of Medinas who received Mohammed
and his followers into their protoflion, and afEfted
them againft their enemies. By the leaders of
the Mohajerin are meant thofe who believed on
Mohammed before the Hejra, or early enough to
pray towards Jerufalem , from which the Kebla
was changed to the temple of Mecca in the fe-
cond year of the Hejra, or elfe fuch of them as
were pfefent at the battle of Bedr . The lead-
ers of the Anfars were thofe who rook the oath
of fidelity to him at al Jkaba y either the firft
or the fecond time 7 .

b Of the Arabs of the defart who dwell round
about you , & c.J be. In the neighbourhood of
Medina . Thefe were the tribes of Jobeina* Mo-
xeina , AJtam, ^fi>jd, and Gbifdt * .

c We will flunifi them twice ;] Either by ex-
pofing them to public fhame, and putting them
to death ; or by either of thofe punifbments and
the torment of the fepulchrc ; or elfe by exalt-
ing alms of them by way of fine, and giving
them corporal punilhmcnt 3 .

d Others have acknowledged their crimes ;]
Making no hypocritical excufes for them. Thefe

were certain men, who having flaid at borne
Mead of accompanying Mohammed to TMc, as
foon as they heard the fevere reprehenfij^i and
threats of this chapter againft thofe who jitibid
behind, bound themfelves to the pillart of the
mofijoe, and fwore that they would notloofe
themfelves, till they were looted by the prophet.
But when he eotred the molque to pray, and
was informed of the matter, he alfo fwore that
he would not loofe them without a particular
command from God ; whereupon this paflage
was revealed, and they were accordingly dif-
miffed *

e They have mixed a good a# ion with a bad ;]
Tho* they were backward in going to war, and
held with the hypocrites, yet they coafefled
their crime and repented.

f Take alms of their fubftance , &c.] When thefe
perfons were loofed, they prayed Mohammed to
take their fubflance, for the fake of which they
had Ibid at home, as alms, to cleanfe them from
their tranfgreflion ; but he told them he had no
orders to accept any thing from them: upon
which this verie was fent down, allowing him
to take their alms 5 .

g There art others who wait , &c.] The per*
Tons here intended were the three Anfars whole
pardon is granted a little below.

7 Al Beidawi.

1 Idem.

3 Idem.

4 Idem.

3 Idem.

Chap. 9. Al KORAN. 163

divifion among the true believers % and for a lurking place for him who hath
fought againft God and his apoftle in rime paft k ; and they fwear, faying ,
Verily we intended no other than to do for the beft : but God is withefs

that they do certainly lye. Stand not up to pray therein forever. There is
a temple founded on piety % from the firft day of its budding. It is more juft
that thou ftand up to pray therein : therein are men who love to be purified 4 j
for God loveth the clean. Whether therefore is he better, who hath found-
ed his building on the fear of God and his good will ; or he who hath
founded his building on the brink of a bank of ;arth which is wafhed away by
waters, fo that it falleth with him into the fire of hell? God diredteth
not the ungodly people. Their building which they have built will not ceafe
to be an occafton of doubting in their hearts, until their hearts be cut in pieces*;

Y 2 and

* There are fame who have built a temple to hurt
the faithful , &c.J When Banu Amru Ebn Awf
had built the temple or mofque of Kobd , which
will be mentioned by and by, they asked Mo-
hammed to come and pray in it, and he complied
with their requeft. This exciting the envy of
their brethren, Banu Ganem Ebn Awf they alfo
built a mofque, intending that the Imam or pfieft
who fhould officiate there, fhould be Abu Amer
a Qbriftian monk j hut he dying in Syria, they
came to Mohammed and defired he would confe-
crate, as it were, their mofque by praying in it.
The prophet accordingly prepared himfelf to go
with them, but was forbidden by the immediate
Tevelation of this paflage, difeovering their hy-
pocrify and ill defign : whereupon he fent Make
Ebn al Dokbjbom, Maan Ebn Addi , Amer Ebn
al Sac an, and al iVdbfba the Ethiopian to demo-
lifh and burn it ; which they performed and
made it a dunghil. According to another account
this mofque was built a little before the expe-
dition of Tab&c t with a defign to hinder Mo-
hammed's men from ingaging therein ; and
when he was asked to pray there, he anfwered
that he was jufl: fetting out on a journey, but
that when he came back, with God’s leave, he
would do what they defired ; but when they
applied to him again, on his return, this paflage
was revealed l * ,

b For a lurking place for him who bath fught
againft God and his apoftle in time paft That
is Abu Amer the monk, who was a declared ene-
my to Mohammed, , having threatened him at
Obod, that no party ihould appear in the field
againft him, but he would make one of them ;
and, to be as good as his word, he continued to
oppofe him till the battle of Honeiu at which
he was prefent, and being put to flight with
thofe of Hawazen, he retreated into Syria , de-
figning to obtain a fupply of troops from the

Grecian emperor to renew the war ; but he died
at KintfifAn- Others fay that this monk was a
confederate at the war of the ditch, and that he
fled thence into Syria a .

c There is a temple founded on piety , &c.] viz.
That of Kobi» a place about two miles from
Medina , where Mohammed refted four days be-
fore he entred that city, in his flight from Mec-
ea , and where he laid the foundation of a
mofque 3 , which was afterwards built by Banu
Amru Ebn Awf. But according to a different tra-
dition, the mofque here meant, was that which
Mohammed built at Medina .

d Therein are men who deftre to be purified ;]
Al Beidawi fays, that Mohammed walking once
with the Mohajetln to Kobd, found the Anjars
fitting at the mofque door, apd asked them
whether they were believers ; and, on their be-
ing filent, repeated the queftion : whereupon
Omar anfwered, that they were believers ; and
Mohammed demanding wnether they acquipfced
in the judgment Omar had made of them, they
faid, yes. He then asked them whether they
would be patient in adverfity, and thankful in
profperity ; to which they anfweripg in the affir-
mative, he Iwore by the Loan of the Caaba,
that they were true believers. Afterwards he
examined them as to their manner of performing
the legal wafhings, and particularly, what they
did after eafing themfelvcs ; they told him that
in fuch a cafe they ufed three ftones, and after
that wafhed with water : upon which he repeat-
ed thefe words of the Koran to them.

e Until their hearts be cut in pieces j] Some
interpret thefe words of their being deprived of
their judgment and underlhnding ; and others
of the punifhment they are to expeft, either of
death in this world, or of the rack of the fe-
pulchre, or the pains of hell.

1 Idem . Jablalo’ddih. 1 It Jem. 3 lidem* Ebw Shohnah. V. Abulfed, vit. Mob.

p. 5 2. Where the tranftator taking this pajfage of the Koran, which is there cited , for the worda

of bis author , has miffed the true Jenfe.

164 K 0 R A N* Chap. q,

and God is knowing and wife. Verily Goo hath purchafed of the true be-
lievers their fouls, and their fubftance, promifing them the enjoyment of para-
dife ; on condition that they fight for the cauie of God : whether they flay 0 r
be (lain, the promife for the fame is affuredly due by the law, and the gofpel
and the Koran. And who performeth his contradt more faithfully chan
God? Rejoice therefore in the contra# which ye have made* This fhal]
be great happinefs. The penitent, and thofe who ferve Go />, and prai k him
and who faft, and bow down, and worfliip ; and who command that which is
juft, and forbid that which is evil, and keep the ordinances of God, fhall
likewife be rewarded with paradife: wherefore bear good tidings unto the
faithful. It is not allowed unto the prophet, nor thofe who are true believers, that
they pray for idolaters 1 , although they be of kin, after it is becon® known
unto them, that they are inhabitants of hell b . Neither did Abraham afk
forgivenefs for his father, otherwife than in purfuance of a promife which
he had prom ifed unto him c : but when it became known unto him, that he
was an enemy unto God, he declared himfelf clear of him*. Verily Abra-
ham was pitiful and compafflonate. Nor is God difpofed to lead people into
error e , after that he hathdiredted them, until that which they ought to avoid
is become known unto them \ for God knoweth all things. Verily unto God
belongetb the kingdom of heaven and of earth ; he giveth life, and he caufech
to die 5 and ye have no patron or helper befides God. God is reconciled un-
to the prophet, and unto the Mohajerin, and the Ansars*, who followed
him in the hour of diftrefs *, after that it had wanted little but that the hearts

of

was a promife made to Abraham by his father,
that he would believe in God. For th§ words
may be taken either way.

When he knew that he teas an oimy f God,
be declared himfelf clear of him*] DtMh to
pray for him, when he was a Fared by infpintion
that he was not to be converted ; or after he
aflually died an infidel. See chap, 6. p. t 0 6.

e To lead people into error ;] i. e. To confider
or punifh them as tranfgreffon. This pafiage
was revealed to excufe thofe who had prayed for
fuch of their friends as had died idolaters, be-
fore it was forbidden i or elie to excufe certain
people who had ignorantly prayed, towards the
firft Kebla , and drank wine, (Ac .

f God is reconciled unto the prophet, , &c.l
Having forgiven the crime they committed, in
giving the hypocrites leave to be abfeotfrom
the expedition to Tabic ; or for the other fins
which they might, thro* inadvertence, have been
guilty of. For the beft men have need of re
pentance a .

1 In the hour if diftrefs ;} viz. In ^the expedi-
tion of Tabuc ; wherein Mohammed's men were
driven to fueh extremities, that (befides what
they endured by rcaibn of the exceflive heat)

1 Al Beidawi.

a It is not allowed the prophet— to pray for idola-
ters , &c.] This pafTage was revealed, as fome
think, on account of Abu Taleb, Mohammed's
uncle and great benefactor 5 who on his death-
bed, being prefled by his nephew to (peak a
word which might enable him to plead his caufe
before God, that is, to profefe IJlam , abfolutdy
refufed. Mohammed however told him that
he would not ceafe to pray for him, till he
fhould be forbidden by God 5 which he was by
thefe words. Others fuppofe the occafion to
have been Mohammed s vi firing his mother Ame-
nds fepulchre at al Abwd % foon after the taking
of Mecca ; for they fay that while he flood at
the tomb he burft into tears, and faid, I asked
leave of God to pifit my mother's tomb, and he
granted it me ; but when I asked leave to pray for
her, it was denied me *.

b After it is become known unto them , that they
qre inhabitants of bell By their dying infidels.
For otherwife it is not only lawful, but com-
mendable, to pray for unbelievers, while there
arc hopes of their converfioo.

c In furfuance f a promife which he had pro-
mi fed him ;j via;. To pray that God would dif-
pofe ijis heart to repentance. Some fuppole this

* Idem.

Chap. 9. Al K'O Rtf N. 165

6f a part of them had fwcrved from their faty ; afterwards was he turned
unto them } for he was compaiEopate and merciful towards them. And he
is alfo reconciled unto the three who were left behind *, fo that the earth be-
came too ftrait for them, notwithstanding its fpacioufnefs, and their fouls be-
came Straitened within them, and they considered that there was no refuge
from God, otherwife than by having recourfe unto him. Then was he turn-
ed unto them, that they might repent ; for God is eafy to be reconciled and
merciful. O true believers, fear God, and be with the Sincere. There was
no rea/on why the inhabitants of Medina, and the Arabs of the defart who
dwell around them, Should Stay behind the apoftle of God, or Should prefer
themfelves before him b . This is unreafonable : becaufe they are not diftrefTed
either by third, or labour, or hunger, for the defence of God’s true religion ;
neither do they Stir a Sjtep, which may irritate the unbelievers ; neither do
they receive from the enemy any damage, but a good work is written down
unto them for the fame ; for God fufftreth not the reward of the righteous
to perifh. And they contribute not any fum either fmall or great, nor do they
pafs a valley, but it is written down unto them, that God may reward them
with a recompense exceeding that which they have wrought. The believers
are not obliged to go forth to war all together : if a part of every band of
them go not forth, it is that they may diligently indraft themfelves in their
religion' *» and may admonish their people, when they return unto them, that
they may take heed to themfelves. O true believers, wage war againft fuch

ten men were obliged to ride by turns on one
camel, and provifions and water were fo fcarce,
that two men divided a date between them. and
they were obliged to drink the water out of the
camels ftomacks x .

a The three who were left behind;] Or, as it
may be tran Hated, who were left injhfpenfe , whe-
ther they fliould be pardoned or not a . Thefe
were three Anfttrs , named Caab Ebn Malec ,
Heidi Ebn Omeyy a and pfierdfa Ebn Ratn x who
went not with Mohammed to 'fabHc* and were
therefore, on his return, fecluded from the fel-
lowHiip of the other Mpftfys ; th^ prophet for-
bidding any to falute them, "or to hol'd difcourle
with them. Under which interdiction they
continued fifty days, till* on their fincere re-
pentance, they were at length discharged from
it, by the revelation of this paflage ft.

b Or Jbbuli prefer themfelves befbre him ;} By
not coring to fhare with hitn tbe'dangerc and fa-
tigue* of war. Al Bedddwi tells us, that after
Mohammed had fet out for Tab&c, one Abu Khai -
tbama fitting in his garden, where his wife, a
very beautiful woman, had fpread a mat for him
in the fiude, and had fet new dates and freffi

water before him, after a little reflexion, cryed
out. This is not well \ that I jboutd thus take my
eafe and pleafure y while the apoftle tf God is ex-
pired to the fc arching of the fun-beams , and the
inclemencies if the air \ and immediately mounting
his carnal, took his fword and lance, and went to
Join the arn^y,

c Tfta pari of every hand of them go not forth *
&c.] That is, if fome of every tribe or town be
left behind, the Snd of theiif b*pk; fo left is, that
they may apply'- themfelves to ffudy, and attain
a more exaCt knowledge of the feveral points of
their religion, fo as to be. able to inflruft fuch as
by reafoft of their continual efnplcwment in the
wars, have no other means of information.
They fay, that after the preceding paflkges were
revealed, reprehending thole who had ftaid at
home during th$ expedition of Tab&c , eveiy man
went to war; fo that Ihe ftudy of fefigion, which
is rather more acceflaiy for the defence jand pro-
pagation of the fslithi than even arms themfelves,
became wholly laid afide and neglefted ; to pre-
vent which, tor the future, a convenient number
are hereby dhefted to be left behind, that they
may have leifure to prolcfcute their ftudiee.

1 Al B kid aw 1. 2 See before , /. t6z. not, g.
Mob. p. 133, 126.

3 Jall aid’Ddk , Aftut r Fit

166 Al KORAN. Chap. io.

of the infidels as are near you * ; and let them find feverity b in you : and
know that God is with thofe who fear him. Whenever a Sura is fent down
there are fome of them who fay. Which of you hath this caufed to increafe
in faith ? It will increafe the faith of thofe who believe, and they fhall re-
joice : but unto thofe in whofe hearts there is an infirmity, it will add far-
ther doubt unto their prefent doubt 5 and they fliall die in their infidelity.
Do they not fee that they are tried every year once or twice e ? yet they re-
pent not, neither are they warned. And whenever a Sura is fent down, they
look at one another, faying , Doth any one fee you 4 ? then do they turn
afide. God fhall turn afide their hearts frm the truth ; becaufe they are a peo-
ple who do not underftand. Now hath an apoftle come unto you of our own
nation % an excellent perfon : k is grievous unto him that ye commit wick
ednefs ; he is careful over you, and compaflionate and merciful towards the
believers. If they turn back, fay, God is my fupport: there is no God
but he. On him do I truft ; and he is the Lord of the magnificent throne.

* Such of the infidels as are near yon ;] Either forth to war, and bjr being made witneffes of
of your kindred or neighbours ; for thefe claim God’s miraculous proteflion of the faithful,
your pity and care in the foil place, andfhdr d They loot at one another, &c.] They wink, at
converiion ought firft to be endeavoured. The one another to rife and leave the prophet’s pre-
perfons particularly meant in this paJI^ge, are fences if they think they can do it without being
fuppofed to have been the Jews of the tribes of obferved ; to avoid hearing the fevefe and defov-
Koreiiha and Nadbir , and thofe of Kbaibar ; or ed reproofs which drey apprehend in every new
clfe the Greeks of Syria 1 . revelation. The perfons intended are the hypo.

b Severity ;] Or fiercenefs in war. critical Moflems.

c They are tried every year once or twice i] i. e. ' See chap. j. p. 55. not. b.

JBy various kinds of trials ; or by being called

* Al Beidawi.

CHAP. X.

Inti tied) Jonas*; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

A L. R. b Thefe are the figns of the wife book. Is it a ftrange thing unto
the men of Mecc^s, that we have revealed our will unto a man from
among them c , faying. , Denounce threats unto men if they believe not ; and
bear good tidings unto thofe who believe, that on the merit of their finceri-
ty they have an intereft with their Lord? The unbelievers fay. This is ma-

nifeft

* This prophet is mentioned towards the end the moft powerful among them neither; fo that
.of the chapter. _ the Koreijb Cud it was a wonder God could find

b See the Prelim. Difo. §. III. p. 59, 60. out no other meilenger than the oiphan pupil of
e A man frm among them ;] And not one of Abu Taleb '.

/

1 Idem .

Chap. io. Al KORAN. i6y

nifeft forcery *. Verily your Loro is God, who hath created the heavens
and the earth in fix days •> and then afeended bis throne, to take on himfelf
the government of all things. There is no intercefior, but by his permif-
fion b . This is God, your Lord ; therefore ferve him. Will ye not confider?
Unto him fhall ye all return, according to the certain promife of God : for he
produceth a creature, and then caufeth it to return again ; that he may re-
ward thofe who believe and do that which is right, with equity. But as for
the unbelievers, they fhall drink boiling water, and they Jhall fuffer a grievous
punilhment, for that they have difbelieved. It is he who hath ordained the fun
to fhine by day , and the moon for a light by night ; and hath appointed her
ftations, that ye might know the number of years, and the computation of
time. God hath not created this, but with truth. He explaineth bis figns
unto people who underftand. Moreover in the viciffitude of night and day,
and whatever God hath created in heaven and earth, are furely figns unto
men who fear him. Verily they who hope not to meet us at the laft day,
and delight in this prefent life, and reft fecurely in the fame, and who are
negligent of our figns ■, their dwelling fhall be bell fire, for that which they
have deferved. But as to thofe who believe, and work righteoufhefs, their
Lord will direct them becaufe of their faith *, they fhall have rivers flowing
through gardens of pleafure. Their prayer therein Jhall be, Praife be unto thee,
O God ! and their falutation c therein Jhall be. Peace ! and the end of their
prayer Jhall be, Praife be unto God, the Lord of all creatures ! If God fhould
caufe evil to haften unto men, according to their defire of haftening good, veri-
ly their end had been decreed. Wherefore we fuffer thofe who hope not to
meet us at the refurrefiion, to wander amazedly in their error. When evil
befalleth a man ; he prayeth unto us lying on his fide, or fitting, or Hand-
ing d : but when we deliver him from ms affliftion, he continueth bis former
cqurfe of lift, as though he had not called upon us to defend him againft the
evil which had befallen him. Thus was that which the tranfgrefTors committed
prepared for them. We have formerly deftroyed the generations who were be-
fore you, O men ef Mrcca, when they had atffed unjuftly, and our a pottles had
come unto them with evident miracles and they would not believe. Thus do we
reward the wick&d people. Afterwards did we caule you to fucceed them in the
earth ; that we might fee how ye would ad. When our evident figns are
recited unto them, they who hope not to meet us at the refurreSHert^ fay.
Bring a different Koran from this; or make feme change therein. Anfwer,
It is not fit for me, that I fhould change it at my pleafure ; I follow that on-
ly which is revealed unto me. Verily I fear, if I fhould be difobedient unto
my Lord, the punilhment of the great day. Say, If God had fo pleafed, I
had not read it unto you, neither had I taught you the fame. I have al-
ready

* This is mnnifeft forcery j] Meaning the Ko-
'an. According to the reading of fome copies,
the words may be rendered, This man, (i. e, Mo-
hammed) is no other than a manifeft forcerrr.

b There is no intercejfor but by bis permtfjionJ]
Thefe words were revealed to refute the foolifh
opinion of the idolatrous Macaw, who imagined

their idols were interceflors with God for them.

fc Their falutation »] Either the mutual faluta-
tion of the blefled to one another, or that of
the angels to the bfeJTed.

A tying, or fitting, or /landing 0 i. e. In all
poEures, and at all times,

168 Al KORAN. Chap. , 0 .

ready dwelt among you to the age of forty years % before I received it. Do
ye not therefore underftand? And who" is more unjuft than he who de-
vifeth a lie againft God, or accufeth his figns of falfehood ? Surely the wick-
ed lhall not profper. They worfhip befides God, that which can neither hurt
them nor profit them, and they fay, Thefe are our intercefibrs with God \
Anfwer, Will ye tell God that which he knoweth not, neither in heaven nor
in earth c ? Praife be unto him ! and far be that from him, which they afloci-
ate with him ! Men were profefiors of one religion only 4 , but they diflented
therefrom ; and if a decree had not previoufiy iuued from thy Lord, deferring
their punijhment , verily the matter had been decided between them, concern-
ing which they, difagreed. They fay, Unlefs a fign be fent down unto him
from his Lord, we will not believe. Anfwer, Verily that which is hidden is
known only unto God : wait therefore f&e pleafure of God j and 1 aHo will wait
with you. And when lye caufed the men of Mecca to tafte mercy, after an
affli&ion which had befallen them, behold, they devlfed a ftratagem againft our
figns *. Say unto them , God is more fwift in executing a ftratagem, than ye.
Verily our meffengers f write down that which yc deceitfully devife. It is
,he who hath given you conveniencies for travelling by land and by fea ; fo that
ye be in fhips, which fail with them, with a favourable wind, and they rejoice
therein. And when a tepnpeftuous wind overtaketh them, and waves come up-
on them from every fide, and they think themfelves to be encompafitd with
inevitable dangers ; they call upon God, exhibiting the pure religion unto
him*, and faying , Verily, if thou deliver us from this peril , we will be of
thofe who give thanks. But when he had delivered them, behold, they behaved
themfelves infolently in the earth, without juftice. O men. Verily the violence
which ye commit againft your own fouls, is for the enjoyment of this prefent
life only ; afterwards unto us fhall ye return, and we will declare unto you
that which ye have done. Verily the likenels of this prefent life is no other

than

* 7 * the age »f forty years j] For fo old was Mo- Noah. Some fuppofe the firft ages after the flood
banned before he tooa upon him to be a prophet * ; are here intended ; others, the ilate of religion in
during which time his fellow citizens well knew Arabia, from the time of Abraham to that of
that he had not applied himfelf to learning of any Amru Ebn Lob at, the great introducer of idolatry
fort, nor frequented learned men, nor had ever into that country.

cxercifed himfelf in composing verfes, or ora- ' And when me caufei tbofe of Mecca to tafte
tions, whereby he might acquire the art of rh«- mercy after affliBion, &c.] For it is faid that they
toric, or elegance of fpeech ». A flagrant proof, were afflifled with a dearth for feven years, fo
fays al Beidatoi, that this book could be taught that they were very near periihi.ng ; but nofoon-
him by none but God. er relieved by God’s fending them plenty, than

See the Prelim. Difc. 4- 1, p. I J, Isle. they began again to charge Mohammed with hn-

* Will ye tell God that which be knouietb not, poliure, and to ridicule his revelation* 3 .

&C-] ciz,. That he hath equal* or companions 1 Our meffengers \\ i. e. The guardian angels,

either in heaven, or on earth 5 fince he acknow- s Exhibiting the pure religion unto him j] That

ledgeth none ? is, applying themfelves to Gononly, and neglefl-

“ Men were prof effort of one religion only, &c.J ing their idols ; their fears directing them in fuch
That is to fay , the true religion, or Iftam, which an extremity to ask help of him only who could
was generally profefled, as fome lay, 411 Abel give it.
was murdered, or, as others, till the days of

1 See the Prelim. Diji. p. 43. Abuxked. Fit. Mob e. 7.
a Jl Beidawi.

* See the Pre'iot. Difc. p. 27, tftc

Chap. io. Al KORAN. 169

than as water, which we fend down from heaven, and wherewith the produ&i
ons of the earth are mixed, of which men eat, and cattle alfo , until the earth
receive its vefture, and be adorned with various plants : the inhabitants there-
of imagine that they have power over the fame ; but our command cometh unto
it by night, or by day, and we render it as though it bad been mowen, as
though it had not yefterday abounded with fruits. Thus do we explain our
figns unto people who confider. God inviteth unto the dwelling of peace *, and
direfteth whom he pleafeth into the right way. They who do right fhall re-
ceive a moft excellent reward , and a Superabundant addition b j neither black-
nefs c nor fhame fhall cover their faces. Thefe fhall be the inhabitants of
paradife ; they fhall continue therein for ever. But they who commit evil
fhall receive the reward of evil, equal thereunto d , and they fhall be covered with
fhame, [for they fhall have no protestor againft God v) as though their faces were
covered with the profound darknefs of the night. Thefe fhall be the inhabi-
tants of hell fire ; they fhall remain therein for ever. On the day of the refur-
rettion we will gather them altogether ; then will we fay unto the idolaters. Get
ye to your place, ye and your companions*: and we will feparate them from one
another j and their companions fhall fay unto them , Ye did not worfhip us f ;
and God is a fufficient wirnefs between us and you neither did we mind your
worfhipping of us. There fhall every foul experience * that which it fhall have
fent before it k ; and they fhall be brought before God, their crue Lord ;
and the falfe deities which they vainly imagined, fhall difappear from before
them. Say, Who provideth you food from heaven and earth ? or who hath
the abfolute power over the hearing and the fight ? and who bringeth forth
the living from the dead, and bringeth forth the dead from the living ? and who
governeth all things ? They will furely anfwer, God. Say, Will ye not there-
fore fear him ? This is therefore God, your true Lord: and what remainetb
there after truth, except error ? How therefore are ye turned afide from the
truth ? Thus is the word of thy Lord' verified upon them who do wickedly j
that they believe not. Say, Is there any of your companions who produceth a
creature, and then caufeth it to return unto bimfelf? Say, God produceth a
creature, and then caufeth it to return unto himfelf How therefore are ye
Wrned afide from his worfhip ? Say, Is there any of your companions who ai-

Z refteth

* Unto the dwelling of peace s] viz. Paradife.
b And a fuperabundant addition i] For their re-
ward will vallly exceed the merit of their good
works. Al GhazdU fuppofes this additional re-
utnpenfe will be the beatific viiion 1 .

« See the Prelim. Difc. p. 86 .
d Equal thereunto i\ i. e. Tho’ the blefTcd will
be rewarded beyond their defertsj, yet God will
not punilh any beyond their demerits, but treat
them with the exafteft juftice.

e And your companions ;] That is, youT idols,
or the companions which ye attributed untoGoD.
f Ye did not worjbip us ;] But ye really wor-

Ihipped your own lulls, and were feduced to ido-
latry, not by us, but by your own fuperltitioua
fancies. It is pretended, that God will, at the
lall day, inable the idols to lpeak, and that they
will thus reproach their worfttippers, inftead of
interceding for them, as they hoped. Some f\ip-
pofe the angels, who were alfo objefls of the
worfhip of the pagan Arahs, are particularly in :
tended in this place.

g Shall experience ;] Some copies inftead of
tallu, read tatlu, i. e. fhall follow , or meditate

upon.

h See chap. 2. p. 1 2. not. h.

1 See the Prelim. Difi. p. 1 00

170

Al KORAN \ Chap. 10.

refteth unto the truth ? Say, God dire&eth unto the truth. Whether is he
therefore, who direct eth unto the truth, more worthy to be followed •, or he
who diretteth not, unlefs he be dire&ed ? What aileth you therefore that ye
judge as ye do ? And the greater part of them follow an uncertain opinio® only •
but a meer opinion attainethnot unto any truth. Verily God knoweth that which
they do. This Koran couhl not have been compofed by any except God
but it is a confirmation of that which was revealed before it, and an explana-
tion of the feriprure; there is no doubt thereof; fent down from the Lord of
all creatures. Will they fay, Moh^mued hath forged it ? Anfwer, Bring there-
fore a chapter like unto it ; and call whom ye may to your affijlance, befides
God, if ye fpeak truth. But they have charged that with fallhood, the know-
ledge whereof they do not comprehend, neither hath the interpretation there-
of come unto them. In the fame manner did thofe who were before them,
accufe their pophets of impofturc ; but behold, what was the end of the un-
juft. There are fome of them who believe therein ; and there are fome of
them who believe not therein* : and thy Lord well knoweth the corrupt doers.
If they accufe thee of impofture, fay, I have my work, and yc have your
work ; ye fhall be clear of that which I do, and I will be clear of that which
ye do. There are fome of them who hearken unto thee ; but wilt thou make
die deaf to hear, although they do not underftand ? And there are fome of
them who look at thee ; but wilt thou direft the blind, although they fee not 4 ?
Verily God will not deal unjuftly with men in any refpedt : but men deal un.
juftly with their own fouls e . On a certain day he will gather them together,
as though they had not tarried d above an hour of a day : they fhall know
one another *. Then fhall they perifh who have denied the meeting of God ; and
were not rightly directed. Whether we caufe thee to fee a part of the fumjh-
ment wherewith we have threatened them, or whether we caufe thee to die before
thou fee it ; unto us fhall they return : then fhall God be witnefs of that which
they do. Unto every nation bath an apoftle been fent : and when their apof-
tle came, the matter was decided between them with equity ‘ ; and they were

not

* Ibtrt are jam ef then tebo bdint thereat, Scd]
L e. There are fome of them who are inwardly
well Satisfied of the truth of thy doctrine, tho’
they are fo wicked as to oppofe it s and there are
others of them who believe it not, thro’ preju-
dice and want of confideration. Or the paflage
may be underflood m the future tenfe, of fome
who fhould afterwards believe, and repent, and
©f others who fhould die infidels 1 .

h There are fome of them mho hearken unto thee ;
but milt thou make the deaf to bear 9 &c.] Thefe
words were revealed on account of certain Mec -
tans, who teemed to attend while Mohammed read
the Koran to them, or intruded them in any
poit)t of religion, but yet were as far from being
convinced or edified, as if they had not heard
him at all a .

c God mill not deal unjuftfymitb men ; but they
deal unjuftly with their own fouls!} For God de-
prives them not of their fenfes, or underftand-
ing i but they corrupt and make an ill ufe of
them.

, d As though they had not tarried,} Either in
the world, or in the grave.

e They (ball know one another i] As if it were
but a little while fincc they parted. But this
will happen during the firft moments only of the
rcfurre&ion ; for afterwards the terror of the
dav will difturb and take from them all know-
ledge of one another

f The matter was decided between them with
equity ;] By deli eriqg the prophet and thofe
who believed on him, and deftroyiilg the oblti
nate infidels.

1 *4/ Budavvi.

2 Idem . See chap. 6. f . ioi.

3 Idem.

Chap, i o. Al KORAN. 1 7 1

not treated unjyftly.' The unbelievers fay. When will this threatening be made
good , if ycfpeak truth? Anfwer, I am able neither to procure advantage unto
my felf, nor to avert mifchief from me, but as Goo pleafeth. Unto every na-
tion is a fixed term decreed', when their term therefore is expired, they (hall not
have refpite for an hour, neither fhall their punifhment be anticipated. Say,
Tell me i if the punilhment of God overtake you by night, or by day, what
part thereof will the ungfldly wifti to be haftened ? When it falleth on you, do
ye then believe it? Now do ye believe, and wifi k far from you, when as ye
formerly defired it Ihould be haftened ? Then fhall it be faid unto the wicked,
Tafte ye the punilhment of eternity : would ye receive other than the reward
of that which ye have wrought ? They will defire to know of thee, whether
this be true. Anfwer, Yea, by ray Lord, it is certainly true v neither lhall
ye weaken God’s power , fa as to efcape it. Verily, if every foul which hath
afted wickedly had whatever is on the earth* it would wifingly redeem it felf
therewith at the lajl day. Yet they will conceal their repentance *, after they
fhall have feen the pumfhment : and the matter fhall be decided between them
with equity j and they lhall not be unjuftly treated. Doth not whatfoever is
in heaven and on earth belong unto God ? Is not the promife of God true ?
But the greater part of them know it not. He giveth life, and he caufeth to
die ; and unto him lhall ye all return. O men, now hath an admonition come
unto you from your Lord, and a remedy for the doubts which are in your
breafts •, and a cireftion, and mercy unto the true believers. Say, Through
the grace of Gqd, and his mercy: therein therefore let them rejoice •, this will
be better than what they heap together of worldly riches . Say, Tell me ; of
that which God hath fent down unto you for food, have ye declared part to be
lawful, and other part to be unlawful b ? Say, Hath God permitted you to make
this diJlinSlion ? or do ye devife a lye concerning God ? But what will be the
Opinion of thofe who devife a lye copcerning God, on the day of the rcfur-
rettion ? Verily God is indued with beneficence towards mankind j but the
greater part of them do not give thanks. Thou lhalt be engaged in no bufi-
nefss neither lhalt thou be employed in meditating on any paffage of the Ko-
ran •, nor lhall ye do any aftion, but we will be witneffes over you, when ye
are employed therein. Nor is fo much as the weight of an ant e hidden from thy
Lord, in earth or in heaven : neither is there any thing lefier than that, or great-
er, but it is written in the perfpicupus book \ Are not the friends of God
the perfons, on whom no fear fhall come, and who fhall not be grieved ? They
who believe and fear God, fhall receive good tidings in this life, and in that
which is to come. There is no change in ttfe words of God. This fiall be

Z 2 great

a They will conceal their repentance ;] To hide
their fhame and regret 1 ; or becaufe their fur-
prize and aftonifhment will deprive them of the
ufe of Ipeech*. Some, however, underftand
the verb which is here rendered will conceal , in
the contrary fignificadon, which it fometimcs

1 x 213 5 and then it muft be tranflatcd, They will
openly declare their repentance , &c.
b See chap. 6. p. 1 1 3, fcfr.
c See chap. 4. p. 66. not. d.
d The terfpicuous booh ;] The preferved table :
wherein God’s docrees are recorded.

1 jALLAtQ’Ohlff,

a ^/Beidawx

172 Al KORA N. Chap. 10.

great felicity. Let not their difeourfe * grieve thee ; for all might belongetb
unto God : he both heareth and knoweth. Is not whoever dwelletb in heaven
and on earth, fubjeEt unto God ? What therefore do they follow, who invoke
idols, befides God 7 They follow nothing but a vain opinion ; and they only
utter lyes. It is he who hath ordained the night for you, that ye may take
your reft therein, and the clear day for labour : verily herein are figns unto
people who hearken. They fay, God hath begotten children : God forbid !
He is felf-fufficient. Unto him belongetb whatfoever is in heaven and on earth :
ye have no demonftrative proof of this. Do ye fpeak of God that which ye
know not ? Say, Verily they who imagine a lye concerning God, jhall not
profper. They may enjoy a provifion in this world •, but afterwards unto us
fhall they return, and we will then caufe them to tafte a grievous punilhment,
for that they were unbelievers. Rehearfe unto them the hiftory of Noah k :
when he Paid unto his people, O my people, if my ftanding forth among you ,
and my warning you of the figns of God, be grievous unto you ; in God do I
put my truft. Therefore lay your defign againfl me , and affemble your falfegods;
but let not your defign be carried on by you in the dark : then come forth a-
gainft me, and delay not. And if ye turn afide from my admonitions , I afk not
any reward of you for the fatne * ; I expeEt my reward from God alone, and I
am commanded to be one of thofe who are refigned unto him. But they accuf-
ed him of impofture j wherefore we delivered him, and thofe who were with
him in the ark, and we caufed them to furvive the flood , but we drowned
thofe who charged our figns with falfhood. Behold therefore, what was die end
of thofe who were warned by Nojh. Then did we fond, after him, apoftles
unto their refpeElive people 4 , and they came unto them with evident demonftra-
tions : yet they were not difpofed to believe in that which they had before reject-
ed as falfe. Thus do we foal up the hearts of the tranfgreffors. Then did we
fend, after them, Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh and his princes with our
figns * : but they behaved proudly, and were a wicked people. And when the
truth from us had come unto them, they faid, Verily this is manifeft forcery.
Moses faid unto them. Do ye fpeak this of the truth, after it hath come unto
you ? Is this forcery ? but forcerers fhall not profper. They laid, Art thou
come unto us to turn us afide from that religion , which we found our fathers
prafftfe j and that ye two may have the command in the land ? But we do not
believe you. And Pharaoh faid. Bring unto me every expert magician. And
when the magicians were come, Moses laid unto them, Caft down that which
ye are about to caft down. And when they had caft down their rods and cords ,
Moses faid unto them. The enchantment which ye have performed, fhall God
P urely render vain ; for God profpereth not the work of the wicked doers. And
God will verify the truth of his words, although the wicked be averfo thereto.

And

* Their difeourfe ;] via. The impiotu and re-
bcllious talk of the infidels.

* See chap. 7. p. 1 22, (Ac.

€ I ask not any reward , &c.} Therefore ye
cannot excufe your felves by laying that I am
burthenfome to you.

d We font, after him, apoftles onto their refftr
five people ;] As Hud> Saleh, Abraham hot , and
Bhoaib , to thole of Ad, Tbam&d , Babel, Sodom,
and Midiati.

• See chftp. 7. p* 128. (Ac .

Chap. io. Al KORAN. 173

And there believed not any on Moses, except a generation ofhis people % for fear
of Pharaoh and of his princes, left he fhould afflidt them. And Pharaoh
was lifted up with pride in the earth, and was furely one of the tranfgrefiors.
And Moses faid, O my people, if ye believe in God, put your truft in him,
if ye be refigned to his will. They anfwered, We put our truft in God : O
Lord, fuffer us not to be afflicted by unjuft people ; but deliver us, through
thy mercy, from the unbelieving people. And we fpake by infpiration unto
Moses and his brother, faying , Provide habitations for your people in Egypt,
and make your houfes a place of worfhip b , and be conftant at prayer ■,
and bear good news unto the true believers. And Moses faid, O Lord, verily
thou haft given unto Pharaoh and his people pompous ornaments', and riches
in this prefent life, O Lord, that they may be feduced from thy way :
O Lord, bring their riches to nought, and harden their hearts ; that they
may not believe, until they fee their grievous puniftiment. God faid. Your
petition is heard * : be ye upright therefore *, and follow not the way of thofe
who are ignorant. And we caufed the children of Israel to pals through
the fea ; and Pharaoh and his army followed them in a violenc and hoftile
manner * until, when he was drowning, he faid, I believe that there is no
God but he, on whom the children of Israel believe ; and I am one of the
refigned f . Now doji thou believe i when thou haft been hitherto rebellious,
and one of the wicked doers ? This day will we raife thy body 1 from the
bottom of the fea, that thou mayeft be a fign unto thofe who lhall be after
thee j and verily a great number of men are negligent of our figns. And we
prepared for the children of Israel an eftablifhed dwelling in the land of
Canaan, and we provided good things for their fuftenance: and they dif-
fered

a Except a generation of bis people ;] For when qucnceof this prayer, all the treafures of £•
he firft began to preach, a few of the younger gypt were turned into Bones *.

Tfraelites only believed on him ; the others not e Be ye upright ;] Or, as a l Beidazai interprets
giving ear to him, for fear of the king. But it. Be ye conftant and Beady in preaching to the
fame fuppofe the pronoun bis refers to Pbaraob , people. The Mohammedans pretend that Mofes
and that thefe were certain Egyptians , who, to- continued in Egypt no Iefs than forty years, after
gether with his wife Afia% believed on Mofes 1 . he had firft publifhed his miffion : which cannot
b A pierce of worjiip ] So Jallalo'ddin ex- be reconciled to feripture.
pounds the original word Kebla, which proper- f I believe that there is no God but be, ficc.]
ly fignifies that place or quarter towards which Thefe words, it is faid. Pharaoh repeated often in
one prays. Wherefor c al ZamakbJ&ari fuppofes, his extremity, that he might be heard. But his
that the IJraelites are here ordered to difpofc repentance came too late ; for Gabriel foon flop-
their oratories in fuch a manner, that, when they ped his mouth with mud, left he fhould obtain
prayed, their faces might be turned towards Mec- mercy ; reproaching him at the fame time in the
r a ; which he imagines was the Kebla of Mofes, words which follow.

as it is that of th^ Mohammedans. The former * We will raife thy dead body, fire.] Some of
commentator adds, that Pbaraob had forbidden the children of Ifrael doubting whether Pharaoh
the Jfraelites to pray to God; for which reafon was really drowned, Gabriel , by God’s com-
they were obliged to perform that duty privately mand, caufed his naked corps to fwim to fhore,
in their houfes. that they might fee it 3 . The word here tranf-

c Ornaments ;] As magnificent apparel, cha- lated body , figniiying alfo a coat of mail, fome
riots, and the like. imagine the meaning to be, that his corps floated

d Your petition is beard i] The pronoun is in the armed with his coat of mail, which they tell us
dual number; the antecedent being Mofes and was of gold, by which they knew that it was
Aaron . The commentators fay, that in confe- heu

1 Al Bkidawj

* jALl AliO* DDIN.

* See Exod.x iv. 30,

174 Al KORAN. Chap. io.

fered not in point of religion^ until knowledge had come unto them * ; verily
thy Lord will judge between them on the day of refurredfciq©, concerning
that wherein they difagreed. If thou art in a doubt concerning any part of that
which we have lent down unto thee b , alk them who have read the book of the
law before thee. Now hath the truth come unto thee from thy Lord ; be not
therefore one of thofe who doubt : neither be thou one of thofe who charge
the figns of God with fallhood, left thou become one of thofe who perilh.
Verily thofe againft whom the word of thy Lord is decreed, lhall not believe,
although there come unto them every kind of miracle ; until they fee the griev-
ous punifhment prepared for them. And if it were not Jo, fome city, among
the many which have been deftroyid, would have believed ; and the faith of
its inhabitants would have been of advantage unto them : but none of them be -
lieved, before the execution of their fentence, except the people of Jonas c .
When they believed, we delivered them from the puoilhment, of lhame in
this world, and fuffered them to enjoy their lives and poffeffions for a time 11 .
But if thy Lord had pleafed, verily all who are in the earth, would have
believed in general. Wilt thou therefore forcibly compel men to be true
believers ? No foul can believe, but by the permiffion of God : and he
lhall pour out his indignation' on thofe who will not underftand. Say, Confi-
der whatever is in heaven and on earth : but figns are of no avail, neither preach-
ers, unto people who will not believe. Do they therefore expert any other
than fome terrible judgment , like unto the judgments which have fallen on thofe
who have gone before them ? Say, Wait ye the ijfue \ and I alfo will wait with
you : then will we deliver our apoftles and thofe who believe. Thus is it
a juftice due from us, that we Ihould deliver the true believers. Say, 0
men of Mecca, if ye be in doubt concerning my religion, verily I worlhip
not the idols which ye worlhip, befides God > but I worlhip God, who will
caufe you to die : and I am commanded to be one of the true believer^ And
it was faid unto me. Set thy face towards the true religion, and be orthodox ;
and by no means be one of thofe who attribute companions unto God; nei-
ther

a Until after ‘knowledge bad come unto them
i, e. After the law had been revealed, and pab-
lifhed by Mofes .

b Concerning that which we have fent down un-
to thee j] That », concerning the truth of the
-hiftorie* which are here related. The commen-
tators doubt whether the perfon here fpoken to,
be Mohammed himfelf, or his auditor.

c The people of Jonas ;] viz. The inhabitants
of Ninh ?e, which flood on or near the place
where al Mawfel now frauds. This people hav-
ing corrupted themfeives with idolatry, Jonas
the fon of Matt at (or Amittal, which the Mo-
hammedans fuppofe to be the name of his mo-
ther,) an Uraelite of the tribe of Benjamin , was
fent by God to preach to, and reclaim them.
When he firfl began to exhort them to repen-

2 Al Beidawi, Jal

tance, infread of hearkening to him, they ufed
him very ill, fo that he was obliged to bate the
city; threatening them, at his departure that
they Ihould be deftroyed within three days, or,
as others fay, within forty *. But when the time
drew near, and they faw the heavens overcaft
with a black cloud, which fhot forth fire, and
filled the air wkh fmoke, and hung diredUy over
their city, they were in a terrible confternation,
and getting into the fields, with their families
and cattle, they put on faokclotb, and humbled
themfelves before God, calling aloud for pardon,
and fincerely repenting of their paft wickednefs.
Whereupon God was pleafed to forgive them,
and the florm blew over a .

d For a time ;J L e. Until they died accord-
ing to the ordinary courfe of nature.

axo*ddin, Abuxfsd. See chap* 21, and 37.

1 See Jonah iii. 4.

Chap. ii. Al KORAN. 175

ther invoke, befides God, that which can neither profit thee nor hurt thee:
for if thou do, thou wilt then certainly become one of the unjuft. If God
afflift thee with hurt, there k none who can relieve thee from it, except
he ; and if he willeth thee any good, there is none who can keep back his
bounty : he will confer it on fuch of his fervants as he pleafeth ; and he is
gracious and merciful. Say, O men, now hath the truth come unto you
from your Lord. He therefore who Hull be directed, will be dire&ed to
the advantage of his own foul : but he who /hall err, will err only againft the
fame. I am no guardian over you. Do thou, 0 prophet , follow that which
is revealed unto thee : and perfevere with patience, until God lhall judge ;
for he is the beft judge.

CHAP. XL

Inti tied) Hud*; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

A L. R. b This book, the verfes whereof are guarded againft corrup-
tion c , and are alfo diftin&ly explained d , is a revelation from the wile,
the knowing God: that ye ferve not any other than God •, (verily I am a de-
nouncer of threats , and a bearer of good tidings unto you from him ;) and
that ye alk pardon of your Lord, and then be turned unto him. He will
caufe you to enjoy a plentiful provifion, until a prefixed time : and unto eve-
ry one that hath merit by good works , will he give his abundant reward. But
if ye turn back, verily I fear for you the puni foment of the great day :
unto God foall ye return ; and he is almighty. Do they not double the folds of
their breads', that they may conceal their defigns from him ? When they cover
themfelves with their garments, doth not he know that which they conceal,

and

a The ftory of which prophet is repeated in
this chapter.

b See the Prelim- Difc. p. 59, &c.
c The verfes where of are guarded againft corrup-
tion i] According to the various fenfea which the
verb obkimat , in the original, may bear, the
commentators fuggeft as many different interpre-
tations. Some fuppofe the meaning to be, ac-
cording to our verflon, that the Koran is not li-
able to be corrupted 1 , as the law and the gofpel
have been, in the opinion of the Mohammedans :
others, that every verfe in this particular chapter
is in full force, and not one of them abrogated :
others, that the verfes of the Korin are difpofed
in a clear and perlpicuous method, or contain

1 See the Prelim . Difc . p. 75

evident and demonllrative arguments: and o-
thers, that they comprize judicial declaration#,
to regulate both faith and pra&ice a .

d And are alfo dijlinflh explained }1 The figni-
fication of the verb foffilat , which is here ufed,
being alfo ambiguous, the meaning of this paf-
fage is fuppofed to be, cither that the verfes are
diffinftly prbpofed or expreffed in a clear man-
ner ; or that the fubjeft matter of the whole may
be diftinguifhed or divided into laws, monitions,
and examples j or elfe that the verfes were re-
vealed by parcels.

e Do they not double the folds of their brtafts ;]
Or, as it may be tranllated. Do they not turn a -
way their breaftr 9 See.

2 Al Beidawi, Jallavo'ddin, 41 Zamakhsharj, tsf,

176 Al KORAN. Chap, ii,

and that which they difcover? For he knoweth the innermoft parts of the
XII. breads of men \ * There is no creature which creepeth on the earth, but

•God provide! h its food ; and he knoweth the place of its retreat, and where
it is laid up b . The whole is written in the perfpicuous book of bis decrees.
It is he who hath created the heavens and the earth in fix days, (but his
throne was above the waters before the creation thereof %) that he might prove
you, and fee which of you would excel in works. If thou fay. Ye fliall fure-
ly be raifed again, after death j the unbelievers will fay. This is nothing but
manifeft forcery. And verily if we defer their punifhment unto a determined
feafon, they will fay. What hindreth it from falling on us ? Will it not come
upon them on a day, wherein there fhall be none to avert it from them ; and
that which they fcoffed at fliall incompals them ? Verily, if we caufe man
to tafte mercy from us, and afterwards take it away from him ; he will fure-
ly become defperate <f , and ungrateful. And if we caufe him to tafte favour,
after an affli&ion hath befallen him, he will furely fay. The evils which /
fuffered are paffed from me ; and he will become joyful and infolent: except
thofe who perfevere with patience, and do that which is right ; they fhall re-
ceive pardon, and a great reward. Peradventure thou wilt omit to publifi

S art of that which hath been revealed unto thee, and thy breaft will become
raitened, left they fay, Unlefs a treafure be fent down unto him, or an angel
come with him, to boar witnefs unto him , we will not believe. Verily thou art
a preacher only ; and God is the governourof all things. Will theyfcy, He
hath forged the Koran? Anfwer, Bring therefore ten chapters « like unto it,
forged by your felves ; and call on whomfoever ye may to affijl you., except
God, if ye fpeak truth. But if they whom ye call to your ajfiftance hear you
not ; know that this book hath been revealed by the knowledge of God on-
Jy f , and that there is no God, but he. Will ye therefore become Modems?

Whofo

* This paffage was occafioned by the words of which waters they imagine are fnpported by a
certain of the idolaters, who faid to one another, fpiritor wind, were, withfome other things, creat-
When we let down our curtains , (fuch as the wo- ed before the heavens and earth. This fancy they
men ufe in the eaft to fereen themfelves from the borrowed from the Jews, who alfo fay, that the
fight of the men, when they happen to be in throne of glory then flood in the air, and was
the room,) and wrap our Jehes up in our garments , born on the face of the waters, by the breath of
and fold up our breafts , to conceal our malice a- God’s mouth 1 * .

gain/} Mohammed, bow Jkould be come to the d Defperate ,] Calling afide all hopes of the
knowledge of it ? Some fuppofe the pafTage re- divine favour, for want of patience; andtruftin
lites to certain hypocritical Moflems ; but this God.

opinion is generally rejeded, becaufe the verfe c Ten chapters ;] This was the number which
was revealed at Mecca , and the birth of hypocri* he firll challenged them to compofe ; but they
fy among the Mohammedans happened not till not being able to do it, he made the matter ftiil
after the Hejra. eafier, challenging them to produce a /ingle

b The place of its retreat , and where it is laid chapter only a , comparable to the Koran in doc-
jtpQ i. e. Both during its life, and after its trine and eloquence.

’death i or the repofitory of every animal, before f By the knowledge of God only j] Or contain-
ers birth, in the loins and wombs of the parents. ing feverai paflages wrapped up in dark and myi-
c But bis throne was above the waters , brfore the terious expreifions, which can proceed from, and
creation thereof ;] For the Mohammedans fuppofe are perfedly comprehended by none but God 3 .
this throne, and the waters whereon it itands,

1 Rash i, ad Genef i. z. F. Reland, de relig. Mob. p . 50, £sfr.

zo. p. 170, £sV. 3 See chap . 3. p. 35.

* See chap. 2. p. 3. chap.

Chap. ii. Al KORAN* 177

'Whofo choofeth the prefent life, and the pomp thereof, unto them will we
give the recompenfe of their works therein, and the fame lhall not be diminilhed
unto them. Thefe are they for whom no other reward is prepared in the next
life, except the fire of hell: that which they have done in this life ftiall perilh ; and
that which they have wrought fhall be vain. Shall he therefore be compared with
them, who followeth the evident declaration of his Lord, and whom a witnefs
from him * attendeth, preceded by the book of Moses b , which was reveal-
ed for a guide, and out of mercy to mankind ? Thefe believe in the Koran :
but whofoever of the confederate infidels believeth not therein, is threatened
with the fire of bell , which threat Jhall certainly be executed : be not therefore
in a doubt concerning it ; for it is the truth from thy Lord : but the greater
part of men will not believe. Who is more unjuft than he who imagineth a
lye concerning God ? They lhall be fet before their Lord, at the day of
judgment , and the witneffes c lhall fay, Thefe are they who devifed Jyesagainft
their Lord. Shall not the curfe of God fall on the unjuft ; who turn men
afide from the way of God, and feek to render it crooked, and who believe
not in the life to come ? Thefe were not able to prevail againfi God on
earth, foas to efcape punijhment 5 neither had they any protestors befides God :
their punilhment lhall be doubled unto them d . They could not hear, nei-
ther did they fee. Thefe are they who have loft their fouls ; and the idols
which they faHely imagined, have abandoned them. There is no doubt but
they lhall be moft miferablc in the world to come. But as for thofe who believe,
and do good works, and humble themfelves before their Lord, they lhall be
the inhabitants of paradife ; they lhall remain therein for ever. The fimilitude
of the two parties * is as the blind and the deaf, and as he who feeth and
heareth : lhall they be compared as equal ? Will ye not therefore confider ? We
formerly lent NoAH f unto his people •, and he faid, Verily I am a public preacher
unto you ; that ye worlhip God alone : verily I fear for you the punilhment of
the terrible day. But the chiefs of his people, who believed not, anfwered.
We fee thee to be no other than a man, like unto us ; and we do not fee
that any follow thee, except thofe who are the moft abjedt among us, who have
believed on thee by a ralh judgment*; neither do we perceive any ex-
cellence in you above us : but we efteem you to be lyars. Noah faid, O
my people, tell me ; if I have received an evident declaration from my
Lord, and he hath beftowed on me mercy from himfelf, which is hidden
from you, do we compel you to receive the fame, in cafe ye be averfe there-
to ? O my people, I afk not of you any riches, for my preaching unto you :
my reward is with God alone. I will not drive away thofe who have be-
lieved 11 : verily drey fhall meet their Lord, at the refurrebtion ; but I per-

A a ceive

* A witnefs from him ;] viz. The Koran ; or,
as others fuppofe, the angel Gabriel

b Preceded by the book of Motes ;] Which bear*
trilimony thereto.

e The witneffes ;] That is. The angels, and
prophets, and their own members.

11 Tbeir punijbmeut fhall be doubled »] For they
lhall be pnniihed both in this life, and in the
next.

e Of the two parties ;] i. e. The believers and
the infidels.. _

{ See chap. 7 . p. 1 23, CjV.

* By a rofb judgment 5] For want of mature
confederation, and moved by the firft impulLe of
their fancy.

b I will not drive away thofe "who have believed ; j
For this they asked him to do, becaufe they were
poor mean people. The fame thing the Koreijb

demanded

i 7 8 Al K 0 RA N. Chap.u.

ceive that ye are ignorant men. O my people, who (hall aiTift me againft
God, if I drive them away ? Will ye not therefore confider ? I fay not un-
to you. The treafures of God are in my power ; neither do J fay, I know the
fecrers of God : neither do I fay, Verily I am an angel * i neither do I f ay
of thofe whom your eyes do contemn, God will by no means beftow good
on them : (God beft knoweth that which is in their fouls ;) for then Ihould
I certainly be one of the unjuft. They anfwered, O Noah, thou haft already
difputed with us, and haft multiplied difputes with us ; now therefore do thou
brincr that punijhment upon us wherewith thou haft threatened us, if thou
fpeakeft truth. Noah faid. Verily God alone lhall bring it upon you, if he
pleafeth } and ye lhall not prevail againft him, fa as. to tfcapt the fame. Neither
fhall my counfel profit you, although I endeavour to counfel you aright, if
God (hall pleafe to lead you into error. He is your Lord, and unto him
fhall ye return. Will the Meccano l ay, Mohammed hath forged tie Koran?
Anfwer, If I have forged it, on me be my guilt j and let me be clear of that
which ye are guilty of. And ic was revealed unto Noah, faying. Verily
none of thy people fhall believe, except he who hath already believed; be
not therefore grieved, for that which they are doing. But make an ark in
our prefence, according to tbe form and dmenfions which we have revealed
unto thee: and fpeak not unto me in behalf of thofe who have afted unjuftlyj
for they are doomed to he drowned. And he built the ark ; and fo often as a
company of his people palled by him* they derided him b : but he faid. Though
ye feoff at us now, we will feoff at you hereafter, as ye feoff at us •, and ye fhall
furely know on whom a puniftrtnent (hail be inflidted, which fhall cover
him with fbame, and on whom a lifting punifhment fhall fall. Thus were
they imployed until our fentence was put in execution, and the oven poured
forth water'. And we faid unto Noah , Carry into the ark of every fpecies

demanded of Mohammed, but he was forbidden
to comply with their requeft l * .

a See chap. 6. p. 103.

* 7 bey derided him f] For building a veffel in
an inland country, and fo far from the fea ; and
for that he was turned carpenter, after he had
fet up for a prophet

c And tbe oven poured forth water ;] Or, as the
original literally ngnifics, boiled over ; which is
confonant to what the Rabbins fay, that the
waters of the deluge were boiling hot.

This oven was, as fome fay, at £&fa, in a fpot
whereon a mofque now ftands ; or, as others ra-
ther think, in a certain place in India, or elfe at
Ain tvarda in Mefipotamia . 3 l and its e^undation
was the fign by which Noah knew the flood was
coming 4 Some pretend that it was tbe fame

oven which Eve made ufe of to bake her bread
in, being of a form different from thofe we ufe,
having the mouth in the upper part, and that it
defeended from patriarch to patriate till it
came to Noah It is remarkable fkwMbam-
in all probability, borrowed this circum-
ftance from the Perfian Magi, who aifo fancied
that the firft waters of the deluge gulhed out of
the oven of a certain old woman named Zola
Ctlfa

But the word tannttr, which is here trinllated
oven , alfb fignifying the fuperjicUc of tbe earth,
or a place whence waters fpring forth, or where
they are colUfied, fome fuppofe it means no more
in this paffage, than the fpot or £ifure whence
the firll eruption of waters brake forth.

1 See (bap. 6 .p. 103. * Al Beidawi. 3 Idem . 4 Jallalo'ddiw, isFr. f V. D’Hir'

belot, Bib/. Orient, art. Noah, 6 V. Htde de rth vet . Perfap. and LoRd’j atmnt /

tbe relig . of tbe Perfect, p K 9.

Chap, nl Al K 0 RA N. 179

of animals one pair* v and thy family b , ("except him on whom a previous fen-
tence of definition hath paffed %) and thofe who believe d . But there believ-
ed not with him, except a few . And NoAHfaid* Embark thereon, in the
name of God ; while it moveth forward, and while it ftandeth ftill f ; for my
Lord is gracious and merciful. And the ark fwam with them between waves
like mountains 8 : and Noah called unto his fon h , who was feparated from
him y faying* Embark with us, my fon, and ftay not with the unbelievers. He

A a 2 anfwered*

a One pair ;] Or, as the words may alfo be c foere believed not with him ext eft a /etc ;]
rcndred, and fome commentators think they viz. His other wife, who was a true believer,
ought, two pair , that is, two males, and tvro fe- his three Cons, Shem, Ham, and Japbet , and
males of each fpecies s wherein they partly agree their wives, and feventy two perfons more 1 1 .
with divers JetviJh and Cbriftian writers x , who f Embark thereon , in the name of God, while
from the Hebrew exprellion, /even and j even , and it moveth fortoard % and while it ftandeth ftiU j]
two and two, the male and bis female 2 , fuppofc That is, omit no opportunity of getting on
there went into the ark fourteen pair of eve- board. According to a different reading, the
ry clean, and two pair of every unclean fpe- latter words may be rendred, Who {ball caufe it
cies. There is a tradition that God gathered to move forward , and to flop, as there lhall be oc-
together unto Noah, all forts of beafts, birds and cafion. The commentators tell us that the ark
other animals, (it being indeed difficult to con- moved forwards, or flood ftill, as Noab would
ceive how he fhould come by them all, without have it, on his pronouncing only the words, In
Ibme fupematural affiftance,) and that as he laid the name of Goo 12 .

hold on them, his right hand conftanriy fell on It is to be obferved that the more judicious
the pale, and his left on the female 3 . commentators make the dimenfions of the ark to

b Tby family $] Namely thy wife ; and thy be the fame with thofe affigned by Mofes r 3 ; not-
fons, and their wives 4 . withilanding others have enlarged them moft ex-

c Except him on whom a previous /entente of travagantly I4 , as fome Cbriftian writers 1 % have
definition bath paffed ;] This was an unbelieving alfo done. They likewife tell us that Noab was
fon of Noab % named Canaan 6 , or Tam 7 i tho * two years in building the ark, which was framed
others fay he was not the fon of Noab , but his of Indian plane tree 16 , that it was divided into
grandfon by his fon Ham , or his wife’s fon by three ftorica, of which the lower was defigned
another husband ; nay fome pretend he was relat- for the beafts, the middle one for the men and
ed to him no farther than by having been educat- women, and the upper for the birds ir ; and
ed and brought up in his houfe 8 . The beft that the men were feparated from the women by
commentators add, that Noah's wife, named the body of Adam, which Noab had taken into
Wdila, who was an infidel, was alfo compre- the ark 18 . This laft is a tradition of the eaft-
hended in this exception, and periflied with her ern Gbriftiaw l9 , fome of whom pretended that
fon 9 . the matrimonial duty was fuperfoded and fu£

d And thofe who believe .] Noah's family being pended during the time Noab and his family were
mentioned before, it is fuppofed that by thde in the ark 20 ; tho* Ham has been accufed of not
words are intended the other believers, who were obferving contincncy on that occaiion, his wife,
his profelytes, but not of his family: whence it ftems, bringiagfoxthCtfjM^inthe very ark ai .
the common opinion among the Mohammedans , * Between waves like mountains j] The water®

of a greater number than eight being faved in prevailing fifteen cubits above the mountains 22 .
ihe ark, feems to have taken iu rife lo . b See above, not. c.

1 Aben Ezra, Justin Martyr, Origen, (jjV. * Gene/ vii, z. 3 jALtAto'DDiN.
4 ^Beidawi. 1 Yahya. 6 JaI/Lalo’ddih, Al Beidawi. 7 Ebn Shohnan.

8 ^Zamakhshari. V. D’Herbbl. Bibl. Orient, p. 676. 9 Jallalo’dImn, Al ZamakH-

sharj, al Beidawi. 10 See chap. y.p. 123. 11 See ibid. not. a. 12 Al Beidawi, £jfr.

* 3 Idem, &c. 14 Yahya. V. Maeracc. in Alter . p. 340. 11 Oricen. contr. Celf

/ 4. V. Kirciier. de Area Noe, c. 8. 16 Al Beidawi. V. D'Herbel. p. 675. and Eutych.

p. 34. 17 ^/Beidawi. V. Eutych. amtal. p. 34. 18 Yahya. 19 Jacob. Edesse-

nus, apud Barupham de farad* part i.r, 14. Eutych. ubi fup. V. etiam Eliezer. firke c. 23.
20 Ambros .de Noa arcane, 21. 21 V. Heidegger, Hift. Potriarcbar.v. 1. p.409.

22 ^/Beidawj.

180 Al KORAN. Chap. ir #

anfwered, I will get on a mountain, which will fecure me from the water.
Noah replied. There is no fecurity this day from the decree of God, except
for him on whom he fhall have mercy. And a wave paffed between them,
and he became one of thofe who were drowned. And it was faid, O earth,
fwallow up thy waters, and thou, O heaven, withhold tby rain. And imme-
diately the water abated, and the decree was fulfilled, and the ark relied on
the mountain Al Jodi *; and it was faid, Away with the ungodly people f
And Noah called upon his Lord, and faid, O Lord, verily my fon is of
my family -, and thy promifeis true*: for thou art the moll juft of thofe who
exercife judgment. God anfwered, O Noah, verily he is not of thy family « :
this interceffion of tbine for him, is not a righteous work*. Aik not of me
therefore that wherein thou haft no knowledge : I admonilh thee that thou
become not one of the ignorant. Noah faid, O Lord, I have recourfe unto
thee/cr the ajfifiance of thy grace, that I alk not of thee that wherein I have
no knowledge : and unleis thou forgive me, and be merciful unto me, I fhall

be

■ And the ark refltd on the mountain al Judi ;] obferving that feveral of the inhabitants there-
This mountain is one of thofe which divide Ar- abouts fcraped the pitch off the planks as a ran-
menia, on the foutK, from Mefopotamia, and that ty, and carried it about them for an amulet: and
part of AJJyria, which is inhabited by the Curds , the latter faying, that they ufed the wood of the
from whom the mountains took the name of Car - veffel againft many difeafes with wonderful fnc-
du, or Garda, by the Greeks turned into Gordyari , cefs. The relics of the ark were alfo to be feen
and other names *• Mount al Judi, (which here in the time of Epipbauius, if we may be-
name feems to be a corruption, tho’ it be con- lieve him 9 s and we are told the emp^-or Her a-
fhntly fo written by the Arabs, for Jordi or clius went from the town of Tbamanin up to the
Giordi) is alfo called "Tbamanin probably from mountain al Judi , and faw the place of the aik ,0 .
a town at the foot of it 3 , fo named from the There was alfo formerly a famous monaftery,
number of perfons faved in the ark, the word called the monaftery of tbe ark, upon fome of
tbamanin fignifyiftg eighty , and overlooks the thefe mountains, where the Neftoria&t ufed to
country of Diydr Rabiah, near the cities of celebrate a fcaft day on the fpot where tlbey fup-
Jdawjel , Forda, and Jarir at Ebn Omar » which pofed the ark retted ; but in the year of Cbrift
lad place one affirms to be but four miles from 776, that monaftery was deftroyed by lightening,
the place of the ark, and fays that a Mohammedan with the church, and a numerous congregation
temple was built there with the remains of that in it 1 1 , Since which time it feems the credit
veffel, by the Kbalif Omar Ebn Abdalariz , of this tradition hath declined, and given place
whom he by miftake calls Omar Ebn al Kbat- to another, which obtains at prefent, and ac-
tdb 4 . cording to which the ark retted on mount Metjis

The tradition which affirms the ark to have in Armenia, called by the Turks, Agbir iagb , or
retted on thefe mountains mutt have been very tbe beady or great mountain , and fituate about
ancient, fince it is the tradition of the Chaldeans twelve leagues fouth eaft of Erevan ia .
themfelves * : the Cbaldee paraphrafts confent to b Tby pnmife is true ;] Noah here challenges
their opinion 6 , which obtained very much for- God’s promife, that he would fave his family,
inerly, efpecially among the eafttm Cbriftians 7 . c He is not of tby family #] Being cut off from

To confirm it, we are told, that the remainders it on account of his infidelity,
of the ark were to be feen on the Gordyetan 4 According to a different reading, thispaffage
mountains : BeroJus and Abydenus both declare may be rendrid. For be hath afted unrigbtwjly
there was fuch a report in their time 9 j the firft

1 See Bochart. Pbaleg. /. i.n]. * Geogr.Nub.p . 202 . 3 V D’Herbbl. Bibl. Orient .

t- 404, & 676* Acathiam, L 14./. 135. * Benjamin. Itiner.p . 61. 1 Bi-

rosus, apud Jojepb. Antiq. 1 . 1. c. 4. 6 Qnkelos & Jonathan, in Genef. viii. 4. 7 F.Eu-

ttch. Annul. p. 41. 8 Berosus, apud Jefepb. ubi ftp . Abydenus, apud Eufeb. Brat. Ev.

/. 9. r. 4, 9 Epiph. Hearef 18. iey Elmacin. /. i.r. t, 11 V. Chronic .

Dion y 111 patriarch , Jmhitar . apud JJfeman . Bibl. Orient . T. 2.p. 113. 12 Al Be idawi.

Chap. ii. Al KORAN. i8T

be one of thofe who perifh. It was faid unto him , O Noah, comedown from
the ark % with peace from us, and bleffings upon thee, and upon a part of
thofe who are wich thee b : but as for a part of thorn c , we will fuffer them to
enjoy the provifton of this world ; and afterwards fhall a grievous punifhment
from us be infU&ed on them, in the life to come. This is a fecret hiftory,
which we reveal unto thee : thou didft not know it, neither did thy people,
before this. Wherefore perfevere with patience ; for th eprofperous iffue mall
attend the pious. And unto the tribe of An we fent their brother Hud \ He
faid, O my people worfhip God ; ye have no God befides him : ye only
imagine falfehood, in fitting up idols and interceffors of yotir own making. O
my people, I afk not of you for this my preachings any recompenfe: my
recompenfe do I expeft from him only, who hath created me. Will ye not
therefore underftand ? O my people, afk pardon of your Lord ; and be
turned unto him: he will fend the heaven to pour forth rain plentifully upon
you*, and he will encrcafe your ftrengfh by giving unto you farther ftrength f :
therefore turn not afide, to commit evil. They anfwered, O Hud, thou-
haft brought us no proof of what thou fayejl ; therefore we will not leave
our gods for thy faying, neither do we believe thee. We fay no other
than that fome of our gods have afflidted thee with evil r ; He replied. Ve-
rily I call God to witnefs, and do ye alfo bear witnefs, that I am clear of
that which ye affociate with Goo , befides him. Do ye all therefore join to
devife a plot againft me, and tarry not ; for I put my confidence in God,
my Lord and your Lord. There is no beaft, but he holdeth it by its fore-
lock h : verily my Lord proceedeth in the right way. But if ye turn back,
I have already declared unto you that with which I was fent unto you; and
my Lord fhall fubftitute another nation in your ftead ; and' ye fhall not
hurt him at all : for my Lord is guardian over all things. And when our
fentence came to be put in executions we delivered Hud, ahd thofe who
had believed with him *, through our mercy ; and we delivered them from a
grievous punifhment. And this tribe of An wittingly rejected the figns of
their Lord, and were difobedient unto his meflengers, and they followed the
command of every rebellious perverfe perfon. Wherefore they were followed

in

* Come down from the ark. See.) The Moham-
medans fay that Noah went into the ark on the
tenth of Rajeb, and came out of it the tenth of
at Moharram ; which therefore became a fall.
So that the whole time of Noah's being in the
ark, according to them, was fix months 1 * .

b With peace, and blejpng, on a part of them ;]
viz. Such of them as continued in their belief.

c But as for a part of them j] That is, fuch
of his pofterity as ihould depart from the true
faith, and fall into idolatry.

4 See chap. 7. p. 1*3.

* He will fend you rain plentifully }] For the
Aiites were grievoufly diftreiled by a drought

1 ^/Bbidawi. See D'Herbel. ubi fup.

Be id aw 1. * Idem.

for three years *.

f And will entrtafe your ftrengtb ;] By giving
you children ; the womb* of their wives being
alfo rendered barren, during the time of the
drought, as well as their lands J .

* ftave affiUled thee with evil 5] Or madnefs $
having deprived thee of thy reafon for the indig-
nities thou hail offered them.

h There is no beaft but he' holdeth it by its fere-
lock l] That is, he exercifeth an abfoiute power
over it. A creature held in this manner being
fuppofed to be reduced to the loweft fubjeflion.

1 And thofe who believed with him >] Who were
in number four thouland +.

* Set the notes to chap. 7. p. 1 24 3 At

182 Al KORAN. Chap. ii.

in this world by a curfe, and they Jhall be followed by the fame on the day of
refurre&ion. Did not Ad difbelieve in their Lord ? Was it not faid, A-
way with Ad, the people of Hud ? And unto the tribe of Thamud wefent
their brother Saleh \ He faid unto them , O my people, worfhip God ;
ye have no God befides him. It is he who hath produced you out of the
earth, and bath given you an habitation therein. Aik pardon of him there-
fore, and be turned unto him ; for my Lord is near, and ready to anfwer.
They anfwered, O Saleh, thou waft a perfon on whom we placed our
hopes before this b . Doft thou forbid us to worfhip that which our fathers
worfhipped ? But we are certainly in doubt concerning the religion to which
thou doft invite us, as juftly to be fufpeCbed. Saleh faid, O my people,
tell me •, if I have received an evident declaration from my Lord, and he
hath bellowed on me mercy trpm himfelf ; who will protect me from the
‘vengeance of God, if I be difobedient unto him ? For ye lhall not add un-
to me, other than lofs. And he faid, O my people, this Jhe-camel of God is
a fign unto you ; therefore difmifs her freely that lhe may feed in God’s
earth, and do her no harm, left a fwife punifhment feize you. Yet they
killed her ; and Saleh faid. Enjoy yourfelves in your dwellings for three days';
after which ye Jhall be defrayed. This is an infallible prediction. And when
our deiree came to be executed, we delivered Saleh and thofe who believed
with him, through our merev, alfo from the difgrace of that day ; for thy
Lord is the ftrong, the mighty God. But a terrible noife from heaven af-
iailed thofe who had aCted un]ufHy ; and in the morning they were found
in tfrtir houfes, lying dead Wproftrate ; as though they had never dwelt
therein. Did not Thamud difbelieve in their Lord ? Was not Thamud
oaf far away ? Our meflengers 4 alfo came formerly unto Abraham, with
good tidings : they laid, Peace be upon thee. And he anfwered, And on
-you be peace ? ;uid he tarried not, but brought a roafted calf. And when
he law that their hands did not touch the meat, he mifliked them, and en-
tertained a fear of them e . But they faid. Fear not : for we are fent unto
the people of Lot f . And his wife Sarah was Handing by*, and {he laugh-
ed 11 ', and we promifed her Isaac, and after Isaac, Jacob. She faid, Alas!

lhall

* chap. j. p. 124. others, agreeably to feripture, lay they were but

b W t had plated our hopes on tbit before this ;] throe, viz. Gabriel, Michael, assd Ifraftl *.
Dufigning to have made thee our prince, becaofe « He entertained a fear of tbemi ) Apprehend-
of the lingular prudence and other good qualities ing they had fome ill defign againtt him, becaufe
which we obferved in thee s but tby diffenting they would not eat with him.
from us in point of religious worfhip has fruftrat- ‘ We sere fent unto the people of Lot ;] Being

:ed thofe hopes ’. angels, whofe nature needs not thefupportof

c For three dayti] via. Wedni/da y, Ibttrfday, food*,
and Friday K See chap. 7. p. 125. not. c. e Sarah mu flatting by ;] Either behind the

Our mjftngtrs ;] Tfrcfe were the lagek, cotta*** or door of the tent j or elfe waiting up-
who were fent to acquaint Abrtbmn with the pro- on them,

aifeof and to deftroy Sodom and Gomor- *■ And fie laughed j] The commentators are
borne of the commentators pretend they fe little acquainted with feripture, that, not
were twelve, or nine, or ten in number ; but know-

* dl BsinAwa. * ld*m. 3 idem, JalLalo’jioih, See Gen. xviia. 4 Ida*.

/

/

Chap. ii. Al KORAN. 183

lhall I bear a fon, who am old $ this my hufband alfo being advanced in
years 4 ? Verily this would be a wonderful thing. The angels anfwered, Doft
thou wonder at the effebl of the command of God ? The mercy of God
and his bleflings be upon you, the family of the houle 11 : for he it praife-
worthy, and to be glorified. And when bis apprehenfion had departed frorti
Abraham, and the good tidings of Isaac's birth had come unto him, he
difputed with us concerning the people of Lot c : for AbrAham was a piti-
ful, compaffionate, and devout perfon. Ihe angels' faid unto him, O Abra-
ham, abftain from this $, for now is the command of thy Lord comedo
put their [entente in execution, and an inevitable punifhinent is ready to fall
upon them. And when our mefiengcra came unto Lou, he was troubled

for them 4 , and his arm was ftraitened concerning them % and he faid, This

is a grievous day. And his people came unto, him, rufhing upon him : and
they had formerly been guilty of wickednefs. Lot faid unto them, O my
people, thefe my daughters are more lawful for you : therefore fear God,
and put me not to lhame by wronging my guefts. Is there not a man of
prudence among you? They anfwered, Thou knoweft that we have no need
of thy daughters ; and thou well knoweft what we would have. He laid.
If I had ftrength fufficient to oppofe you, or I could have recourfe unto a
powerful fupport j I Would certainly do it. ‘The ahgtls faid, O Lot, verily we
are the meflengers of chy Lord j they fhall by no means come in unto thee 1
Go forth therefore with thy family, in feme part of the night, and let noc

any of you turn back : but as for thy wife *, that lhall happen unto her,

which

knowing the true ooeafion of Sarah's laughter,
they ft nun their inventions togivefotrlereafonfor
it One fays, that (he laughed at the ffngeladifcover-
ihg themfeives, and ridding Abraham and herfeif
of their apprehenfions j and another, that it was
at the approaching deftruflfen of the Sodomites,
(-t Very prohable motive in one of her fex.) Some
however interpret the original word differently,
and wil! have ft that (he did not tough', but that
htr ttutfis, which had flopped tot ffemal years,
tame upon her at this time, as a previous ftgn of
her future conception 1 .

» Shall I beat- a fin « bo am old, my husband
alfi being advanced in years A] At Bsidtwi writes
that Sarah was then ninety, or ninety nine years
old, and Abraham a hundred and twenty.

b The family of thelmfi t] Or the flock whence
all the prophets were -to proceed for the future.
Qr the expreflion may perhaps refer to Abraham
and Jfmach building the Caaba, whith is often
called, by way of excellence, the keufi.

e He difputed with us ceneerniteg the peepkof
Lot ;] That is, he interceded with us for them *.
Jalldo'ddin, inftead of the numbers mentioned by
Mofis, (ays, that Abraham firft asked whether Goo

1 Idem, Jam. aeo’ddin, ^//Zamakhshari;
din, ^/Beidawi. V. Joseph, Ant . /. t. r. t

would deftfoy thofe cities if throe hundred righ-
teous perfons were found therein, and lo fell fncs
ceffively to two hundred, forty, fourteen, and
at laft came to one :< but there was not one righ-
teous peifon to be found among them, except
only Lot and his fondly.

“ He was troubled for them »] Bccaufe they »p.
peared in the lhape of beahdfui yonng men,
which mud needs tempt thofe of Sodom to abufo
them } .

• His arm a rat ftraitened ceucerseing them ;] i. t,
He knew hiutfclf on able to proton them againfl
the infults of his townfroeir.

f The augelt ftift, O Lot — they ftralt b$ no
means come in unto thee i] Al BeiJduit fays, that
Lot (hot his door, and argued the matter with
the riotous affirm bly freon, behind it i but at
length, they endeavoured to get over the » ad :
whereupon Gabriel, feeing tus.d'rftreh, (buck
them on the face with one of his wmg»,*and
blinded them ; (o that they moved off, crying out
for help, and dying that Lot had magicians
in his houte.

t But as for thy wife, &c.] This feems to
be the true fenfe of the paflage ; but according

to

* V. Gen. xviii, 23, (Ac. J J.tu.A uo'a

1.

184 At KORAN. Chap, ii,

which fliall happen unto them. Verily the prediction of their punijhment (hall
te fulfilled in the morning : is not the morning near ? And when our com-
mand came, we turned thole cities upfide down *, and we rained upon them
(tones of baked clay 11 , one following another, and being marked", from
thy Lord 4 and they are not far diftant from thofe who a£t unjuftly 4 . And
unto Madian we fent their brother Shoaib*: he laid, O my people, wor-
-fhip God ; ye have no God but him : and diminilh not meafure and
weight. Verily I fee you to be in a happy condition f : but I fear for you
the puriifhment of the day which will encompafs /A* ungodly. O my peo-
ple, give foil meafure, and juft weight \ and diminilh not unto men ought
of their matters ; neither commit injuftice in the earth, aCting corruptly.
The refidue which Jhdl remain unto you as the gift of God, after yo Jhalt have
.done juftice to others , will be better for you, than Wealth gotten by fraud j if
ye be true believers. I am no guardian over you. They anfwered, O
Shoaib, do thy prayers injoin thee, that we lhould leave the gods which our
fathers worlhipped ; or that we fhould not do what we pleafe with our fob-
ftance * ? Thou only, it feems, art the wife perfon , and fit to diredh He faid,
O my people, tell me ; if I have received an evident declaration from my
Lord, and he hath beftowed on me an excellent provifioft, and I will notcon-
fent unto you in that which I forhid you ; do I feek any other than your re-
formation, to the utmoft of my power ? My fopport is from God alone ; on
him do I truft, and unto him do l turn me. O my people, let n6t your oppofing
of me, draw on you a vengeance like unto that which fell on the people of

to a different reading of the rowel, fome in*
terpret it, Except xby toff* J the meaning being,
that Lot is here commanded to take his family
with him except bis wife. Wherefore the com-
mentators cannot agree whether Lot's wife went
forth with him or not 5 fome denying it, and
pretending that fhe was left behind and penfhed
in the common defhruftion; and others affirming
it, and faying, that when fhe heard the noife of
the ftorm and overthrow of the cities, fhe turn-
ed back lamenting their fate, and was immediate-
ly ftrnek down and killed by one of the flones
mentioned a little lower *. A punilhment fhe
jnftly merited for her infidelity, and difobedience
to her husband a .

a We turned tbofe cities upfide down For they
tell us, that Gabriel thrufl his wing under them;
and lifted them up fo high, that the inhabitants
of the lower heaven heard the barkingof the
dogs, and the crowing of the cocks ; and then
inverting them, threw them down to the earth 3 .

b Stones of baked clay.\\ The kiln wherein
they were burned, fome imagine to have .been
hell

\ ’ ' i * ij L '

1 Iidem interprets * See chap. 66 .

* ^// Beidawi.

c And being marked That is, as fome foppofe,
ftreaked with white and red, or having^ fame ci-
ther peculiar mark to diftingtttfh them frpm ordi-
nary flones. But the common opinion is, that
each ffone had the name of the perfon who was
to be killed by it, written thereon \ The army
of Jbraba al Afhram was alfo defhoyed by the
fame kind of ftones.

d And they are not far defiant from tbofe who
a 8 unjuftly ;] This is a kind of threat to other
wicked perfons, and particularly to the infidels
of Mecca , who deferved and might juftly ap-
prehend the fame puniihment

* See chap. 7. p. 126, &c.

f I fee you to be in 0 happy condition ;] That is,
enjoying plenty of all things ; and therefore hav-
ing the lefs occafion tp defraud one another, and
befog the more ftrongly bound to be thankful
and obedient unto God.

* That we fhould not do what we pleafe with
our fubftance »] For this liberty they imagined
was taken from them, by his prohibition of falfe
weights and me a fares, or to diminilh or adulte-
rate their coin * .

3 Jallalo’ddiii, a/Riidawi. * Iidem

/

/

Chap. ii. Al KORAN. 185

Noah, or the people of Hbd, or the people of Saleh : neither was the peo-
ple of Lot far diftant from you *. Ask pardon therefore of your Loro »
and be turned unto him : for my Lord is merciful, and loving. -They anfweredi

0 Shoaib, we underftand not much of what thou fayeft ; and we fee thee to
be a man of no power b among us : if it had not been for the fake of thy
femily *, we had furely ftoned thee, neither couldeft thou have prevailed a-
gainft us. Sho^vb faid, O my people, is my family more worthy in your
opinion, than God ? and do ye caft him behind you with negledt ? Verily
my Lord comprehendeth that which ye do. O my people, do ye work ac-
cording to your condition ; I will furely work according to my duty *. And ye
/hall certainly know, on whom will be inflifted a punifliment which fhall
cover him with fhame, and who is a lyar. Wait therefore the event ; for

1 alfo will wait it with you. Wherefore when our decree came to be executed.,
we delivered Shoaib and thofe who believed with him, through our
mercy : and a terrible noife from heaven affailed thofe who had afted
unjuftly ; and in the morning they were found in their houfes lying dead
and proftrate, as though they had never dwelt therein. Was not Madian
removed from off the earth , as Thamuo had been removed? And we
formerly fent Moses with our figns, and manifeft power, unto Pha-
raoh and his princes*: but they followed the command of Pharaoh \
although the command of Pharaoh did not diredt them aright- Pha-
raoh fhall precede his people on the day of refur region, ana he fhall
lead them into hell fire ; an unhappy way Jhall it be which they fhall be led.
They were followed in this life by a curfe, and on the day of rcfurreftion
-miferable Jhall be the gift which fhall be given them. This is a fart of the
hiftories of the cities, which we rehearfe unto thee. Of them there are fame
ftanding ; and others which are utterly demolilhed f . And we treated them
not unjuftly, but they dealt unjuftly with their own fouls: and their gods which
they invoked, befides God, were of no advantage unto them at all, when
the decree of thy Lord came to be executed on them , neither were they any
other than a detriment unto them. And thus was the punilhment of thy Lord
infliEled , when he punifhed the cities which were unjuft } for his punilh-
ment is grievous and fevere. Verily herein is a fign unto him who feareth

B b the

* Neither was the people of Lot far diftant frm refpeft we bear to thy family and relations;
ytu ;] For Sodom and Gomorrah were fituate not whom we honour as being of our religion, and
a great way from you, and their deftru&ion not for any spprehenfion we have of their power
happened not many ages ago ; neither did they to affift you againft us. The original word here
deferve it, on account of their obftinacy and tnnflated family , fignifies any number from three
wickedncfs, much snore than your (elves. to feven or ten, but not more

k A man of no power j] The Arabic word datf, * See chap. 6. p. it 3. not. a.
weak, fignifying alfo, in the Hamyaritit dialed, ' See chap. 7. p. 1 28, $tc.
blind, fomc fuppofe that Shoaib was (0, and that f DtmolifieJ;} Literally, mwen down; the
the Midianitei objc&ed that to him, as a de. fentence prefenting the different images of corn
fed which disqualified him for the prophetic ftanding, and cut down, which is alfo often ufed
office. by the facrcd writer*.

« lor the fake rf thy family >] i. e. For the

1 Al Bud awl

186 Al K 0 RA N. Chap.h.

the punifhmentof the laft day: that Jball be a day, whereon all men fhall be
a (Tembled, and that /ball be a day whereon wknefs (hall be born ; we defer it
not, but to a determined time. When that day fhall come, no foul (hall fpeak
to excufe it felf, or to inter cede for another , but by the perm i (lion of Goo. Of them
one Jball be miferable, and another Jhall be happy. And they wh<5 fhall be mifer-
able, fhall be thrown into bell fire ; there (hall they wail and bemoan themfclves *:
they fhall remain therein fo long as the heavens and the earth fhall endure k ;
except what thy Lord fhall pleafe to remit of their fenteUce * ; for thy Lord ef-
fefteth that which he pleafeth. But they who fhall be happy, Jhatl be admitted
into paradife ; they fhall remain therein fo long as the heavens and the earth
.endure ; befides what thy Lopoj fhall pleafe to add Unto their blifs * a boun-
ty which fhall not be interrupted. Be not therefore in doubt concerning
that which thefe men worfhip : they worfhip no other than what their fathers
worfliipped before them ; and we will furely give them their full portion, not
in the leaft diminifhed. We formerly gave unto Moses the book of the law-,
and difputes arofe among his people concerning it : and unlefe a previous de-
cree had proceeded from thy Lord, to bear with them during this life, the
matter had been furely decided between them. And -thy people are dfo jealous
and in doubt concerning the Kqojn. But unto every one of them will thy
Lord render the reward of their works ; for he well knoweth that which
they do. Be thou ftedfnft therefore, as thou haft been commanded ; and
let him alfo be jledfaft who fhall be converted with thee •, and tranfgrefs not:
for he feeth that which ye do. And incline not unto thofe who aft un-
juftly, left the fire of bell touch you : for ye have no proteftorjj except
God s neither fhall ye be affifted again f him. Pray regularly morning and
evening A ; and in the former part of the night', for good works drive* away
evils. This is an admonition unto thofe who confider : wherefore perfevere
with patience ; for God foffereth not the reward of the righteous to perifh. Were
fuch of the generations before you, indued with underftanding and virtue,
who forbad rhe afting corruptly in the earth, any more than a few only of
thofe whom we delivered ? But they who were unjuft followed the delights
which they injoyed in this world*, and were wicked doers * : and thy Lord

was

* There Jball they wall and bemoan ibemfelvei ;]
The two words in the orygia&l fignify properly
the vehement drawing in and expiration of one’s
breath, which is ufual to perfons in great pain
and angutfh ; and particularly the reciprocation
of the voice of an afs, when he brays.

b So long as the heavens and the earth Jball efb
dure ;] This is not to he ftriffy underftood, as if
either the punifhnaxnt of the damned fhould
have an end, or the heavens and the earth fhould
endure for ever ; die eaepreffion being, only ufed
by way of image or companion, which needs
not agree in every point with the thing figniiicd.
Some, however, think the future heavens and

1 Al Bbidawi.

earth, into which the prefent fhall be changed,
are here meant *.

c 6 ee the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. {* 93.

d Morning and evening ;] Literally in the two
extremities of the day.

c And in the firmer fart if the night ;} That
is, after fun-ftt, and before fuppd# ; when thfc
Mohammedans iky their fourth prayer, called by
them Salat al mogbreh, or the evenmg^prayer s .

f Followed the delights which they enjoyed in this
world ;] Making it their foie bufinefstppleaft
their luxurious defires and appetites? and placing
their whole felicity therein.

* Al Beidawi fays, that this paffage gives the

/

Chap. 12. Al K 0 RA N, 187

was not of fucb a difpofilion as to deftroy the cities unjuftly *, while their
inhabitants behaved themfelves uprightly. And if thy Lord pleafed, he
would have made all men of one religion : but they lhall not ceafe to dif-
fer among themfelves, unlefs thofe on whom thy Lord fhall have mercy :
and unto this hath he created them ; for the word of thy Lord lhall be ful-
filled, when he /aid. Verily I will fill hell altogether with genii and men. The
whole which we have related of the hiftories of our apoftles do we relate un-
to thee, that we may confirm thy heart thereby ; and herein is the truth
come unto thee, and an admonition, and a warning unto the true believers.
Say unto thofe who believe not, Adi ye according to your condition ; we
furely will adt according to our duty b : and wail the ijfue ; for we certainly
wait it alfo. Unto God is known that which is fecrfct in heaven and earth ;
and unto him lhall the whole matter be referred. Therefore worlhip him,
and put thy truft in him } for thy Lord is not rcgardiefs of that which ye do.

reafon why the nations were d^ftroyed of old ; * Unjuftly i] Or, as the commentator full

viz. for their violence and injuftice, their fbl- named , explains it, for their idolatry only, when,
lowing their own lulls, and for their idolatry and thty obferved juftice in other refpeda.
unbelief. b See chap, 6. p. 1 13, not. jl

CHAP. XII.

Intitledy Joseph*; revealed a/Mecca.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

1 A L. R- b Thefe are the figns of the perfpicuous book ; which we have
fent down in the Arabic tongue, that peradventure ye might under-
stand. We relate unto thee a moft excellent hiftory, by revealing unto thee
this Koran % whereas thou waft before one of the negligent 11 . When Jo-
seph faid unto his father s O my father, verily I faw in my dream eleven

B b 2 ftars,

* The Kmijby thinking to pawde Mobam - c This KorUa j] Or this particular chapter;
med, at the initiation, and by the direction of For the word Koran, as has been elfewhere ob-
-certain JewUb Rabbins, demanded of him how ferved 3 , properly fignifying no more than a
Jacob's family, happened to go down into Egypt j reading, or lecture, is often ufed to denote, not
and that he would relate to them the hiftory of only 'the whole volume, but any diltind chapter
Jofcphy with all its circumftaiKCs whereupon or fbfton of it.

he pretended to have received this chapter front d One of the negligent 5] i. e. So far from be-
heaven, containing the ftoiy trf that patrjsfch l . ipg acquainted with the’ ftory, that k never fo
It is feid, however, to have been receded by much as entred into thy thoughts : a certain ar-
two Mohammedan feds, branches of the Kbdjij- gument, fays al Beiddtoi, that it mull have been
ites x called the Ai&redittx and' chb Mamfmians, revealed to him from heaven.

-as apocryphal fpwious. c Hu father j\ Who was Jacob, the fon of

b See the Prelim. Difc. p. 59. t$c. Ifaac, the fon of Abraham 3 .

3 Prelim. Dif III. f 56. 3 Al Bildawi, dfa

* ./£/$EIDAWI.

1 8 8 Al KORAN. Chaf. 12.

ftars*, and the fun and the moon 5 I faw them make obeifance unto me.
Jacob fa id, O my child, tell not thy vifion to thy brethren, left they devife
fome plot againft thee h ; for the devil is a profefled enemy unto man: and
thus, according to tby dream , ftiall thy Lord chufe thee, and teach thee the in-
terpretation of dark fayings c , and he fhall accomplifh his favour upon thee
and upon the family of Jacob, as he hath formerly accomplilhed it upon thy,
fathers Abraham and Isaac ; for thy Lord is knowing and wife. Surely
in the hiftory of Joseph and his brethren there are figns of God’s providenu-
to the inquifitive •, when they faid to one another , Joseph and his brother*
are dearer to our father than we, who are the greater number : our father
certainly maketh a wrong judgment. Wherefore flay Joseph, or drive him
into fome diftantor defart part of the earth, and die face of your father fhall be
cleared towards you* ; and ye fhall afterwards be people of integrity. One
of them f fpoke and laid ; Slay not Joseph, but throw him to the bottom of
the well i and fome travellers will take him up, if ye do this. They faid,
unto Jacob , O father, why doft thou not intruft Joseph with us, fince we are
fincere well-wijhtrs unto him? Send him with us to morrow, into the field,
that he may divert himfelf, and fport *, and we will be his guardians. Ja-
cob anfwered. It grieveth me that ye take him away } and I rear left the wolf
devour him h , while ye are negligent of him. Thev (aid, furely if the wolf
devour him, when there are fo .many of us, we fhall be weak indeed *. And
when they had carried him with them, and agreed to fet him at the bot-
tom of the well*, they executed their defign: and we fent a revelation unto

him,

* Eleven ftars ;] The commentators give us
the names of thefe ftars, (which I think it need-
lefs to trouble the reader with,) as Mohammed
repeated them, at the requeft of a Jew, who
thought to intrip him by the queftion x .

b Left they devife feme plot againft thee}] For
they fay, Jacoby judging that JofepFs dream por-
tended his advancement above the reft of the
family, juftly apprehended his brethren’s envy
might tempt them to do him fome mifehief.

c The interpretation of dark fayings ;] That is,
of dreams ; or, as others fuppofe, of the pro-
found paflages of feripture, and all difficulties
refpefling either religion or juftice,

ri His brother ;] viz. Benjamin} his brother
by the lame mother.

e The fate of your father fhall be cleared to*
wards you 5] Or, he will fettle his love wholly
upon you, and ye will have no rival in his fa-
vour .

f One of them , &c.] This perfon, as fome fay,
was Judah-, the moft prudent and noble-minded
of them all ; or, according to others, Reuben ,
Whom the Mohammedan writers call Rulfil 1 2 .
And both thefe opinions are fupported by the

1 Idem, ^Zamakhshaiu.

* JJ&UVAWJj

account of Mofes , who tells us, that Reuben ad-
vifed them not to kill Jofepb , but to throw him
into a pit privately, intending to releafe him 3 j
and that afterwards Judah , in Reuben's abfence,
perfuaded them not to let him die in the pit, but
to fell him to the Iftmaelites

t That he may divert himfelf &c.] Some co-
pies read, in the firft perfon plural, that toe may
divert our /elves, &c.

h Left the wolf devour him ;] The reafon why
Jacob feared this beaft in particular, as the com-
mentators fay, was either bccaufe the land was
full of wolves s or elfe becaufe Jacob had dreamed
he faw Jofepb devoured by one of thofe crea-
tures

* We J, hall be weak indeed j] L e. It will be
an inftance of extream weaknefs and folly in us,
and we fhall be julUy blamed for his lofs.

k At the bottom of the well . ] This well, lay
fome, was a certain well near Jernfalem , or not
far from the river Jordan ; but others call it the
well of Egypt, or Midian . The commentators
tells us, that when the Tons of Jacob had gotten
Jofepb with them in the field, they began to
abuie and to beat him fb unmercifully, that they

had

* Ibid. a6j 27.

2 Idem . 3 Cat. xxxvii. 21, 22.

^/Z&MAXHSHA&I.

Chap. i2. Al KORAN. 189

him*, faying. Thou (halt hereafter declare this their a&ion unto ii rm j eu 1
they (hall not perceive thee to be Joseph. And they came to their IV,
at even, weeping, and faid. Father, we went and ran races with one another b ,
and we left Joseph with our baggage, and the wolf hath devoured him >
but thou wilt not believe us, although we fpeak the truth. And they pro-
duced his inner garment Jlained with falfe blood. J^coe anfwered. Nay, but
ye your felves have contrived the thing for your own fakes c : however patience
is raoft becoming, and God’s afllftance is to be implored to enable me to
fupport the misfortune which ye relate. And certain travellers 4 came, and
fent one * to draw water for them: and he let down his bucket', and faid.
Good news * ! this is a youth. And they concealed him h , that they might fell
him as a piece of merchandize : but God knew that which they did. And

they

had killed him, had not 'Judah, on his crying out
for help, infilled on the promife they had made
not to kill him, but to call him into the well.
Whereupon they let him down a little way ; but
a* he held by the fides of the well, they bound
him, and took off his inner garment, defigfling
to flam it with blood, to deceive their father.
Jofepb begged hard to have his garment returned
him, but to no purpofe, his brothers telling him,
with a fneer, tlat the eleven ftars, and the fun
and the moon might cloath him and keep him
company. When they had let him down half
way, they let him fall thence to the bottom ;
and there being water in the well (tho* the fcrip-
ture (ays the contrary,) he was obliged to get
upon a ilonc, on which as he Hood weeping, the
angel Gabriel came to him with the revelation
mentioned immediately 1 .

* We fent a revelation unto him ] Jofepb be-
ing then but feventeen years old, Al Beiddwi
©bferves that herein he referobled John the Bap-
tift and Jesus, who were alfo favoured with the
divine communication very early. The com-
mentators pretend that Gabriel alio cloathed him
in the well with a garment of filk of paradife.
lor they fay that when Abraham was thrown
into the fire by Nimrod a , he was ftrippedj and
that Gabriel brought this garment and put it on
him i and that from Abraham it defcended to
Jacob, who folded it up and put it into an amu-
let, which he hung about Jofepb\ neck, whence
Gabriel drew it out 3 .

b And ran races* &c.] Thefe races they ufed
by way of exercife ; and the commentators ge-
nerally underiland here that kind of race where-
in they alfo fhewed their dexterity in throwing
darts, which is flill ufed in the cait

c Ye your felves have contrived the thing , &C.J

This Jacob had reafon to fufpcft, becaufe when
the garment was brought to him, he obferved ■
that tho’ it was bloody, yet it was not torn \

d Certain travellers ;] viz. A caravan or com-
pany travelling from Midian to Egypt, who rett-
ed near the well, three days alter Jofepb had
been thrown into it.

e They fint one to draw water , &C.J The com-
mentators are fo exadl as to give us the name of
this man. Who, as they pretend, was Malec Bin
Dbor , of the tribe of Kboxdab f .

f He let down bis bucket ;] And Jofepb , mak-
ing ufe of the opportunity, took hold of the
cord, and was drawn up by the man.

* Good news /] The original words are Ya tejh-
ra: the latter of which fome take for the proper
name of the water-drawer’s companion, whom
be called to his afEftance ; and then they mutt
be tranllated, O Bofbra .

h They concealed him , &c.] The expofitors are
not agreed whether the pronoun they relates to*
Malec and his companions, or to Jofepb'* bre-
thren. Thofe who efpoufe the former opinion
fay, that thofe who came to draw water con-
cealed the manner of their coming by him from
therettof the caravan, that they might keep
him to therofclvesj pretending that fome people
of the place had given him to them to fell for
them in Egypt . And they who prefer the latter
opinion, tell us, that Judah carried victuals to
Jofepb every day while he was in the well, but
not finding him there on the fourth day, he ac-
quainted his brothers with it : whereupon (hey
all went to the caravan and claimed Jofepb as
their Save, he not daring to difeover that he was
their brother, left fbmething worfc fhould befal
him ; and at length they agreed to fell him to
them 6 .

* l idem . a See ebap, 2i,

* Idem. 6 Idem .

3 Al Bsidawi, Al ZAMAKHtKAM'

4 atfgsiPAWi,

igo Al KORAN. Chap. 12,

they fold him for a mean price, for a few pence*, and valued him lightly.
And the Egyptian who bought him b faid to his wife % ufe him honour,
ably ; peradventure he may be fer viewable to us, or we may adopt him for
our fon 4 . Thus did we prepare an eftabliihmertt for Joseph in the earth,
and we taught hjm the interpretation of dark fayings : for Gof> is well able
to effeft his purpofe ; but the greater part of mett do not underftamJ. And
when he had attained his age of ftrertgth, we bellowed on him wifdom,
and knowledge ; for thus do we recomttenfe the righteous. And foe, i tt
• whofe houfe he was, delired him to lie wftH her ; and Ihe Ihut the doors and
faid. Come hither. He anfwered. Goo forbid ! VfcrHy my lord « hath made
my dwelling with him eafy ; and the ungrateful fhall not profper; But lhe
refolved within her felf to enjoy him, and he WOtild have refolved to enjoy
her, had he not feen the evident demonftration of his Lord'. So we turn-
ed away eyil and filthinels from him, becaufe he was one of our fincere
fervants. And they ran to get one before the othit to the door®; and flje
rent his inner garfnent behind. Ana they met her lord at the. door. She
faid. What (hall be the rewaid of him who feeketh to commit evil in thy
family, but imprifonment* and a painful punilhment ? And Joseph faid,
She aiked me to lie with her. And a witriefi, of her Family* bore witnefs,

f a m,

a They fold him far a man frk*, &c.] Name-
ly twenty, or twenty two dirhem , and thole
not of full Weight neither ; for having weighed
one ounce of (liver only, the remainder was paid
by tale, which is the moft unfair way of pay-
ment

b The Egyptian who fought His name

was Kitftr , or Itfir, (a corruption of Potiphurif
and he was a man of great cdnfidemtkm, being
fuperintendenr of the royal treafmy 4 .

The commentators fay, that JoJepb came into
his fervice at feventeen, and lived with him thir-
teen years ; and that he was made prime mhniiter
in the thirty third year of his age, and died at
an hundred and tWettty.

They Who fuppofe Jofeph ww twice fold; dif-
fer as to the price tile Egyptian paid for him :
fame faying it was twenty dinirt of gold, a pair
of (hoes, and two white garments i and others,
that it was a large quantity of fi ver, or of gold.

c His toife ;] Some- call her RdtU but the
name (he is b eft inown by> is that of Zoleikb*.

d Or we may adapt him ;] Kiefir havitog no
children, k is ftid that Jofeph gained his wri-
ter's good opinion fd fuddenly by hi s counte-
nance, which Kaffir* who, they pretend, had
great skill in phyfiognomy, judged to* indicate
his prudence and other good qualities.

* My lord }] viz. Kitfir . But others un-

derfhnd it to oe (poken of God.

f Had he not feen the evident denrnf ration f
his Lord i] That is, had he not ferioufty con-
fidered the filthinefs of whoredom, xssd (he great
gu*k thereof Some, however, fuppcvt that the
words mean fonre miraculous voice or apparition,
font by God to divert Jofeph from executiagthd
criminal thoughts which began to pofTeft him.
For they fcy, that he was fo hr tempted with
his miftrefs’s beauty and inticing behaviour, that
he fit in her lap, and even began toundrefs
hkkfelf, when a voice called to him, and bid him
beware of her ; but he taking no notice of this
admonition, tho* it was repeated three times, at
length the angel Gabriel* or, as others will
have it, the figure of hit tmifter appeared to
him : but the more general ppinion is that it was
the apparition of his father Jacob f who bit his
fingers ends, or, as foihe write, ftruck -him on
the bread, whereupon his lubricity palled out at
the ends of his fingers 3 .

For this fable, fo injurious to the charaftet of
Jeftph) the Mohammedans are obliged to their eld
friends the Jews *, who imagine that he had a
defign to lie with his miftrefi, from thefe words
of Msfet i , Jtnd it came to p*fs> — that Jofeph
t&nf into the fotefe to do bis btfnefs, Uc.

* They ran to the door ;] He flying item her,
and fhe running after to detain hhn.

* A tyifitefi bf her family ;] viz, A coufin of
hers, who was then a child in the cradle

x Al Beidawi. 1 Idem . 3 Idem , Al Zamakhshari, Jall alo'ddinj Yahya. 4 Idet

Baby l Sed . Najhim, p. 36. F. Bartolocc. BibL Rabb, part . 3. p. 509. 1 Geruf xxxiz. 11.

4 Supra citati interpreter

Chap. 12. Al 1 C 0 RAN \ 191

faying , If his garment be rent before, fhe fpeaketh truth, and he is a liar :
but if his garment be rent behind, fhe lieth, and he is a fpeaker of truth.
And when her hujband faw that his garment was torn behind, he faid, This
is a cunning contrivance of your Jex » for furely your cupning is great. O
Joseph, take no farther notice of this affair : and thou, O woman , afk par-
don for thy crime ; for thou art a guilty perfon. And certain women faid
fublickly * in the city. The nobleman’s wife afked her fervant to lie with
her : he hath inflamed her breaft with his love ; and we perceive her to be in a
manifeft error. And when fhe heard of their fubtle behaviour, fhe fent un-
to them b , and prepared a banquet for them, and fhe gave to each of
them a knife •, and fhe faid unto Joseph^ Come forth unto them. And when
they faw him, they praifed him greatly c ; and they cut their own hands \
and laid, O God ! this is not a mortal > he is no other than an angel,
deferving the higheft r$fp e<3\ And his miftrffs fa$ 5 This is he, for whofe
fake ye blamed me : I afked him to lie with me, but he hath conftanrly re-
fofed 7 But if he do not perform that which I command him, he fhall fure-
ly be call into prifon, and lie fhall be made one of the contemptible. Joseph
laid, O Lqrd, a prifon is more eligible unto me than* the crime to which
they invite me $ but unlefs thou turn afide their fnares from me, I fhall
youthfully incline unto them, and I fhall become one of the foolifh. Where-
fore his Load heard him, and turned afide their fnare from him ; for he
both heareth and knoweth; And it feemed goocj unto them e even after they
had feen the £gns of his innac*ncy, to impnfan him for a time. And there
entred into the pjrifon with him two of the king's fervants f . One of them g faid.

a Certain zaorqey, $c.] Thefe women, whofe
tongues were f q free with Ze/etkb a's chandler on
thisoccafiotfi, were five in number, and the wives
0f>fo many of the kmgV chief officers, his
^Jtiitvberlain, his butler, his baker, his jailor,
and his herd (man 1 .

b She fent mo them ;] The number of all the
women invited*, was fp.rfy, and among them were
the five ladies a.bovemetiuoned a .

c They 'prpiftjt b\m gn#fy *] The old Latin
tranflators have lli^nfely mjftaken the feufe of
the original word Qefatrnabo, which they render
menftruat<e fttni ; and then rebuke Mohammed for
the indecency, crying otit demurely ip the mar-
gin, O fadum & obfearmm prophet pm t $rpe*
nius 3 thinks that there is not the ieaft trace or
fuch a meaning in the wosd 1 but he is mittaken :
for the verb cab art in the fourth conjugation,
which is here ufed* has tfiatjmpptf, tho* the
fuhioining of the pronoun to it hert fyvhich pof-
fibly the Latin tranflators did not pbfcrve) abfo-
lately overthrows that in te rprqta jtiqju.

d They <ut tbeir <nvn bands Through extreme

furprize at the wonderful beauty of Jofepb }

which forprize Zpleikba forefeet ng, j>ut ktjiyes
into their hands, on purppfe that thus" accident
might happen: Some writers have pbferved,
on occafion of this pfiflage, that it is cuftomaiy
in the eaft for lovers to teflify the violence of
their paffion by cutting themfelves, as a fign that
they would fpend their bjood in the fervice of
the perfon beloved ; which is true enough, but
I do not find that any of the commentators fup-
pofe thefe ^Egyptian ladies had any fpda defign.

e It feeme/ffood unto them, 0 That is to Kitfif
and his (rienas. The otcafion of Jofepb'* im-
prifonmetitis faid to be, either that they fufpeft-
ed him to be guilty, notwithftanding the proof®
which had been given of his innocence ; or clfe
that Zoleikba deflred it, feigning, to deceive her
husband, that fhe wanted to have Jofepb remov-
ed from her fight^ till fhe could conquer her paf-
fion by rime ; tho' her real defign was to force
him to oopiplfaDc^

f Tzfto off the king's fervapts ;] viz. His chief
butler ana baker ; who were accufed of a defign
to povfon him.

* One of them ;] Namely the butler.

3 In not. ad Hifl . Jofepbi .

1 ^/Beidawi.

* Idem.

192 Al KORAN. Chap. 12.

It Teemed to me in my dream that I preffed wine out of grapes. And the 0-
ther faid, It Teemed unto me in my dream that I carried bread on my head
whereof the birds did eat. Declare unto us the interpretation of our dreams'
for we perceive that thou art a beneficent perfon. Joseph anfwered, No food*
wherewith ye may be nourifhed, (hall come unto you, but I will declare un!
to you the interpretation thereof, before it come unto you a . This knowledge
is a part of that which my Lord hath taught me : for I have left the religion
of people who believe not in God, and who deny the life to come; and I
follow the religion of my Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. It
is not lawful for us to a ffocia te any thing with God. This knowledge of
fhe divine unity bath been given us of the bounty of God towards us, and to-
wards mankind ; but the greater part of men are not thankful. O my fej.
low-prifoners, are fundry lords better, or the only true and mighty God ?
Yc worftiip not, befides him, other than the names which ye have named b
yp and your fathers, concerning which God hath Tent down no authoritative
proof : yet judgment belongetb unto God alone ; who hath commanded that
ye worlhip none befides him. This is the right religion ; but the greater
part of men know it not. O my fellow - prifoners, verily the one of you
fhall ferve wine unto his lord, as formerly ; but the other fhall be crucified
and the birds fhall eat from off his head. The matter is decreed concern-
ing which ye feek to be informed. And Joseph faid unto him whom he judg-
ed to be the perfon who fhould efcape of die two. Remember me in the pre-
fence of thy lord. But the devil caufed him to forget to make mention of -
Joseph unto his lord e ; wherefore he remained in the prifon fome years d . And
the king of EortT* faid. Verily I faw in my dream feven fat kine, which
feven lean kine devoured, and feven green ears of corn , and other feven withered
ears. © nobles, expound my vHion unto me, if ye be able to interpret a
vifion. They anfwered, They are confided dreams ; neither are we (killed
in the interpretation of fucb kind <f dreams. And Jos£Ph.s fellow-prifontr

who

a No food wherewith ye may be nourifhtd , Jball
come unto you , but I will declare unto you the in-
terpretation thereof, before it come unto you .] The
meaning of thispaflage feeras to be, either that
Jofeph, to lhew he ufed no arts of divination or
affrology, promifes to interpret their dreams to
them immediately, even before they fhould eat a
fingle meal ; or elfe, he here offers to prophefy
to them beforehand, the quantity and quality of
the vi duals which (hould be brought them, as
a taffe of his skill.
b See chap. 7. p. 1*3. not. g.
c But the devil cauf&d him to forget to mention
Jofeph unto his lord ;] According to the expli-
cation of fome, who take the pronoun him to
^relate to Jofeph, this paflage may be rendred.
But the devil caufed him (i. e. Jofeph) to forget to

1 Al Beidawi. 2 Idem, Jallalo’ddjn.

awi. Set chap* 7* f, 4x8. not, a.

makehis application unto his Lou; and to beg the
good offices of his fellow-prifoner for his deliver-
ance, inftead of relying on Gan alone, as it be-
came a prophet, efpecially, to have done l * .

d Some years ;J The original word fignifying
any number from three to nine, or ten, the com-
mon opinion is that Jofeph remained in prifon fe-
ven yean ; tho* fome fey he was confined no lefe
than twelve years *.

* The king of Egypt ;] This prince, as the
oriental writers generally agree, was Riy£n, the
fon of al W slid the Amalekite who was con-

verted by Jofeph to the worihip of the true God,
and died in the life time of that prophet. But
fome pretend that the Pharaoh of Jofeph and of
Mojes, were one and the fame perfon, and that
he lived (or rather reigned) four hundred years **

3 See the Prelim. D ft- p. 8. 4 JIBu-

/

%

Chap, i i* Al KORAN. 193

who had been delivered, faid, (Tor he remembred Joseph aiter a certain fpace
of time,) I will declare unto you the interpretation thereof ; wherefore let
me go unto the perfon who will interpret it unto me. And he went to the
prifon , and faid, O Joseph, thou man of veracity, teach us the interpretation
of feven fat kine, which feven lean kine devoured, and of feven green eai \
of corn *, and other feven withered ears, which the king f aw in his dream ; that I
may return unto the men who have fent me, that peradventure they may
underftand the fame. Joseph anfwered. Ye fhall fow {even years as ufual :
and the corn which ye fhall reap, do ye leave in its ear *, except a little where
of ye may eat. Then (hall there come, after this, feven grievous years of j a
mine, which fhall confume what ye fhall have laid up as a proviuon for the
fame, except a little which ye fhall have kept. Then fhall there come, af-
ter this, a year wherein men fhall have plenty of rain k , and wherein they
fhall prefs wine and oyl. And when the chief butler had reported this , the king
faid, Bring him unto me. And when the mcflenger came unto Joseph, he
laid. Return unto thy lord, and afk of him, what was the incent of the
women who cut their hands' ; for my Lord well knoweth the fnare which
they laid for me*. And when the women were affembled before the king, he
faid unto them. What was your defign, when ye follicited Joseph to un-
lawful love ? They anfwered, God be praifed ! we know not any ill of him.

The nobleman’s wife faid. Now is the truth become manifefl : I follicited
him to lie with me ; and he is one of thofe who fpeak truth. And when
Joseph was acquainted therewith he faid. This difcovery hath been made, that
my lord might know that I was not unfaithful unto him in bis abfence,
and that God diretteth not the plot of the deceivers. * Neither do I ab- XIII.
folutely juftify my felf * : fince every foul is prone unto evil, except thofe on
whom my Loro fhall fhew mercy j for my Lord is gracious and merciful.

C c And

* Ye jball leave the corn in the ear, &c.J To
preferve it from the weevil l .

b Wherein men Jball have plenty of rain ;] Not-
withilanding what fome ancient authors write to
the contrary it often rains in winter in the
lower Egypt, and even fnow has been obferved
to fall at Alexandria, contrary to the exprefs af-
fertion of Seneca 3 . In the upper Egypt indeed,
towards the catarafts of Nile , it rains very fel-
dom 4 . Some, however, fuppofe that the rains
here mentioned are intended of thofe which
Ihould fall in Ethiopia, and occafion the fwelling
of the Nile , the great caufe of the fertility of
Egypt, or elfe of thofe which ihoold fall in the
neighbouring countries, which were alfo afflifted
with famine during the fame time.

c Return unto thy Loro, and ask of him, &c.]
Jofepb , it feems, cared not to get out of prifon,
till his innocence was publickly known and de-

clared. It is obferved by the commentators, that
Jofepb does not bid the melfenger move the king
to inform himfelf of the truth of the affair, but
bids him dirc£Uy to ask the king, to incite him
to make the proper inquiry with the greater ear-
neftnefs. They alfo obferve that Jofepb takes
care not to mention his miftrefs, out of refpe£fc
and gratitude for the favours he had received
while in her houfe 1 * .

d The fnare which they bad laid fir me ;] En-
deavouring both by threats and perfuaiions to in-
tice me to commit folly withiny miftrefs.

e Neither doyJ abfo/utely juftify my Jrfi) Ac-
cording to a tradition of Ebn Abbds, Jofetb had
no fooner fpoken the foregoing words, averting
his innoccncy, than Gabriel faid to him, What
not when thou waft deliberating to lie with her t
Upon which Jofepb confeffed his frailty 6 .

1 Idem. a Pl/.to, in Tim*o. Pomp. Mela. 1 Nat. quatft. 1 4. 4 See Greavis*/

Defer, of the pyramids f. 74, {*. RatV Celled ion rf Travels, 2 . z. p. 92. * Al Beioawi*

faV. 6 Idem, &£<

194 Al KORAN. Chap. i2 #

And the king faid. Bring him unco me : I will take him into my own peculiar fer-
vice. And when Joseph was brought unto the king , and he had difcourfed with him,
he faid. Thou art this day firmly eftablilhed with us, and /halt be intruded
with our affairs \ Joseph anfwered, Set me over the ftore-houfes of the land ;
for I will be a fltilful keeper thereof. Thus did we eftablifh Joseph in the land,
that he might provide himfelf a dwelling therein, where he pleafed. We beftow
our mercy on whom we pleafe, and we fuffer not the reward^ of the right-
eous to perifh : and certainly the reward of the next life is better, for

thofe who believe, and fear God. Moreover Joseph’s brethren came b , and

went

a And when Jofeph was brought unto the ifag,
&c.] The commentators fay, that Jofeph being
taken out of prifon, after he had wafhed and
changed his cloaths, was introduced to the king,
whom he faiuted in the Hebrew tongue, and on
the king’s asking what language that was, he
anfwered, that it was the language of his fathers.
This prince, they fcy, underflood no lefs than
feventy languages, in every one of which he
difcourfed with Jofeph , who anfwered him in the
fame ; at which the king greatly marvelling, de-
fired him to relate hk dream, which he did, de-
fcrihing the mofl minute circumflancea ; where-
upon the king placed Jofeph by him on his throne,
and made him his JVaz.tr, or chief minifter.
Some fay that his mafler Kitflr dying about this
time, lie not only fucceedled him in his place,
but, by the king’s command, married the widow,
his late miftrefs, whom he found to be a virgin,
and who bare him Ephraim and Manajfes 1 . So
that according to this tradition, fhe was the fame
woman who is called Afenatb by Mofes. This
fuppofed marriage* whifch authorized their
amours, probably incou raged the Mohammedan
divines to make ufc of the loves of Jofeph and
ZoUikha, as an allegorical emblem of the fpiri*
tual love between the Creator and the creature,
God and the foul; juft as the Cbriftians apply
the fong of Solomon to the fame myftical pur*
pofe

b Moreover JofephV brethren came, &e.] J&
fepk, being made Waxtr, governed with great
wifdom ; for he not only caufed juflice to be im-
partially adminiflred, and incouraged the people
to induftry and the improvement of agriculture
during the feven years of plenty, but began and
perfected feveral works of great benefit ; the na-
tives at this day aferibing to the patriarch Jofeph
almoft all the ancient works of public utiUty
throughout the kingdom ; as particularly the ren-
dering the province of al Feyyum, from a (landing

1 Idem, Kitab tafasir, &c.

in not. in Alfragan. p. 175, &c.

205, & tom, iii. p. 53. 4

pool or marfh, the moft fertile and beft cultivat-
ed land in all Egypt 1 * 3 . When the years of famine
came, the effefts of which were felt not only in
Egypt, but in Syria and the neighbouring coun-
tries, the inhabitants were obliged to |pply to
Jofeph for com, which he fold to them, firft for
their money, jewels, and ornaments, then for
their cattle, and lands, and at length for their
perfons 5 fo that all the Egyptians in general be-
came flaves to the king, tho’ Jofeph , by his con-
fent, foon releafed them, and returned them their
fubflance. The dearth being felt in the land of
Canaan, Jacob fent all his fona, except <m\ y Ben -
jamiu, into Egypt for com. On their arrival,
Jofeph (who well knew them) asked them who
they were, faying he fufpefled them to be fpies;
but they told him they came only to buy provi-
lions, and that they were all the fons of an an*
cient man, named Jacob, who was alfij a.pro-
phet. Jofeph then asked how many brothers
there were of them ; they anfwered. Twelve;
but that one of them had been loft in a defart.
Upon which he enquired for the eleventh bro-
ther, there being no more than ten of them
prefent They (aid, he was a lad, and with their
father, whofe fondnefs for him would not fuffer
him to accompany them in their journey. At
length Jofeph asked them, who they hid to
vouch for their veracity i but they told him they
knew no man who could vouch for them in Egypt.
Then, replied he, one of you fhall flay behind
with me as a pledge, and the others may return
home with their provifions ; and when ye come
again, ye fhall bring your younger brother with
you, that I may know ye have told me the truth.
Whereupon, it being in vain to difpute the mat-
ter, they caft lots who fhould ftay behind, and
the lot fell upon Simeon. When they departed,
Jofeph gave each of them a camel, and another
for their brother 4 .

2 V. D’Hbrbelot, Bib/. Orient . ar, Joufouf. 3 V. Go-
Kircher. Qtdip. Mgypt, voL 1. p. 8. Lucas, Vaj» tim. ii. P-
Al Beidawi

Chap. 12. Al KORAN, 195

^yent in unto him ; and he knew them, but they knew not him. And when
he had furnifhed them with their provifions, he faid, Bring unto me your
brother, the fon of your father : do ye not fee that I give full meafure,
and that I am the moft hofpitable receiver of guefts ? But if ye Bring him
not unto me, there fhall be no corn meafured unto you from me, neither
fhall ye approach my prefence. They anfwered, We will endeavour to ob-
tain him of his father, and we will certainly perform what thou requireft.
And Joseph faid to his fervants. Put their money 1 which they have paid for
their corn , into their lacks, that they may perceive it, when they mall be
returned to their family : peradventure they will come back unto us. And
when they were returned unto their father, they faid, O father, it is forbid-
den to meafure out corn unto us any more, unlefs we carry our brother Ben-
jamin w itb us : wherefore fend our brother with us, and we fhall have corn
meafured unto us ; and we will certainly guard him front any mifcbance.
Jacob anfwered. Shall I truft him with you with any better fuccefs than I
trufted your brother Joseph with you heretofore ? But God is the bell
guardian ; and he is the moft merciful of thofe who fhew mercy. And when
they opened their provifions, they found their money had been returned un-
to them ; and they faid, O father, what do we defire farther ? this our
money hath been returned unto us: we will therefore return , and provide com
for our family : we will take care of our brother ; and we fhall receive a
camel’s burthen more than we did the lajl time. This is a fmall quantity*.
Jacob faid, I will by no means fend him with you, until ye give me a
folemn promife, and fwear by God that ye will certainly bring him back
unto me, unlefs ye be encompaffed by fome inevitable impediment. And when
they had given him their folemn promife, he faid, God is witnefs of what
we fay. And he faid, Myfons, enter not into the city by one and the fame
gate ; but enter by different gates. But this precaution will be of no advan-
tage unto you againft the decree of God for judgment belongeth unto God
jalone : in him do I put my truft, and in him let thofe confide who feek in
whom to put their truft. And when they entred the city , as their Jather had
commanded them, it was of no advantage unto them againft the decree ef
God ; and the fme ferved oniy to fatisfy the defire of Jacob’s foul, which he
had charged them to perform: for he was indued with knowledge of that which
we had taught him ; but the greater part of men do not underftand. And
when they entred into the prefence of Joseph, he received his brother

C c 2 Ben.

1 Their money i] The original word figrnfying not fufficient for the fupport of their families, fo
«ot only money, but alfo goods bartered or gi»- that it was neceilary for them to take another jour-
cn in exchange for other merchandise, fome ney s or elfe, that a camel's load more or left was
commentators tell as, that they paid for their but a trifle to the king of Egypt. Some fuppofe
corn, not in money, but in flioes and dreffed thefe to be the words of Jacob, declaring it was
tkins *. too mean a confideration to induce him to part

b This is a fmall quantity.'] The meaning may with his fon.
be, cither that the com they now brought was

1 Al Beidawi.

jg6 ^ K 0 R A TV* Chap.i2

Benjamin as his gueft, and faid, Verily I am thy brother*: be noc
therefore afflifled for that which they have committed againjl us .. And when he
had furnifhed them with their provifions, he put bis cup b in his brother
Benjamin's fack. Then a cryer cried after them faying, O company of
travellers, ye are furely thieves. They faid, (and turned back unto them,)
What is it that ye mifs ? They anfwered, We mifs the prince’s cup : and
unto him who fliall produce it, Jball be given a camel s load of corn ; and I
will be furety for the fame. Joseph’s brethren replied. By God, ye do well
know, that we come not to a£t corruptly in the land', neither are we
thieves. The Egtptiane faid, What fliall be the reward of him, who Jball
appear to have flolen the cup, if ye be found liars ? Josephs brethren an-
fwered, As to the reward of him, in whofe lack it fhall be found, let him
become a bondman in fatisfaftion for the fame : thus do we reward the un-

juft, who are guilty of theft 4 . Then he began by their fades, before be
Searched the fack of his brother e j and he drew out the cup from his brother’s
fack. Thus did we fumifh Joseph with a ftratagem. It was not lawful
for him to take his brother for a bondman , by the law of the king of E-
crpr f , had not God pleafed to allow it, according to the offer of bis brethren.
We exalt to degrees of knowledge and honour whom we pleafe : and there is
one who is knowing above all thofe who are indued with knowledge. His
brethren faid. If Benjamin be guilty of theft, his brother JosEPtf hath been
alfo guilty of theft heretofore K But Joseph concealed thefe things in his mind.

* He received bis brother Benjamin as bis gtiefi,
&c,] It is related that Jofepb, having invited his
brethren to an entertainment, ordered them to
be placed’ two and two together ; by which
means Benjamin, the eleventh, was obliged to lit
alone, and burfling into tears, laid. If my bro-
ther Jofepb were alive, he would have fat with
me. Whereupon Jofepb ordered him to be feat-
ed at the fam* table with himfelf, and when the
entertainment was over, difmiffed the reft, or-
dering that they fhould be lodged two and two
in a ho nfe, but kept Benjamin in his own apart-
ment, where he palled the night. The next day
Jofepb asked him, whether he would accept of
himfelf for his brother, in the room of him whom
he had loft; to which Benjamin replied, Wbo
can find a brother comparable unto tbeet yef
tbou art not the fon of Jacob and Rachel. And
upon this Jofepb difeovered himfelf to him x .

b His cup ;] Some imagme this to be a meafure
holding a San (or about a gallon,) wherein they
ufed to meafure corn, or give water to the beafts.
But others take it to be a drinking-cup of filver,
or gold.

c Te well know that we came not to aB corruptly ,
kcJ] Both by our behaviour among you, and
•ur bringing again our money which was return-

1 w£/Beidawj»

ed to us without our knowledge.

d Thus do we reward tbofe wbo are guilty of
theft ;] This was the method of puniftmt^ theft
ufed by Jacob and his family: for anunigthe
Egyptians it was punilhed in another manner.

e He began by tbeir Jacks , &c.] Some fuppofe
this fearch was made by the perfon whom Jofepb
fent after them ; others by Jofepb himfelf when
they were brought back to the city.

* It war iiot lawful fon him to take bis brother
for a bondman by the lay of Egypt;] For there
the thief was not reduced to fervitude, bat was
fcourged, and obliged to reftore the double of
what he had flolen

8 His brother Jofeph bath been guilty of theft
heretofore ;] The occafion of this fufpicion, it is
faid, was, that Jofepb having been brought up
by his father’s filler, lhe became fo fond of him,
that when he grew up, and Jacob defigned to
take him from her, fhe contrived the following
ftratagem to keep him. Having a girdle which
had once belonged to Abraham , lhe girt it about
the child, and then pretending lhe had loft it,
caufed ftri<ft fearch to be made for it ; and it be-
ing at length found on Jofepb, he was adj'udged,
according to the abovementioned law of the fa-
mily, to be delivered to her as her property.

Some,

2 Idem, Jallalq’9»lh,

Chap. 12. Al KORAN. igj

and did not difcover them unto them : and he faid within himfilf, Ye are
in a worfe condition than us two \ and God beft knoweth what ye difcourfe
about. They faid unto Joseph, Noble lord. Verily this lad hath an aged fa-
ther ; wherefore take one of us in his ftead ; for we perceive that thou art
a beneficent perfon. Joseph anfwered, God forbid that we fliould take any
other than him with whom we found our goods ; for then Jhould we cer-
tainly be unjuft. And when they defpairedof obtaining Benjamin , they re-
tired to confer privately together. And the elder of them * faid. Do ye not
know that your father hath received a folemn promife from you, in the name
of God ; and how perfidioufly ye behaved heretofore towards Joseph ?
Wherefore I will by no means depart the land of Egtpt , until my father
give me leave to return unto him, or God maketh known his will to me ;
for he is the beft judge. Return ye to your father, and fay, O father, verily
thy fon hath committed theft ; we bear witnefs of no more than what we
know, and we could not guard againft what we did not forefee : and do thou
inquire in the city, where we have been, and of the company of merchants,
with whom we are arrived, and thou wilt find that we fpeak rhe truth. And
when they were returned , and bad fpoken thus to their fatter, he faid. Nay
but rather ye your felves have contrived the thing for your own fakes : but
patience is moft proper for me •, peradventure God will reftore them all
unto me *, for he is knowing and wife. And he turned from them and faid.
Oh how am I grieved for Joseph ! And his eyes became wjiite with mourn-
ing % he being oppreffed with deep forrow. His fins faid. By God, thou wilt
not ceafe to remember Joseph, until thou be brought to death’s door, or
thou be actually deftroyed by excefiive qffliSIion . He anfwered, I only repre-
fent my grief, which I am not able to contain, and my forrow unto God?
but I know by revelation from God that which ye know not*. O my fons,
go and make inquiry after Joseph and his brother \ and defpair not of the
mercy of God ; for none defpaireth of God’s mercy, except the unbelieving
people. Wherefore Joseph's brethren returned into Egypt: and when they
came into his prefence they faid, Noble lord , the famine is felt by us and
our family, and we are come with a fmall fum of money e : yet give unto

us

Some, however, fa y that Jofepb a&ually ftofe an
idol of gold, which belonged to his mother’s fa-
ther, and deftroyed it ; a ftory probably taken
from Rachel* s Healing the images of Laban : and
others tell us that he once Hole a goat, or a hen,
to give to a poor man 1 .

a The elder of them ;} viz. Reuben . But fbme
think Simeon, or Judah to be here meant ; and
inftead of the elder, interpret it, the moft prudent
of them .

b Peradventure God will reftore them all \ &c.]
i. e. Jofepb , Benjamin , and Simeon .

c His eyes became white ;] That is, the pupils
loft their deep blacknefs, and became of a pearl
colour, (as happens in fufFufions,) by his conti-

nual weeping r which very much weakened his
fight, or, as fome pretend, made him quite blind’.

d / know by revelation from God, that which
ye know not ;J viz. That Jofepb is yet alive 1 of
which fome tell us he was affured by the angel
of death in a dream 5 tho’ others fuppofe he de-
pended on the completion of Jofepb'% dream,
which muft have been fruftiated, had he died
before his brethren had bowed down before
him 3 .

c A fmall fum of money 5] Their money being
dipped and adulterated. Some, however, imagine
they did not bring money, but goods to barter,
fuch as wool and butter, or other commodities
of fmall value 4 .

1 JaIvLalq’ddu*.

% Al Beidawi. 3 Idem*

4 Idem*

198 Al K 0 R A N. Chap, j 2,

us full meafure, and beftow corn upon us as alms ; for God rewardeth the
alms-givers. Joseph faid unto them y Do ye know what ye did unto Joseph
and his brother, when ye were ignorant of the conferences thereof* ? They
anfwered. Art thou really Joseph b ? He replied, I atn Joseph ; and this is
my brother. Now hath God been gracious unto us. For whofo feareth God ,
and perfevereth with patience, Jhall at length find relief ; fince God will not
fuffer the reward of the righteous to perifh. They faid. By God, now hath
God chofen thee above us ; and we have furely been finners. Joseph anfwer-
ed, Let there be no reproach cajt on you this day. God forgiveth jtm ; f or
he is the mod merciful of thofe who fhew mercy. Depart ye with this my
inner garment c , and throw it on fny father’s face ; 'and' he fhall recover his
fight : and then come unto me with all your family. And when the com-
pany of travellers was departed from Egypt: on their journey towards Caitaan,
their father faid unto tbqfe who were about him , Verily I perceive the fmell of
Joseph d : although ye think that I dote. They anfwered. By God, thou
art in thy old miftake*. But when the meffenger of good tidings f was come
with Joseph* inner garment , he threw it over his face > and he recovered his
£ye-tGght. And Jacob faid. Did I not tell you that I knew from God,
that which ye knew not? They anfwered, O father, afk pardon of our
fins for us, for we have furely been finners. He replied, I will furely afk
pardon for you of my Lord 6 » for he is gracious and merciful. And when
Jacob and bis family arrived in Egypt, and were introduced unto Joseph,
he received his parents unto him*, and faid. Enter ye into Egypt, by God's
favour, in full fecurity. And he raifed his parents to the feat of ftate, and

they

* Do ye know tobat ye did unto Jofeph and bis
brother , See.] The injury they did Benjamin,
was the feparatSng him from his brother ; after
which they kept him in fo great fubje&ion, that
he durft not fpeak to them, but with the utmoft
fubmiihon. Some fay that thefe words were oc-
casioned by a letter which JofepFs brethren deli-
vered to him from their father, requefting the
releafement of Benjamin, and by their reprefent-
ing his extreme aflfittion at the lofs of him and his
brother. The commentators obferve that Jofepb,
to excufe his brethren’s behaviour towards him,
attributes it to their ignorance, and the heat of
youth l .

b Art tbou really Jofeph ?] They fay that this
queftion was not the effect of a bare fufpicion
that he was Jofeph, but that they actually knew
him, either by his face and behaviour, or by his
foreteeth, which he fhewed in fmiling, or elfe by
putting off his tiara , and difeovering a whitifh
xriole on his forehead a .

c My inner garment ;] Which the commenta-
tors generally fuppofe to be the fame garment
with which Gabriel invefted him in the welt »

1 Idem . * 1dm- 3 Idm, Jallalo’dmn.

Seidawj. 7 Idem, See Genef xxxvii. oo.

which having originally come from paradife,
had preferred the odour of that place, and was
of fo great virtue as to cure any diftemper in the
peifon who was touched with it 3 .

d I perceive the fmell if Jofeph ?] This was
the odour of the garment abovenjentioned,
brought bv the wind to Jacob, who fmelt it, as
is pretended, at the diftanefc of eighty para-
fangs 4 ; or, as others will have, three, or eight
days journey off

* Iboa art in thy old miftakt ;J Being led into
this imagination by thy exceffive love of Jofepb.

f The mejfcnger of good tidings ;] viz. Judd ;
who as he hadfonnerly grieved his father, by bring-
ing him Jofepb *s coat ftained with blood, now re-
joiced him* as much, by being the bearer of this
veft, and the news of Jofepb** prolperity 6 .

* 1 will ask pardon for you, &c.J Deferring
it, as fome fancy, till he ihould fee Jofepb , and
have his confent.

* His parents ,J viz. His father, and Leal, his
mother’s lifter, whom he looked on as his mo-
ther, after RacbePs death \

Al Beidatoi tells us, that Jofepb fent carriages

and

4 Idem . * Jallalo’min. 6 £

Chap. 12. At KORAN.

199

they, together with his brethren , fell down and did obeifance unto him \ And
he faid, O my father, this is the interpretation of my vifion, which I faw
heretofore : now hath my Lord rendred it true. And he hath furely been
gracious unto me, fmce he took me forth from the prifon, and hath brought
you hither from the defart ; after that the devil had fown difcord between
me and my brethren : for my Lord is gracious unto whom he pleafeth ; and
he is the kn owing, the wife God . O Lord, thou haft given me a part of the
kingdom, and haft-taught me the interpretation of dark fayings. The Crea-
tor of heaven and earth ! thou art my prote&or in this world, and in that
which is to come : make me to die a Modern, and jpin me with the right-
eous b . This is a fecret hiftory, which we reveal unto thee, O Mohammed,
although thou waft not prefen t with the brethren of Joseph^ when they con-
certed their defign, and contrived a plot againft him. But the greater pare
of men, although thou earneftly defire it, will not believe. Thou (halt not
demand of them any reward for thy publijhing the K°$an \ it is no other than
an admonition unto all creatures. And how many figns foever there be of
the beings unity , and providence of God , in the heavens and the earth ; they
will pals by them, and will retire afar off from them. And the greater
part of them believe not in God, without being alfo guilty of idolatry e . Do they
not believe that fome overwhelming affliction Jhall fall on them, as a punifti-
ment from God ; or that the hour of judgment (hall overtake them fuddenly,
while they confider not its approach? Say unto tboft of M&ccji, This is
my way : I invite you unto God, by an evident demonftration ; both I and
he who folio weth me ; and, prajfe be unto God! Iam not an idolater. We
fent not any apoftles before thee, except men, unto whom we revealed our
will , and whom we chafe out of thofe who dwelt in cities 4 . Will they not
go through the earth, and fee what hath been the end of thofe who have pre-
ceded

and provifiops for Us father, and his family ;
and that he and the king of Egypt went forth to
meet them. He adds, that the number of the chil-
dren of Iff ad) who entred Egypt with him, was
fevepty two; and that when they were led out
thence by Mofes , they were inereafed to fix hun-
dred thoufand five hundred and feventy men and
upwards, befides the old people and children.

a And be raifed bis patents to tbi fiat of flate,
and they r, together with bis brethren , fell dmn and
did obeifance unto him.] A tranfpofition is fup-
pofed to be in thefe words, and that he feated
his father and mother after they had bowed down
to him, and not before x .

u The Mohammedan authors write, that Jacob
d welkin Egypt twenty four years, and at his
death ordetecl his body to be buried in Pateftine
by his father, which Jafepb took care to per-
form ; and then returning into Egypt, died twen-
ty three years after. They add, that fuch high

difputef arofe amon^ the Egypt ion h concerning
his burial, tfiat they had nke to have come to
blows ; but at length they agreed to put his body
into a marble coffin, and to fink it in the Nile ;
out of a fupcrftitjous imtgihatipn# that it might
help the regular increafc of the rjvef, and de-
liver them from famine, for the future : but
when Mofes led the Ifraelites out of Egypt , he
took up the coffin, and carried JofipFs bones
with him into Canaan, where he buried them by
his anceftors a .

c Without being alfo guilty f idolatry i] For
this crime Mohammed charges not only on the
idolatrous Meccans , but alfo on the Jews and
Cbriftiant ; as has been already obferved more
than once.

Of thofe who dwelt in cities ;] And not of
the inhabitants of the defarts ; becaufe the for-
mer are more knowing and cqmpaffionaCt , and
the latter more ignorant and hard-hearted 3 .

1 Idem.

* Idem.

3 Idem . See the Prelim, Dife. I. p. 30.

200 Al KORAN. Chap. 13.

ceded them ? But the dwelling of the next life (hall furely be better for thofe
who fear God . Will they not therefore underftand ? Their predeceffors were
born with for a time , until, when our apoftles defpaired of their converfion , and
they thought that they were liars, pur help came unto them* and we delivered
whom we pleafed \ but our vengeance was not turned away from the wick-
ed people. Verily in the hiftories of the prophets and their people there is
an inftra&ive example unto thofe who are indued with underftanding.
Koran is not a new invented fiftion ; but a confirmation of thofe fcriptures
which have been revealed before it, and a diftindt explication of every thing
neceffary, in refpeSt either to faith or practice, and a direction and mercy un-
to people who believe.

CHAP. XIII.

Intitled , Thunder* ; revealed at Me cc A b .

In the name of the moft merciful God.

A L.M. R. Thefe are the figns of the book of the Korau: and that
which hath been fent down unto thee from thy Lord, is the truth ;
but the greater part of men will not believe. It is God who hath railed the
heavens without vifible pillars ; and then afcended his throne, and compelled
the fun and the moon to perform their fervices : every of the heavenly bodies
runneth an appointed courfe. He ordereth all things. He Iheweth bis figns
diftindlly, that ye may be allured ye muft meet your Lord at the lajl day.
Jt is he who hath ftretched forth the earth, and placed therein ftedfaft moun-
tains, and rivers ; and hath ordained therein of every fruit two different kinds a .
He caufeth the night to cover the day. Herein are certain figns unto people
who confider. And in the earth are tradts of landof different natures though
bordering on each other ; and alfo vineyards, and feeds, and palm-timfpring-
ing feveral from the fame root, and fingiy from diftindt roots. They are
watered with the fame water, yet we render Ibme of them more excellent
than others to eat. Herein are furely figns unto people who underftand. If thou
doft wonder at the infidels denying the refurrettion, furely wonderful is their fay-
ing, After we Ihall have been reduced to duft, fhall we be rejlorei in a new
creature? Thefe are they who believe not in their Lord j thefe Jhall have

collars

* This word occurs in the next page. d Two different kinds ;] As fweet and fonr,

fc Or, according to fome copies, at Medina. black and white, fmatl and large, (fc
c The meaning of thefe letters is unknown. c Lands of different nature',] Some trails being
-Of feveral conjeftural explications which are fruitful and others barren, fome plain and others
given of them, the following is one: 1 am the mountainous, fome proper for corn and others
moft wife and knowing God. for trees, £jf c *.

'idem, Jallalo’ddih,

* iidem.

Chap. 13. Al KORAN. 20 1

collars on their necks *, and thefe Jhall be the inhabitants of hell fire : therein
fhall they abide for ever. They will afk of thee to haftenevil rather than good b :
although there have already been examples of the divine vengeance befofe
them. Thy Lord is furely indued with indulgence towards men, notwith-
ftanding their iniquity ; but thy Lord is alfo fevere in punifhing. The infi-
dels fay, Unlefs a fign be fent down unto him from his Lord, we will not be-
lieve. Thou art comtnijftoned to be a preacher only, and not a worker of mira
ales : and unto every people hath a dire&or been appointed. God knoweth what
every female beareth in her womb *, and what the wombs want or exceed
of their due time., or number of young. With him is every thing regulated ac-
cording to a determined meafure. He knoweth that which is hidden, and
that which is revealed. He is the great, the moft high. He among you who
concealeth bis words, and he who proclaimcth them in public ; he alfo who
feeketh to hide himfelf in the night, and he who goeth forth openly in die day,
is equal in refpeli to the knowledge of God, Each of them hath angels mutu-
ally fucceeding each other, before him, and behind him ; they watch him by
the command of God *. Verily God will not change his grace which is in men,
.until they change the difpojition in their fouls by Jin. When God willeth evil on
a people, there fhall be none to avert it ; neither fhall they have any prote&or
befide him. It is he who caufeth the lightening to appear unto you, to Jlrike
fear, and to raife hope 4 , and who formeth the pregnant clouds. The thunder
celebrateth his praife , and the angels alfo , for fear of him. He fendeth his
thunderbolts, ' and ftriketh therewith whom hepleafeth, while they difpute con-
cerning God f ; for he is mighty in power. It is he who ought of right to be

D d invoked ;

* Theft fhall have collars on their necks }] The is meant the angel who pr Hides over theelouds, anti

collar here mentioned is an engine fomething drives them forwards with twilled Iheets of fire + .
like a pillory, but light enough for the criminal f While they difpute concerning God.J This
to walk about with. Befides the hole to fix it on paffage was revealed on the following occafion.
the neck, there is another for one of the hands, Amer Ebn al Tufail, and Arbad Ebn Rabiab, the
which is thereby fattened to the neck r . And brother of Labtd, went to Mohammed with an*in-
in this manner the Mohammedans fuppofe the re- tent to kill him ; and Amer began to difpute with
probates will appear at the day of judgment * . him concerning the chief points of his doflrinc.
Some underftand this paffage figuratively, of the while Arbad, taking a compafs, went behind him
infidels being bound in the chains of error and to difpatch him with his fword : but the prophet
obftinacy 3 . perceiving his defign, implored God’s protec-

b They will ask of thee to haften evil rasher than tion ; whereupon Arbad was immediately (truck
good ;] Provoking and daring thee to call down dead by thunder, and Amer was (truck with a
the divine venggance on them for their impeni- peftilential boil, of which he died in a ihort time,
tency. in a miferable condition 5 .

e See the Prelim. Difc. $. JV. p. 72. fallali ddin, however, tells another (lory,

4 To raife hope%\ Thunder and lightening be- laying that Mobarmed having fent one to invite
ing the fign of approaching rain ; a great blcffing, a certain m n to embrace his religion, the perfon
in the caltern countries more efpecially. put this queftion to the midionary, Who is tbit

* The thunder celebrateth bis praife 5] Or caufeth apojlle, and what it God? is he of gold, or
thofewhohearit, to praife him. Some commenta- of fiber, or of brafsP Upon which a thunderbolt
tors tell us, that by the word thunder, in this place, ftruck off his skull, and killed him.

’ V. Ch^edih, Voy. de Perfe, T. 2. /. 229. * See chap. 5. p. 91, 5 Al Beidawi.

4 Idem, Jallalo’ddin. 5 Al Beidawi. V. Gam, not. tn Adagia Arab. adjeB. ad Gram

Erpenii, p. 99.

202 Al KORAN. Chap., ij,

invoked ; and the idols which they invoke befules him, fhall not hear them at
all v otherwife than as he is beard , whp ftretcheth forth his hands to the water
that it may afcend to his mouth, when it cannot afcend thither : the fupplica-
tion of the unbelievers is utterly erroneous. Whatfoever is in heaven and on
earth worfhippeth God, voluntarily or of force* ; and their lhadows alfi,
morning and evening b . Say, Who is the Lord of heaven and earth? An-
fwer, God. Say, Have ye therefore taken unto your [elves procedon befide
him, who are unable either to help, or to defend themlelves from hurt ? Say,
Shall the blind and the feeing be efteemed equal ? or fhall darknefs and light be
accounted the fame ? or have they attributed companions unto God who have
created as he hath created, fo that their creation bear any refemblanGe unto
his? Say, God is the creator of all things ; he is the one, the victorious God.
He caufeth water to defcend from heaven, and the brooks flow according to
their rejjpeftive meafure, and the floods bear the floating froth: and from
the metals which they melt in the fire, feeking to caft ornaments or veffels for
ufe , there arifetb a fcum like unto it. Thus God fetteth forth truth and vanity.
But the fcum is thrown off, and that which is ufeful to mankind remaineth
on the earth. Thus doth God put forth parables. Unto thofe who obey
their Lord fhall be given the moft excellent reward : but thofe who obey
• him not, although they were pofleffed of whatever is in the whole earth and
as much more, they would give it all for their ranfom. Thefe will be brought
to a terrible account : their abode fhall be hell; an unhappy couch fbdl it be!
Shall he therefore, who knoweth that what hath been fent down unto thee from
thy Lord, is truth, be rewarded as he who is blind ? The prudent only will
confider ; who fulfil the covenant of £op, and break not their contraft ; and
who join that which God hath commanded to be joined % and who fear their
Lord, and dread an ill account j and who perfevere out of a fnicere defire to
pleafe their Loro, and obferve the dated times of prayer, and give alms out
of what we have beftowed on them, in fecret and openly, and who turn away
evil with good : the reward of thefe 'Jhall be paradife, gardens of eternal
abode *, which they fhall enter, and alfo whoever fhall have aCted uprightly,
of their fathers, and their wives, and their pofterity : and the angels fhall go
m unto them by every gate, faying, Peac? be upon you, becaufc ye have,en-
dured with patience j how excellent a reward is paradife ! But as for thofe who
violate the covenant of God, after the eftablifhment thereof, and who cut in

funder

* Whatever is in heaven and on earth worjhip- appear proftrate on the ground, in the pollure of
etb God, voluntarily or of forte ;] The infidels adoration.

and devils themfelves being conlbained to hum- c Who join that •which God bath commanded tt.
ble themlelves before him, tho’ agiinft their will, be joined',] By believing in all the prophets
■when they are delivered up to puniihment. without exception, and joining thereto the con-

b Jnd their jhadows aljb , evening end morning ;] tinual praftice of their, doty, both towards God
This is an allufion to the increaling and diminish- and man *.

mg of the lhadows, according to the height of d Gardens of eternal abode ;] Literally, gardens
the fun; fo that when they are the longeft, tf Eden. See chap. 9. p. 158.
which is in the morning and the evening, they

* 1 Idem, Jallalo’ddih, Yahta.

Chap. 13 . At KORAN. 203

funder that which God hath commanded to be joined, and aft corruptly in
the earth* on them fhall a curfe fati s and they (hall have a miferable dwelling in
belL God giveth provifion in abundance unto whom he*pleafeth, and is
fparing unto wbomhe pie afeth. Tbofeof Mecca rejoice in the prefent life ; although
the prefent life, in refpeft of the future, is but a precarious provifion. The
infidels fay, Unlefs a fign be fent down unto him from his Lord, we will not
believe. Anfwer, Verily God will lead into error whom he pleafeth, and will
diredt unto himfelf him who repenteth, and thofe who believe, and whofe hearts
reft fecurely in the meditation of God ; fhall not mem hearts reft fcCurely in
the meditation of God ? They who believe and do that which is right Jhdl
enjoy bleffednefs, and partake of- a happy refurreftion. Thus have we fent
thee to a nation which other nations have preceded, unto whom prophets have
Ukewife been fertf, that thou matyeft rehftarfe unto them that which we have
revealed unto thee, even while they believe not in the merciful God. Say
unto them , He is my Lord ; there is no God but he : in him do I truft,
and unto him muft I return. Though a Korant were revealed by which
mountains fhould be removed* or the earth cleaved in funder, or tne dead
be caufed to fpeak % it would be in Vain. But the matter behngetb wholly
unto God* Ek> not therefore the believers know, that [f God jpleafed, he
would certainly ditfett all men ? Adverfity fhall not oeafe to amidt the un-
believers for that which they have committed, or to fit down near their ha
bitations b , until Gob’s promife come c : for God is not contrary to die pro-
mife. Apoftles before thefe have been laughed to fcorn 5 and I permitted the
infidels to enjoy a long and happy life : but afterwards I punilhed them ;
and how fevere was the punifhment which I infiitted on them ! Who is it
therefore that ftandeth over every foul, to obferve that which it committeth f
They attribute companions unto God. Say, Name them : will ye declare
unto him that which he knoweth not in the earth? or will ye name them in out-
ward fpeech only d ? But the deceitful procedure of the infidels was prepared

D d 2 for

* Though a Koran jkould be revealed , by which
mountains jbould be removed, &c.l Thefe are mi*
racles which the Koreijb required of Mohammed ;
demanding that he Would by the power of his
Koran , either remove the mountains from about
Mecca, that they might have delicious gardens
in their room j or that he would oblige the wind
to tranlport them With their merchandize to Sy-
ria i (according to which tradition the words
here tranflated, or the earth cleaved in funder ,
ihould be rendered, or the earth be travelled over
in an inftant ;) or elfe raife to life Kofai Ebn
Keldb 1 , and others of their anceftors, to bear
witnefs to him: whereupon this paflage was re-
vealed.

b Or to Jit down near their habitations ;] It is
fuppofed by fame, that thefe words are fppken
to Mohammed , and then they muft be translated

* See tbdp . S. J* 14 2. not. a. * e

in the fecond perfon. Nor fbalt thou eeafe to fit
down, &c. For they fay this verfe relates to tne
idolaters of Mecca ; who were afflifted with a
feries of misfortunes for their ill ufage of their
prophet, and were alfo continually annoyod and
nar rafted by his parties, which frequently plun-
dred their caravans and drove off their cattle 1
himfelf fitting down with his whole army near
the city in the expedition of al Hodeibiya

c Until Gob\r promife come ;] i. e Till death
and the day of judgment overtake them j or, ac-
cording to the expofition in the preceding note,
until the taking of Mecca 3 .

d In outward fetch only ;] That is, calling
them the companions of God, without being
able to ffign any reafon, or give any proof why
they deferve to be fharers in the honour and war
ihip due from mankind to him 4 .

I Bsidawj, 3 Idem. 4 2 dm.

204 Al KORAN 1 Chap, rg,

for them ; and they are turned afide from the right path : for he whom
God lhall caufe to err, (hall have no director. They (hall fuffer a punifc.
ment in this life ; but the punilhment of the next (hall be more grievous:
and there (hall be none to protect them againft God. This is the defcrip-
tion of paradife, which is promifed to the pious. It is watered by rivers ;
its food is perpetual, and its (hade alfo : this' fliall be the reward of thole
who fear God. But the reward of the infidels (hall be hell fire. Thofe to
whom we have given the fcriptures, rejoice at what hath been revealed un-
to thee *. Vet there are fome of the confederates who deny part thereof b .
Say unto them , Verily I am commanded to worlbip God alone; and to
give him no companion : upon him do I call, and unto him lhall I re-
turn. To this purpofe have we fent down the Koran, a rule of judgment,
in the Arabic language. And verily if thou follow their defires, after the
knowledge which hath been given thee, there lhall be none to defend or
protect thee againft God. We have formerly fent apoftles before thee, and
bellowed on them wives and children c ; and no apoftle had the power to
come with a fign, unlefs by the permiffion erf - God. Every age hath its book
of revelation : God lhall abolilh and (hall confirm what be pleafetb. With
him is the original of the book d . Moreover, whether we caufe thfce to fee
any part of that punijhment wherewith we have threatened them, or whether
we caufe thee to die before it be infixed on them , verily unto thee belongetb
preaching only, but unto us inquifition. Do they not fee that we come in-
to their land, and ftraiten the borders thereof, by the conqutfts of the true be-
lievers? When God judgeth, there is none to reverfe his judgment; and
he will be fwift in taking an account. Their predeceffors formerly devifed
fubtle plots againft their prophets ; but God is mailer of every fubtlti device.
He knoweth that which every foul deferveth : and the infidels lhaij furely
know, whofe will be the reward of paradife. The unbelievers * will fay.
Thou art not fent of God. Anfwer, God is a fufificient witnefe between me
and you, and he who nnderllandeth the fcriptures.

CHAP.

Tbofe to whom we have given the fcriptures ,
&c,] viz. The fir ft profelytcs to Mobammedifm
from Judaifm and Cbriflianity ; or the Jews and
Cbrrjiians in general, who were pleafed to find
the Koran fo confonant to their own fcriptures x .

b - Some of the confederates , &c,] That is, fuch
of them as had entred into a confederacy to op-
pofe Mohammed i as did Caab Ebn a! Afhraf \ and
the Jews who followed him, and al Seyid al
Najrani , al Akib, and feveral other Chriftians ;
who denied fuch parts of the Koran as contra-
dicted their corrupt dodtrines and traditions a .

c And beftowed on them wives and children ;] As
we have on thee. This paflage was revealed in
anfwer to the reproaches which were ca on Mo-
hammed, on account of the great number of his

2 See chap. 3. 59. % Idem. 3 Jallai

part . 2 . e . 36, ( fc . * A / BiiDAvn .

wives. For the Jews faid. That if he was 2
true prophet, his care and attention would be
employed about fomething elfe than women and
the getting of children 2 3 . It may beobferved
that it is a maxim of the Jews that nothing is
more repugnant to prophecy, than carnality 4 .

d The original of the book ;] Literally, the mo-
ther of the book ; by which is meant the prtfemd
table , from which all the written revelations
winch have been from time to time publilhed to
mankind, according to the feveral difpenfations,
are tranfcripcs.

c 7 he unbelievers ;] The perfons intended in
this paflage, it is (aid, were the JewiJb doc-
tor^

i’pdik, Yahya. * V. Maii^on* MoreHev.

Chap. 14.'

Al KORAN.

205

CHAP. XIV.

Int tiled, Abraham 3 ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

A L. R b . This book have we fent down unto thee, that thou maveft
• lead men forth from darknefs into light, by the permiflion of their
Lord, into the glorious and laudable way. God is he unto whom he-
longetb whatfoever is in heaven and on earth: and woe be to the infidels,
becaufc a grievous punilhment waiteth them ■, who love the prefent life above
that which is to come, and turn men afide from the way of God, and feek
to render it crooked : thefe are in an error far diftant from the truth. We
have fent no apoftle but with the language of his people, that he might
declare their duty plainly unto them c : for God caufeth to err whom he
pleafeth, and dire&eth whom he pleafeth ; and he is the mighty, the wife.
We formerly fent Moses with our figns, and commanded him faying , Lead
forth thy people from darknefs into light, and remind them of the fa*
vours of God d : verily therein are figns unto every patient and grateful
perfon. And call to mind when Moses faid unto his people, Remember
the favour of God towards you, when he delivered yoti from the people
of Pharaoh : they grievoufiy oppreffed you j and they flew your male chil-
dren, but let your females live *: therein was a great trial from your Lord.
And when your Lord dedared by the mouth of Moses , faying. If ye be
thankful, I will furely increafe my favours towards you ; but if ye be un-
grateful, verily my puniftunent (ball be fevere. And Moses faid. If. ye be un-
grateful, and all who are in the earth likewife verily God needeth not
your thanks , though he dcferveth the higheft praife. Hath not the hiftory
of the nations your predeceffors reached you-, namely , of the people of Noah,

' and of Ad, and of THAMUD f , and of thofe who fucceeded them-, whofe
number none knoweth except God ? Their apoftles came unto them with
evident miracles ; but they clapped their hands to their mouths out of indig-
nation,

* Mention is made of this patriarch toward* God ; which may alfo be traijflated, the battles
the end of the chapter. of God, (the ftrabs uling the word day to fig-

•> See the Prelim. Difc. $. III. p. S9» nify a ismarkable engagement, as the Italians da

c That be might declare their duty plainly ante giernata, and the French, jottrnie,) or his Won-
ticm ;} That fo they might not only perfe&ly derful afts manifefted in the various fuccefi of>
and readily underftand thofe revelations them- former nations in their wars *.
felves, but might alfo be able to tranilate and in- e See chap. 7. p. 1 30, lie,

terpret them unto others *. f See ibid. p. 1 22, He,

" The favours of God i] Literally, the days of

* Idem.

* Idem.

2o6 Al KORAN \ Chap. 14,

nation , and faid, We do not believe the meffage with which ye pretend to
be fent ; and we are in a doubt concerning the religion to which ye invite
us, as juft ly to be fufpedfed. Their apoftles anfwereq, Is there any doubt
concerning God, the creator, of heaven and earth ? He inviteth you to the
true faith that he may forgive you part of your fins •, and may refpite your
punifbment, by grafting you /pace to repentt Until an appointed time. They
anfwered, Ye are but men, like unto us : ye feek to turn us afide from
the gods which our fathers worlhipped : Wherefore bring us an evident de-
monftration by fame miracle , that ye J peak truth. Their apoftles replied unto
them. We are no other than men like unto you ; but God is bountiful
urrto filth of his fervants as he pleafeth : and it is not in our power to give
you a miraculous demonftration of our miff on, unlefs by the permiflioji of
God •, in God therefore let the faithful truft. And what txcftfe have We to
dledge t that we Ihould not put our truft in God ; fince he hath direfted us
our paths? Wherefore we will certainly fuffer with patience the perfecution
wherewith ye fhall afflift us : in God therefore let thole put their confidence
who feek in whom to puc their truft. And thole who believed not, faid
unto their apoftles. We will fbrely expel you out of our land ; or ye lhaH
return unto our religion. And their Lord fpafee unto them by revelation,
faying , We will furely deftroy the wicked doers ; ahd we will cattle you to
dwell in the earth, after them. This frail be granted ubto him who fhall
dread the appearance at my tribunal, and fhall fear my threatening. And they
afked afliftance of Got) b , and every rebellious perverfe perfon failed
of fuccels. Hell iyetb nnfetn before him, and he lhall have filthy
water c given him to drink : he lhall Fup it up by little and little, and
he lhall not eafily let it oafs his throat, becOufi of its naufeoufnefs ; death
alfo lhall come upon him from every quarter, yet he fhall not dfe ; and be-
fore him /bail there ftand prepared a grievous torment. This is the likenefr
of thole who believe not in their Lord. Their works are as alhes, which
the wind violently fcatttreeh in a ftormy day: they fhall not be able to
obtain any folid advantage from that which they have wrought. This is an
error moft diftant from truth. Doft thou not fee that God hath created
the heavens and the earth in wifdom? If he pleafe, he can deftroy you, and
produce a new creature in your ftead: neither will this be difficult with
God. And they lhall all come forth into the prefence of God at the Lift
day

* Vart of your fits ;] That is, fuch of them enemies ; or the infidels, who called for God’s
.as were committed direflly againfl God, which decifion between tbemfelves and them ; or both,
are immediately cancelled by faith, or embracing And fome fuppofe this verie has no connexion
JJlam ; but not the crimes of injuftice, and op- with the preceding, but is fpoken of the people
prefliou, which were committed againfl man 1 : of Mecca, who begged rain in a great drought
for to obtain remiffion of theft laft, belides faith, with which they were afflifted at the prayer of
repentance and refutation, according to a man's their prophet, bnt could not obtain it *.

.ability, are alfo neceffary. c Filthy water i] Which will iflue from thebo-

b "They ashed ajpftance of God. 3 The com- dies of the damned, mixed with purulent mat-
iinetttators are uncertain whether thefe were the ter and Wood,
prophets, who begged afliftance againft their

1 Jit Beidawi.

* Idem.

Chap. 14. Al KORAN 207

day: and the weak among them lhall fay unto thofe who behaved them-
felves arrogantly *, Verily we were your followers on earth ; will ye not
therefore avert from us fame part of the divine vengeance ? They /hall an -
fiver. If God had directed us aright, we had certainly directed you*. It is
equal unto us whether we bear our torments impatiently, or whether we en-
dure them with patience : for we have no way to efcape. And Satan lhall
fay, after judgment lhall have been given, Verily God promifed you a pro-
mife of truth : and I alfo made you a promife > but I deceived you. Yet I
had not any power over you to compel you j but I called you only, and ye
anfwered me : wherefore accufe not me, but accufe your felves c . I cannot
aflift you ; neither can ye alfift me. Verily I do now renounce your hav-
ing alTociated me with God heretofore 4 . A grievous punilhment is prepared
for the unjuft. But they who lhall have believed and wrought righteoufnefs,
fhall be introduced into gardens, wherein rivers flow i they lhall remain
therein for ever , by the permifiion of their Lord } and their falutation
therein fhall Be, Peace e ! Doft thou not fee how God putteth forth a para-
ble ; reprefenting a good word, as a good tree, whofe root is firmly fixed
in the earth , and whofe branches reach unto heaven \ which bringeth forth
its fruit in all feafons, by the will of its Lord ? God propoundeth parable*
unto men, that they may be inftru&ed. And the likenefs of an evil word
is as an evil tree ; which is torn up from the face of the earth, and hath no
lability f . God lhall confirm them who believe, by the ftedfaft word of
faitb, both in this life and in that which is to come *: but Goo fhall lead
the wicked into error ; for God doth that which he pleafeth. Haft thou
not confidered thofe who have changed the grace of God to infidelity h , and

caufe

a The weak Jball fay unto thofe who behaved
mttoMnth ;] i. e. The more fimpje and inferior
pttple fhall fa y to their teachers and princes who
ftduccd them to idolatry, and confirmed them in
their ^bftinate infidelity*
b If God bad direBed us aright , we bad cer-
tainly direBed you ;] That is. We made the fame
choice for you, as we did for our felves; and
had not God permitted us to fall into error, we
had not feduced you.

c Wherefore accufe not me, &c.] Lay not the
blame on my temptations, but blame your own
folly in obeying and trufting to me, who had
openly profeffed my felf your irreconcileable

enemy,

d / do now renounce your having ajfociated me
with God heretofore ;] Gr I do now declare my
telf clear of your having obeyed me, preferably
to God, and worfhipped idols at my mitigation.
Or the words may be tranljated, I believed not
heretofore in that Being with whom ye did ajfth
date me ; intimating his firll difobedicnce in re-
fofing to worfhip Adam at God’s command h

e See chap. 10. p. 1 67.
f What is particularly^ iriten<fed in this paflage
by the good por/l, arid the evitpoTd, the expof?-
tors differ. But the firlt feems to mean the pro-
feffion of God’s unity, the inviting others to
the true religion, or the Kordn it felf; and the
latter, the acknowledging a plurality of gods,
the feducing of others to idolatry, or the obftl-
nate oppofition of God’s prophets *.

b And in that which is to come ;] Jalfalo'ddin
fuppoles the fepqlchre to be here underffood ; in
which place when the true believers come to be
examined by the two angels concerning their
faith, they will anfwcr properly and without he-
fitation ; which the infidels will not be able to
do 3 .

h Haft thou not confidered thofe so bo have chang-
ed the grace of God to infidelity, &c.] That is,
who requite his favours with difobediente and
incredulity. Or, whofe ingratitude obliged
God to deprive them of the bldBngs he had De-
flowed on them ; as he did the Meccans , who
though God had placed them in the facred ter-
ritory.

1 Idem.

2 Idem, Jallalq’ddin.

3 See the Prelim. Difc. f IV- /• 76-

208 Al KORAN. Chap. 14;

caufe their people to defcend into the houfe of perdition , namely, into hell ?
They lhall be thrown to bum therein ; and an unhappy dwelling Jhall it
be. They alfo fet up idols as copartners with God, that they might caufe
men to ft ray from his path. Say unto them , Enjoy the pleafures of this life
for a time ; but your departure hence lhall be into bell fire. Speak unto
my fervants who nave believed, that they be affiduous at prayer, and give
alms out of that which we have bellowed on them, bub privately and in
public ; before the day cometh, wherein there lhall be no buying nor fel-
lng, neither any friendlhipi. It is God who hath created the heavens and
the earth •, and caufeth water to defcend from heaven, and by means there-
of produccth fruits for your fuftenancc : and by his command he obligech * the
Ihips to fail in the lea for your fervice ; and he alfo forceth the rivers to fupply
your ufes : he likewife compelleth the fun and the moon, which diligently perform
their courfcs, to ferve you •, and hath fubjedled the clay and the night to
your fervice. He giveth you of every thing which ye alk him ; and if ye
attempt to reckon up the favours of Gnu, ye Ih.ill not be able to com-
pute the fame. Surely man is unjuft an/ ungrateful. Rtimmhcr when Abra-
ham faid, O Lord, make this land b a place of lecurity ; and grant that I
and my children* may avoid the woefhip of idols; for they, O Lord, have
feduced a great number of men. Whoever therefore lhall follow me, he
Jhall be of me : and whofoever (hall difobey me ; verily thou a -ill be gracious
and merciful 4 . O Lord, I have cauled/cmr of my otf-fpring « to fettle in
an unfruitful valley, near thy holy houfe, O Lord, that they may be con-
ftant at prayer. Grant, therefore, that the hearts of fome men f may be af-

fefted

ritory, and given them (he cuftody of the Caaba,
and abundant prorifion of all necefiariea and
conveniences of life, and had alfo honoured them
by the miffion of Mohammed, yet in return for
all this, became obftinate unbelievers, and per-
fecutcd his apoftlc ; for which they were not
only punched by a famine of feven years, but
alfo by the lofe and difgrace they fuftained at Be, r\
fo that they who had before been celebrated for
their profperity, were now Gripped of that, and
become conspicuous only for their infidelity 1
JF this be the drift of the pafiage, it could not
have been revealed at Mecca, as the reft of the
chapter is agreed to be ; wherefore fome fuppoie
this verfe and the next to .have been revealed at
Medina.

a He obligttb ;J The word ufed here, and in
the following fentences, is fakbkbara, which fig-
nifies forcibly to prep into any Jervis 2

b This landi J viz. The territory of Mecca.
See the Prelim. Difc. §. IV.

c And my children i] This prayer, it feem$ #
was not heard as to all his pofbaity, Darticulj fly
as to the defeendants of Ifmael i too fome pre-
lend that thefc latter did not worihip image .

1 ^/Beidawi. 2 See chap. 2 f. 19 d

but only paid a fuperftitious veneration to certain
ftones, which they fet up and compared, as re-
prefentations of the Caaba 3 .

d Thou wilt he gracious and merciful ;] That is,
by difpoftng him to repentance. But JaMak'diin
foppofes thefe words were fpoken by Abraham
before he knew that God would not pardon
idolatry.

e Some f xp ^p r <ngi] L e Ifmael and his
pofterity. The Mohammedans lav, that He^r,
his mother, belonged to Sarah, who gave her
to Abraham ; and that, on her bearing him this
fon, Sarah became fo jealous of her, ihit fhc
prevailed on her husband to turn them both out
of doors; whereupon he fent them to the terri-
tory of Mecca* where God caufed the fountain
of Zmzem to fpring forth for their relief, in
confideration of which the Jorhmim, who
were the matters of the country, permit ted them
to fettle among them \

‘ The hearts f 'fame men. See.] Had he faid
the tfarn of mm, Abfhlutdy, the- Perfaut and
the Roman: would sjfo have treated them as
friends ; and both the Jews and Chrijflam would
have m^de their phgrirrages to Mecca \

J. 20, 21 .

4 Idem . Idem 9 Jallalo 4 d.din.

Al Beida w u See the Prelim. Dip . §. L

Ghap. 14. Al KORAN 209

fedted with kindnefs toward them -, and do thou beftow on them all forts of
fruits a i that they may give thanks. O Lord, thou knoweft whatfoever we
conceal, arid whatfoever we publifh ; for nothing is hidden from God, either on
earth, ot in heaven. Praife be unto Goo, who hath given me, in my old age,
Ismael and Isaac .- for my Lord is the hearer of fuppjieation. O Lord, grant
that I may be an obfenrer of prayer, and a part of ray pofterity alfq b , O Lord,
and receive my fupplication. O Lord, forgive me, and my parents 1 , and the
faithful, on the day whereon an account lhall be taken. Think not, O prophet,
that God is regardlefs of what the ungodly do. He only deferreth thewpunifhment
unto the day whereon mens eyfis fhall tte fixed : they mall haften forward, at the
voice of the angel calling to judgment , and fhall lift up their heads ; they fhall not
be able to turn thejr'fight/n?m v |fef vjojeQ whereon itjhall he feed, and their hearts
fhall be void of fenfe , through excejfive terror. Wherefore do thou threaten
men with the day, whereon their punifhmjenti fhall be inflicted on them, and
whereon thofe who have attedunjaftly (hall fay, O L6rd, give us fdpite unto a
term near at hand ; and we will obey thy call, and we will follow thy apoftles.
But it fhall be anfwered unto them. Did ye not fwear heretofore, that no re-
verie fhould befal you* ? yet ye dwelt in the dwellings of thofe who had treat-
ed their own fouls unjuftly e ; and it appeared plainly unto you how we
had dealt with them f ; -and we propounded their deJlruSlion as examples un-
9 you. They employ their utmoft fubttety to oppofe the truth ; but their
fiibtlety is apparent unto God, who is able to frujlrate their deftgns % although
their fubtlety were fo great, that the mountains might be moved thereby. Think
not therefore, O prophet , that God will be contrary to his promife of af-
fjlance, made unto his apoftles ; for God is mighty, able to avenge. The
day will come, when the earth fhall be changed into another earth, and the
heavens into other heavens * ; and men fhall come forth from their graves to
appear before the only, -the mighty God. And thou fhak fee the wicked

* Ee on

* Beftow on them fruits ;] This part of the ter death be raifed to jadgment *:

prayer was granted ; Mecca being fo plentifully * The drvcUirsgi of thofe sobo bad treated their
fupplied, that the fruits of fpring, fummer, and own fouls unjuftly ;] viz. Of the Adites and
autumn, are to be found there at one and the Tbamudites.

feme time '. { And it appeared plainly unto you bow we bad

b And a part of my pofterity ;] For he knew dealt with them ;] Not only by the hiftories of
by revelation that fome of them would be infi- thofe people revealed in the Korda, but alio by
dels. the monuments remaining of them (as the

c Forgive me, and my parents jJ Abraham put houfes of the Tbamudites,) and the traditions
up this petition to God, before he knew that preferved among you of the terrible judg-
his patents were the enemies of God *. Some ments which befel them.

fuppofe his mother was a true believer, and * When the earth /ball he changed into another
therefore read it in the lingular, and my father, earth, and the heavens into other heavens >] This
Others fancy that by his parents the patriarch the Mohammedans fijppofe will come to pafs at the
here means Adam and Eve f laft day } the earth becoming white and even,

* That no reverfe fhould befal you ;] That is, or, as fome will have it, of filver ; and the
That ye thould nottalle of death, but continue heavens of gold '.

in this world for ever ; or that ye lhould not af-

1 Idem. * Eee chap.sy. p. it>4- T Jallalo’ddin, Al Beidawi. + Tsiem, Alf.u-
uajchshari, Yahya. 1 lidenu. V. Prelim. Difc IV. p. 86.

2io At KORAN. Chap. 15.

on that day bound together in fetters : their inner garments (hall be of pitch,
and fire fhall cover their faces ; that God may reward every foul, according
to what it (hall have deferved ; for God is fwift in taking an account. This
is a fufficient admonition unto men, that they may be warned thereby, and
that they may know that there is but one God s and that thofe who are indued
with underftanding may confider.

CHAP. XV.

Inti tied) A l H e j R a ; revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

A LR b . Thefe are the figns of the book, and of the ptrtplcuous Ko-
ran . * The time may come when the unbelievers Ihall wifti that they
had been Moflems c . Suffer them to cat, and to enjoy themfelves in this world 5
and let hope entertain them: but they fhall hereafter know that folly. We
have not deft rayed any city, but a fixed term of repmemee was appointed
them. No nation fhajl be punifted before their time fhall he come s neither
fhall they be refpited qflet. The Meccans fay, O thou to whom the admo-
nition d hath been fent down, thou art certainly poffeffed with a devil : wouUcft
thou not have come unto us with an altevdsnce of angels, if thou hadft fpoken
truth ? Anjwe r, We fend not down the angels, unlefs on a juft occafion * i nor
fhould they be then refpited any longer. We have furely fent down the Ko-
ran ; and we will certainly preferve the fame from corruption f . We have
heretofore fent apoflles before thee, among the ancient fedts : and there came no
apoftle unto them, but they laughed him to fcom. In the fame manner will
we put it into the hearts of the wicked Meccans to feoff at their prophet :
they (hall not believe on him ; and the fentence of the nations of old hath
been executed heretofore* If we fhould open a gate in the heaven above them,
and they fhould afeend thereto 8 all the day long, they would furely fay. Our

eyes

rj Al Hejr is a territory in the province of
Hejazt between Medina and Syria, where the
tribe of Thamud dwelt 1 ; and is mentioned to*
wards the end of the chapter.
b See the Prelim. Difc. v III. p. 59, &PA
c When the unb'Hevtn Jbeil wifi toot they irnt
hra Moflems;] viz. When they fliafl fee the
fhpeefs and profperity of the true believers ; or
when they fhall come to die ; or at the refur-
xe&ion.

d 'The admonition ;] i. e. The revelations which
coin poie the Korin.

e A jmfl ou often ;] When the divine ivifdom
fhall judge it proper to nfe their mirdfirp* as in
bearing his revelations to the prophet*, and the
executing his fentence on wished people; but
not to humour you with their appearance in vif-
ble Ciapes, which, fhoulJ your tkiu.ind be com-
pHcd with, would only inercafe yotar cunfufiot?,
and bring Qod’s vchg&tiQc on ym the fooner.

J " See the Prelim. Dill\ j , IV. f "y.
g Ar:J they fitt/Sd ajeatd tbfrets ;] j, e. Thr
incredulous Mw^ms (hemfdies ; or* ss other*
rather think, the mgth in vifibk forms.

1 Set the Prelim* Dfh f.

Chap. i$. Al KORAN. 211

eyes are only dazzled ; or rather we are a people deluded by mchantments.
We have placed the twelve figns in the heaven, and have fet them out in va-
rious figures , for the obfervation of fpedfcators : and we guard them from every
devil* driven away with ftones * ; except him who lifteneth by Health, at whom
a vifible flame is darted c . We have alfo fpread forth the earth, and thrown
thereon ftable mountains \ and we have caufed every kind of vegetable to fpring
forth in the fame, according to a determinate weight : and we have provided
therein neceflaries of life for you, *nd for him whom ye do not fuftain 4 . There
is no one thing but the ftore-houfes thereof are in our hands \ and we diftribute
not the fame otbermfe than in a determinate meafure. We alfo fend the winds
driving the pregnant clouds, and we fend down ftom heaven water, whereof
we give you to drink, and which ye keep not in ftore. Verily we give life, and
we put to death •, and we are the heirs of all things e . We know thofe among
you who go before ; and we know thofe who ftay behind f . And thy Lord
ihall gather them together at the laft day ; for he is knowing and wife. We
created man of dried clay, of black mud, formed into fhape 1 : and we had
before created the devil of fubtiie fire. And remember when thy Lord faid
unto the angels, Verily I am about to create man of dried clay^ of black mud,
wrought into ftiape ; when therefore I fhall have completely formed him, and
fhail have breathed of my fpirit into him ; do ye fall down and worfhip him*
And all the angels worfhipped Adam together, except Ebus, who refufed to
be with thofe who worfhipped him. And God faid#»/0 him , O Eblis, what
kindred thee from being with thofe who worfhipped Aojsm ? He anfwer-
ed, It is not fit that I fhould worfhip man, whom thou haft created of dried
clay, of black mud, wrought into fhape. Go d faid, Get thee therefore hence ;
for thou fhalt be driven away with ftones : and a curfe Jhdl be on thee, until
the day of judgment. The devil faid, O Lord, give me refpite until the
day of refurre&ion. God anfwered, Verily thou ihalt be one of thofe

E e 2 who

* We guard them ftm every devil , See.] For
the Mohammedans imagine that the devils endea-
vour to afeend to the conftellations, to pry into
the aft ion s, and overhear the difeourfe of the
inhabitants of heaven, and to tempt them. They
alfo pretend that thefe evil fpirhs had the liberty
of entring any of the heavens till the birth of

I ESua, when they were excluded three of them ;
mt that on the birth of Mohammed they were
forbidden the other four x .
b See chap. 3. p. 39. not. d.
c At whom a vifible flame is darted For
when a liar feems to fall or fhoot, the Mobamwe*
dans fuppofe the angels, who keep guard in the
conftellations, dart them at the devils who ap-
proach too near.

d And for him whom ye do not fuftain ;] viz.
Your family, fervants, and flaves, whom ye
wrongly imagine that ye feed your felves j tho*
it is G o d who provides for them as well as you 2 :

or, as fome rather think, the animals, of whom
men take no care 3 .

e The heirs of all things ;] i. e. Alone furviv-
ing, when all creatures fhall be dead and anni-
hilated.

f We hnm thofe among y ou who go before t and
thofe who flay behind ;] What thefe words parti-
cularly drive at, is uncertain* Some think them
fpoken of the different times of men’s feveral en-
trance into this world, and their departure out of
it ; others of the refpc&ivc forwardnefs and
backward nefs of Mohammed * s men in battle ; and
a third fays, the paffage was occafioned by the
different behaviour of Mohammed ' s followers, on
feeing a very beautiful woman at prayers behind
the prophet ; fome of them going out of the
Mofque before her, to avoid looking on her more
nearly, and others flaying behind, on purpofe to
view her 4 ,

£ See chap. 2. p. 4, See.

J M Beidawj. 2 Idem . 3 Jaj.lalo’ddijn, 4 41 ReidawI.

212 Al KORAN. Chap. 15^

who are refpited until the day of the appointed time \ Tbe de oil replied,
O Lord, becaufe thou haft feduced me, 1 will furely tempt them to difobe-
diencc in the earth; and I will feduce them all, except fuel of them as Jb all
hi thy chofen fervants. Goo faid, This is the right way with me". Verily
its to my fervants, thou fhalt have no power over them ; but over thofe only
who lhall be feduced, atui who lhall follow thee. And hell is furely de-
nounced unto them all : it hath feven gates ; unto every gate a diftind com-
pany of them /ball be esfigntd z , But thofe who fear God Jhall dwell in gar-
dens, amidft fountains. The angels Jbeil fay unto tlxm , Enter ye therein in
peace and iecurky. And we will remove all grudges from their breafts 4 - Y
they Jbdl be as brethren, fitting over againft one another* on couches: wea-
rinefs lhall not affe& them therein, neither lhall they be call out thence/V
ever. Declare unto my fervants that I am the gracious, the merciful G o;
and that my puniftiment is a grievous punilhment. And relate unto them
the biftory of Abraham's guefts^. When they went in unto him, and faid.
Peace be unto thee ; he anfwered. Verily we are afraid of you « : and they
replied. Fear not ; we bring thee the promile of a wifefon. He laid, Do ye
bring me the promife of a [on now old age hath overtaken me? what is it there-
fore that ye tell me? They faid. We have told thee the truth ; be not there-
fore one of thofe who defpair. He anfwered. And who defpair erh of the mer-
cy of God, except thofe who err? And he faid. What is your errand there-
fore, O meflengere of God ? They anfwered. Verily we are lent to defiroy a
wicked people: but as for the family of Lot, we will lave them a) I, ex-
cept his wife ; we have decreed that Ihe lhall be one of thofe who remain
behind to be dejlroyed with (be infidels. And when the meffengers came to the
family of Lot, he laid unto them , Verily ye are people who are unknown to
me. They anfwered. But we are come unto thee to execute that /entente, con-
cerning which your fellow citizens doubted : we tell thee a certain truth v and
we are mejfengers of veracity. Therefore lead forth thy family, in feme time
of the night ; and do thou follow behind them, and let none of you turn
back; but go whither ye are commanded \ And we gave him this com-
mand ; becaufe the utmoft remnant of thofe ■people was to be cut off in the
morning And the inhabitants of the city came unto Lot, rejoicing at the
news of the arrival of Jbme grangers. And he laid unto them , Verily thefe

are

See ibid, and chap. 7. p 117.

This is tbt rigbt sr*y with tie ;] viz. The
fa vine of the cleft, and the utter reprobation of
the wicked, according to my eternal decree.
c See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. 92.

* We will remove all trudges from their treaflsi\
That is, all hatred ana ill-will which they bore
each other in their life- rime 1 ; or, aslomechoofe
to expound it, all envy or heart-burning on ac-
cmnt of the different degrees of honour and
happinefs to which the bleffed will be promoted,
according to their relpeftive merits.

e paint ever agaittfi at another ;] Never
turning their back: to one another*; which
might be conftrued a lien of contempt:

' See chap, 1 1. p, i Si, tic.

We are afraid f y.a i] What ocoSsnedAlra-
bem't apprehenfion was, either their Hidden en-
tring without fcav e; or their coming at an un-
feafonable rime ; or eHc t heir not eating with
him.

h Whither y ore nmssoaiti ;] Which was in-
to Syn: ; or into Egypt '.

* See (bap. 7. p. 120. not . e. * Jalialo’ddin.

3 Al Biida'-i, Jallalo'duuc

Chap. 15. Al KORAN. 215,;

are my guefts: wherefore do not di (grace me by abujing them', but fear God,
and put me not to fhame. They anfweredi Have we not forbidden thee from
entertaining or protelring any man? Lor replied, Thefe are my daughters;
therefore rather Make ufe of them , if ye he refohtd to do what ye purpofe. As
thou lived they wander in their folly *. Wherefore a terrible dorm from
heaven aflailed them at fun-rife : and we turned the city upfide down ; and
we rained on them dones of baked clay# Verily herein are figns unto men
of fagacity : and th'ofe cities were punifhed , to point out a right way for men
to walk in. Verily herein is a fign unto the true believers. The inhabi-
tants of the wood negr Midia n b were alfo ungodly : wherefore we took
vengeance on them c . And both of them were defrayed, to ferve as a manifed
rule for men to dir ell their actions by. And the inhabitants of Al Hejr 11 like-
wife heretofore accufed the tnefffengcrs of God of impodure : and we pro-
duced our figns unto them, but they retired afar off from the fame. And
they hewed houfes out of the mountains, to fecure themfelves. But a terrible
noife from heaven aflailed them hi the morning: neither was what they
had wrought of any advantage unto them. We nave not created the hea-
vens and the earth, and whatever f contained between them, otherwife than
injudice: and the hour of judgment Hid finely come. Wherefore, O Movam-.
med , forgive thy people with a graciou; forgivenefs *• Verily thy Lord is the
creator of thee and of them , and knoweth what is moft expedient. We have
already brought unto thee feven verfes which are frequently to be repeated f ,
and the glorious Koran. Cad not thine eyes on the good things which we
have bedowed on feveral of the unbelievers , fo as to covet the fame g ; neither
be thou grieved on their account. Behave thy felf with meeknefs towards
the true believers ; and fay, I am a public preacher. If they believe not,
we will infill a like punijhment on them , as we have inflicted on the di-
viders b , who diftinguilhed the- K oran into different pacts ; for by thy Lord,

we

* Some will hare thefe words fpokerv by the profperity, <finre thou haft received. In the Ko-
angels to Loti others, by God to Mohammed . ran , a blefling, in companion whereof all that
D The inhabitants of the wood}] To whom we have bellowed on them, ought to be con-
Shoaib was alfo fenfe as well as to the inhabitant* temned as of no value. Al Bfiiatoi mentions a
of Midian i they being of the fame tribe. tradition, that Mohammed meeting at Adhridt (a

c We took vengeance on themi] Deftroying them, town of Syria) feven caravans, very richly la-
for their incredulity and difobedicnce, by a hot den, belonging to lime Jmsts of the tribes of
wind 1 , Koreidha and al Nadir > his- men had a great

4 The inhabitants of al Hejr Who were the mind to plunder them, faying. That thofe richei
tribe of Tbamud a . would be of gmt'fervice for the propagation of

c This werfe, it is laid, was abrogated by God’s true religion. Butrhe prophet reprefeiit-
that of the fword. ed to them, by<this paflage, thamhey had no res-*

f Seven verfes > &c ] That is, the firli chap- fon to repine, God having giveij them the for
ter of the Koran* which confifts of fo many ver- ven verfes , which were io/initeJy more valuable,
fes : tho* fome fuppofe the feven long chapters 5 than tltofe feven caravans 4 .
are here intended. ' h The dividers Some interpret the original

E Caji not thine eyes on the good things which word, the obfi rubier s t who hindred men from
tee have befiovstd on feveral of the unbelievers , &c.] entring Mecca f to vifit the temple! left they
That is. Do not envy or covet their worldly ftiould be perfuaded to embrace IJlim ; and thisy

it

1 lidem * Set chap. 7. p, fjfV. and Prel. Dift> 7* 3 Seechap^.p, 148. iw/.a. 4 J/Esidawi

2i4 & KORAN . Chap. 16.

we will demand an account from them all, of that which they have wrought.
Wherefore publifh that which thou haft been commanded, and withdraw from
the idolaters. We will furely take thy partagainft the fcoffers *, whoaffo-
ciate with God another god j they ftiall furely know tbeir fitly. And now
we well know that thou art deeply concerned on account of that which they fay:
but do thou celebrate the praife of thy Lord ; and be one of thofe who wor-

ihip j and ferve thy Lord, until dea

it is faid, was done by ten men, who were all
flain at Bi « ' Others tranflatc the word, trfo
btstnJ ihimfrfocs h *4tb ; and fuppofe certain
Tbartndittu who fwore to kill Saltb by night,
are here meant But the fentence more proba-
bly relates to the J'fm and Cbrijltem* who [fay
the BLhjtenfiiatri) receive fome j>ir; of the icrip-
tures, and rt]c£i others; and aim approved of
fome paflages of the and disapproved of

other*, according to weir prejudices ; or c\(c to
the unbelieving fome of whom c died

the KtratJ a piece of witchcraft ; others, flights
of divination; others, old ftorks; and others*
a poetical competition

a We zviil take tb * p&r§ the JtijfrriJ]

This paflajgy, it is fail, wm revealed on account
of tive noble Ksreijb* whofe names were a/ if j-
fid Eb?i Mogbeira, al At Eh IFtijth OJa Eh
JCgii* *1 Jfwai Ebn AbdTvgbxtK and a! Afwai

1 Htm , Jallal&’ddi

* mail overtake thee.

Eh a! Nt&lUb* Thefe were i timers te enemies
of Mjbtmmti* continually perfocuting him, and
turning him into fidicule; wherefore as length
Gabriel came and told him that he wju command-
ed to tike his part ag LnU them ; and on the an-
gel** nuking a fign towuiL them one a: ter ano-
ther, a! iFfiKd pafllng % fome arrows, one of
them hitched in hh garment and he, out of
prid!e T not Hooping- to tifcc it aff t but walking
forward, the bead of it cut a vein in h«s heel,
and he Lied to death ; of A* wn lilltd with a
tburtij which fhiek into tlic sbleof his foot, and
ctufod his leg to fwell to a mgnffoous fize;
OJ-i died with violent -md perpetual fneczjDg j.
*1 Amed E6* Ahi Yafjbdih run his head againft a
thorny tree and sailed IJtnfeli; and al JjmaJ Eh
at Mjiitikb was ftrutk blind ^

b Death ;] Liter illy, Thar which tr certain*

r. 2 ^/Beidawi.

CHAP. XVI.

Intitledy The Bee a ; revealed at Mecca 1 *.

In the name of the mod merciful God.

T H E fentence of Goo will furely come to be executed ; wherefore do
not haften it. Praife be unto him ! and far be that from him which
they affociate with bin ! He fhall caufc the angels to defeend with a re-
velation by his command, unto fuch of his fervants as he pleafeth, faying,
Preach that there is no God, except my felf •, therefore fear me. He hath
created the heavens and the earth to numfift bit juftice : far be that from
.him which they affociate with him 1 He hath created man of feed ■, and y et

behold

* Thu infeft u mentioned about the middle of'the ctar’.cr.
verfea.

0 Except the three lall

Chap. i6. Al K 0 R A Df. 21$

behold, he is a profefled difputer againft the refurreftionK He hath likewife
created the cattle for you : from them ye have wherewith to keep your
felves warm b , and other advantages ; and of them do ye alfo eat. And they
are likewife a credit unto you S when ye drive them home in the evenings
and when ye lead them forth to feed in the morning : and they carry your bur-
thens to a diftant country, at which ye could not otherwife arrive, unlefs
with great difficulty to vourfelves ; for your Lord is compafllonate and
merciful. And he hath affo createdhorfes , and mules, andafles, that ye may
ride thereon, and for an ornament unto you \ and be likewife creatcth other
things which ye know not. Jt appertained unto God, to inftruft men in the
right way ; and there is who turneth afide from the fame : but if he had plea-
fed, he would certainly have directed you all. It is he who fendeth down
from heaven rain water, whereof ye have to drink, and from which plants,
whereon ye feed your cattle , receive their nouri/bment. And by means thereof
he caufeth corn, and olives, and palm-trees, and grapes, and all kinds of fruits
to fpring forth for you. Surely herein is a fign of the divine power and
wifdom unto people who confider. And he hath fubje&ed the night and the
day to your fervice \ and the fun, and the moon, and the ftars, which are
compelled to ferve by his command. Verily herein are figns unto people
of hnderftanding. And be hath alfo given you dominion over whatever he hath
created for you in the earth, diftinguimed by its different colour Surely herein
is a fign unto people who refleft. It is he who hath fubjedted the fea unto you 9
that ye might eat fifh e thereout, and take from thence ornaments f for you
to wear : and thou feeft the fliips plowing the waves thereof, that ye may
feek to enrich your felves of his abundance, by commerce \ and that ye might
give thanks. And he hath thrown upon the earth mountains firmly rooted,
left it fhould move with you *, and alfo rivers, and paths, that ye might be
dire&ed : and he bath likewife ordained marks wheriby men may know their
way j and they are dircfted by the ftars h . Shall Gem rijerefbre w ho createth,

be

* Behold he is a proofed difptcter againft the
Tt/krreffion i] The perfon particularly intended
in this place, was Obba Eon Kbalf who came
to Mohammed with a rotten bone, and asked
him whether it was poffible for God to reftore
it to life *.

b Ye have wherewith to keep year /elves warm ;]
viz; Their skins, wool, and hair, which ferve
you for ck&thing.

c A credit unto you ;] Being a grace to your
court-yawls, and a credit to you in the eyes
of your neighbours a .

d Diftinguijhed by its different tohwr\) That is,
of every kind ; the various colour of things being
one of their chief diftinflions 3 .

e Fijh i] Literally, f reft fieft 1 by which fifh is
meant, as being naturally more frefh, and fooner
liable to corruption, than the flefh of birds and

beafts. The cxpteffion it thought to hav* been
made ufe of here the rather, becaufe the pro-
duction of fuch frefti food from fait water, is
an inftance of God’s power

f Ornaments jl As pearls and coral.
g Left it Jbmd move with yotsi] The Moham-
medans fttppofe that the earth, when firft created,
was fmooth and equal, and thereby liable to a
circular motion as well as the celeftial orbs ; and
that the angels asking, who could be able to ftand
on fo tottering a frame, God fixed it the next
morning by throwing the mountains on it.

h And they are directed by the ftars ;] Which
are their gutdes, not only at mt t but alfo on
land, when they travel by night through the de-
farts. The ftars which they ofcferve for thi9
puipofe, are either the pleiades, or feme of
thofe near the pole.

1 Idem*

% Idem .

3 Idem*

4 Idem.

2 i 6 Al KORAN. Chap. 16 .

!.- si he who createth not? Do ye not therefore confide r ? If yc at temp
to reckon up the favours of God, ye fhall not be able in comp Lite their
number : God is furcly gracious, and merciful ; and God knowcch that which
ye conceal and that which ye publifh. But the h; toil which ye invoke,
OC%b God, create nothing, but are thertifclvta created. 5T».- y arc dead,
■TwJ no. living; neither do they underitand when tlvty fhill be railed *, Your
Go® is one God. As to thofe who believe not in the life to come, their
hearu deny tbt pl.tinej I evidence, and they proudly reject the truth. There
is no doubt but Goo knoweth thit which they conceal and that which they
difcover: verily he Jovcth not the proud. Ami when it is laid unto them,
What hath your Lord lent down unto Motumma? they anfwor, Fables
of ancient tima. "thus arc they given up to error , that they m.iy bear their
own burthens without diminution on the day of relumclion, and afa a pari
of the burthens of tholb whom they caufed to err* without knowlctW. H
it not be m evil bun hen which they (kill bear? • r prudeceflors devi-
fed plots heretofore; but God came unto their building, to ever {brow if
from the foundations : and the roof ft 11 on them from above, and 1 puttMh-
imni cime upon them, from whence they did not expect*. Alto on the
d,iy of itfurrc&on he will cover them with flume •> and' will fit y* Where arc
my companions, concerning whom ye difputcd ? Thofe unto whom knowledge
fhall have been given 4 , fhall ftnfwer, Tltis day flunv.- am) mtibry ju.'. 1

upon the unbelievers. They whom the angeS if all caufr to dir, having
dealt unjultly with their own lbuls, fhall offer to in.ilte their pence 4 in the
article of tic.al', faying. We have done no evil. But the angels JhaH reply,
Yaa ; verily Goo well knowttlt that which ye have wrought i wherefore
enter the gates of hell, therein to remain far ever ; and milemble fhall be
the abode of the proud. And it fhall be laid unto thofe who fhall tear God,
What hath your Lord fent down? They fhall anfwer. Good : unto thofe
who do right fhall be given an excellent reward in this world ; but the dwelling
of the next life /ball be better ; and happy /ball be the dwelling of the pious'’
namely, gardens of eternal abode *, into which they fhall enter ; rivers fhall
flow beneath the fame ; therein fa all they enjoy whatever they with. Thus will
God recompenfe the pious. Unto the righteous whom the angels fhall caufe

to

» When tbn fiett it rafti i] i. e. At whit

time they or die if north ipprrt Hull be railed to

receive judgment.

b God rptTibrttp tbrir failJing, it-] Some
underftand this paflage iigurnively, of God's
dilappointing their winked defigtn ; bin others
fuppofe the words liter.. )y lebie Li lb Lower
which Nivn,d i ‘.shorn the ibbernmidiv will
have to be the fan of Ca.i.'.m. the tor. uf Hans, and
fo the nephew of Cupt, and not nit ion) built in
Babel, and carried to an i:. menle height, i, five:
thoofand cubits, ifa fame.) fo lifhly purport si e
thereby to afeend to Jv--.. t en and stage wtr with

the inhabitants of dut pi ■ -t i hut Gi. d jrofttaicii
his attempt- interl)' overthrowing the tower by
a violent iviod and e*ritiqu.vke

'Theft tilth trb as itmltdgt jie,'. care Sent
gt#m t] vft. The prophet 9 , and the reaefoert
and prefcfTor? of G. o': uniiy . ••r, the an

: -'.ill ffftr lerute riietr Making their

fut mtiTt 1 hi, and Lkimbi • ev-.uiir./ meir eiii iifti-
Oua, • priKccdinp froiu '.;,u ir-D:e, arc not from
obtUiuey or malice a .

' Get jets if eternal aMr>] Lifj-i.y, ^
i f Eden. Sec chip <y. p, ty 3 .

'Hem, Jaiialo’ddi*. V. D’Hakbel Bile Oiinti. An- HttitoL * lidt* l « ■,

Ch at. 1 6. Al K C) H A N, 217

to die, they lhall fay, Peace be upon you -, enter ye into paradife, as a re-
ward for that which ye have wrought. Do the unbelievers expert any ether
than that the angels come unto them, to part their fouls from their bodies ; or
that the fentence of thy Lord come to be executed on them ? So did they aft who
were before them ; and God was not unjuft towards them in that be defrayed
them \ but they dealt unjuftly with their own fouls : the evils of that which
they committed, reached them ; and the divine judgment which they fcoffed
at, fell upon them. The idolaters fay, If God had pieafed, we had not
worfhipped any thing befides him, neither had our fathers : neither had we
forbidden any thing, without him». So did they who were before them.
But is the duty of the apoftles any other , than public preaching ? We have
heretofore railed up in every nation an apoftle to admonifh them , faying,
Worfhip God, ana avoid T achut \ And of them there were fome whom
God direfted, and there were others of them who were decreed to go aftray
Wherefore go through the earth, O tribe of Koseish , and fee what hath been
the end of thofe who acci^ed their apoftles of impofture. If thou, O prophet ,
doft earneftly wifti for their direftion ; verily God will not direft him whom
he hath refolved to lead into error •, neither lhall they have any helpers.
And they fwear moft folemnly by God, faying , God will not raife the dead.
Yea ; the promife thereof is true : but the greater part of men know it not.
He will raife them that he may clearly Ihew them the truth concerning which
they now difagree, and that the unbelievers may know that they are liars.
Verily our fpeech unto any thing, when we will the lame, is, that we only fey
unto it. Be ; and it is. As for thofe who have fled their country for the fake
of God, after they had been unjuftly perfecuted*; we will furely provide
them an excellent habitation in this world, but the reward of the next life
lhall be greater ; if they knew it 4 . They who perfevere patiently, and put
their truft in their Lord, Jball not fail of happinefs in this life and in that which
is to come. We have not fent any before thee, as our apoftles , other than'
men e , unto whom we fpake by revelation. Enquire therefore of thofe who
have the cuftody of the feriptures, if ye know not this to be truth. We
fent them with evident miracles , and written revelations ; and we have fent

F f down

* If God bad pieafed, toe bad not worjbippci
any btftdes bim, &c.J This they fpoke in a
fcoffing manner, juilifying their idolatry and
fupcrflitious abllainrng from certain cattle by
pretending, that had thefe things been difagree-
ableto God, he would -not have fuffered them
to he.pradifed.

b Taghut See chap. 2. p. 31.
c Who have fled tbeir country after they bad
been unjuftly perfecuted ;] Some fuppofe the pro-
phet ana the companions of his Sight in general,
are here intended : others fuppofe that thofe are
patdcntarly meant in this place, who, after Mo-
bammd'a departure, were imprifoned at Mecca

1 See ebap. 6. p. 114, lie.

on account of their having embraced his reli.
gion, and fuffered great perfecution from the
Kortijb', as, Belal, Sobtib , Kbabbab, Ammar,
Abes, Abu' l f an dal, and Sobail 2 .

i If tbty knew it ;] It is uncertain whether
the pronoun they relates to the infidels, or to the
true believers. If to the former, the confe-
quence would be, that they would be defirous of
attaining to the happinefs of the Mabajenn, by
profelling the fame faith; if to the latter, the
knowledge of this is urged as a motive to pati-
ence and perfeverance

* See chap. 7. p. 122. not. k. chap. u. p.
199, (Ac.

2 Al Beidawi.

3 Idem.

218 Al KORAN. Chap. 16.

down unto thee this Koran *, that thou mayeft declare unto mankind that
which hath been lent down unto them, and that they may confider. Are
they who have plotted evil againft their prophet fecure, that God will not
caufe the earth to cleave under them, or that a punilhment will not come
upon them, from whence they do not expeft ; or that he will not chaftife
them while they are bulled in travelling from one p ace to another , and in
traffick ? (for they lhall not be able to elude the power of God,) or that he
will not chaftife them by a gradual deftruftion ? But your Lord is truly
gracious and merciful in granting you refpite. Do they not confider the things
which God hath created ; whofe lhadows are call on the right hand and on
the left, worlhipping God 1 *, and become contrafted ? Whatever movethboth
in heaven and on earth, worfhippeth God, and the angels alfo ; and they
are not elated with pride, fo as to difiain his fervice : they fear their Loro,
who is exalted above them, and perform that which they are commanded.
God faid, Take not unto yottrfelves two gods ; for there is but one God :
and revere me. Unto him bdongetb whatfoever is in heaven and on earth*,
and unto him is obedience eternally due. Will ye therefore fear any befides
God ? Whatever favours ye have received, are certainly from God ; and
when evil afflidleth you, unto him do ye make your fupplication ; yet when
he taketh the evil from off you, behold, a part of you give a companion
unto their Lord, to fhew their ingratitude for the favours we have bellowed on
them. Delight your felves in the enjoyments of this life : but hereafter lhall ye
know that ye cannot efcape the divine vengeance . And they fet apart unto idols
which have no knowledge*, a part of the food which we have provided for them.
By God, ye (hall furely be called to account for that which ye have falfe-
ly deviled. They attribute daughters unto God d *, (far be it from him !) but
unto themfelves children of the fen which they defire *. And when any of
them is told the news of the birth of a female, his face becometh black f , and
he is deeply afflicted : he hideth himfelf from the people, becaufe of the ill
tidings which have been told him; considering within himfelf whether he lhall
keep it with dilgrace, or whether he lhall bury it in die dull. Do they not
make an ill judgment ? Unto thofe who believe not in the next life, the fi-
miiitudc of evil ought to be applied) and unto God the moll fublime fimili-
tude* : for he is mighty and wife. If God Ihould punilh men for their ini-
quity.

* This Korin ;] Literally, this admonition ’ .

* See chap. 13 p. 202. aot. b.

c Idols which have s. knowledge ;] Or, which
they know not ; fooliihly imagining that they have
power to help them, or intereft with God to in-
tercede for them.

As to the ancient Arabs fetting apart a certain
portion of the produce of their lands for their
idols, nd their fuperftitio'qs abitaining from the
ufe of certain cattle, in honour to the lame, fee
chap. 5. p. 96, and chap. 6. p. 113, and the
notes there.

* See the Prelim. Difc. p. 17. A Seidiwi
lays, that the tribes of Khaaab and Katina,
in particular, ufed to call the angels the daugh-
ters of God.

e Of the fex which, they dcjsrti] via. Sons :
for the birth of a daughter was forked on as a
kind of misfortune imoeg the Arabs , and ifcey
often ufed to put them to death by burying them
alive 2 .

r His face iecmttb black ;] i. e. Clouded with
confusion and forrow.

a This paJTage condemns the Meccam injudici-
ous

1 See the Prelim. Difc. *)■ HI. p. 57. * See th/tp. 81.

Chap. 16. Al KORAN, 219

quity, he would not leave on the earth any moving thing : but he givetfr
them reipite unto an appointed time ; and when their time (hall come, they
(hall not be refpised an hour, neither fhall their punifhment be anticipated.
They attribute unto God that which they diflike thcmfelves % and their
tongues utter a He ; namely \ that the reward of paradife is for them. There
is no doubt but that the fire of bell is prepared for diem, and that they
fhall be fent thither before the reft of the wicked. By God, we have hereto-
fore fent nuffengers unto the nations before thee : but Satan prepared their
works for them ; he was their patron in this world b , and in that which is to
come they fhall fuffer a grievous torment. We have not fent down the book
of the Koran unto thee, for any other purpofe t than that thou fhouldeft de-
clare unto them that truth concerning which they difagree ; and for a di-
rection and mercy unto people who believe. God fendeth down water from
heaven, and caufeth the earth to revive after it hath beeh dead. Verily
herein is a fign of the refurreHian unto people who hearken. Ye have alfo
in cattle an example of inftruCtion : we give you to drink of that which is
in their bellies, a liquor between digefted dregs, and blood c ; namely pure
milk S which is fwallowed with pleafure by thole who drink it. And of the fruits
of palm-trees, and of grapes, ye obtain an inebriating liquor, and alfo good
nourifhment *. Verily herein is a fign unto people who underftand. Thy Lord
fpdke by infpiratkm*unto the bee, faying , Provide thee houfes { in the moun-
tains, and in the trees, and of tbofe materials wherewith men build hives for
thee : then eat of every kind of fruit, and walk in the beaten paths of thy
Lord *. There proceedeth from their bellies a liquor of various colour 11 ;

F f 2 where-

ous and blafphemoUs application of fuch circum-
ftances to God as were unworthy, of him, and
not pnly derogatory to the perfections of the
Deity, bnt even difgraceful to man ; while they
arrogantly applied the more honourable circum-
ftances to themfdves.

4 They attribute unto God that zobieb they dif
like tbmfehes i] By giving him daughters; and
afibciates in power and honour ; by difregarding
his meflengers 5 and by fetjing apart the better
Jhare of tkeprefents and offerings for their idols,
and the worfe for him 1 .

b He was their patron in this world ,] or. He it
the patron of tbetm {'t\&> the Ktreijb\ this day,
c A liquor between digefted dregs, and blood i]
The milk coit&fting of certain pat tides of the
blood, fupplied from the finer parts of the ali-
ment. Elm Abbas fcys, that the grower parts of
the food fubfide into excrement, and that the
finer parts are converted into mikkj and the fineft
of all into blood.

d Pure milk »} ‘Having neither the colour of
the blood, nor the fmell of the excrements.
e And of tbe fruits of palm-trees if. grapes,

ye obtdin an inebriating liquor, and alfi good
nourijbvmt ;] Not only wine, which is forbid-
den, but alfo lawful food, as dated, raifins, a
hind of honey flowing from the dates, and vine-
gar.

Some have fiippofed that thefe words allow
the moderate ufe of wine ; but the contrary is
the received Opinion *,

f Hntfesi\ So the apartments which the bee
builds are here called, be c 3 ufe of their beautiful
workminftiip, and admirable contrivance, which
no geometrician can excel 3 .

* And walk in tbe beaten paths of tbj Lord
i. e. The ways through which, by God’s power,
the bitter flowers pafling the bee’s ftomach be-
come honey i or, the methods of making honev,
which he J is taught her by idftin£t v or elft tfcfe
ready way home from the diftant places to
which that infeft flibs \

h A liquor of variate eftottr ;] via. Honey ;
the colour of which is very different, occasioned
lay the different ptanfs on which the bees feed }
forte being white, feme yellow, fome red, and
fome .bkck *.

1 Al Bsidawx.

2 See chap, 2 . p . 2 5.

3 Al Beidawi. 4 liens .

* Idem .

220 Al KORAN. Chap. 16.

wherein is a medicine for men*. Verily herein is a fign unto people who
confider. God hath created you, and he will hereafter caufe you to die :
and fome of you (hall have his life prolonged to a decrepit age, fo that he
fhall forget whatever he knew ; for God is wife and powerful. God caufeth
fome of you to excel others in worldly pofleffions : yet they who are cauf-
ed to excel, do not give their wealth unto the JIaves whom their right hands
poffefs, that they may become equal Jbarers therein b . Do they therefore deny
the beneficence of God ? God hath ordained you wives from among your-
felves', and of your wives hath granted you children and grand-children ; and
hath bellowed on you good dungs for food. Will they therefore believe in
that which is vain, and ungratefully deny the goodnefs of God? They wor-
fhip, befides God, idols which poffefs nothing wherewith to fuftain them, ei-
ther in heaven, or on earth ; and have no power. Wherefore liken not any
thing unto God* : for God knoweth, but ye know not. God propoundeth as
a parable a poffeffed Have, who hath power over nothing, and him on whom
we have bellowed a good provifion from us, and who giveth alms thereout
both fecretly and openly * : lhali thefe two be efteemed equal ? God forbid !
But the greater part of them know it not. God alfo propoundeth as a para-
ble two men ; one of them bom dumb, who is unable to ao or underftand any
thing, but is a burthen unto his mailer ) whitherfoever he fhall fend him, he
fhall not return with any good fuccefs : fhall this man, and he who bath his
fpeecb and underjlanding , and who commandeth that which is juft, and fol-
lowedi the right way, be elleemed equal f ? Unto God alone is the fecret of
heaven and earth known. And the buftnefs of the loft hour * fhall be only as

* Wherein is a medicine fir men ;] The fame
being not only good food* but a ufcful remedy
in feveral diftempers, particularly thofe occafion-
ed by phlegm. There is a ftory, that a man
came once to Mohammed, and told him that his
brother was affiifked with a violent pain in bis
belly : upon which the prophet bade him give
him fome honey. The fellow took his advice $
but foon after coining again* told him that the
medicine had done his brother no manner of fcr-
vice ; Mohammed anfwered* Go and give him
more honey , fir God /peaks truth, and thy bro-
ther's belly lies . And the dofe being repeated*
the man* by God's mercy* was immediately
cured *•

Vot) give not their wealth unto their JUoes,
Jcc.] Thefe words reprove the idolatrous Mec-
cans, who could admit created beings to a fhare
©f the divine honour* tho* they fuffered not
their Haves to fhare with themfelves in what
God had beftowed on them *.

c From among your Jehes ;] That is, of your
own nations and tribes. Some think the for-
mation of Eve from Adam is here intended.
f Liken not any thing unto God *] Or propound

no fimilitudes or comparifonft between him and
his creatures. One argument the Meccans em-
ployed in defence of their idolatry, it feems*
was * that the worfhip of inferior deities did
honour to God » in the fame manner as the re-
fpeft fhewed to the fervants of a prince* does
honour to the prince himfelf 3 .

e God propoundeth as a # arable a pojfeffed fiave ,
&c.] The idols are here likened to a dave, who
is fo far from having any thing of his own, that
he it himfelf in the poHefiion of another ; where-
as God is as a rich free man, who provided for
his family abundantly, and alfo aihfte^h others
who have need, both in public and in private 4 .

f God alfo propoundeth as a parable twomdn,Scc.]
The idol is here again represented under the j-
mage of one who, by a defeat in his fen e$, is a
ufelefs burthen to the man who maintains him *
and God* under that of a perfon completely
Qualified either to dire& or to execote any m(c-
ful undertaking. Some fnppofe the companion
is intended of a true believer and an infidel.

* The bufintfs of the laft hour ;] That is. The
refurrc&ion of the dead.

1 Idea.

* Idem .

* Idem

4 Idem , Jallax.o*bpik.

Chap. 16.

Al KORAN.

221:

the winkling of an eye, or even more quick: for God is almighty. God
hath brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers ; ye knew nothing,
and he gave you tbe fenfes of hearing and feeing, and underftandings, that ye
might give thanks. Do they not behold the fowls which are enabled to fly
in the open firmament of heaven? none fupporteth them except God. Veri-
ly herein are figns unto people who believe. God hath alfo provided your
houfes for habitations for you •» and hath alfo provided you tents of the fkins
of cattle, which ye find light to be removed on the day of your departure
to new quarters., and eafy to be pitched on the day of your fitting down there-
in : and of their wool, and their furr, and their hair hath be fupplied you
with furniture and houfehold-ftuff for a feafon. And God hath provided for
you, of that which he hath created, conveniences to (hade you from tbe
fun % and he hath alfo provided you places of retreat in the mountains b , and
he hath given you garments to defend you ’from the heat', and coats of
mail to defend you in your wars. Thus doth he accomplifh his favour to-
wards you, that ye may refign your felves unto him. But if they turn
back a , verily thy duty is public preaching only. They acknowledge the
goodneis of God, and afterwards they deny the fame d ; but the greater part
of them are unbelievers'. On a certain day we will raife a witnefs out of
every nation * : then they who lhall have been unbelievers fhall not be fuf-
fered to excufe tbemf elves', neither fhall they be received into favour. And when
they who fhall have a&ed unjuftly fhall fee the torment prepared for them ;
(it fhall not be mitigated unto them, neither fhall they be refpited ;) and
when thofe who fhall have been guilty of idolatry fhall fee their falfe gods*,
they fhall fay, O Lord, thefe are our idols which we invoked, befides thee.
But they fhall return an anfwer unto them, faying , Verily ye are liars \
And on that day fhall tbe wicked offer fubmiffion unto God ; and thcfdfe
deities which they imagined fhall abandon them. As for thofe who fhall nave
been infidels, ana fhall have turned afide others from the way of God, we will
add unto them punifhmentupon punifhment, becaufe they have corrupted others.
On a certain day we will raife up in every nation a witnefs againft them, from
among themfelves ; and we will bring thee, O Mohamjaev, as a witnefs a-
gainft thefe Arabians. We have fent down unto thee the book of >the
Koran,

* Conrer.itncies to fade you from tbe funi\ As
trees, houfes, tents, mountains, tstc.

b Places of retreat in tbe mountains ;] viz.
Caves and grotto’s, both natural and artificial.

* To defend you from tbe beat ;] Al Beiddai
fays, that one extream, and that the moll infup-
portabie in Arabia , is here put for both ; but
Jallutiddin fuppofes that by beat we are in this
place to underftand cold.

d They acknowledge tbe goodnefs ef God, and
afterwards they deny tbe fame ;] Confeffing God
to be the author of all the bleffings they enjoy ;
and yet directing their worfliip and thanks to
their idols, by whofe intcrceffion they imagine

blefiinga are obtained.

e But tbe greater part of them are unbelievers j]
Abfolutely denying God’s providence, either
through ignorance, or perverfenefi,

f See chap. 4. p. 66. not. e.

* Their falfe gods i] Literally, Their tompay
nious.

b Ye are liars ;] For t thajt we are not the
companions of God, as ye imagined; neither
did ye really ferve us, but your own corrupt
sffe&ions and lofts ; nor yet were ye led into
idolatry by us, but ye fell into it of your own
accord 1 •

> Al Beidawu

222 AL KORAN \ Chap. 16;

Koran, for an explication of every thing uecejfary both as to faith and pratike,
and a direction, and mercy, and good tidings unto the Modems. Verily
God commandeth juftice, and the doing of good, and the giving unto kin-
dred what jhdl he necejfary ; and he forbiddeth wickednefs, and iniquity, and
opprellion : he aimonifoeth you that ye may remember*. Perform your co-
venant with God \ when ye enter into covenant with him \ and violate not
your oaths, after the ratification thereof •, fince ,ye have made God a witnefs
over you. Verily Gop knoweth that which ye do. And be not like unto her
who undoeth that which foe hath fpun, un twilling it after foe hath twilled
it flrongly'} taking your oaths between you deceitfully, becaufe one party
is more numerous than another pavty 4 . Verily God only temptetb you there-
in ; and he will make that manifeft unto you, on the day of refurredlion*
concerning which ye now difagrey. If God had pleated, he would furely have
made you one people e: but he will lead into error whom he plea-

fetb, and he will direct whom he pleafeth ; and ye Aall furely give an ac-
count of that which ye have done. Therefore take not your oaths between
you deceitfully, left yettr foot flip, after it hath been ftediallly fixed, and ye
tafte evil in this life, for that yc have turned .ifide from the way of God*,
and ye fstjfer a grievous p uni 111 men t in the life tp tome. And fell not the
covenant of God for a ftnall price* v fur with Gan Ls a better recompettfe pre-
pared for you, if ye be men of umltrilanding. That whfth is with you will
fail ; but that which is with God is permanent: and we will furely reward

thofe who foall perfevere, according to the utmoft merit of their adlions.
Whofa worketh righteoufnefs, whether he be male or female, and is a true
believer, we will furely caife him to a happy life ; and we will give them
their reward, according to the utmoft merit of their aflions. When thoU
readeft the Koran, have recourfe unto GojJ, that hi may preface thee from

Sat

* This verfe, which was the oecafion of the Ptr.thu] to undo at night, the work that the had
converfion of Ottoman Eton Matin, the commen- done in the day. Her name, they fay, was
tators lay, containeth the whole, which it is a Rtitu Bin! Sand Ei -• 7ej, v» of the tribe of Am-
man’s duty either to perform or to avoid; and it rtijb *.

alone a fufficient demonftration of rv hat : faid m ■ Takir.g y ■ :tbt .itmt/tt/y, iteau ft one
the foregoing verfe. Under the three things i t is mors numerous than mother ;] Of this in-
here commanded, they nnderftand the belief of firreeriu in their al iances the Koreijb are accufed;
God’s unity, without inclining to atheifm. on it being nfua] with them, when they few the
the one hand, or pqlytheifin, on the other; obe- enemies of their confederates to be Superior m
dience to the commands of God; and charity force,, to renounce their league with their old
towards thofe in dill refs. And under the three friepds, and ftrike up one with the others J .
things forbidden; thfey c oxn prt h eBd all corrupt r One people ;] Or, of one religion,
and carnal afiedUons ; all falle' ddftripes and ho- 1 Set! nst the esptnairt of Gob fir a final l
rertcal opinions ; and all injufiide towards man *. flee ;] That is. Be not prevailed on to renounce
*> Perform your covenant with God ;] Bv per- your religion, or your engagements 1 rh your
fevering in his true religion. Some thin : that prophet, by any promifes or gifts of the infidels,
the oath of fidelity taken to Mohammed by his Por, it {cents, the Koretjb, to tempt (be poorer
followers, is chiefly intended here, McJUm to apnftstke, made them offers, not

* Be not like her who undoetb that vtoieb fbe very confident}! e indeed, but fuch as they
bath Jpttn, Ac.] Some fuppofe that a particular imagined might be worth their acceptance *.
woman is meant in this pafiage, who ufed (.like

1 Al Beidawi.

* Idem.

k Idem.

* Ide m,

Chap. i6. At K 0 RA N. 223

Satan driven away with (tones a : he hath no power over thofe who believe,
and who put their confidence in their Lord * but his power is over thofe
only, who take him for their patron, and who give companions unto Gon «
When we fubftitute in the Koran an abrogating verfe in lieu of a verfe ab-
rogated , (and God bed knoweth the fitnefs of that which he revealech*)
the infidels fay, Thou art only a forger of tbefe verfet: but the greater part
of them know not truth from fcdjhood . Say, The holy fpirit b hath brought
the fame down from thy Lord with truth that he may confirm thofe who
believe, and for a diredtion and good tidings unto the Modems. We alfo know
that they fay. Verily, a certain man teacheth him to compofethe Koran. The
tongue of tbeperfon unto whom they incline, is a foreign tongue *, but this, wherein
the Koran is written^ is the pcrfpicuous Arabic tongue c . Moreover as for

thofe

quented 6 i anqther, that it was Addas , a fervant
of Otba Ebn Kabia 7 j and another, that it was
Salman the Perfian 9 >

According to fome Chrifiian writers 9 , Abdal-
lah Ebn Salami the Jew who was fo intimate
with Mohammed, (named by one, according to
the Hebrew dialeft, Abdias Ben Salon, and by
another, Abdala Celen ) was aiJHling to him
in the compiling his pretended revelations. This
Jew Dr. Prideaux confounds with Salman the
Perfian, who was a very different man # as a late
author 1 0 has obferved before me ; wherefore,
and for that we may have occalion to fpeak of
Salman hereafter, it may be proper to add a
brief extract of his ftory as told by himfelf. He
was of a good family of 1 /pahan , and, in his
younger years, left the rdteion of his country
to embrace Chrifiianity; ana travelling into Sy~
ria> was advifea by. a certain monk of JmurU ,
to go into AraSla* where a prophet was expell-
ed to arife about that time, who fhould eftablifh
the religion of Abraham ; and whom he fhould
know, among other things* by the fealof /r«-
phecy between his fhoulders. Salman perfoEiped
the journey, and meeting with Mxhmmedx t
Kobe, where he refted in lus flight to Medina,
foon found him to be the perfon he fought, and
profeffed Jfidm r/ .

The general opinion of the Cbriftians how-
ever is, that the chief help Mohammed had in
the contriving his Koran , was from a Neflorian
monk named Sergius, fuppofed to be the fame
perfon with the monk Bokeira* with whom Aft*
ham/ntd in his younger yearf had fome confe-
rence at Bofra, a city of Syria Damfiepa* where

that

1 In not. ad cap. zi. 2 Jallalo’ddi v, Al Beidawi, Yahy a, &c. 3 Al Zamakh-

shari, Al Beidawi, Yahya. A Al Zamakh. ^/Beidawi. See Prid. Life of Mah. p.
32. * lidem . 6 Jallalo’jhhn. 7 At Zamakh. Yahya* 8 Al Zamakh. Al

Beidawi* * Ricardi Gortfut . legis Saracenica, r* 13* Joh. Ahdreas, de tonfufi feNae Maho-
metan*, e. 2. See Piud. Life of Mah . p ; 33. 34. 10 Gagnier not. inAbsdflmit . Mob .. p. 74,

11 Ex Ebn Ishak* V. Gagnier, ibid.

4 When thou readeft the Koran, have recourfi
unto God, &c.] Mohammed one day reading
in the Koran , uttered a horrid blafphemy, to
the great fcandal of thofe who were prefent, as
will be obferved in another place 1 s to excufe
which he allured them that thofe words were
put into his mouth by the devil 5 and to prevent
any fucli accident for the future, he is here
taught to beg God’s prote&ion before he entred
on that duty *. Hence the Mohammedans, be-
fore they oegin to read any part of this book,
repeat thefe words, l have recourfe unto God fir
efit (lance againft Satan driven away with fonts.

“ \ Xhthwy fpirit ;] viz* Gabriel See chap. 2. p. 12.

c A certain man teacheth him , &c,] This was
a great obje&ion made by the Meccans to the
authority of the Koran ; for when Mohammed in-
filled, as a proof of its divine original, that it was
impoflible a man fo utterly unacquainted with learn-
ing as himfelf, could compofc fuch a hook, they
replied*. that he had one or more affiftants in the
forgery ; bur as to the particular perfon or per-
fpag, tvfpe&ed of this confederacy, the tradi-
tion* differ. One fays it was Jabar, a Greek,
fervant to Atner Ebn al Hadratni, who could read
and write well 3 i another, that they were Ja-
bot and Tejdr two flaves, who followed the trade
of fword-cutlers at Mecca, and ufed to read the
pentateuch and gofpel, and had often Mohammed
for their auditor^ when he paffed that way 4 . A-
nother tells us, it was one Aijb, or Yaip, a do-
mcftic of cl Haweiteb Ebn Abd al Uzza , who
was a man of fome learning, and had embraced
Mohtwtuedifm Another fuppofes it was one
Kail* a Cbrifiian , whafe houfe Mohammed fre-

224 Al KORAN. Chap. 16.

thofe who believe not in the figns of God, God will not drreft them, and
they fhall fuffer a painful torment : verily they imagine a falfhood who be-
lieve not in the figns of God, and they are really the liars. Whoever de-
nieth God, after he hath believed, except him who fhall be compelled a-
gainft his will, and whofe heart continueth ftedfaft in the faith, Jhall be Jt~
verely cbajli/ed but whoever fhall voluntarily profefs infidelity, on thofe

fhall

that monk refided *. To confirm which flap- fidels ty ing Sommej , i between two camels, and
pofuion, a paflage has been produced from an ftriking a lance- thro 1 her petty parts K When
Arab writer 2 * , who fays that Bobeiras name news was brought to Mtbammbi, that Ammar
in the bo ks of the Cbriflians, is Sergius » but had denied the frith, he faid, it could not be, for
this is nly a conjedurc; and another * tells us, that Ammar was full of frirh from the crown of
his true name was Send* or Felix, and his fur- his head to the foie of his fooi T faith being mized
name B baira. But be that as it will, if Bobeira and incorporated with his very flefh and blood;
and Sergius were the fame man, I find not the and when AntmAr himfelf came weeping to the
leaft intimation in the Mohammedan writers, that prophet, he wiped his eyes* frying. What fault
he ever quitted his monaftery to go into Arabia was it sf thine, if they forced the f
(as is fuppofed by the Cbriftians)i and his ac- But tho* it be here frU, that thofe who a-
quaintancc with Mohammed at Bofra, was too early pofhtize in appearance only, to avoid death or
to favour the furmife of his affifting him in torments, may hope for pardon from God, yet
the K’.ran , which was compofed long after; it is unanimoufly agreed by the Mohammedan
thd* Mobammel might, from his difeourfe, gain do&ors, to be much more meritorious and
fome knowledge of Cbrijf Unity and of the ferip- pleafing in the fight of God, courageously and
tttres, which might be of ufe to him therein. nobly to perfift in the true faith, and rather to

From the anfwer given in this paflage of the fuffer death it felf than renounce it, even in
Koran, to the objedion of the infidels, viz . words. Nor did the Mobammedm religion want
that the perfon fufpeded by them to have a hand its martyrs, in the flrid fcnfe of the word ; of
in the i^ri»,fpoke a foreign language, and there- which I will here give two inftances, befides
fore could not, with any face of probability, be the above mentioned One is that of Kbobaib
fuppofed to aififl in a compoTition written m the Ebn Add, who being perfidioully fold to the
Arabic tongue, and with fo great elegance, it is Koreijb, was by them put to death in a cruel m in-
plain this perfon was no Arabian. The word ncr, by mutilation, and cutting off his flefh
Ajamiy which is here ufed, fignifies any foreign piece-meal ; and being asked, in the midft of
or barbarous language in general ; but the Arabs his tortures, whether he did not wiih Mob am -
applying it more particularly to the Perjsan, it meJ was in his place, anfwered, *1 would not wijb
has been thence concluded by fome, that Salman to be with my family , my fubftance, and my cbiU
was the perfon; however, if it be true that he came drtn, on condition that Mohammed was only to
not to Mohammed till after the Hejra , cither he be pricked with a thorn 6 . The other is that
could not be the man here intended, or elfe this of a man who was put to death by Mofeilama ,
verfe muft havebeen revealed at Medina , contra- on the following occafion. That fcilfe prophet
ry to the common opinion. having taken two of Mohammed's followers, ask-

* Except him who Jhall be compelled againfi bis ed one of them, what he faid of Mohammed f
will, &c.J Thefe words were added for the fake the man anfweied. That he was the apoftle of
of Ammar Ebn Yafer , and fome others, who be- God : And what fayefi thou of me P added Mo-
ing taken and tortured by the Koreijb , renounced feilama ; to which he replied. Thou aif art the
their faith out of fear, tho 1 their hearts agreed apoftle of God ; whereupon he was immediately
not with their mouths 4 - It feems Ammar want- amnifled in fafety. But the other, having re-
ed the conihncy of his father and mother, lifer turned the fame anfwer to the former queftion,
and Smmeya , who underwent the like trial at refufed to give any to the laft, tho 1 required to
the fame time with their fon, and refohuely re- do it three feveral times, but pretended to be
fiufing to recant, were both put to death, the in- deaf, and was therefore flain. It is related that

Mobanh

1 See Pain, dbi Juf - P iAe. Gacniir, ubi Jup.f . ro, 1 1- Marrac. de Alcor. p . 37.

* Al Masudi. * Abu'l Hasan a/Bbcri in Karan. 4 AIBiida wi, Al Zamaxh.

Yahta. 1 Al Beidawl. 6 Ebn Sbohnau.

Chap. 16 . Al KORAN. 225

ihall the indignation of God fall, and they (hall fufFer a grievous punrfh
ment. -This Jhall be their /entente, becaufe they have loved the prefetit life
above that which is to come, and for that God diredleth not the unbelieving
people. Thefe are they whofe hearts, and hearing, and fight God hath fealed
up ; and thefe are the negligent : there is no doubt but that in the next life
they Ihall perifli. Moreover thy Lord will be favourable unto thofe who have
fled their country, after having fuffered perfecution *, and been compelled to de-
ny the fyith by violence, and who have fince fought in defence of the true reli
gion, and have perfevered with patience ; verily unto thefe will thy Lord be
gracious and merciful, after they Jhall have fhewn their fmcerity. On a cer-
tain day Ihall every foul come to plead for itfelf b , and every foul Jhall be
repaid that which it Jhall have wrought ■, and they Jhall not be treated un-
juftly. God propoundeth as a parable a city e which was fecure and quiet,
unto which her provifions came in abundance from every fide ■, but Jhe un-
gratefully denied the favours of Gop : wherefore God caufed her to tafte the
extreme famine, and fear, -becaufe of that which they had done. And now is
an apoftle come unto the inhabitants of Mecca from among themfelves ; and
they accufe him of impofture : wherefore a puniJhment Jhall be inflifted on
them, while they are acting unjuftly. Eat of what God hath given you for
ibod, that which is lawful and good ; and be thankful for the favours of
God, if ve feive him. He hath only forbidden you that which dieth of it
felf, and blood, and twine’s fleJh, and that which hath been flain in the name
of any, befides God 4 . But unto him who Jhall be compelled by neceflity to
eat of thefe things , not lulling nor wilfully tranfgrfcfiing, God will furely be
gracious and merciful. And fay not that wherein your tongues utter a lie ;
This -is lawful, and this is unlawful * \ that ye may devife a lie concerning
God : for they who devife a lie concerning God, Ihall not profpe$. ’They J ball
have fmall enjoyment in this world, and in that which is to come they Jhall fuf-
fer a grievous torment. Unto the Jews did we forbid that which we have told
thee formerly 1 : and we did them no injury in that refpetl } but they injured

G g their

Mohammed, when the ftory of thefe two men
told bun, faid. The firfl of them threw him -
Self on Go &'s merry ; but ‘the latter profefftdtbe
truth ; and be Jhall find his mount m it 1 *
a Thofe who have fied their country, after bav-
in? fuffered perfecution , &c.] As did Ammdr ,
who made one m both the flights. Some, read-
ing the verb with different vowels, render the
lalt word*, after having perjecuted the true be-
lievers ; and inftance in al Hadrami , who oblig-
ed a fervant of his to renounce Mobammedifm,
by force, hut afterwards, together with that
fervant, profeffed the fame faith, and fled for it a .

b Every foul Jhall come to plead for it felf ;]
That is. Every perfon (hall be follicitous for his
own falvation, not concerning himfelf with the

condition of another, but crying out. My own
foul, my own foul 3 /

c God propoundeth as a parable a city , &c.l
This example is applied to every city which
having received great blefflngs from God, be-
cometh infolent and unthankful, and is therefore
chaftifed by fome fignal judgment ; or rather to
Mecca in particular, on which the calamities
threatened in this paffage, viz . both famine and
fword, were infli&ed
d See chap. 5. p. 82.

^And fay ' rtci— *Tbis is lawful, and this is
unlawful »] Allowing what God hath forbidden,
and fuperititioufly abfbining from what he hath
allowed. See chap. 6. p. 113 i&c.
f Formerly j] viz. In the 6th chapter, p. 114.,

1 jU Bxidawi.

* Idem-

3 Idem .

♦ Idem .

226 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 16.

their own fouls *. Moreover thy Lord will be favourable unto thofe who do
evil through ignorance ; and afterwards repent and amend : verily unto tbefe
wul thy Lord be gracious and merciful, after their repentance. Abraham was
a model of true religion, obedient unto God, orthodox, and was not an ido-
later b : be was alfe grateful for his benefits : Wherefore God chofe him, and
directed him into the right way. And we beftowed on him good in this world ;
and in the next he lhail fureiy be one of the righteous. We have alfb fpqken
unto thee, O Mohmmed, by revelation, faying , Follow the religion of Abra-
ham, who was orthodox, and was no idolater. The fabbath was only ap-
pointed unto thofe who differed with their prophet concerning it * ; and tny
Lord will fureiy judge between diem, on the day of refurre&ion, as to that
concerning which they differed. Invite men unto the way of thy Lord, by
wifdom, and mild exhortation } and difpute with them in the rrioft condefcena-
ing manner : ft>r thy Lord well knoweth him who ftraycth from his path,
and he well knoweth thofe who are rightly dire fled. If ye take vengeance on
any , take a vengeance proportionable to the wrong which hath been done
you 4 but if ye fuffer wrong patiently, verily this will be better for the
patient e . Wherefore do thou bear oppofition with patience ; but thy patience fhall
not be fra£iieable , unlefs with God's aj/ijlanee. And be not thou grieved on ac-
count of the unbelievers ; neither be thou troubled for that which they fubtilly
devife i for God is with thofe who fear him, and arc upright.

CHAP.

* They injtrtd thttr man fish ;] i. e. They
were forbidden things which were in themfelves
indifferent* as a pummment for their wickednefs
and rebellion.

1 Ami ms s.t an ihUftr This was to re-
prehend the idolatrous A who prets nde..l thait

they profeffed the religion of Abraham-

£ Who differ t i t viib their prophet twmning it,~\

Thefe were thejevs ; who being orderedby M /h
to let apart friday (the day now obferved by the
Mshammedans) for the exerci e of divine worfhip,
refufed it* and chole the kbbath-div, becaufc
on that day God refted from his works of crea-
tion : for which realon they were commanded
to keep the day they had chofen in the ft rift eft
manner *•

4 If je tale vengeance* &c.J This pillage is
fuppe&d to have been revealed at Madina, on oc-
cabosi of Hamza, Mohammed's uncle, being
flain at the battle of Obmi. For the infidels hav-
ing abufed his dead body, by taking out his

bowels, and cutting off hi* ears and his nole,
when AhhmneJl aw it* hefwore that if God
granted him fucceft, he wr. aid retaliate thofe
cruelties on feventy of the Kcreip ; but he was
by th<fe words forbidden to execute what he had
fworo, and he accordingly made void his oath *.
A&uJftJa makes the number on which Mohan*
r;pj fa-ore to reek his vengeance, to be but thir-
ty * : but it may be obferved, by the way, that
tne tranflator renders the paflkge in that author,
God l' Jib tmakd ante me that I JbaU retd*
Uatf, in Head of. If God gram me vi&ary
i'&tr tbf Korei h a / mill retaliate* Ac. reading
Lain asbhjtn s. for Mbfarwii God, far. from
putting this defign into the prophet’s head by a
revelation, exptefaly Ibtbiddrng him to put it
in exception

e The patient ?] Here, fays al B WiwiV the K*
ran principaity points ac Mohammed, who was

of ail men the the moft c&nipicLious for meeknefs

and clemency.

1 Idemy Jallalo’ddi n.

3 Abu'li. Viu Meb. 6$,

a Iidem.

Chap. 17

Al KO RAN.

227

CHAP. XVII.

Int tiled, The Night- Journey a ; revealed ^Mecca 1 * * *.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

*T^ RAISE be unto him, who tranfported his fervant by night, from the XV.

facred temple of Mecca to the farther temple of Jerusalem * the
circuit of which we have bldfed, that we might Ihfiw him joriie of our figns ;
for God ii he who heareth, and feeth. And we gave unto Moses the book
of the law, and appointed the fame to be a direction unto the children of Is-
rael, commanding them , faying , Beware that ye take not any other patron be-
fides me. O pofterity of thofe whom we carried in the ark with Noah d :
verily he was a grateful fervant. And we exprefsly declared unto the children
of Israel in the book of the law, faying. Ye will furejy commit evil in the
earth twice % and ye will be elated with great infolence. And when the
f&nifhment threatened for the firft of thofe tranfgrejfom came to be executed, we
ifent againft you our fervants *, indued with exceeding ftrength in war, and they

G g 2 fearched

a The reafon of this iufcrlptwm appears in the
firft words. Some fcrtitle the chapter, The ebil-
drert vf Ifrael.

b Some except eight verfes, beginning at thefe
words. It wanted little hut that the infidels bad
fiduced thee, &c.

c Who transported his fervant by night, from
the temple of Mecca to the temple of Jerufalem.]
From whence he was carried through the fevcu
heavens to the prefence of Goo, and brought
back again to Mecca the fame night.

This journey of Mohammed to heaven is fo
well known, that I may be pardoned if I otiait
the deferiptian of it. The Engttjb rfeaddr may
find it in Dr. Prideauet s life of Mahomet l , and
the learned in Abu'Jtfeda a , whofe annotator has
correfled feverai mi flakes in the relation of Dr*
Prideanx, and in other writers!.

It is a difpute among the Mohammedan divines,
whether their prophet’s mghH durjt *y was really
performed by him corporally, or Whether it was
only a dream or vlfien. Some think the whole
was no more than a viflon ; and allege an ex-
prefs tradition of Modt&iyab 3 * one of Moham-
med's fuccefToxs, to that purpofe. Others (ip-

pofo he was carried bodily to Jerufahm, but no
farther ; and that he afeended thence to heaven
in fpirit only. But the received opinion is, that
it was no viwoil, but that he was afiuaily tranf-
poried in the body to hh journey’s end ; and if
any impoflibility be objected, they think it a fdf-
ficient anfwer to &y, that it might eafily be ef-
fefled by an omnipotent agent 4 .

d O pefierity of theft, fire.] The commenta-
tors are put to it to find out the connexion of
thefe words with the foregoing. Some think
the accufative cafe is here put for the vocative,
as I have tranflated it : and others interpret the
words thus. Take not far year patrons , hefides me*
the pofietity of thefe, Set. meaning, mortal men.

6 Ye mill furely commit evil in the earth twice ;]
Their firft tranlgreffion was their rtje&ing the
decifioxs of the law, their putting Ifaiab to
death % and their imprifonmg of Jeremiah 6 :
and the foeoitd, was %hm flaying of Zathetiah,
and John the Bapriil; and thiir Imagining the
death of Jesus 7 .

f We fent again# you our fervants, &G.] Thefe
were Jalit, or QoHab, and Ids forces 8 ; or Sen -
naehorib the Affyrlm \ or elfe Nebuchadnezzar,

whom

1 'Ste alfo Morgan’/ Maborftetifm cxplaktttf, voL 2. % Pit. Moham. cap . 19/

3 V. Ibid. e. 18. 4 Al Beidawj. * Idem. 6 Jallalo'pwn. * liden . 8 fat-

ulo’d din, Yahya.

228 Al KORAN, Chap. 17.

fearched the inner apartments of your houfes •, and the prediction became ac-
complifhed. Afterwards we gave you the victory over them*, in your turn, and
we granted you increaft of wealth and children, and we made you a more
numerous people, faying. If ye do well, ye will do well to your own fouls ;
and if ye do evil, ye will do it unto the fame. And when the punijbmmt
threatened for your latter tranfgreffwn came to be executed, we font enemies a-
gainft you to afflift you \ and to enter the temple, as they entred it the
firft rime, and utterly to deftroy that which they had conquered. Perad-
venture your Lord will have mercy on you hereafter: but if ye return to
tranfgrefs a third me, we aifo will return to ebajltfe you c i and we have ap-
pointed hell to be the prifon of the unbelievers. Verify this Koran direfteth
unto the way which is mod right, and declareth unto the faithful, who do
good works, that they fhall receive a great reward ; and that for thofe who
believe not in the life to come, we have prepared a grievous punifhmeot. Man
prayeth for evil, as he prayeth for good 4 ; for man is hafty e . We have

ordained

whom the eaftem writers call flsibtaefr (which
was however only his fumame, his true name
bang Gudorz* or RobomJ the governour of Ba-
tyfen under Loborafp, Jong of Perfia *, who
took Jerufalem* and deployed the temple

* Afterwards we gave you the vilfory aver then*
&c.] By permitting David to kill Goliab ; or by
the miraculous defeat of Sennacherib'* army ; or
far that God put it Into the heart of Bahman
the fon of ffandiyar, when he fuccceded his
grandfather to order Kirejb, or Cyrus,

then governor of B riyhw, to fend home the
Jews from their captivity, under the condud of
Daniel* which he accordingly did, and they
prevailed againft thofe whom BaJtbinafr had
left in the land * .

b We Jkxt enemies agm nfi ym H *Jfii& ym ;]

Some imagine the army meant in thit place was
that of BakhtnaJr 3 l but others (ay the Perfinm
conquered the Jem this fecond time, by the
arms of Guiarz (by whom they feem to intend
Antiochus Eptphams ,) one of the fucceflors of
Alexander at Baby In. It is related that the ge-
neral in this expedition, entring the temple, few
blood bubbling up on the great altar, and asking
the reafon of it, the Jews told him it was the
blood of a fecrifiee which had not been accepted
©f God; to which he replied, that they had
not told him the truth, and ordered a thoufend
of them to be (lain on the altar : but the blood
not ceafing, he told them, that if they would
not confefs the truth, he would not fpare one
of them ; whereupon they acknowledged it was

1 Al Zamakhsbari, Al Bkipawi.
4 Al Bksdawi, 1 Idem.

the blood of Jthn: and the general laid. Thus
bath ymr Lord takm trngeaait onym\ and
then cried out, O John, nv Lord uni thy Lord
hnemtih sr has both b, failttt thy fople fer tby
fakt\ wherefore kt tby blond fi@p f by God \ per-
mijjton , lefi I hare m me f tbet s alive ; upon
which the blood ini mediately flopped * .

Thefe are the explications of the commenta-
tors, wherein their ignorance in ancient hiftory
is fufficiently manifefl: ; the' perhaps Mohammed
himfelf, in this latter paflage, intended the de-
finition of yern/alem by the Romans,

c But if ye return to tranjgrifs a third time ,
we aft will return to chafin ' jw ] And this
came accordingly to pafs : iai the Jews being
again fo wicked as to rejeft M*bommtd+ and
confpire againft his Hie, God delivered them into
his hands; and he exterminated the tribe of Ko-
reidhjj and flew the chiefs of that of al Nadir ,
and obliged the reft of the Jewifi tribes to pay
tribute *.

tt Man prayeth fir evil as * trap*

Out of ignorance, miftaking evil for good ; or
making wicked imprecations on himfelf and o-
thers, out of pafhon and impatience.

* Man is bafiyi\ Or inconsiderate, not weigh-
ing the confequence of what he asks.

It is faid that the perfon here meant is Adam*
who, when the breath of life was breathed into
his noftrils, and had reached fo far as his navel,
tho’ the lower part of his body was, as yet,
but a piece of clay, muft needs try to rife up,
and got an ugly fall by the bargain. But o-

thers

% 1 idem . 3 Yakya, Jallalo'ddm.

G hap. 1 7- Al KORAN. 229

ordained the night and the day for two figns of. our power : afterwards we
blot out the fign of the night, and we caufe the fign of the day to Ihine
forth, that ye may endeavour to obtain plenty from your Lord by doing your
buftnefs therein., and that ye may know the number of years, and the com-
putation of time •, and every thing necejfary have we explained by a perfpi-
cuous explication. The fate * of every man have we bound about his neck 6 !
and we will produce unto him, on the day of refurre&jon, a book wherein
bis actions Jhall be recorded: it fhall be offered him open, and the angels fbdl
fay unto him. Read thy book ; thine own foul will be a fufficient accoun-
tant againft thee, this day e . He who fhall be rightly directed, fhall be
directed to the advantage only of his own foul ; and he who fhall err, fhall
err only againft the fame : neither fhall any laden foul be charged with
the burthen of another. We did not punifh any people , until we had firft
fent an apollle to warn them. And when we refblved to deftroy a city, we
commanded the inhabitants thereof, who lived in affluence, to obey our apo fie \
but they a fled corruptly therein : wherefore the fentence was juftly pro-
nounced againft that city ; and we deftroyed it with an utter deftrufiion.
And how many generations have we confumed fince Noah ? for thy Lord
fufficiently knoweth and feeth the fins of his fervants. Whofoever chpofeth
this tranntory life , we will beftow on him therein before hand that which
we pleafe on him, namely , whom we pleafe : afterwards will we appoint him
hell for his abode ; he fhall be thrown into the fame to be fcorched, cover-
ed with ignominy, and utterly rejefled front mercy. But whofoever choofeth
the life to come, and direfleth his endeavour towards the fame, being alfo
a true believer ; the endeavour of thefe fhall be acceptable unto Cod. On
all will we beftow the blejjings 6f this life, both on thefe and on thofe, of
the gift of thy Lord ; for the gift of thy Lord fhall not be denied unto
any. Behold, how we have caufed fome of them to furpafs others in wealth
and dignity : but the next life fhall be more confiderable in degrees of ho-
nour, and greater in excellence. Set not up another god with the true Good
left thou fit down in dilgrace, and deftiture. Thy Lord hath command-
ed that ye worfflip none, befides him j and that ye Jhew kindnefs unto your
parents, whether the one of them, or both of them attain to old age with
thee 11 . Wherefore fay not unto them, Fy on you! neither reproach them,

but

then pretend the paflige was revealed on the taking omens from the flight of birds, which
following occaflon. Mohammed committed a they fuppofed to portend good luck, if they flew
certain captive to the charge of his wife, Satoda from the left to the right, but if from the right
hint Zamaa, who moved with companion at the to the left, the contrary ; the like judgment
man’s groans, unbound him, and let him efcape: they alfo made when certain beafts paffed be-
upon which the prophet, in the firft motions fore them.

of his anger, wilhed her hand might fall off ; b Have vie bound about hit neck ;] Like a col-
but immediately compofing himfelfr faid aloud, lar, which he cannot by any means get off
0 God, lam but a mam therefore turn my See the Prelim. Difc. IV. p. 103.
turfe into a blejftng ’. c See ibid. p. 89.

a The fate ;] Literally, the bird, which is 4 With thee i] That is, receiving their fup-
here ufed to fignify a man’s fortune or frnteft ; port and maintenance from thee,
the 'Arabs, as well as the Greeks and Romans,

1 Jaluauq’ddin.

230 Al KORAN. Chap. 17 .

but fpeak refpcftftilly unto them ; and fubmit to behave humbly * towards
them, out of tender affection, and fay, O Lord, have mercy on them both,
as they nurfcd me when I was little. Your Lord well knoweth that which is
in your fouls •, whether ye be men of integrity : and he will be gracious unto thole
who fincerely return unto him . And give unto him who is of kin la \m fits due b ,
and alfo unto the poor, and the traveller. And wafte notify fkkjtame profilfe-
ly: for the profufe are brethren of the devils*; and the devil was ungrateful
unto his Loud. But if thou turn from them, in expectation of the mercy
which thou hoped from thy Loud 4 5 fe&ft y fpeak kindly unto them. And
let not thy hand be tied up to thy neck ; neither open it with an unbounded
expanfion e , left thou become worthy of reprehen Ron, and be reduced to po-
verty- Verily thy Lq&d will inlargcthe ftoreof whom hepleafeth, and will
be i paring msia t&twm he phafttb \ for he knoweth and regarded! his fcrvam*.
Kill not your children for fear of being brought to want ; wc will provide for
them and for you : verily the killing them is a great fin f . Draw not near un-
to fornication ; for it is wickedncfs, and an evil way. Neither flay the foul
which God hath forbidden you to J!sy y unlcfs for a juft c&ufe 1 ; and whofo^
ever (hall be (lain unjuftly, we have given his heir power to demand faltsfek-
non h ; but let him not exceed the bounds of modertiHort in putting to death the
nmrtherer in too cruel n maknir y or by rrtwtigiug bis friend* 1 Moca on any other
than the per -in who killed him \ fmee he h jfRfted by this law l . And meddle
not with the fubftance of the orphan* urslefs it be to improve it, until he attain
his age of ftrength k : and perform your covenant ; for the performance of your
covenant fhall be inquired into hereafter. And give full meafure, when you
meafure ought ; and Weigh with a juft balance. This w31 be better, and
more eafy for determining every man 9 s due And foHow not that whereof

thou

a Submit 1 $ behove humbly , he.'] Literally,
%omer the miflg of humility, he.

b His due i) That is, fxien dihip and affection,
and affiftance in time of need.

e fhe profu/e are the brethren tf the devils ;]
Prodigality, and fquandcring away one’s fab-
ftance in folly or luxury, .being a very great fin.
The Arabs were particularly guilty of extrava-
gance in killing camels, and diflributing them by
lot* meetly out of vanity and oftentation ; which
they are forbidden by this paffage, and com-
manded to bellow what they could (pare on their
poor relations, and other indigent people r .

d If then turn from tbm 'in expeQ stitm* tkcl]
That is. If thy prefent circum ranees will not
permit thee to aflifl others, defer thy charity
till God fhall grant thee better ability.

e Lit not thy band be tied up* neither open it
with an unbounded expanded 5} i e. Be neither
niggardly norprofufe, but observe the mean bc-

1 ^Bbidawi. * Idem. % Idem.
« V. 41 Beidawi. 7 Idem, ^/Zamakh

tween the two extreams, wherein confifb true li-
berality *,

f See dwp. 6. p. 113, and 115. and chap. 81.
g Unlt/i for a jujl caufei] The crimes for
which .1 man may jdKy be put to death axe thefe ;
apofbry, adultery, and murder 3 .

n We hat t pvtttbis heir power ta demand fh
iitfaSitx ;] It Being at the ele&ion of the heir, or
next of kin, either to take the life of the mur-
derer, or to accept of a fine in lieu of it +

Si/u* hr u ajfi.$fd ± Ax.] Some refer the pro-
noun ht to the pen bn for the avenging

whorfe death thU Uw was made ; feme to the
heir, who has a right grimed him to demand fa-
tisfrftion for his frienchs blood 1 ; and others to
him who lhall be flain by the heir, if he carry
his vengeance too far 6 .

* See chap 4- p. 60, 61.

1 More eafy fir Mertemirt£ T &c] Or, more
aduantagiojuj in th end T .

4 dap, 20,11. * Yakya.

Chap. 17. Al KORAN. 231

thou haft no knowledge* ; for the hearing, and the fight, and the heart, every
of thefe (hall be examined at the loft day. Walk not proudly in the land, for
thou canft not cleave the earth, neither (halt thou equal the mountains in
ftature. All this is evil, and abominable in the fight of thy Lord. Thefe
precepts are a part of the wifdom which thy Lord hath revealed unto thee.
Set not up any other god as equal unto Gon, left thou be caft into hell, re-
proved and rejected. Hath your Lord preferably granted unto you fons, and
taken for him/eif daughters from among the angels b ? Verily in afferting this
ye utter a grievous faying. And now have we ufcd various arguments and
repetitions in this Koran, that they may be warned ; yet it only rendereth
them more difpofed to fly froin the truth. Say unto the idolaters. If there were
other gods with him, as ye fay, they would furely feek an occafion of making
fotne attempt agatnft the pofleflor of the throne * : God forbid ! and far, very
far, be that from him which they utter ! The feven heavens praife him, and
the earth, and all who are therein : neither is there any thing which doth not
celebrate his praife •, but ye underftand not their celebration thereof: he is gra-
cious and merciful. When thou readeft the Koran, we place between thee
and thofe who believe not in the life to come, a dark vail; and we put co-
verings over their hearts, left they Ihould underftand it, and in their ears thick-
nds of hearing. And when thou makeft mention, in repeating the Koran, of
thy Lord ohly 4 , they turn their backs, flying the doSlrinc of bis unity. We
well know with what deftgn they hearken, when they hearken unto thee, and
when they privately difeourfe together : when the ungodly fay. Ye follow no
other than a mad-man. Behold ! what epithets they beftow on thee. But they
are deceived *, neither can they find any juft occafion to reproach thee. They
alfo fay. After we lhall have become bones and duft, fhall we furely be raifed
a new creature ? Anfwer, Be ye Clones, or iron, or fome creature more im-
probable in your opinions to be raifed to life. But they will fay, Who lhall re-
ftore us to life ? AnfWer, He who created you the Jifft time : and they will
wag their heads at chee, faying. When fhall this be ? AnlWer, Peradventure it
is nigh. On that day lhall God call ycru fastis, from y our ftpukbres, and ye
lhall obey, with celebration of his praife * } and ye lhall think that ye tar-
ried f but a little while. Speak unto my fervants, that they fpeak mildly
unto the unbelievers , left ye exafper&te them ; for Satan foweth dilcord among

them,

* tallow not that whereof thou baft no know-
ledge ;] i c. Vain and uncertain opinions, which
thou haft not good reafon to believe true, or at
leaft probable. Some interpret the words, Ac-
tufe not another of a crime whereof thou baft no
knowledge \ iOppofing they forbid the bearing fa lie
witnefs, or the fpreading or giving dredit to idle
reports of others 1 .

'• See chap. 16. p. 218, 219.

* They would make form attempt againft the fof-
ftftbr of the throne ;] i. e. They would in all pro-
bability contend with God for fuperiority, and

endeavour to dethrone him, »n the fame manner
as princtfs aft wkh one another on earth.

® Of thy Lord only 5] Not allowing their
gods to be his alfociates, nor praying their urtei-
ceffion with him.

* Ye ft ill they, with celebration eft bis praife ;]
The dead, fays al Beidawi, at bis call mail im-
mediately rife, and ftialttog the duft oft their
heads, lhall fay, Praife be unto tbee, 0 God.

f That ye tarried ;] viz. In yow graves ,' or,
in the world.

1 Iiim.

232 Al KORAN. Chap. 17.

them, and Satan is a declared enemy unto man. Your Lord well knoweth
you ; if he pleafeth, he will have mercy on you, or, if he pleafcth, he will
punifh you * : and we have not fent thee to be a fteward over them. Thy Lord
well knoweth all perfons in heaven and on earth b . We have bellowed pe-
culiar favours on fome of the prophets, preferably to others •, and we gave
unto David the pfalms c . Say, Call upon thofe whom ye imagine to be gods
befides him ; yet they will not be able to free you from harm, or to turn
it on others. Thofe whom ye invoke do themfehes defire to be admitted
to a near conjunftion with their Lord ; ftrtvmg which of them (hall approach
neareft unto him : they alfo hope for his mercy, and dread his punilhment i
for the punifliment of thy Lord is terrible. There is no city but we will
deftroy the fame before the day of refurred ion, or we will punifh it with
a grievous punilhment. This is written in the book of our eternal decrees.
Nothing hindred us from fending tbee with miracles, except that the former
nations have charged them with impollure. We gave unto the tribe of Tha-
mud, at their demand, the fhe-carael vifible to their fight j yet they dealt un-
iuftly with her e : and we fend not a prophet with miracles, but to ftrike
Terror. Remember when we faid unto thee. Verily thy Lord encompafleth
men by his knowledge and power. We have appointed the vifion which we
Jhewea thee f , and alfo the tree « curfed in the Koran, only for an occafion
of difpute unto men, and to ftrike them with terror j but it (hail caufe them

to

1 Your Lord well knoweth you, &c.] Thefe
words are defigned as a pattern for the Maflems
to follow, in difeourfing with the idolaters ; by
which they are taught to ufe foft and dubious
expreffions, and not to tell them direflly that
-they are doomed to hell fire ; which, befides
the prefimnption in offering to determine the
fentence of others, would only make them more
irreconcileable enemies r .

*Tby Loud well knoweth all perfims, &c.] And
may choofe whom he pleafes for his embaffa-
dor. This is an anfwer to the objections of

the Koreijb , that Mohammed was .the orphan
pupil of Abu Taleb , and followed by a parcel
of naked and hungry fellows a .

c The pfalms 5] Which were a greater honour
-to him than his kingdom 5 and wherein Mo-

hammed and his people are foretold by thefe
-words , among others 1 * 3 * * The righteous Jball

inherit the earth + .

d Thofe whom ye invoke ;] viz. The angels and

prophets, who are the fervants of God as well
as. your fel^es.

'See chap. 7. p. 1 25.

f The vifion. which wejhewed thee, $ccl] Moham-
med's journey to heaven is generally agreed to
be intended in this place; which occafioned
great heats and debates among his followett,
till they were quieted by Abu Beer's bearing
tdtimony to the truth of it 5 * . The word vifion,
here ufed, is urged by thofe who take this joar-
ney to have been no more than a dream, as a
plain confirmation of their opinion. Some, how-
ever, fuppofe the vifion meant in this paflage
was not the night-journey, but the dream Mo-
hammed faw at al Hodeibiya , wherein he feemed
to make his entrance into Mecca 6 ; or that at
Bedr ’ ; or elfe a vifion he had relating to die
family of Ommt* .i, whom he faw mount his pul-
pit, and lump about in it like monkeys ; upon
which he find. This is their portion in this
world* which they have gained by their pro-
feifion. of Ifi&m 8 . But if any of thefe latter ex-
poll lions be true, the verfe muff have been re-
vealed at Medina*

g The mrfid tree ;] Called $1 Zakkxnt, which
iprings from the bottom of hell 9 .

1 Al Bkidavm. % Idem . 3 V. Marracc in Ale, p. 28, £sTa Prid life fMab.

3. 122. 4 Pjal. xxxvii. 28. Al Beid. * F Abulf. pit. Mob. p. 39. net. ibid- Prideau x y life

tf Mob. p. 50. and Prelim . Difc, $. II. p- 47. 6 See Kir* chap- 48, 7 See chap* 8.

4.144. 8 Al Beldawj. 9 See chap. 37.

Chap. 17. Al KORAN. 233

to tranfgrefs only the more enormoufly. And remember when we faidunto the
angels, Worfhip Adam ; and they all worfhipped him except Eblis, who faid.
Shall I worfhip him whom thou haft created <?/clay ? And he faid. What thinkeft
thou, as to this man whom thou haft honoured above me ? verily, if thou grant
me refpite until the day of refurredtion, I will extirpate his off-fpring, except a
few. God anfwered. Be gone, I grant thee refpite : but whofoever of them
fhall follow thee, hell fhall furely be your reward •, an ample reward for
your demerits 1 ! And intice to vanity fuch of them as thou canft, by thy
voice ; and affault them on all fides with thy horfemen and thy footmen b i
and partake with them in their riches, and their children c ; and make them
promifes ; ('but the devil fhall make them no other than deceitful promifes :)
as to my fervants, thou fhalt have no power over them ; for thy Lord is a
fufficient protedtor of tbofe who trufi in him. It is your Lord who driveth
forward the fhips for you in the fea, that ye may feek to enrich your [elves
of his abundance by commerce ; for he is merciful towards you. When a
misfortune befalleth you at fea, the falfe deities whom ye invoke are for-
gotten by you , except him alone : yet when he bringeth you fafe to dry land,
ye retire afar oft’ from him, and return to your idols ; for man is ungrateful *.
Are ye therefore fecure that he will not caufe the dry land to fwallcrw you
up, or that be will not fend againft you a whirlwind driving* the fands to
overwhelm you ? then fhall ye find none to protedf you. Or are ye fecure
that he will not caufe you again to commit your felves to the fea another
time, and fend againft you a tempeftuous wind, and drown you ; for that ye
have been ungrateful ? then fhall ye find none to defend you againft us, in
that dijtrefs. And now have we honoured the children of Adam by fundry
peculiar privileges and endowments ; and we have given them conveniences of
carriage by land and by fea, and have provided food for them of good
things ; and we have preferred them before many of our creatures which we
have created, by granting them great prerogatives. On a certain day we will
call all men to judgment with their refpeSHve leader * : and whofoever fhall
have his book given him into his right hand, they fhall read their book with
joy and fatisfaflion and they fhall not be wronged a hair*. And whoever
hath been blind in this life, fhall be alfo blind in the next, and fhall wan-
der more widely from the path of falvation. It wanted little but the unbe-
lievers had tempted thee to fwerve from the inflruElions which we had re-
vealed unto thee, that thou fhouldeft devife concerning us a different

H h thing;

a See chap. 2. p. 4. and chap. 7. p. 117, (* tc. * See chap. 10. p. 168.

b With thy horfemen and with tbjfoctmen ;] i. e. ' Their refpedive leader ;] Some interpret this
With all thy forces. of the prophet fent to every people ; others, «f

* And partake with them in their riches and the heads of feds ; others, of the various reli-
tbeir children ;] Inftigating them to get wealth gions profeffed in the world ; others, of the booU
by unlawful means, and to fpend it in fupport- which fhall be given to every man at the refur-
ing vice and fuperftition ; and tempting them reftion, containing a regifter of their good and
to incefluous mixtures, and to give their chil- bad actions 2 .

dten names in honour of their idols, as Aid f Seethe Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. 89 •
togbutb, Abd'al Uzza, &c l . 1 See chap. 4. p. 67. not. 1 .

* Idem.

1 Al Budawi.

234 Al KORAN . Chap. 17.

thing*; and then would they have taken thee for their friend: and unlefs
we had confirmed thee, thou hadft certainly been very near inclining unto
them a little. Then would we furely have caufed thee to tafte the punifh-
mentof life, and the punifhment of death b ; nnd thou (houldeft not have
found any to proteft thee agairtft us. The unbelievers had likewife almoft
caufed thee to depart the land, that they might have expelled thee thence c :
but then fhould they not have tarried therein after thee, except a little while \
This is the method of dealing wkkh we have preferihi our /elves in refpeft to
our apoftles, whom we have already fent before thee : and thou (halt not
find any change in our prefmbed method Regularly perform thy prayer
at the declenfion of the fun e , at the firit darknefs of the night 1 , and the
prayer of day-break g ; for the prayer of day break is bom witnefs unto by
the angels \ And watch fome part of the night in the fame eker(lfe y as a work

of

* It wanted tittle hnt the unhliertrs bxi je+

dated &c.] Thefc ire generally tupp-T led to
hate been the tribe of Thaknf, the mhabi tin Is
of a/Tdytf, wh ;■ infilled on grist-

ing them fevcral very extraordinary privilege!,
as the terms of their mbtnillion to him ; for they
demanded that they might be free from the legal
contribution nf alms, ,>nd from obftrvmg the
appointed times of prayer; that they might be
allowed to keep their idol Jiiii for a certain
tiro* 1 * and that their territory might be declar-
ed a place of fecurity and not be violated, like
that of Mii'ca, &c. And they added, that if
the other Arabs asked him the reafon of thefe
conceffions, he fhould fay* that God had com-
manded him fo to do 2 . According to which ex-
plication it is plain this verfe muft have been re-
vealed long after the HejriL

Some, however, will hare the to have

been revealed at Meet 1, on occ fun of the AV
rajb i v.ho told they wtidd not fuf-

ter him to hit* the hhzk flone in the wall of
Cdirtx* unlefi he alfo vifited their idols, and
.touched them with hh hand, to (hew hii refpefi.

The pvnif ms ft: f Jife t .?na the pxni/hmejtt tf
Jv/A;] t- e Both of this life and the next Some
interpret the firftof the p nni£h men Un the next
and the taxier of the torture of the fb-
pulchre 3 .

The win Hirer-, tad Idmiji cafrJ thee

tv the k , Sc.] The thnuounatoir diifcr
as to the phi cc where this p.-Jxgt delivered,
and she occafin de" it * Some think it wm re*
l ulled at Mr™, and that ii rdirs to ihe violent
enmity which the K.reip bare AfalwpuntJ, and
llidr rjdUeft endecs to make him bve -Her-

at* ; as ne wu a! length obliged to do. But
a± the per Lon* here fpoken of Seem not tn hive
prevailed m thtk psrajcil, other* fuppoie ih:.t

the verfe wM revealed at MedifU, ;i the fol-
lowing occaioA. The envied qf Mt-

hammed 1 * good reception and ft ay there, colei
him, by way of ctunlel, that Syria was the Und
of the prophcti, and that if ht Was realty a pro-
phec he ought to go thither, Mthnaftt/d Je-
riaufiy refle&iug on what they had fold, began
to think They had advifed him well ; and re-
ally fet out, and proceeded a day’s jo a racy m
his way to Syria : whereupon Goo aoqu inttff
him with their defign by the revelation of ims
verfe ; and he returned to Me Urn .

Then JhestiJ they n &e u*ried tbtrtiv

after thee s t w&ft a mrlt while ] This was ful-
filled, according to the former of the men-
tioned explications, by the !o£s oF sjic Kar/iJL- ?a
B e*sr 5 and according to the hue r, by the great
Jl.i ii^hter of the Jews of Ktftidbn and a I N,idir *\

K At the dtrfmjkn if the Jw i] i. e. At the
time of noon prayer, when the inn decline*
from the meridian ; or, as fome ehoafe v *
tranflate the words, the Jetting 5/ the /k,
which b the time of the firit tvening prayer

? At the Jirft darimfs f the night ; ] The
time of the laft evening prayer.

* The pfsqtr sf i frj-fara*;] Litto[ly, th-
reading cf the dtiybrtlk% whence fome hip p« :
the reading of the Karin it that time b litre
metnt.

il By Hr angth i] viz. The guardian angels,
who, according to Lqiue, yje relieved at that
mot ; or clfe ihe angele, appointed to mbt
the change cf eight into day, ^ .

1 Seethe Prelim. D t f 18. 2 AI BEiDAwi, Jallalo’ddis V. Ablji r. vi$, Ms /

126 J Ji Beida^v* 4 i it7T 4- ^ Jallalo*ddis.

• Al Beidawi.

Chap. 17. Al KORAN. 235

of fupererogation for thee ; peradventure thy Lord will raife thee to an ho-
nourable ftation \ And fay, O Lord, caufe me to enter with a favourable entry
andcaufe me to come forth with a favourable coming forth b ; and grant me
from thee an affifting power. And fay, Truth is come, and fallhood is
vanifhed : for faHhood is of fhort continuance c . We fend down of the Koran
that which is a medicine and mercy unto the true believers , but it fl all
only increafe the perdition of the unjuft. When we beftow favours on
man, he rctireth and withdraweth himfelf ungratefully from us ; but when e-
vil toucheth him, he defpaireth of our mercy . Say, 1 Every one afteth after
his own manner 4 : but your Lord beft knoWeth who is moft truly directed
in bis way. They will afk thee concerning the fpirit : anfWer, Thefpirit
was created at the command of my Lord f : but ye have no knowledge
given unto you, except a little *. If we pteafed, we mould certainly take a -
way that which we have revealed unto thee h j in fuch cafe thou couldeft not
find any to aflift thee therein againft us, unlefs through mercy from thy Lord \
for his favour towards thee hath been great. Say, Verily if men and ge-

H h 2 nii

* An honourable ftation ;] According to a Some interpret it of the angel Gabriel, or of the
tradition of Abu Hortira, the hono arable ftation divine revelation 7 .

here intended, is that of interccffor for others 1 . f The fpirit tv as er taxed at the command of
k Caufe me to enter with a favourable entry my Lord;] viz, by the word Km, L e. Bt\
f^cau/e me to come forthwith a favourable coming confuting of an immaterial fubftance, and not
f9r tb\\ That is. Grant that I may enter my grave generated, like the body. But, according to a
With peace, and come forth from it, at the re- different opinion, this paffage ftiould be tranfla-
furrejflion, with honour and fktisfattion. In ted. The fpirit is of tkofe things, the knowledge of
which fenfe this petition is the fame with that which thy Lord hath refervtd to himfelf. For
of Balaam, Let me dye the death of the righteous , it is faid that the Jews bia the Kareilh ask Mob am-
end let my left end Be like bis *. med to relate the hiftory ofthofe who flept in the

But as the perfonhere fpoken to is generally cave®, and of DbuTkarnein 9 , and to give them
fllppofed to be Mohammed, the commentators fay an account of the foal of man ; adding, that if
he was commanded tot pray in thefc words for he pretended to anfiver all the three queftfous,
a fafe departure from Mecca, and a good recep- or could anfwer none of them, they nrght be
tion at Medina ; or for a fure refuge in the cave, fure he was no prophet ; but if he gave an an-
where he hid himfelf when he fled from Mec- fwer to one or two of the queftions and was
a 3 } or {which is the more common opinion) filent as to the other, he wa»re«Hy a prophet,
for a victorious entrance into Mecca, and a fafe Accordingly when they propounded the queftions
return thence 4 . to him, he told them the two hiftorics, but ac-

c Saj, Truth is come, and falfbood is vanifhed, knowledged his ignorance as to the origin of
&c.] Thefc words Mohammed repeated, when the human foul 10 .

he eatred the temple of Mhos, after the tak- « Ye have no knowledge give* unto you, except a
ing of that city, and clean fed it of the idols; little ;] AH your knowledge being acquired from
a great number of which are faid to have fal- the information of your fenfea, which muft ne-
len down on his touching them with the end of ceffarily fail you in fpiritual fpeculatioQt, with-
the Hick he held in his hand 1 . out the affifhnce of divine revelation XI .

d Every one aBetb after his own manner j] i. je. h We would Certainly rake away that which
According to his judgment or opinion, be it true we have revealed ;] Viz. the Koran *» by razing
or falfe; or according to' the bent of his mind, it both* from the written copies, and the memo-
and the natural conftitution of his body vies of men.

c Camming the fpirit ;] Or the foul of man.

1 Idem . * Numb, xxili. io* 1 See the Prelim . Difc . II. f. ji. 4 ^/Beidawi,

JalialoVdin. 1 Iidem . V. Gacnier, Vie de Mahomet, tom. 2: p. 127. 6 Al Bei-

uawu 7 Idem. 8 See the next chapter. 9 See ib. 10 Al Biidawl. 11 Idem.

236 Al KORAN. Chap. iy r

nii were purpofely aflembled, that they might produce a book like this Koran,
they could not produce one like unto it, although the one of them afiifted
the other. And we have varioufly propounded unto men in this Koran, e-
very kind of figurative argument j but the greater part of men refafe to re-
ceive it, merely out of infidelity. And they fay. We will by no means be-
lieve on thee, until thou caufe a fpring of water to gufli forth for us out of
the earth * ; or thou have a garden of palm-trees and vines, and thou caufe
rivers to fpring forth from the midft thereof in abundance ; or thou caufe the
heaven to fall down upon us, as thou haft given out, in pieces j or thou
bring down God and the angels to vouch for tbee ; or thou have a houfe of gold ;
or thou afcend by a ladder to heaven : neither will we believe thy afcending
thither alone b , until thou caufe a book to defcend unto us, bearing witnefs of
thee , which we may read. Anfwer, My Lord be praifed ! Am I other
than a man, fent as an apoftle ? And nothing hindrcth men from believing,
when a direftion is come unto them, except that they fay, Hath God fent
a man for bis apoftle ? Anfwer, If the angels had walked on earth as fa-
miliar inhabitants thereof we had furely fent down unto them from heaven
an angel for our apoftle. Say, God is a fufficient witnefs between me and
you : for he knoweth and regardeth his fervants. Whom God fba.1] direct,
he (hall be the rightly directed ; and whom he (hall caufe to err, thou (halt
find none to alfift, befides him. And we will gather them together on the
day of refurredtion, creeping on their feces, blind, and dumb, and deaf* :
their abode Jball be hell 1 io often as the fire thereof (hall be extinguifhed, we
will rekindle a burning flame to torment them d . This (hall be their reward, be-
caufe they dilbelieve in our figns, and fay, When we (hall have been reduced
to bones and duft, (hall we furely be raifed new creatures ? Do they not
perceive that God, who created the heavens and the earth, is able to create
other bodies , like their prefent ? And he hath appointed them a limited
term * j there is no doubt thereof : but the ungodly rejeft the truth, mere-
ly out of unbelief. Say, If ye pofleffed the treafures of the mercy of my
Lord, ye would furely refrain from ufing them, for fear of (pending them 1 •,
for man is covetous. We heretofore gave unto Moses the power of working nine
evident figns . And do thou aik the children of Israel as to the fiery of

Mo-

a Until tbon caufe a fpring of mater to gajb
forth , &c ] This and the following miracles were
demanded of Mohammed by the Kereijh, as proofs
of his miflion.

b Thy afcending thither alone ;] As thou pre-
tended to have done in thy night- journey ; but
of which no man was witnefs.
c See the Prelim. Difc. IV. p. 85.
d So often as the fire fhall be extinguifhed , we
mill rekindle it to torment them;] i. c. When
the fire fhall go out or abate for want of fuel,
after the confumption of the skins and flefh of

the damned, we will add frefh vigour to the
flames by giving them new bodies 1 ,
e A limited term j] Of life, or refurre&ion.
f For fear of {pending them ;] That left they

fhould be erha ufted.

8 Nine figns i] Thefe were, the changing his
vod into a ferpent, the making hit hand white and
Alining, the producing locufb, lice, frogs, and
blood, the dividing of the red-fea, the bringing
water out of the roc h <j and the ihaking of mount
Sinai over the children of I/rml. In lieu of the
three laft fome reckon the inundation of the

Nile,

1 Al Beidawi. See chap. 4. /. 68.

Chap. 17* Al KORAN. 2 *$rp

Moses * -, when he came unto them, and Pharaoh faid unto him, Verily
I efteem thee, O Moses, to be deluded by forcery. Moses anfwei'ed, Thou
well knoweft that none hath fent down thefe evident figns except the Lord
of heaven and earth ; and I furely efteem thee, O Pharaoh, a loft man.
Wherefore Pharaoh fought to drive them out of the land •, buc we drown-
ed hiru, and all thofe who were with him. And we faid unto the children
of Israel, after bis deftruEHon , Dwell ye in the land : and when the pro-
mife of the next life fhall come to be fulfilled , we will bring you both promif-
cuoufly to judgment. We have lent down the Koran with truth, and it"
hath aefcended with truth : and we have not fent thee otberwife than to be
a bearer of good tidings, and a denouncer of threats. And we have divided
the Koran, revealing it by parcels , that thou mighteft read it unto men
with deliberation ; and we have fent it down, caufing it to defcend as occa-
fion required*. Say, Whether ye believe therein, or do not believe, verily
thofe who have been favoured with the knowledge of the fcriptures which
were revealed before it, when the fame is rehearfed unto them, fall down on
their faces*, worfhipping, and fay, Our Lord be praifed, for that the
promife of our Lord is furely fulfilled ! And they fal
weeping -, and the hearing thereof increafeth their humi
God, or call on the Merciful : by which foever of the two names ye invoke
bm, it is equal-, for he hath moft excellent names'*. Pronounce not thy
prayer aloud, neither pronounce it with two low a voice % but follow a mid-
dle way between thefe : and fay, Praife be unto God* who hath not begotten
any child-, who hath no partner in the kingdom, nor hath any to protect,
him from contempt : and magnify him- by proclaiming his greatnds.

down on their faces,
lty. Say, Call upon

CHAP.

Nile, the blading of the com, and fcarcity of who is hereby commanded to demand the
the fruits of the earth'. Thefe words, howe- children of Ifrae! of Pharaoh, that he might
ver.are interpreted by others, not of nine miracles , let them go with him.

but of nine commandments, which Moles gave his b See the Prelim. Difc. $. III. p. 64, 65.
people, and were thus numbred up by Mabam- c On tbeir faces ;] Literally, on their (bins:

med himfelf to a few, who asked him the quef- A Call on God, or the Merciful, See } The in-

tion, viz. That they fliould not be guilty of fidels hearing Mohammed fay, O God, and O
idolatry, nor fteal, nor commit adultery or Merciful, imagined the Merciful was the name
murder, nor prafl ice forcery or ufury, nor ac- of a deity different from GoD,and that he preach-
enfe an innocent man to take away his life, or ed the .worfttip of two ; which occaiioned th 1
a model! woman of whoredom, nor defert -the paflage.- See chap. 7. p. 1 36.
army j to which he added the obferving of the * Pronounce not tby prayer aloud, nor with too

fabbath, as a tenth commandment, but which low a voice, &c.] Neither fo loud, that the infi-

peculiarly regarded the Jews : upon which dels may overhear thee, and thence take occalion
anfwer, it is faid, the Jew killed the prophet’s to blafpheme and feoff - ; nor fo foftly as not to
hands and feet *. be heard by the affiltants. Some fuppofe that

* Do tbou ask the children of Ifrael, £5V.] by the word prayer, in this place, is meant the
Some think thefe words are directed to Mo fee, reading of the Koran.

1 Idem, Jallalo’ddin. * ^/-Bbidaw-i.

238

Al KORAN.

Chap. 18.

CHAR XVIII.

Intitled) The Cave * ; revealed at Mecca 15 .
In the name of the moft merciful God.

P RAISE be unto God, who hath fent down unto his fervant the book
of the Koran, and hath not inferte I therein any crookeinefs, but hath made
is a ftrait rule: that he lhould threaten a grievous punifliment unto the unbe-
lievers, from his pre fence ; and fbouid bear good tidings unto the faithful,
who work righteoulheis, that they ihail receive an excellent reward, name-
ly* par adi/e, wherein they fhall remain lor ever : and that he fhouii] warn
thofe who fay, God hath begotten lfi'uc i of which matter they have no
knowledge, neither bad their fathers, A grievous faying it is, which pro-
ceedeth from their mouths: they fpeak no other than a lie. Perjdvcnture
thou wilt kill thy fell with grief after them, out of thy eamejl zeal for tbeir
converjnn, if they believe nothin this new revelation of the Koran. Verily we
have ordained wnatfoever is on the earth for the ornament thereof, that we
might make trial of men , and fee which of them excelleth in works : and we
will fucely reduce whatever is thereon, to dry duft. Doft thou confider that
the companions of the cave*, and Al Rakim d , were one of our ligns, and
a great miracle ? When the young men took refuge in the cave, they faid,
O Lord, grant us mercy from before thee, and difpofe our bufinefe for us
to a right iffue. Wherefore we ftruck their ears with deaftiefj, fo that they
Jlept without difturlance in the cave for a great number oSf years : then we

awaked

* The chapter is thus inscribed becaufe it makes
mention of the cave wherein the feven Beepers
concealed themfelves.

b Some except one verfc, which begim tlma,
Behave thy/eij with tinJJa.ney, &c^

c Tht c&mpamttm if the cave i] Thefe wiire
certain Chriftian your hi, of a good family in E-
phefus , who, to avoid the perfeention of the em-
peror Deem , by the Arab writers called Decidua ,
hid themfelves in a cave, whore they llept for
-a great number of years 1 .

This apocryphal ftory (for Baronins 2 treats it
as no better, and Father Marr$cd * .ilLliow-

1 ^/Beidawi, Jallalo'ddi
p . 425. fcf in Prodr. part. 4. p. 103.
Turon. W Simeon. Metafhrast.

ledges it to be partly falfe* or at kail doubtful*
tho’ he caHa JLr tinker a m.idfr f ittifitfj* n ryj ,
the fffxm f hmetiril for term tag kal'ibje 4 ,)
wj5 borrowed by ALl-anmJ from the Chriffim
md : uom ', but hi* been embelli filed by ' him
and liu fbnpkvcrs with feveril iidlLrional cicuni-
ihnecs

- Al R . / " .] W'hii is meant by this word Eli™
commentators cannot agree. Some will have it
to be ihc name of the mounLim, cr the valEcy,
whcitln the cat e ww ; lame Lay it the
name of tbeb- dog ; and at hen [who feem to
come neareft the true lignincation} that it waj

3

2 In Martyr A. ad 27. Jw/jV, * fo JL~m

Hotting. HijI. Orient* p- 40. J r. Gilec

6 V. D’Her bilot, Blhl Orient, p. 1S9,

4

Chap. 18 . Al KORAN. 239

awaked them, that we might know which of the two parties ' was more ex-
aft in computing the f^ace which they had remained there. We will relate
unto thee tneir hiftory with truth. V erily they were young men who had
believed in their Lord j and we had abundantly direfted them : and we forti-
fied their hearts with conftancy when they flood before the tyrant ; and they
faid, Our Lord is the Lord of heaven and earth: we will by no means
call on any god befides him -, for then fhould we furely utter an extravagance.
Thefe our feUow people have taken other gods, befides him ; although they
bring no demonftrative argument for them : and who is more unjuft than

he who devifeth a lie concerning God? And they faid the one to the other ,
When ye (hall feparate yourfelves from them, ana from the deities which they
worfhip, except God b , fiy into the cave : your Lord will pour his mercy
on you abundantly, and will difpofe your bufinefs for you to advantage. And
thou mighteft have feen the fun, when it had rifen, to decline from their
cave towards the right hand ; and when it went down, to leave them on the
left hand 1 : and they were in the fpacious part of the cave*. This was one of
the figns of God. Whomfoever God Ihall direft, he Jhall be rightly direfted ;
and whomfoever he fhall caule to err, thou /halt not find any to defend or to
direft. And thou wouldft have judged them to have been awake*, while they
were deeping ; and wecaufed them to turn themfelves to the right hand r and
to the left f . And their dog * ftretched forth his fore-legs in the mouth of

the

a brafs plate, or ftone table placed near the mouth
of the cave, on which the names of the young
men were written.

There are feme, however, who take the com-
panions of al Rnkim to be different from the feven
ffeepers : for they lay the former were three
men who were driven by ill weather into a cave
for fhelter, and were {hut in there by the falling
down of a vaft ftone, which ftopped the cave’s
mouth ; but on their begging God’s mercy, and
their ^relating each of them a meritorious a&ion
which they hoped might intitle them to it, were
mirac&loufly delivered by the rock’s rending in
fander to give them paflage
a The two parties^] viz. Of the ffeepers them-
felves, or others, who were divided jn Opinion
as to the length of their ftay in the cave.

h Except God;] For they, like other idolaters,
worlhipped the true God and idols alfo 2 ,
c The fun declined from their cave, &c.] Left
it fliould be offenfive to them, the cave opening
towards the fouth 3 .

* In the jfacious part of the cave'] i. e. In tho
midft of it, where they were incommoded nei-
ther by the heat of the fun nor the clofenefs of the
cave*.

* Thou wmldeft have judged them to bate been
aw ale ;} Becaufe of their having their eyes open,
or their frequent turning themfelves from one
ffde to the other * .

f And they turned themfelves, &c.] Left their
lying fo long on the ground fhould confame
their ffefh 6

g Their dog ;] This dog had followed them
as they pa fled fry him when they fled to the cave,
and they drove him xwzy ; wherettport God
caufrd him to {peak, and he faid, f fove ihofe
who are dear unto God ; go to fleep tbtrtfofej and
I will guard you . But feme fay, it was a dog
belonging to a (hepherd who followed them, and
that the dog followed the fhepherd ; which 0-
pinion is fupported by reading, as fome do, cd-
lebohom, their dog'j mafter , inftead of calhohom ,
their dog 7 . Jaflalo'dditt adds, that the dog be-
haved as his mafters did, in turning hknfrff,
in fleeping, and in waking.

The Mohammedans have a great f$fpeft for
this dog, and allow him a plactf in paraalfe with
fomc other favourite brutes : and they have a fort
of proverb which they ufe in fpeaking of a covet-
ous perfon, that be would not Throw a hone to fhe
dog of the feven Jleepers : nay it is faid that they havo

1 Al Beidawi, ex trad* Noomdn Ehn Bajbir. 1 Idem* 3 Idem . 4 Idem,

1 Idem . ^ jr A llalo’ddin. r Idem .

24>o KOHAffl* Chap. i8#

the cave : if thou hadft come fuddenly upon them, verily thou wouldeft have
turned thy back and fied from them, and thou wouldeft have been filled
with fear at the fight of them ■. And fo we awaked them from tbeir flcep,
that they might a(k queftions of one another. One of them fpake and faid,
How long have ye tarried here? They anfwered. We have tarried a day, or
part of a day. The others faid. Your Lord beft knoweth the time ye have
tarried b : and now fend one of you with this your money into the city%
and let him fee which of its inhabitants hath the beft and cheapeft food, and
let him bring you proviGon from him; and let him behave circumfpe&ly,
and notdifcover you to any one. Verily, if they come up againft you, they
will ftone you, or force you to return to their religion * and then (hall ye
not profper for ever. And fo we made tbeir people acquainted with what bad
^happened to than ; that they might know that the promife of God is true,
and that there is no doubt of the laft hour * ; when they difputed among
themfelves concerning their matter e . And they faid, Ere& a building over
them : their Lord beft knoweth tbeir condition . Thofe who prevailed in
their affair anfwered. We will furely build a chappel over them f . Some
fay, The Jleepers were three ; and their dog was the fourth 1 : and others fay.

They

the fuperffition to write his name, which they d That there is no doubt the Uft hurj] The
fuppofe to be KaitsAr, , (Ehtf fome, as is obferved long fleep of thefe young men, and their making
jrf i)ve, think he was called mI Raitm) on their after fo many years, being a reprefen &itkm of the
letters which go far, or which pals the lea, as ftate of thole who die, and are afterwards raifed
a protection, or kind of tali Cm an, to jpreferve to life.

them from mifearriage 1 . * Concerning tbeir matter 5] L e. Concerning

a Than wouldeft have been filled with fear at the refurreftion ; lome faying that the fouls only
the fight of tbem\\ For that God had given Ihould be raifed, others, that they Ihould be rail,
them terrible countenances ; or elfe becaufe of the ed with the body : or, concerning the deepen,
largenefr of their bodies, or the horror of the after they were really dead,; one laying, that
place. they were dead, ana another, that they were

It is related that the Khalif Modmyah, in an only alleep : or elle concerning the erecting a
expedition he made Natoiia, paifedbythe building over them, as it follows in the neit

cave of the feven Jleepers, and would needs words ; fome advikng a dwelling-bode to be
fend fomebody into it, notwithlhndiag Ebn Ab- built there, and others a temple 4> .
has remonftrated to him the danger of it, faying, r fb-jt whs frnaileJ /aid, ffe &iJ/ bsiti a
That a better man than him, (meaning the pro- thafpel over tkm ;] When the young man who
phet) had been forbidden to enter it, and repeat- was fent into the city, went to pay for the pro-
ed this verlc ; but the men the Kbaliff, fent in had vinon he had bought, hij money was fo old, be-
no fooner entred the cave, than they were llxuck ing the coin of Decianus, that they imagined he
dead by a burning wind 3 . had found a treafure, and carried him before the

b Tour Lord beft knoweth the time ye ba*e tar- prince, w ho was a Chriflian, and having heard his
r/W;] As they. entred the cave in the morning, ttory, lent fome with Him to the cave, who law
and waked about noon, they at firft imagined and fpoke to the others : after which they fell
they had llept half a day, or a day and a half at alleep again and died i and the prince ordered
molt: ; but when they found their nails and hair them to be buried in the fame place, and built a
.grown very long, they ufed thefe words 3 . chappel over them.

c Into the city ;] Which fome commentators * Some jay. They were three, See.] This was
/uppofc was Tar Jus. the opinion of alhyid, a Jacbite Chriftim oi

A^rjj/r.

1 La Roqni, Foy. de t Arable hettr,f. 74, V 1 D'Hsrbel. uHfup,

3 Al Beida wi. 3 Idem.

Chap. 1 8. Al KORAN. 241

they were five ; and their dog was the fixth * \ guefling at a fecret matter: and
others fay. They were feven, and their dog was die eighth b . Say, My
Lord be4 knoweth their number : none (hall know them, except a few.
Wherefore difpute not concerning them, unlefs with a clear deputation, according
to what bath been revealed unto thee : and a(k not any of the Cbrijlians concerning
them. Say not of any matter, I will fureJy do this to morrow ^ unleft
thou add , If God pleafe *. And remember thy Lord, when thou forget-
teft d , and fay. My Lord is able to direct me with eaje, that I may draw
near unto the truth of this matter rightly. And they remained in their cave
three hundred years, and nine years over «. Say, God belt knoweth how
long they continued there : unto him are the fecrets of heaven and earth
known 7 do thou make him to fee and to hear f . The inhabitants thereof
have no protestor befides him ; neither doth he fuffer any one to have a (hare
in the eftablifhment or knowledge of his decree. Read that which hath been
revealed unto thee, of the book of thy Lord, without prefuming to make any
change therein g : there is none who hath power to change his words ; and thou
lhalt not find any to fly to, befides him, if thou attempt it. Behave thy felf
with conftancy towards thofe who call upon their Lord morning and evening,
and who feek his favour *, and let not thine eyes be turned ayray from them,
feeking the pomp of this life h \ neither obey him whofe heart we have cauf-
ed to negledt the remembrance of us *, and who followeth his lulls, and

I i leaveth

* Other t fay they were jive, &c.] Which was en by the Cbrijlians, who differed among them-
the opinion of certain Cbrijlians, and particular* felves about the time ; one faying it was three
ly of a Nejlorian prelate. hundred years, and another, three hundred and

b Others fay, Ihey were fevtn, &c.] And this nine years 5 . The interval between the reign
is the true opinion 1 . of Decius, and that of The ado [tut the younger,

c Say not of any thing, I will do this to morrow ; in whofe time the Beepers are faid to have awak-
en/^/} thou add. If God pleafe ;] It is faid, that ed, will not allow them to have flept quite two
when the Koreifb, by the dlreflion of the Jews, hundred years j tho’ Mohammed is fomewhat ex-
put the three quellions abovementioned to Mo- cufable, lince the number alligned by Simeon Me -
bammed, he bid them come to him the next day, tepbraftes 4 is three hundred and feventy two
and he would give them an anfwer, but added years.

not, if it pleafe God ; for which reafon he had f Do thou make him to fee, and to bear j] This
the mortification to wait above ten days, before is an ironical expreffion, intimating the folly and
any revelation was vouchfafed him concerning madnefsofman’sprefumiugtoinftrufl God *.
thofe matters, fo that the Koreifb triumphed, and * Read that which hath been revealed unto thee,
bitterly reproached him a* a liar : but at length without making any change therein j] As the un-
Gabriel brought him direftions what he ihould believers would perfuade thee to do *.
fay j with this admonition however, that he h Let not thine eyes be turned away from them,
ihould not be fo confident for the future *. Ac.] That is, Defpife not the poor believers,

4 Remember thy Lord, &c.] L e. Give the becaufe of their meannefs, nor honour the rich
glory to him, and ask pardon for thy omiflion, in becaufe of their wealth and grandeur,
cafe thou forget to fey. If it pleafe God. 1 Whofe heart we have tastfed to tugUB the re-

« Three hundred and nine years s] Jall&lo'ddin membrance »f us i] The perfon more particularly
fuppofes the whole fpace was three hundred folar intended here, it is faid, was Ommeya Ebit Kbalf,
years, and that the odd nine are added to reduce who defired Mohammed to difcard his indigent
them to lunar years. companions, out of refpeft to the Koreifb. See

Some think thefe words are introduced as fpok- chap. 6. p. 103.

1 Idem , Jallalo'ddik. * ,^/Beidawi. } Idem . 4 Ubi ftp . 1 Al Beidawi.
Jallalo’ddin. 6 Idem .

242 Al KORAN. Chap. 18.

leaveth the truth behind him. And fay. The truth is from your Lord ;
wherefore let him who will, believe, and let him who will, be incredulous.
We have furely prepared for the unjuft hell fire, the flame <md fmoke
whereof (hall furround them like a pavilion : and if they beg relief, they
(hall be relieved with water like molten brafe, which (hall fcald their faces ;

0 how miferable a potion, and how unhappy a couch ! As to thole who believe,
and do good works, we will not fufler the reward of him who (hall work
righteoufoefs to perilh : for them are prepared gardens of eternal abode \ which
fhall be watered by rivers ; they (hall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold,
and (hall be clothed in green garments of fine filk and brocades ; repofing
themfelves therein on thrones. O how happy a reward, and how eafy a couch !
And propound unto them as a parable two men b : on the one of whom we had
bellowed two vineyards, and had furrounded them with palm-trees, and had
caufed com to grow between them. Each of the gardens brought forth its
fruit every feefon , and failed not at all *, and we caufed a river to flow in the
midft thereof : and he had great abundance. And he Laid unto his companion by
way of debate, I am fuperior to thee in wealth, and have a more powerful 14-
nail y. And he went into his garden *, being guilty of injuftice againft his own
foul, and faid, I do not think that this garden will decay for ever } neither do

1 think that the laft hour will come : and although I ihould return unto my
Lord, verily 1 (hall find a better garden than this in exchange *. And his
companion faid unto him, by way of debate, Doft thou not believe in him
who created thee of the dull, and afterwards of feed ; and then fafhkmed thee
into a perfect man ? But as for me, God is my Lord ; and I wfll not afiociate
any other deity with my Lord. And when thou entereft thy garden, wilt
thou not fay. What God pleafeth jhall come to pafs % there is no power but
in Gop alone ? Although thou feed me to be inferior to thee in wealth and
member of children, my Lord is well able to bellow on me a better gift than
thy garden, and to Ihoot bis arrows againft the fame from heaven, fo that it
fhall become barren dull or its water may link deep into the earthy chat thou
canftnot draw thereof. And his po Hellions were incompaffed with dtf ruc-
tion, as bis companion bad forewarned him : wherefore he began to turn down

the

* Gardens sf eternal abode ;] literally of Eden.
See chap. 9. p. 158.

b Two men ;] TW thefe feem to be general
characters only, dcftgned to repjefent the diffe-
rent end of the wicked, and of the good ; yet
it is fuppofed, by fome, that two particular per-
fons are here meant One 678 they were two
I free tilts and brothers, who had a conGderable
fum left them by their Cither, which they divid-
er! between them ; and that one of them, being
an unbeliever, bought large Gelds and pofTollioins
with his portion, while the other, who was a true
believer, difpofed of his to pious ufes ; bat that
in the end, the former was ruined, and the latter

profpered. Another thinks they were two men
of the tribe of Mokbxum : the one named A
Afaai Ebn AbeTA Ajkadd, an infidel j and the
other Abu Salma Ebn ALTaltab, the husband t f
Omm Salma, {tvhom the prophet msrried rJicr
his death.) and a true believer 1 .

c And be meat it!n sij gjt .uv}] Carrying hi
companion with him, out of alien cukm, and to
mortify him with the view of his Jitc? polfei
fions *.

* 1 Jhall find a better garden :n ftcrbaagt i]

Vainly imagining that his prol'periiy was not in
much the froc gift of (ios, as due to his
merit 3 .

* At Blips wi

» Idem.

5 idem-

Chap. iS. Al KORAN. 243

the palms of his hands out of forrow and regret for that which he had expend-
ed thereon for the vines thereof were fallen down on their trails : and he
faid. Would to Goo that I had not affociated any other deity with my Lord f
And he had no party to afilft him, befides God, neither was he able to defend
himfelf againfi bis vengeance. In fuch cafe prote&ion behngelb of right unto
Goo alone \ he is the beft rewarder, and the beft giver of fuccefs. And pro-
pound to them a fimilitude of the prefent life. ,It is like water which we
lend down from heaven ; and the herb of the earth is mixed therewith, and af-
ter it bath been green and floarijhing, in the morning it becometh dry ftubble,
which the winds fcatter abroad : and God is able to do all things. Wealth
and children are the ornament of this prefent life : but good works , which are
permanent, are better in the fight of thy Lord, with refpeft to the reward, and
better with rcfpeft to hope. On a certain day we will caufe the mountoins to
pafs away *, and thou fhalt fee the earth appearing plain and even ; and we will
gather mankind together, and we will not leave any one of them behind. And
they fhall be fet before thy Lord in difiinli order, and be jhdl fay unto them ,
Now are ye come unto us naked, as we created you the firft time : but ye
thought that we fhould not perform our promife unto you. And the book.
wherein every ow?s actions are recorded fhall be put into bis band ; and thou fhalt
fee the wicked in great terror, becaufe of that which is -written therein, and they
lhallfay, Alas for us! what tneanetb this book? it omitteth neither a finall
aftion nor a great one, but it comprizeth the fame ; and they fhall find that
which they have wrought, prefent before their eyes : and thy Lord will not
deal unjuftly with any one. Remember when we faid unto the angels, Wor-
fliip ye Adam : and they all worfhipped him, except Eblis b , who was one of the
genii % and departed from the command of his Lord. Will ye therefore
take him and his offspring for your patrons befides me, notwkhftandmg they
are your enemies ? Miferable jball Jueb a change be to the ungodly {' I called
not them to be prefent at the creation of die heavens and of the earth, nor
at the creation of themfelves, neither did I take tbofe fedacers for my afftffrurts.
On a certain day, God fhall fay unto the idolaters. Call thofe whom ye ima-

§ ined to be my companions, to -protest you : and they fhall call them, but they
lall not anfwer them and we will place a valley of deftruftion between them d :
and the wicked fhall fee hell fire \ and they mail know that they fhall be
thrown into the fame, and they fhall find no way to avoid it. And now
have we varioufly propounded unto men, in this Koran, a parable of every

I i 2 kind •,

» The mountains pall pafs away }] For being him the father ef the genii, whom he begat af
lorn up by the roots, they fhall fly is the air, ter his fail * ; it being a conftant opinion, among
and be reduced to atoms 1 * . the Mohammedans, that the angels are impeccable,

0 See chap. 2. p. 4, and ch. 7. p. 117, tic. and do not propagate their fpecies 1 .

* Who was one of the genii i] Hence feme ima- A A valley of deftrtBion between them i] i. e.
ginc the genii are a fpecies of angels : others flip- Between the idolaters and their falfe gods. Some
pofe the devil to have been originally a genius, fuppafe the meaning is no more than that Goo
which was the occafion of his rebellion, and calk wili fet them at variance and divifion,

1 Idem. See Prelim. Difc. $. IV. /. 82. * Jallaio’djjik, tie. 3 See the Prelim. Dife.

S. iy. p. 71, {j ix.

24+ Al KORAN. Chap. i 8.

kind *, but man cavilleth at moft things therein. Yet nothing hindreth men
from believing, now a dirtftion is come unto them, and from alking pardon
of their Lord, excepting that they wait until the punifhment of their pre-
deceffors come to he infilled on them, or that the chaftifement of the next life
come upon them publickly. We fend not our mefiengers, but to bear good
ridings, and to denounce threats. Thofe who believe not, difpute with vain
arguments , that they may thereby render the truth, of no effeft : and they
hold my figns, and the admonitions which have been made them, in deri-
fion. And who is more unjuft than he who hath been acquainted with the
figns of his Lord, and retirethafar off from the fame, ana forgetteth that
which his hands have formerly committed ? Verily we have calt vails over
their hearts, left they fhould underftand the Koran , and into their ears
thicknefs of hearing : if thou invite them to the true direction, yet will they
not tlfcrefore be directed for ever. Thy Lord is gracious, indued w ith mer-
cy *, if he would have punilhed them for that which they have committed,
he would doubtlefe have haftened their punifhment : but a threat hath keen
denounced againft them*, and they lhall find no refuge, befules him. And
thofe former cities k did we deftroy, when they atted unjuftly *, and we gav.-
them previous warning of their deftruttion. And remember when Moses laid
unto his fervant Joshua, the [on of Nun, I will not ctale to go forward, un-
til I come to the place where the two feas meet * or l will travel for a
long fpace of time e . But when they were arrived at the meeting of the two
feas*, they forgot their fifh, which they bad taken with them * ; and the
fijb took its way freely f in the fea. And when they had palled beyond

1 A threat bath been denounced againft them ;]
via. Of their calamity at Sedr, (for the Kareilb
are the infidels here intended,) or their punim-
ment at the refurreftion

b Tbtje former cities ;] That is, the towns of
the Adites , Tbamudites , Sodomite* > See.

c For a long jpaaef time; ] The original word
properly fignifies the fpace of eighty years and
upwards. To explain this long paflage the
commentators tell the following Eory. They
lay that Motet once preaching to the people,
they adtnirea his knowledge and eloquence fo
much, that they asked him, whether he knew
any man in the world who was wifer than
himfelf ; to which he anfwered in the negative:
whereupon God, in a revelation, having re-
prehended him for his vanity (tho* fome pretend
that Mejes asked Go d the question of his own
accord) acquainted him that his fervant at Khedr
was more lmowing than he ; and, at re~

qLiedn told him he might find that perlon at a
curtain where the two feas met; directing
him to tike a fi(h wkh him in a bucket, and that
where he miffed the fifh, that was the place.

Accordingly Mofes fet out, wkh his let van:
Jafbua, in fearch of dt Kbtdr; which expedition
is nere defer ibed 2 .

d The dieting efth/ tvs* fen ;] vi*. Thofe of
Ptrfid and Greets Some fancy that the meet-
ing of and etl Kbedr fg here intended, n
of two fias of knowledge * .

c They firgit then fjr, &c ] Mfes forgot to
inquire concerning rt, and forgot to re! I

him when he miffed it. It is faid that when
they came to the rack, Msjri Faking jjlecp, the
fifh, which was wiled* leaped out e; the b^l;et
into the fea ; fome add, that Jtjkm making the
ablution at the fountain of life, jqf which im-
mediately ), fome of the water happened to be
fprinltled on the fifh, which immediately reftored
it to life A .

f The fjb tstk its way freely in f'v The

word here tnnllated fignifyiug slib a pipe:
or arched canal for conveyance of wtttr, feme
have irn -gined t\ut the water of the fe.i iv i- mi-
raculoufly kept from touching the body of -he
fifh, whkh naj led through it as under an arch .

1 Al Beidawi. 2 Idem , Al Zauakiishah, Al Bokhara, h So v.t ?, £sY.

* Idem. 1 Idem .

Chap. 18. Al KORAN. 245

that place , Moses faid unto his fervant, Bring us our dinner ; for now are
we fatigued with this our journey. His fervant anfwered, Doft thou know
what has befallen me ? When we took up our lodging at the rock, verily
1 forgot the fifh: and none made me to forget it, except Satan, that Ifhould
not remind tbee of it. And the fifh took its way in the fea, in a wonderful
manner. Moses faid, This is what we fought after. And they both went
back, returning by the way they came. And coming to the rock they
found one of our fervants % unto whom we had granted mercy from us,
and whom we had taught wifdom from before us. And Moses faid un-
to him. Shall I follow tnee, that thou mayeft teach me part of that which
thou haft been taught, for a direction unto me ? He anfwered. Verily thou
eanft not bear with me : for how cahft thou patiently fuffer thofe things, the
knowledge whereof thou doft not comprehend ? Moses replied. Thou fhalt
find me patient, if God pleafe ; neither will I be difobedient unto thee in
any tiling. He faid, If thou follow me therefore, alk me not concerning any
thing, until I lhall declare the meaning thereof unto thee. So they both
went on by the fea fhore, until they went up into a (hip ; and he made a
hole therein \ And Moses faid unto him. Haft thou made a hole therein,
that thou mighteft drown thofe who are on board ?• now haft thou done a
ftrange thing. He anfwered. Did I not tell thee that thou couldeft not bear
with me? Mos$s faid, Rebuke me not, bccaufe I did forget ; and itnpofe not
on me a difficulty in what I am commanded. Wherefore they left the fbip
and proceeded, until they met with a youth ; and he flew him c . Moses faid.

Haft thou (lain an innocent perfon, without bis having killed another ? now
haft thou committed an unjuft aftion. * He anfwered. Did I not tell thee XVI.
that thou couldeft not bear with me ? Moses faid, If I afk thee concern-
ing any thing hereafter, fuffer me not to accompany thee : now haft thou
received an excufe from me. They went forwards therefore, until they came to
the inhabitants of a certain City 4 : and thby allied food of the inhabitants
thereof; but they refufed to receive them. And they found therein a wall,
which was ready to fall down ; and he fet it upright*. Whereupon Moses
faid unto him. If thou wouldeft, thou mighteft doubtlefs have received a re-
ward

* One of cur fervants ;] This perfon, accord-
ing to the general opinion, was the prophet al
Kbedr ; whom the Mohammedans ufually con-
found with Pbineas, Elias , and St. George ,
faying that his foul pafled by a metempfychofo
fucceSively through all three. Some, however,
fay his true name was Balya Ebn Malcan, and
that he lived in the time of Afriddft t one of
the anekfet kings of Perfia, and that he pre-
ceded $bt£ikarnfin> and lived to the time of
Mofes. They fuppofc al Khedt , having found
out the fountain of life and drank thereof, be*
came immortal j and that he had therefore this
name, from hisfiourijbing and continual youth 1 .

Part of thefe fiflions tipy took from the Jews y
fome of whom alfo fancy Pbipeas was Elias 2 .

b He made a bole in tb( (hip ;] For al Kbedr
took an ax, and knocked out two of her
planks 3 .

c He flew him ] By twilling his neck round,
or dafhing his head againfl a waJJ, or elfe by
throwing him down and cutting his throat 4 .

d A certain at* ; 1 This city was Antioch ; or,
as fome rathe* think* Obollab » near fiajra , or
elfe Bay if wan in Armenia 1 .

* He fit it uprigbt\\ By only ftrokiqg it with
his hand ; tho’ others lay -he threw it down
and rebuilt it 6 .

1 Idem. V, D’Herbelot, Bibl. Orient . Art. Kbedber, Siptemcastrens. de Turcar. mo-

ribus t Busbec^ Epift . 1./. 93> &c. Hotting. Hifl. Orient, f . 58, See. 99, &c. 292, &c.

a R. Levi Ben Gbrsqn b append. 1. 1. Reg. 1 . 2 Q. 1 Al Beidawi. ♦ Idem . 1 Idem. 6 Idem.

2+6 AL KORAN, Chap. 18.

w,ud for it He airfwered, This foall be a reparation between me and
thee : kkt I will firfi declare unto thee the fignification of that which thou
couldeft not bear with patience. The vefiel belonged to certain poor men
who did their bufinefs in the fea : and I was minded to render it unfer-
v iceable, bee Aide there was a king b behind diem, who took every found (hip
by force. As to the youth, his parents were true believers ; and we fear-
ed left he, being mi unbeliever, fhould oblige them to fuffer bis perverfends
and ingratitude : wherefore we defined that their Lord might give them a
more righteous child in exchange for him, and one more afte&ionate towards
And the wall belonged to two orphan youths 4 in the dfy, and
under it was a treafure bidden which belonged to them ; and their father was
a righteous man: and thy Lord was ptenled that they Ihould attain their
lull age, and cake forth their treafure, through the mercy of thy Lord,
And I did not wbst thou haji fern of mine own will, but by Gnn*s direflm.
This is the interpretation of that which thou couldeft not bear wkh pa-
tience. The Jews will alk dice concerning Dhc’licartvein e . Anfwer, I
will rehearfe unto you an account of him. We made him powerful in the
earth, and we gave him means to accmplijb every thing he pleafei. And
he followed bis way, until he came to the place where the lun fetteth ;
and he found it to fet in a fpring of black mud * and he found near ihe
fame a certain people e . And we fj id, O Dhv’lkarnein, either punifo

this

* Certain ^ mew ;] They were ten bro-
thers, five of whom were pad their labour by
reafon of their age 1 .

h A kings'] Named J aland Ebn Karktf, or
Mimoar Ebn J aland al Azdi 2 .

c That tbeir Loud might give them a mere
righteous child, &c.] It is laid that they had af-
terwards a daughter, who was the wife and the
mother of a prophet ; and that her fan con-
verted a whole nation

4 Two orphans ;] Their names were A Jr am
and Sarim 4 .

0 Dbu'lkarnciwd Or, The two- horned. The
generality of the commentators 1 fuppofc the
perfon here meant to be Alexander die Great,
or, as they call him, Ifcander al Rami, ting of
Perfia and Greece ; but there are very different
opinions as to the reafon of this furnamc. Some
think it was given him becaufe he was kine of
the Eafi and of the Weft, or becaufe he had
made expeditions to both thofe extream parts of
the earth ; or eife becaufe he had two horns on
his diadem, or two curls of hair, like horns,
on his forehead; pr, which is moft prob^e,
by reafon of his great valour. Several modern

writers 4 rather ftippofe the furname was oc-
cafioncd by his being reprefen ted in his coins
and ftacues with horns, as the fon of Jupiter
Ammon ; or elfe by his being compared by the
prophet Daniel to a lie-goat 7 ; tho* he is there
represented with but one horn *.

There are fame good writers, however, who
believe the prince intended in this paffage of
the Karin , was not Alexander the Grecian, but
another great conqueror, who bore the fame
name and furname, and was much more ancient
than he, being contemporary with A lor whom % and
one of the kings of Perfta of the firft race 9 i or,
as others fappofe, a king of Taman, named
Afaat Ebn a t Rije/b ,0 .

They all agree he was a true believer, but
whether he was a prophet or no, is a difputed
point.

f He Jttmi the ftm it fit in a // ring of bkek

mndi] Thai is, it feemed fo to him, when he
came to the oeean, and favr nothing bnt wa-
ter 11 .

* A certain people Q An unbelieving nation,
w ho were doathed in the of wild bcafb,
and lived upon what the fca caff on fhore 1 a .

1 Idem . 2 Idem, 3 Idem. 4 Idem. * Idem, At Zamakshart* Jallalo’doiic,

Yaht a. 6 Scaliger, de Emend, temp . I/Emfxreur, not. in JacbiadDan. vflL j.Gol m Atfrag- .

p. 58, Sec. n ScmcKARD. Tarith reg ptrf. p. 73. J See Dan, viiL 9 Abu< feda,

KfiQROEtiiR, Tori kb Montakbah , Sc c. V. D’Hirbil. Bibl. Orient. Art. Ejeanier. 10 Ex trad,

Ebn Abbas. V \ Poc. Spec. p. 58. 11 Al Bbidawi, Jallaxo’do 12 Jidm.

Chap. 1 8. Al KORAN. 247

this people? or ufe gendcnefs towards them a * He anfwered, 'Wfiofoever of
them fhall commit injuftice, we will finely ptinifh him in this world j af-
terwards lhall he return unto his Loud, and he fhall punilh him with a
fevere puhifhment. But whofoever believeth, and doth that which is right,
fhall receive the moft excellent reward, and we will give him in command
that which is edy. Then he continued bis way, until he came to the place
where the fun rifeth*; and he found it to rife on certain people, unto whom
we had not given any thing wherewith to fhelter themfelvea therefrom c . Thus
it was ; and we comprehended with our knowledge the farces which were
With him. And he profecuted bis journey from fmtb to north? until he came
between the two mountains 4 5 beneath which he found certain people, who
could fcarce underftand what was faid°. And they faid, O Dhu’crarnbin,
verily Gog and Magog wafte the !and f ; fhall we therefore pay thee tribute,
on condition that thou build a rampart between us and them ? He an-
fwered, The power wherewith my Loro hath ftreogthened me, is better
than your tribute: but affift me ftrenuoufly, and I will fet a ftrong wall
between you and them. Bring me iron in large prices, until it fill up the
/pace between the two fides of thefe mountains. And he faid to the work-
men > Blow with your bellows? until it make the iron ted hot as fire. And
he faid further , Bring me molten brafe, that I may pour upon it. Where-
fore, when this wall was finifhed ? Gog and Magog could not fcale it, neither

could

* Either punifi them or ufe them with gentle-
nrfii] For God gave Dfnilkarnein his choice,
either to deftroy them for their infidelity, or to
inftruft them in the true faith ; or, according to
others, either to put thou to the fword, or to
take them captive* : but the words which fol-
low confirm the former interpretation, by which
it appears he chofe to invite them to the true
religion, and to punifh only the difbbcdient and
incredulous.

b The plate where the fun rifttb ;] i, e. That
part of the habitable world on which the fun firft
rifes.

c And he found it to rift on a certain people. See.]
Who had neither cloaths nor houfes, their
country not bearing any buildings, but dwelt in
holes under ground, into which they retreated
from the heat of the fun 2 . Jallalo'ddin fays they
were the a black nation lying fouth-weft of
Ethiopia . They feem to be the Troglodytes of
the ancients.

d Tbe two mountains 5] Between which Dbul-
fornein built the famous rampart, mentioned
immediately, againft the irruptions of Gog and

Magog . Thefe mountains are fitilate in Arme-
nia and Adhtrhij&n , or, according to others,
much more northwards, on the confines of
Turkman The relation of a journey taken
to this rampart, by one who was fent on pur-
pose to view it by the KhaSf al Watbtt ,
may be feen in D'Jknhefa 3 .

* Who could fcarce underftand tubat was faidi\
By reafon of the flrsmgene& of their ipccch
and their flownefs of apprehenfion ; where-
fore they were obliged to make ufe of an
interpreter 4 .

f Gog and Magog wafte the land i] The A-
tabs call them Tajui and Maj£j f and fay they
are two nations or tribes dcfixnded from Ja-
pbet the fon of Noah , or, as others write, Gog
are a tribe of the Turks , and Magog of thofe of
Gildn *, the Geli and Gel* of* Ptolemy and
Strabo 6 .

It is faid thefe barbarous people made their
irruptions into the neighbouring countries in
the fpring, and deftroyed and carried off all
the fruits of the earth; and fome pretend they
were man-eaters 7 .

1 Iidem . 2 Al Beidawi. 3 BibL Orient. Art. Jagiouge . 4 Al Beidawi

* Idem . V. D’Herbel. ubi fufra. 6 V \ Goh. in Alf\ rag. p. 207. 7 Al Beidawi

248 Al KORAN. Chap. 18

could they dig through it*. And DmrLKARNEiN faid, This is a mercy from
my Lord : but when the predi£tion of my Lord lhall come to be fulfilled \
he lhall reduce the wall to dull: j and the prediftion of my Lord is true.
On that day we will fuffer fome of them to prefs tumulruoufly like waves
on others E j and the trumpet lhall be founded, and we will gather them in
a body together. And we will fet hell, on that day, before the unbelie-
vers •, whofe eyes have been veiled from my remembrance, and who could
not hear my words. Do the unbelievers think that 1 will not fwnijb them ,
for that they take my fervants for tbtir prote&ors befides me ? Verily
we have prepared hell for the abode of the infidels. Say, Shall we de-
clare unto you thole whofe works are vain, whofe endeavour in the prefent
life hath been wrongly directed, and who think they do the work which
is right? Thefe are they who believe not in the figns of their Lord, or
that they lhall be aflembled before him •» wherefore their works are vain,
and we will not allow them any weight on the day of rdurrecTtion. This
Jball be their reward, namely, hell ; for that they have dilbd teved, and
.have held my figns and my a pottles in derifion. But as for thofe who be-
lieve and do good works, they lhall have the gardens of paradife for their
abode ; they lhall remain therein for ever j they lhall wifli for no change
therein. Say, If the lea were ink to write the words of my Lord, verily
the Tea would fail, before the words of my Loud would fail j although
we added another fea like unto it as a farther (apply. Say, Verily I am only a
man as ye are. It is revealed unto me that your God is one only God:
let him therefore who hopeth to meet his Lord, work a righteous work }
and let him not make any other to partake in the worlhip of his Lord.

1 The commentators fay the wall was built in of (tones j Dinod by cramps of iron, on which
tins manner. They dug till they found wa- they poured melted brafs to Men them 1 ,
ter, and having laid the foundation of done and * When the freHHkn if my Lord fieli (mi
melted brafs, they built the fuperltruAure ute fulfilled, .vc.] That is, when the Umefhall
of large pieces of iron, between which they come for Gog and Magog to break forth from
laid wood and coals, till they equalled the height their confinement t which (hall happen fometime
of the mountains ; and then fetting fire to the before the refurrettion *.

combo fti hies, by the help of large bellows, they Tt p'ifi ttemshsiajlj like r-aecs. See ] Thefe

made the iron red hot, and over it poured melt- tvordt resreient either the violent irruption of
ed brafs, which filling up the vacancies between Gog and or the tumultuous afTemblyof

the pieces of iron, rendred the whole work as firm all creatures, men, genii, and brutes, at the re-
as a rock. Some tell us that the whole was built furreftion ' .

1 Idem, tSV. * See :bt Prelim. Difi. J. IV. p 81 , 3 See it. p. 87.

CHAP.

Chap. 19.

I

Al KORAN,

249

CHAR XIX.

Intitled, Mary*; revealed at Mecca .

In the name of the moft merciful God.

C . H. Y. A. S e . A commemoration of the mercy of thy Lord towards his
fervant Zacharias*. When he called upon his Lord, invoking him
in fecret, and faid, O Lord, verily my bones are weakened, and my head
is become white with hoarinefs, and I have never been unfuccefsful in my prayers
to thee, O Lord. But now I fear my nephews, who are to fucceed after me *,
for my wife is barren : wherefore give me a fuccefifor of my own body from be
fore thee ; who may be my heir, and may be an heir of the family of Jacob* ;
2nd grant, O Lord, that he may be acceptable unto thee. And the angel an -
Jwered him , O Zacharias, verily we bring thee tidings of a fon, whofe
name Jhall be John ; we have not caufed any to bear the fame name before
him *. Zacharias faid. Lord, how fhall I have a fon, feeing my wife is
barren, and I am now arrived at a great age h , and am decrepit ? The angel
laid. So Jhall it be: thy Lord faith, This is eafy with me; fince I created
thee heretofore, when thou waft nothing. Zacharias anfwered, O Lord,
give me a fign. The angel replied. Thy fign Jhall be , that thou fhalt not
ipeak to men for three nights, although tbou be in perfedt health. And he

K k went

a Several circumftances relating to the virgin
Mary being mentioned in this chapter, her name
was pitched upon for the title.
b Except the verfe of Adoration .
c See the Prelim. Difc. $. III. p. 59, 60.
d See chap. 3. p. 39, £jfr.

• I fear my nephews, &c.] Thefe were his
brother’s fons, who were very wicked men, and
Zacharias was apprehenfive, left, after his death,
inftead of confirming the people In the true re-
ligion, they fhould {educe them to idolatry r .
And fome commentators imagine that he made
thw prayer in private, left his nephews fhould
overhear him.

1 And may be an heir of the family of Jacob i]
via. In holinefs and knowledge ; or in the go-
vernment and fuperintendence of the Ifmel -
ites. There are fome who iuppofe it Is not the
patriarch who is here meant, but another Jacob,
the brother of Zacharias , or of Imran Ebn M£-
thdn, of the race of Solomon 2 -

* lf r e have not caufed any to bear that name be-

fore him ; ] For he was the firft who bore the
name of John* orTabya (as the Arabs pronounce
it ;) which fancy feema to be occafioned by the
words of St Luke mifunderftcod, that none of
Zacharias 1 / kindred was called by that name 1 : for
otherwife John , or, as it is written in Hebrew ,
Jobnunn, was a common name among the
Jews.

Some expositors avoid this cbje&too, by-ob-
ferving that the original word famiyyan tfgnifies,
not only one who is alt unify called by the fame
name , but alfo one who by reafon of his pofief-
fing the like qualities and privileges* defenses ,
or meet pretend to the fame name.

h 1 am arrived at a great age , &c.] The Mo-
hammedan traditions greatly differ as to the age
of Zacharias at this time ; we have mentioned
one already 4 : Jallalu'ddin fay s, he was an hun-
dred and twenty, and his wife ninety eight;
and the Sonna takes notice of feveral other
opinions.

J Al Beidawi, Jallalo^ddik. a Jidcm*

* Luke i. 6 j

4 4 °- not c •

250 Al KORAN. Chap. 19.

went forth unto his people, from the chamber, and he made Jfigns unto
them as if be Jbould jay , Praife ye God in the morning and in the even-
ing- And tve /aid unto bis jin* O John, receive the book uf the l&Wy with
a refolution to jiudy mid obferve it . And we beftowed on him wifdom, when
b f was yet a child, and mercy from us, and puriry of life b ; and he was a
devout perfon, and dutiful towards 3 us parents, and was not proud or rebel
lious. Peace be on him the day whereon he was born, and the day whereon
he (hall die, and the day whereon he (hall be raifed to life. And remember
in the book of the Koran the ft try of Mary ; when (he retired fiom her
family to a place towards the eaft % and took a veil to conceal berfelf from
them ; and we fent our fpirit Gabriel unto her, and he appeared unto her
in the fbape of a perfect man 4 . She falJ, I ily for refuge unto the mer-
ciful Gov y that he may defend me from thee: if thou fea reft him, thou wilt
not approach me. He anfwered. Verily I am the meflenger of thy Lord, md
am fiat to give thee a holy fon. She faid, How (half I have a Ton, feeing
a man hath not touched me, and tarn no harlot? Gabriel replied, So Jh.il!
it be : thy Lord faith, This is eafy with me ; and we wlU perform it ,
that we may ordain him for a fign unto men, and a mercy from us : for it
is a thing which is decreed. Wherefore (he conceived him e : and (he re-
tired afide with him in her womb to adiftant place ff ; and the pains of child-
birth came upon her near the trunk of a palm-tree*. She faid. Would to

God

* He made figns unto tbemi ] Some fay he
wrote the following words on the ground.

h And purity &/*}] Or, as the word alfo
Hgnifies, The lave of alms-deeds.

c To a plate towards the eaft ;] viz. To the
eaftera part of the temple ; or to a private cham-,
ber in the houfe, which opened to the eaft:
whence, fay? al Beidawi, die CbriJHat: pray
towards that quarter.

There is a tradition, that when the virgin was
grown to yean of puberty, (he ufed to leave
her apartment in the temple, and retire to Ztf-
. bar ias* s houfe to her annt, w ben her courfes
came upon her ; and fo foon as Ihe was dean,
lhe returned again to the temple : and that at the
time of the angel’s vifiting her, (he was at her
aunt’s on the like occafton, and was fitting to
wafh herfelf, in an open place, behind a veil to
prevent her being feen l * . But others more pru-
dently fuppofe the defign of her retirement was
to pray*.

A In the fbape if a man ;] Like a fall-grown
but beardlefs youth. Al Beidawi , not contented
with having given one good reafon why he ap-
peared in that form, viz. to moderate her fur-
prize, that fhe might hear bis meflage with lefs

fhyneb, adds, that perhaps it might be to raife
an emodon in her, and affift her conception.

■ Sb* iiMiMpidi] For Gabriel blew into the
bofom of her fiiift, which he opened with his
fingers 3 , and his breath reaching her womb,
caufed the conception *. The age of the virgin
Mary at the time of her conception was thirteen,
ot, as others fay, ten ; and fhe went fu t, ieven^
eight, or nine months with him, according to
different traditions; tho’ fome *av the child
conceived at its full growth of nine months, and
that fhe was delivered of him within an hour
after *.

f To a d ft ant place ;] To conceal her delivery,
(he went out of the city by night, to a certain
mountain.

8 Her pains came upon hr near th trunk of a

palm-tree The palm to which file fled, that
(he might lean on it in her travail, was a wither-
ed trunk, without any head or verdure, and this
happened in the winter feafon; notwithftanding
which it miraculoufly fupplied her with fruits
for her rcfrefliment* ; as is mentioned imme-
diately*

It has been ahjemd, thax the M'bammtda*

account of the delivery of the virgin Miry, V e-

1 Yahya, Al Beidawi. * AIZaUak^ 3 Yahya. 4 Tall a lo’ own, Al

Beidawi. * ^Beidawi, Yahya. 6 Itiem, AlZsuhiu.

Chap. 19. Al KORAN. 251

God I had died before this, and had become a thing forgotten, and loft in
oblivion ! And he who was beneath her called to her*, faying. Be not grieved :
now hath God provided a rivulet under thee ; and do thou fhake the body of
the palm-tree, and it (hall let fall ripe dates upon thee, ready gathered b .
And eat, and drink, and calm thy mind c . Moreover if thou fee any man,
and he qu eft ion thee , lay, Verily I have vowed a fall unto the Merciful ; where-
fore I will by no means fpeak to a man this day d . So Ihe brought the child
to her people, carrying him in her arms. And they faid unto her, O Mary,
now haft thou done a ftrange thing : O lifter of Aaron ', thy father was not
a bad man, neither was thy mother a harlot. But Ihe made figns unto the
child to anfwer them ; and they faid. How lhall we fpeak to him, who is an
infant in the cradle ? Whereupon the child faid. Verily I am the fervant of
God f ; he hath given me the book of the gofpel, and hath appointed me a
prophet. And he hath made me blefled, wherefoever I lhall be ; and hath
commanded me to obferve prayer, and to give alms, fo long as I lhall live ;
and be hath made me dutiful towards my mother, and hath not made me proud,
or unhappy. And peace be on me the day whereon I was bom, and the day
whereon I lhall die, and the day whereon I lhall be railed to life. This was
Jesus the fon of Mary ; the Word of truth *, concerning whom they doubt.
It is not meet for God, that he Ihould have any fon : God forbid ! When he

K k 2 decreeth

ry much refembles that of Latena , as defer ibed
by the poets *, not only in this circumftance of
their laying hold on a palm-tree *, (tho’ fome
fay Latvia embraced an olive-tree, or an dive
and a palm, or elfe two laurels,) but alfo in that
of their infants fpeaking ; which Apollo is fabled
to have done in the womb 3 .

a He who was beneath ben ] This fome ima-

£ *ne to have been the child himfelf ; but others
Ppofe it w *9 Gabriel, who ftood fomewhat lower
than ihe did 4 . According to a different reading
this paffage may be rendered. And he called to
her from beneath her, See. And fome refer the
pronoun, tranflated her, to the palm-tree ; and then
it fhould be beneath it, See.

b Shake the palm-tree and it Jball let fall rife
dates, &c.] And accordingly Ihe had no fooner
ipoken it than the dry trunk revived, and fhot
forth green leaves, and a head loaden with ripe
fruit.

c Calm thy mind;'] Literally, thine eye.
d I have vowed a faft , See.] Daring which ftie
was not to fpeak to any body, unlefs to acquaint
them with the reafon of her fiknee : and fome
iuppofe ihe did that by figns.

e O ftjler of Aaron ;] Several Chrifiian writers

think the Koran Hands convi&ed of a manifeft
fallhood in this particular, but I am afraid the
Mohammedans may avoid the charge 1 ; as they do
by feverai anfwers. Some fay the virgin Mary
had really a brother named Aaron , who had the
fame father, but a different mother ; others fup-
pofe Aaron the brother of Mo fes is here meant,
but hy Mary is called bis fifter, either fcecaufe
Ihe was of the Levitital race, (as by her being
related to Elizabeth, it ihould feem ihe was,) or
by way of companion s others fay that it was a
different perfon of that name who was contem-
porary with her, and confpicuous for his good
or bad qualities, and that they likened her to
him either by way of commendation, or of re-
proach 6 ,

f Whereupon the child faid, I am the fervant
of God ;] Thefc were the firifc words which
were put into the mouth of Jesus, to obviate
the imagination of his partaking of the divine
nature, or having a right to the worlhip of man-
kind, on account of his miraculous {peaking fo
foon after his birth 7 .

s The word of truth ;] This expreffion may
either be refered to Jesus, as the Word of G od;
or to the account juli given of him.

1 V. Sikh not . inEvang . Infant, p . 9, 21, fefr. * Home*. Hymn, in Atoll Caxlimach

Hymn, in Delum* 3 Callimach. ibid. See Kor. chap. 3. p. 41. 4 Al Beidawi, Ja«i-

ealo’ddin. * See chap. 3. p. 38. 6 -^/Zaiaakh. al Beidawi, Jaxxaj.o’«djh^

YaHYA, fcfc. 7 ^f/BElOAWt, {jfc.

252 Al KORAN. Chap. 19.

decreeth a thing, he only faith unto it, Be ; and it is. And verily Goo is my
Loro, and your Lord •, wherefore ferve him : this is the tight way. Yet thie
feiftaries differ among themfelves concerning Jesus \ but wo I ic unto thofe whe
are unbelievers, bctaufe of thdr appearance at the great day. Do thou
caufe them to hear, and do thou caufe them to fee 1 , on the day w hereon they
ihall come unto us to he judged: but the ungodly are this day in a manifeft er-
ror. And do thou forewarn them of the day of fighing, when the matter
fhall be determined, while they are na%s funk in negligence and do not believe.
Verily we will inherit the earth, and w i, never treaties are therein b ; and un-
to us fhall they all return. And remember Abraham in the book of the
Koran ; for he was one of great veracity, an, l a prophet. When he (aid unto
his father 1 , O my father, why doft thou wo rfhip that which hu-ueth nor,
neither feeth, nor profiteth thee at all ? O my father, verily a d.grte of know-
ledge hath been beftowed on me, which hath not been bellowed on thee : where-
fore follow me i I will lead thee into an even way. O my father, ferve not
Satan ; for Satan was rebellious unto the Merciful. O my father, verily
I fear left a punifhment be inflided on thee from the Merciful, and thou
become a companion of Satan. His father anfwercd, Doft thou rejed my
gods, O Abraham? If thou forbear not, I will fu rely (tone thee: where-
fore leave me for a long time. Abraham replied. Peace be on thee: I wjjl
afk pardon for thee of my Lord ; for he is gracious unto me. And I will
feparate my felf from you, and from the idols which yc invoke be Hides God ;
and I will call upon my Lord : it may be that I fhall not be unfuccefsful in
calling on my Lord, as y are in calling upon them. And when he had
feparated himfelf from them, and from the idols which they worfhipped
befides God a , we gave him Isaac and Jacob ; and we made each of them
a prophet •, and we beftowed on them, through our mercy, the gift of pro-
phecy, and children, and vocal b ; and weeaufedthem to deferve the higheft
commendations*. And remember Moses in the book of the Koran; for
he was fincerely upright, and was an apoftle and a prophet. And we called
unto him from the right fide of' mount Sinai, and cauied him to draw near,
and to difeourfe privately with vs '. And we gave him, through our mercy,
his brother Aaron, a prophet, for bis ajjifianl. Remember iilfo Ism ail m

the

Dt dm ;j\fr ibm fj bar, nl it fit, &c] annihilated. See chap, if. p. 21 1.

Thefe words are varioully expounded : iome c See chap. 6 . p. 106, (jf .

Lit'ng them to exprefi admin tian 1 it the * Iflte bt had jtptrutti bimfdffrm item ;]

amdtnefsof thofe (enfes in the wicked. at the By flying to Harr in, and them* to .w.

day'of judgment, when they fhall plunk per- e (Ft tsnjti (hr* to Jr, tree the ' %<•••?
cove the torments prepared tor them, Un>‘ they .. jt't.- tjj/j.j? ;] laterally, tie grjutid them a
have been deaf and blind in this life ; and others lefty to sgvt ef trstb-

iuppofing the word* contain a threat to the on- 1 And to dijiatrfe prheutij aid sti ;] Or. a*
believer*, of what they (hall then hear and fee ; feme expound it, JjJ ret reijeJ bin ,n high ;
or el e * command to Md-razti to by before for, fay they, he was railed to fo J.rea! an ele-
them the terrors of that day *. vat ion, that he heard the creating of the pen

6 n't will inherit the earth, 4 tc.] i e. Alone writing on the table of God s decrees 1 ,
orviving, when all creatures (hall be dead and

1 Set dtp 18 . p 241 .

* Al Beid.iv is.

Inn.

Chap. 19. Al KORAN. 253

the fam book : for he was true to Ms promife a ; and was art apoftle, and a
prophet. And he commanded his family to obferve prayer, and to give alms ;
and he was acceptable unto his Lord. And remember Edris b in the fame
book *, for he was a juft perfon, and a prophet : and we exalted him to a
high place e . Thefe are they unto whom God hath been boufiteous, of
the prophets of the pofterity of Adam, and of thofc whom we carried in the
ark with Noah ; and of the pofterity of Abraham, and of Israel, and of
thofe whom we have directed and chofen. When the figns of the Merciful
were read unto them, they fell down, worfhipping, and wept: but a fucceed-
ing generation have come after them, who negleft prayer, and follow their
lulls •, and they fhall furely fall into evil : except him who repenteth, and be-
lieveth, and doth that which is right ; thefe (hall enter paradife, and they
fhall not in the lead be wronged : gardens of perpetual abode fhall be their
reward , which the Merciful hath promifed unto his fervants, as an objett of
faith ; for his promife will furely come to be fulfilled . Therein fhall they hear
ncT Vain difcourfe, but peace 4 i and their provifion fhall be prepared for them
therein morning and evening. This is paradife, which we will give for an
inheritance unto fuch of our fervants as fhall be pious. We defcend not from
heaven , unlefs by the command of thy Lord : unto him behn^etb whatfoever
is before us, and whatfoever is behind us, and whatfoever is m the interme-
diate fpace ; neither is thy Lord forgetful of tbee c . He is the Lord of hea-
ven and earth, and of whatfoever is between them : wherefore worfhip him, and
be conflant in his worfhip. Doft thou know any named like him f ? Man

faith.

* He was true to bis promife ;] Being cele *
brated on that account ; and particularly for his
behaving with that relignation and conffency
which he had promifed his father, on his receiving
God's command to facriiice Jjim 1 : for the Mo-
hammedans fay it was Ijmu r/, and not Jfaac,
whom he was commanded to offer.

b Edris ;] Or Enocb t the great-grandfather of
Noah, who had that fumame from his great
knowledge > for he was favoured with no lefs than
thirty books of divine revelations, and was the
firft who wrote with a pen, and ftudied the fci-
ences of aftronomy and arithmetic, &c 2 .

The learned Bartolocci endeavours to ihew,
from the tellimoniea of the ancient Jews , that
Enoch , furnamed Edris, was a very different
perfon from the Enoch of Mofes , and many ages
younger 3 .

c And we exalted him to a high place ;] Some
underftand by this the honour of the prophetic
office, and his familiarity with God; but others
fuppofe his tranflation is here meant: for they
fay that he was taken up by God into heaven
at the age of three hundred and fifty, hav-

1 Idem. a Idem, Jallalo’dbin,

4 Hdtm , Abulfbda. 5 See chap. io. p - 167.

ing firft fuffered death, and been reftored to life 2
and that he is now alive in one of the feven hea-
vens, or in paradife 4 .

d Peace i\ I. c, Words of peace and comfort;
or the falutations of the angels 1 , (Ac.

e We defcend not from heaven , unlefs at the com -
mated of thy Lord, &c.] Thefe are generally
fuppofed to have been the words of the angel
Gabriel , in anfwer to Mohammed's complaint for
his long delay of fifteen, or, according to ano-
ther tradition, of forty days, before he brqught
him inftru&ions what folution he fbould give to
the queftbns which had been asked hifa concern-
ing the flecpers, Dbu'lkamein, and the fpirit
Others, however, are of opinion that they are
the words which the godty will ufe at their en-
trance into paradife ; and that their meaning is,
We take up our abode here at the command and
through the mercy of God alone* who ruleth all
things , faft* future , and frefint ; and who is not
forgetful of the works of his fervants 7 .

* Doji thou know any named like him f] That
is, Deferving, or having a right to the name and
attributes of God.

3 Bartol, BUI Rabb. fart z . /. 845
6 See btfore y p. 242. 7 Al Bbidawi.

254 Al KORAN, Chap, ig,

faith *, After I fhall have been dead, fhall I really be brought forth alive
from the grave ? Doth not man remember that we created him heretofore,
when he was nothing? But by thy Lord we will furely afiemble them and
the devils to judgment b ; then will we fet them round about hell on their
knees : afterwards we will draw forth from every fe<5t fuch of them ns fhall hxue
been a more obftinate rebel again ft the Merciful* *, and we beft know which
of them are more worthy to be burned therein *. There fhall be none of you
but fhall approach near the fame * : this is an eftablifhed decree with thy
Lord. Afterwards we will deliver thofe who fhall have been pious, but
we will leave the ungodly therein on their knees. When our manifeft Eigns
are read unto them, the infidels fay unto the true believers. Which of the
two parties is in the more eligible condition, and formetb the more excellent
n(Tembly f ? But how many generations have we deft royed before them, which
excelled them in wealth, and in outward appearance ? Say, Whofoever is in
error, the Merciful will grant him a long and profperous life •, until titty lee
that with which they are thneatned, whether it be the punifhmerrt of this life,
or ibai of the hji hour; and hereafter they fhall know who is in the wotfe
condition, and the weaker in forces. Goo fhall more fully direct thole who
receive diredion ; and the good works which remain for ever, are better in
the fight of thy Lord than worldly poffefftoits, in refpeift ro che i i etvard, and
more eligible in rrfpcft to the future recorn pence. Hull thou Icen him who
believeth not in our figns, and faith, 1 fhall furely have riches and children
bellowed on me ; ? Is he acquainted with the (ecrets of futurity •, or hath he rv~
ceived a covenant from the Merciful that it flail be Jl ? By no means. We will

lurely

* Men faith ;] Some fuppofe a particular tho 1 it trill lay liold on the other®. Some, lidw-
perfon is here meant, namely, Obba Ebn KhAf 1 * ever, fuppofe that the words intend no moie

b We will ajfemble them and the deeilt i] it is than the p-lJT^-c over the narrow bridge, w hich
-faid that every infidel will appear, at the day of is lard over he ) l

judgment, chained to the devil who feduced f WHrb sf the tm pirtks, See ] vis. Of ns,
him or of you. When the Kjreijb were unable to

c We miff feptffle frm every fill hitn r bs pat! produce a com portion to equal the Knrin 7 they
have ban a mare dfiswatf. rrkt s&aiuff the Mnri- nc^an to glory in the:r weihh and nobility, valu-
«.] Hence, ft; s si Bti it appears that ing tbcmfelve^ highly on that account, and de-
God will pard'jE] feme of the rebellious popple, fpitanp the folio vverp of MkfamuteJ*

But perhaps the dilKnguifhing the unbelievers - H A this fim him who irlimtb j See ]
into different clafles, in order to confign them This p aflame was revealed fj a account of A A;
to different places and degrees of torment, is Eb i J who being indebted to KbM& y
here meant. when he demanded the m o&ey , refufed to pjy

d We befi kssm whieb are msn worthy tv be k, unlefs h- would deny Mehem^fd * to which

burned in ieffd] viz* The more obftinate and propoi 1 Kptibib atifwentd, ilut he ivoiiid never
perverfe, and especially the heads of feds, who deny that prophet, neither alive, nor dead,
will fuffer a double punilhment for their own nor when he Ibotdd be raifed to life at the
■errors and their feducing of others. laft day; therefore rep tied at Ah when thou

e Were is none of yon but fisil affrwh the art raited again, come to me* for 1 fhall then

fame ;] For the true believers muft "alfo pafs by have abundance of richer, ^Jid emidra, and I
or through hell, but the fire will be damped, will pay you + .
and the flames abated, fo as not to hurt them,

1 See chap, *6. p, aij. * Jl Bzidawx 3 JJfw* See tie Frd- DtfL }. IV. /. 9 «.
* Idem* jAXLAXo’nDiii

Chap. ig. At KORAN". agy

furely write down that which he faith ; and increafmg we will increase his punifh-
ment: and we will be his heir as to that which he fpeaketh of *, and on the lajt
day he ftiall appear before us alone and naked. They have taken other gods,
befide3 God, that they may be a glory unto them. By no means. Here-
after ftiall they deny their worftiip b ; and they {hall become adverferies ' un-
to them. Doft thou not fee that we fend the devils againft the infidels, to in-
cite them to Jin by their inftigations ? Wherefore be not in haft: to call down
definition upon them ; for we number unto them a determined number of days
of refpite. On a certain day we will a (Terrible the pious before the Merciful
in an honourable manner , as embaffadors come into the prefence of a prince ;
but we will drive the wicked into hell, as cattle are driven to water : they (hall
obtain no intencdlion, except he only who hath received a covenant from the
Merciful’ 1 . They lay. The Merciful hath begotten ifiue. Now have ye ut-
tered an impious thing : it wanteth little but that on occafton thereof the
heavens be rent, and the earth cleave in funder, and the mountains be over-
thrown and fall, for that they attribute children unto the Merciful ; whereas
it becometh not God to beget children. Verily there is none in heaven or
on earth, but ftiall approach the Merciful as bis fervant. He encompafleth
them by bis knowledge and power, and numbereth them with an exat computation :
and they lhall all come unto him on the day of refurre&ion, deftitute both of
helpers and followers. But as for thofe who believe and do good works, the
Merciful will beftow on them love *. Verily we have rendred the Koran
eafy for thy tongue, that thou mayeft thereby declare our protnifes unto
the pious, and mayeft thereby denounce threats unto contentious people. And
how many generations have we deftroyed before them ? Doft thou find one
of them remaining? Or doft thou hear fi much as a whifper concerning
them ?

CHAP.

* We will inherit what he fpcaleth efi\. i. e.
He lhall be obliged to leave all hia wealth and
his children behind him at his death.

b Hereafter Jball they deny their worjbif, 4 tc.]
viz. At the refurreftlon ; when the idolaters
lhall dlfclaim their idols, and the idols their wor-
lhippers, and lhall mutually accpfe one ano-
ther ' .

c Adverfaries }] Or, the contrary ; that is to
Ity, a di/grace inttead of an honour.

4 They pall obtain no inter cep cm, except be only
who bath received a covenant from the Merciful ;]
That is, except he who mall be a fubjeft pro-
perly difpofed to receive that favour, by having
profelTed If dm. Or, the words may alfo be

1 See chap. 6. p. ioi. chap. to. p- 169, (Ac.

tranflated, according to another expolition.
They pall not obtain the inter ccponoi any, ex-
cept the interceffion of him. Sec. Or elfe. None
pall be able to male intercepon for others, except
be who pall have received a covenant (or permif-
fion ) from God; i. e. who lhall be qualified
for that office by faith, and good works, accord-
ing to God’s promife, or lhall have fpecial
leave given him by God for that purpofe *.

e Love;] viz. The love of God and all the
inhabitants of heaven. Some fuppofe this verfe
was revealed to comfort the Mojlemi who were
hated and defpifed at Mecca, on account of their
faith, by the promife of their gaining the love
and efteem of mankind in a Ihoit time.

* Al BstDAWi. See chap. 2. p. 30, Sic.

256

Al KORAN.

Chap. 20.

CHAR XX.

lutitledy T. H ' ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T . H. We have not fent down the Koran unto thee, that thou fhouldeft
be unhappy k ; but for an admonition unto him who feareth God : be-
ing fent down from him who created the earth, and the lofty heavens. The
Merciful fitteth on bis throne : unto him bdtmgrth whaefberer is in heaven and
on earth, and whatfoever is between them, and whadbever is under the earth.
If thou pronounce tby prayers with a loud voice, kmw that it h not necejfiiry
in refpeft to God \ tor he knoweth that which is ferret, and what s$ yet
more hidden. God ! there is no god but he : he hath moft excellent names c .
Haft thou been informed of the hiftory ©t Moses - ? When he fm fire, and
faid unto his family. Tarry ye bsre ; for I perceive fire : peradventure I
may bring you a brand thereout, or may find a direction in our way by
the fire*. And when he was come near unto it, a v&kt called unto him,
faying, O Moses ! verily I am thy Lord : wherefore put off thy fhoes r *

» The fignification of thefe letters, which
being prefixed to the chapter are therefore taken
for the title, is uncertain f . Some however
imagine they Hand for Ya rajel, i. e. O man f
which interpretation, Teeming not eafily to be
accounted for from the Arabic, is by a certain
tradition deduced from the Bt&hph * : or for
Ta, L e. tread; tdling us that M-fcar* being
employed in watching and prayer the night this
paflage was revealed, flood on one foot only,
but .was hereby commanded to cafe himfelf by
fetting both feet to the gfbonci Others foncy
the firft letter Hands for Tzihj, fcat'itkic i and the
latter for Hawiyaty the name of the lower apart-
ment of hell. " Tab is alfo an interjection com-
manding filence, and may properly enough be
ufed in this place.

b We have fiat damn fbe Koran the/,
that thou JhvldtJf be utwgpfj i] Either by rcafon
of thy iealou* fbllicjtuae fut the converfion
of the infidels, or thy fatiguing thy felf by
watching and other religions exercifes ; for, it
feems, the Kvreijb urged the extraordinary fa-
tigues he underwent in thole refpefts, as the
confluence of his having left their religion 3 .

1 See the Prel . Dijt j. HI p. 59, £s>V.

JEbn Abi &$**. 3 Ai Benia wa.

e See chap, y + p. 136. and chap. 17. p. z% 7.

d The relation of the ftoiy of Males, which
takes up the greatefl part of this chapter, was
deiigned to incourage Mohammed, by his exam-
ple, to di (charge the prophetic office with firm-
net of mind, as being allured of receiving the
1-ke affilbnte from God . for it is laid this chap-
ter wm one of the firfl that were revealed 4 .

* When r r fa w fire, Sec ] The commentators
fay, 'hit /!/. ■ , having obtained *=3 re of Sbt*ib f
or Jet ire, his father in so vifit ha? mother,
departed with h\s family from HSidijs towards
Elft i but coming n the vdlky of Tsa r where-
in j it cunt Si itn Rinds, hEs wife fdl in hhsxt t h
and was delivered of a ion, in a 1 *ery dart and
fnowy night ; he find alfo loft his tvs?, and his
cattle were fc;ttercd frem him ; when on a fudden
he tew a fire by the £dc of a raouqtiln, which
on his nearer approach he found burning in a
green I dh

1 P^t zjf rhj Jbtft ;] T'.b w^. .■ mark of hu-
snSlcy ind reipeft t tho" fome fincy there r -\a$
fome unclean nefi En the fbocs them selves, be-
came they were made of the 5 Lin of an afs not
dreiTcd

Moham Eb h Asp .7, Ba.il 2. ex j“m., Jirema
4 Idm. 1 Idem, 6 Idi to

Chap. 20. Al KORAN. 257

for thou art in the facred valley Towa. And I have chofen thee } there-
fore hearken with attention unto that which is revealed unto thee. Verily
I am God ; there is no god befide me: wherefore worlhip me, and per-
form tby prayer in remembrance of me. Verily the hour cometh : I will furely
manifeft the fame, that every foul may receive its reward for that which
it hath deliberately done. Let not him who believeth not therein, and who
followeth his luft, prevent thee from believing in the fame, left thou perifh
Now what is that in thy right hand, O Moses ? He apfwerecj, It is my rod
whereon I lean,., and with which I beat down leaves for my flock *, and l have
other ufes for it \ God faid unto him, Caft it down, O Moses. And he
call it down and behold, it became a ferpent b , which ran about. God faid,
.Take hold on it^ and fear not* : we will reduce it to its former condition
And put thy right hand under thy lift arm : it lhall come forth white \ with
out ^ny. nurt. ‘This Jhall be another fign : that we may lhew thee fame of
our greateft figns. Go unto Pharaoh: for he is exceedingly impious.
Moses anfwered, Lord, enlarge my breaft, and make what thou haft com-
manded me eafy unto me : and loole the knot of my tongue, that they may
underftand my fpeech *. And give me a councilor ' of my family, namely ,
Aaron my brother. Gird up my loins by him, and make him my coi-
legue in the bufinefs : that we may praife dree greatly, and may remember
thee often ; for thou regardeft us. God replied. Now haft thou obtained thy
ypqueft, O Moses: and we have heretofore been gracious unto thee,
another time ; when we revealed unto thy mother that which was re-
vealed unto her ®, faying. Put him into the ark, and caft him into the
river, and the river lhall throw him on the Ihore *, and my enemy and
his enemy lhall take him and bring him up* j and I bellow on thee

LI love

* And I harte other ufes fat it 5] As to drive into fnch a paffon, that he ordered him to be
away wild beafts from my flock, to carry my put to death : but Afia> his wifl^ reprcfenting
bottle of water on, to flick up and hang my upper to him that he was but a child; wh» could not
garment on to fhade me from the fun 5 and fever- diftinguiih between a burning coal and a ruby,
al- ocher ufes enumerated by the commentators. he ordered the experiment to be made ; and a

b It became a ferpent ;1 Which was at firft live coal and a ruby being fet before Mofes t he
no bigger than the rod, but afterwards fwelled took the coal and put it into his moutn, and
to a prodigious fize x . burnt his tongue: and thereupon he was par-

c Take bold on it, and feat not; ] When Mofes doned. This ic zjetoijb flory a little altered *.
faw the ferpent move about with great nimble- f A counfellor ;J The Arabic word is Waz 1 r $
nefs, and (wallow Hones and trees, he was great- which flgnifies one who has the chief adminiftra-
ly terrified, and fled from it; but recovering his tion of affairs under a prince,
courage at thefe words of God, he had the bold- * When toe revealed unto thy mother , &c.] The
nefs to take the ferpent by the jaws a . commentators are not agreed by what means this

* See chap. 7. p. 128. revelation was made; whether by private ihfpi-

e Ztofe the knot of tny tongue, &c.] For Mqfes ration, by a dream 1 , by a prophet, or by an

had ^impediment in his fpeteh, which was oc- angel.

cafiofied by the following accident. Pharaoh " Put him into the ark, &c.] The com men -
one day carrying him in his arms, when a child, tators {ay, that his mother accordingly made
he fuddenly laid hold of his beard, and plucked an ark of the papyrus , and pitched it, and put
‘it in a very rough manner, which put Pharaoh in fbme cotton ; and having laid the child there-
to*

1 Idem .

2 Idem-.

* V. Sbaljb . tiakkab. p. n.

258 Al KORAN \ Chap. 20 .

love from me \ that thou mighteft be bred up under my eye. When thy
filler went and faid, Shall I bring you unto one who will nurfe the child k ?
So we returned thee unto thy mother, that her mind might be let at eafe,
and that (he might not be affli&ed. And thou fleweft a foul, and we de-
livered thee from trouble*! and we proved thee by fever, d trials 4 : and
afterwards thou didft dwell fome years 'among the inhabitants of Madian.
Then thou cameft bitter according to our decree, O Moses; and I have
chofen thee for my felf: wherefore go thou and thy brother 1 with my
figns j and be not negligent in remembring me. Go ye unto Pharaoh,
for he is exceflively impious : and fpeak mildly unto him ; peradventutt he will
confider, or will fear our threats. They anfwered, O Lord, verily we fear left
he be precipitately violent againft us, or left hie tranfgrds more exorbitant h. God
replied, Fear not t for I am with you : I will hear and will fee. Go ye there-
fore unto him, and fay, Verily we are the mdTengers of thy Lord : where-
fore fend the Children of Israel with us, and do not afflift them. Now ire we
come unto thee with a fign from thy Lord : and peace be upon him who (hah
follow the true direction. Verily it hath been revealed unto us, that a ptini fo-
ment fh&H he inflicted on him who lhall charge us with impofture, and fhall
turnback. And when they had delivered their m0tge y Pn.fRjoH l aid, Who
is your Loro, O Moses? He aWWred, Our Loro is he who giveth all
things : he hath created them, nnd diredbeth them by his provident . Piu-
raob laid, What therefore is the condition of the former generations* ? Moses
anfwered, The knowledge thereof is with my Loro, in the book of h'u de-
crees :

in. committed it to the river, a branch of which
went into Pharaoh ' a garden : that the dream car-
ried the ark thither into a fiihpond, at the head
of which Pharaoh was then fitting, wkh his
wife Jfia, the daughter of Msxabtm i ind
that the ^ king, hiving commanded it to be
taken up and opened, and finding in it a beau-
dful chnd» took a fancy to it, and ordered it to
be brought up f .

Some writer* mention a miraculous prefem-
tion of Mtfts before he was put into the ark s
and tell us, that his mother having hid him trom
Pharaoh's officers m an oven, his filler, in her
mother’s ab fence, kindled a Urge fire in the oven
to heat it, not knowing the child was there, bat
that he was afterwards taken out unhurt
m f ri: ihts? i.-jc fim ziii] That is,

I inspired the love of thee into the he ru of
thofe who (aw thee, and particul rly into the
heart of Pharaoh.

6 Wbtn thy jijhr mat* &c] The Mpkammt-
2am pretend that feveral nurfe* were Houghs*
but the child refufed to rake the bread of any,
tHl his lifter Miriam, who went to Jeam news of
him, told them (he would find a nuric, and

bronchi his mother 3 .

c Tmtt Jfemf a foul , anl at dtliz'trtd tbft ft.m

trouble i]' Mjfti killed an Bgypiim, in defence f
an IJrail&ft and efcipej the d-in^r uf being
punuhed for it* by frying to Midian, which was
eight days journey difhni from Mfjr
The 7« pretend hr wai aftaa Sly imp rifcned
for the saflp .«ntl condemned to be heht.ided, but
that, when he ikould have differed, hu neck
became as hard as boiy, and the iVcud rebound-
ed on the executioner *.

IF* proved fht by vnriiaj irialrs} For he
was obliged to abandon kts country ; nd hi*
friends, and to travel feveral day s, in grat terror
and want of neseJIary pro v thorn*. 10 feel a re-
fuge among (hungers; ana was uicj-ward .& forced
to ferve tor Hme, to gain a livelihood.
e Sowt yiars Q i e. Ten *.
f Gs rhur and thy kmhtr ;] A^rm being by
(hifi time come am to meet hi* brorher, cither by
divine mfpijuchjrt, or having notic jF hWc%n
to return to Eg^pt T X

* What is tsjf feaditiiB sf :b* faratr gtnrra*
Horn?] vjrx. • r to hippinof or mifery after

death.

J Jl Beidawi. % Abulveoa, 3 Al Beidawi. + Mm. * ihAjk

Hakkab. /. it. 6 Al Beidawi. 7 Idm*

Chap. 20. Al KORAN. 259

trees : my Lord erreth nor, neither doth he forger. It is he who hath
fpread the earth as a bed for you, and hath made you paths therein 5 and who
fendeth down rain from heaven, whereby we caufe various kinds of vege-
tables to fpriwg forth ; faying. Eat of part, and feed your cattle with other
part thereof. Verily herein are figns unto thofe who are indued with under-
ftand'mg. Out of the ground have we created you ; and to the fame will we
caufe you to return, and we will bring you forth from thence another time.
And we fhewed Pharaoh all our figns which we had mpoweted Moses to
perform ! but he aecufed him of impofture, and refufed to believe ; and he
(aid. Art thou come unto us that thou mayeft difpofleis us of our
land by thy inchantments, O Moses ? Verily we will meet thee with the like
inchantments : wherefore fix an appointment between us and thee-, we will
not fail it, neither fhalt thou, in an equal place. Moses anfwered, Let your
appointment be on the day of your folemn feaft * ; and let the people be
Stffembled in open day. And Pha.raoh turned away from Moses, and ga-
thered together the moft expert magicians, to execute his ftratagem -, and then
came to toe appointment. Moses faid unto them, Wo be unto you ! do not
devife a lie againft God b , left he utterly deftroy you by fome judgment: for
he fhall not profper who devifeth lies. And the magicians difputed concerning
fiheir affair among themfelves, and difcourfed in private: and they faid, Thefe
two are certainly magicians : they feek to difpoflefs you of your land by their
for eery; and to lead away with them your chiefeft and moft conliderable men.
Wherefore collect all your cunning, and then come in order : for he fhali
profper this day, who fhall be fuperior. They faid, O Moses, whether wilt
thou caft down thy rod fir ft , or mall we be the firft who caft down our rods t
He anfwered. Do ye caft down your rods firft. And beheld, their cords
and their rods appeared unto him, by their inchantment, to run about like
ferpents *: wherefore Moses conceived fear m his heart. But we laid unto
%im. Fear not ; for rhou fhalt be fuperior: therefore caft down the rod
which is in thy right hand ; and it mall fwallow up the feeming ferpents
which they have made : for what they have made is only the deceipt of an in-
chanter ; and an inchanter fhall not profper, whitherfoever he cometh. And
the magicians, when they faw the miracle which Moses performed, fell down
and worshipped, faying, We believe in the Lord of Aaron and of Moses.
Pharaoh fold unto them. Do ye believe in him before I give you permif-
fion? Verily this is your matter, who hath taught you magic. But I will
lurely cut off your hands and your feet on the oppofite fides ; and I will
crucify you on trunks of palm-trees'* : and ye fhall know which of us is
more fevere in punifhing, and can longer protrafr your pains. They anfwer-

L 1 2 ed,

1 The day of the folentn feaft 5] Which was by their inchantments , te rjin about like ferpents }]
probably the firft day of their new year. They rubbed them over with quickfHver, which

6 Do a n iwife a lie againft Gob ;] By faying being wrought upon by the hcWfccf the fun,
the mirades performed in his na ne are the ef- caufed them to move 1 . See chap 7. p. 1 28.
fcfb of magic. d See ibid.

c Their cords and their reds Jhemed unto hint,

J Jdette.

260 Al KO R A N. Chap. 20.

ed, We will by no means have greater regard unto thee, than unto thofc
evident miracles which have been (hewn us, or than unto him who hath
ere 1 ted us. Pronounce therefore that fentence againji us which thou art
about to pronounce : for thou canft only give fentence as to this prefent
life. Verily we believe in our Lord, that he may forgive us our fins, and
the forcery which thou haft forced us to esertife : for God is better to reward,
and more able to prolong p uwijbment than thou. Verily whofoever fhall ap-
pear before his Lord on the Jay of judgment, polluted with crimes, fhall
have hell for bis reward ; he fhall not die therein, neither fhall he live. But
whoever fhall appear before him, having been a true believer, and fhall
have worked righteoufnefs, for thefe are prepared the higheft degrees of bap-
pi itefs •, namely, gardens of perpetual abode *, which fhall be watered by
rivers *, they fhall remain therein for ever : and this fhall be the reward of
him who fhall be pure. And we fpake by revelation unto Moses, faying.
Go forth with my fervants out of Earn by night ; and finite the waters with
tby rod , and make them a dry path through the fea " : be not apprehenfire of
PBMAoifs overtaking thee v neither be thou afraid. And when Alosss bad
done fo. Pharaoh followed them with his forces ; and the waters of the tea
which overwhelmed them, overwhelmed them. And Pharaoh taufed his
people to err, neither did he dire& them aright. Thus, O children of Israel,
we delivered you from your enemy •» and we appointed you the right fide of
mount Sluui to difeourfe with Moses and to give him the law ; and we canted
manna and quails to defeend upon you*, faying. Eat of the good things which we
have given you for food ; and tranfgrefs not therein 4 , left my indignation fall on
you : and on whomfoever my indignation fhall foil, he fhall go down headlong
into perdition. But I will be gracious unto him who fhall repent and believe,
and fhall do that which is right ; and who fhall be rightly dire&ed. What
hath caufed thee to haften from thy people, O Moses, to receive the law L ?
He aniwered, Thefe follow clofe on my footfteps ; but I have haftened unto
thee, O Lord, that thou mighteft be well pleafed with me. God fa id. We
have already made a trial of thy people, fince thy departure f ; and alSa-
meri * hath feduced them to idolatry. Wherefore Moses returned unto

his

* Garden) tf perpetual abode i) Literally, gar- to the mount and appeared before God while

Jtm tf Eden ; See chap. 9. p. 158. they were at fome, tho no great, diftance be-

L A dry path through the fea ;] The eipofilora hind him.
add, that tne fea was divided into twelve fepa- ( Since thy departure Q They continued in the
rate paths, one for each tribe 1 : a fable borrow- worfltip of the true God for the fltft twenty
ed from the Jems * days of Mt/et'a ab'ence, which, by tailing the

c See chap. 2. p 7. nights alfo into their reckoning, they computed.

d Treat fgrtft tu t therein i] By ingratitude, ex- to be forty, and a; their ezpuiuuit curia oied
eefc, or iniblent behaviour. they had raid the full time which M.yci li.ut com-

« If' bat bath taujed tbn t* bajten frem tby pet- manded them, and fo fell into the v-oribip of the
pi r, &c.] For Me t), it teems, outwent thefe- golden calf 4 .

venty «)d«r%*who had been chofcn, in obedi- AlSdrurii] This wa: not tea proper name,
ence to the divine command, to accompany him but he had this appellation became he was of a

certain

* Idem, Asvlfid inHiJf. * V. R. Eliizse, iirke, t. 4a. 3 See shop, 2. p, 7.

ebap . 7. p . 13J, & e . * M Beidawi.

Chap. 20. At KORAN. 261

his people * in great wrath, and exceedingly afflifted. And he laid, O my
people, had not your Lord promifed you a moft excellent promife ‘? Did
the time of my abfence feem long unto you ? Or did ye defire that indignation
from your Lord fhould fall on you, and therefore failed to keep the promife
which ye made me? They anfwered, We have not failed in what we promifed
thee of our own authority •, but we were made to carry, in feveral loads of
gold and Jtlver , of the ornaments of the people c , and we call them into the
fire ; and in like manner al Sameri alfo call in what he bad collected, and
he produced unto them a corporeal calf 4 , which lowed. And Sameri and
bis companions faid, This is your god, and the god of Moses ; but he Hath
forgotten him, and is gone to feek fame other. Did they not therefore fee •
that their idol returned them no anfwer, and was not able to caule them either
hurt or profit? And Aaron had faid unto them before, O my people, ve-
rily ye are only proved by this calf j for your Lord is the Merciful : where-
fore follow me, and obey my command. They anfwered, We will by no
means ceafe to be devoted to its voorfhip , until Moses return unto us. And
when Moses was returned , he laid, O Aaron, what hindred thee, when
thou faweft that they went aftray, that thou didft not follow me * ? Haft
thou therefore been difobedient to my command ? Aaeon anfwered, O fon of-
my mother, drag me not by my beard, nor by the hair of my head. Ve-
rily I feared left thou fhouldeft fay. Thou haft made a divifion among the

children

certain tribe among the Jews called Samaritans,
(wherein the Mohammedans ftrangely betray
their ignorance in hiftory ;) tho v ibine fay he was
a profelyte, but a hypocritical one, and original-
ly of Kir mdn y or fome other country. His true
name was Mo r $s\ or Mufa, EbnDhafar r .

Seldm is of opinion that this perfon was no
Other than Aaron himfelf, (who was really the
maker of the calf,) and that he is here called
al Sameri , from the Hebrew verb fiamar , to
keep 2 ; becaufe he was the Keeper or Guardian
of the children of Ifrael during nis brother’s ab-
fence in the mount ; which is a very ingenious
conjc&ure, not abfolutely inconfiftent with the
test of the Korin, {tho' Mohammed fee ms to
have miftaken al Sameri for the name of a diffe-
rent perfon) and offers a much more probable
origin of that appellation, than to derive it, as
the Mohammedans do, from the Samaritansy who
were not formed into a people* nor bore that
name till many ages after.

a Mofes returned unto bis people j] viz. After
he had completed his forty days ffay in the
mount, and had received the law 1 * .

b A moft excellent promife ;] he. The law,
containing a light and certain direction to guide
you in the right way.

1 Idem . 2 Sex den. de Diis Syr is, Synt ,

V* D’Herbel. BibL Orient . p. 650* and Kor . t

c The ornaments of the ftoplei] Thefe oma
ments were rings, bracelets, and the like, which
the Ifraelites had borrowed of the Egyptians,
under pretence of decking themfclves outfpr
fome feaft, and had not returned to them ; or,
as fome think, what they had dripped from the
dead bodies of the Egyptians, caff on lhore by
the fea : and al Sameri, conceiving them unlaw-
ful to be kept* and the occafion of much wick-
ednefs, perfuaded Aaron to let him collect theta
from the people ; which being done, he threw
them all into the fire, to melt them down into
one mafs 4 .

It is obfervable, that the Mohammedans gene-
rally fuppofe the caff metal’s coming forth in the
fbape of a calf, was befide the expe&ation of
al Sameri, who had not made a mould of that
figure : and that when Aaron excufes himfelf to
his brother, in the pentateuch, he feem9 as if
he would perfuade him it was an accident * .

d See chap, 7. p. 1 3 2. not. f.

e That thou didft not fellow me }] By thefe
Words Mofes reprehends Aaron for not feconding
his zeal in taking arms againft the Idolaters ; or
for not coming after him to the mountain, to
acquaint him with their rebellion.

1. r. 4. 3 ^/Beidawi. 4 Idirm*

tap. z. p. 6, 1 See Exod . xxxii. 24.

262 Al K 0 RA N. Chap. 20.

children of Israel, and thou haft not obferved my frying \ AfMm laid
mtlo al SJMtfth What was thy defign, O Sameri ? He anfwcrodi I law that
which they frw not h : wherefore I took a handful of dxjt from the foo:-

ifccps of the niL-ftenger of God, Lind I caft it into ike molten calf * \ for lb did
my mind direct me, Moses faij, Get thee gone; for thy pumfbmm m this
life (lull be, that thou (halt fay unto thofe who Jbdl met thci y Touch w?
not H ; And a threat is &m§&mn i againll thee of more terrible pains*, in tkt
If: to which thou fhaCt by no means efcapc. And behold now tny

gii.1-, to whale worfbil tnou haft continued aflniutjtifly devoted: verily
Will barn if 8 •, And we will reduce k to powder, and fcatter it in the fei,
Ytnir God is the tntt God* befides whom there is no other god \ he com-
prrhcndrih all things by his knowledge. Thus do we recite unto thee, 0
M ^ , : fruons nt what mth pafictl h : -■.» rforir ; we hlWf giwA

thee an admonition from He who fhall turn afidt: from it, (hall lardy
carry a load (f ±ui:i on the duy of rdtirrection : they fhall con l in ur. tfr ro-
under for ; and a p it vous ourthtn (hall it be unto them on the day of re-
lurretfion f . On that day the trumpet fhalJ he Ion tided ; and we will gather
thr wicked together on that djy, having grey eyes They (hall fptuk with
a low voice to one another, jfSry/flg, Yc have not Lamed h abmi ten day*
We well know wluc they will fry ; when the moll cmfpicttotn among them

tor

■ LA * ttet thxU'itf /urfi f£i§ btfi t mit * M-

vifim ib fk >.-t / Itrid, 4*4 fr#} **f

Kepi m ;] i e. Lc it if I Lid s^fcen arm*

njgaktt t(ic s*., or ih toper* of i he c*lf, thou fhoaldcft
Uy t tat I Ji;id railed a (edition ; or if I bad gone
after thee, thou (ho aide It blame me for abandon-
log my charge, and not waiting tliy return to
refllfy what was am if*.

k I tb#t mbitb /% fin r iw i] Or, / tew
tbst fi'kiib tb+y bum wst i rja. That the meL
fonger fent to rhee from Gan, was a pure Ipirtt,
and th'i hi* '.nntftcp* girt life m whatever shey
touched ; being no other t n t se G - t*L
anoonted on the hor - €-f 1 e: and therefore I
made ufc of *0c dull of his L ■ t to an unite ihe
raoltca «lf. It is mi at feiuw die .uij:cl,
beuaialc he had Gvcd and ultn care of Jirm
when a chi id nisd expoied by li i* niothcr kur
fear ol PforM 1 ■

c See a. p, 7.

d Thau Jbiflt iAj t9 tihf zi'frt jbifii m -ri

Ttucb me not ;] Left they infed tbee with i tim-
ing fever: for that was the ronftqocoee of any
man's touching him, and the fipw hjppcned to
the perfona he touched; for width reaf^n he
was obliged to avoid all comumtii cation with
others, and was alfo ifeuaned by them, win-
dering in the dclart like a wild beaft 2 .

Hence it is concluded that a tribe of S*imm-u
Us ynTWt fxid to inhabit a certain iHe in the red
iei, are the dcl'ccodanu of our nl Sfaatn ; be-
cJtufc It is their peculiar mark of dltiinftion, at
this d y f to ufe feme wards, viz L* mt(Ss%
i e ittib m* to thofe they meet 3 It is
not improbable that thb ftcry m ty owe its rife
to ihc known hitrerd bam by the atxisritoitt to
the Jim* their funerliitkiiiH awarding to
h^c assy commerce wim tJkcm. or any otb«
inngers ♦.

//’• uAf Ur* ? Y;] Or T as the word miy al-
fo I'ks trail fUted, #V «rl// file it 4 mif i but the
Olhef 11 the mi.ne received! iuftipTcMUon.

* bee hap, 6 p 101.

■ flii-.'T.: *y/v thfii] l or Ehsife, ifith thc Afri**
is one mar*, ot an cniiJiiy, ora perfon ri^-v ang
mtnate 5 tokiy a nkfii hi* a fltttb fiw, I
think w : enprpfi cat averfiun by she tctrD wbitr-
iirtredtj rmStp &kuktn, ifl-d grey being a
periphralifl for a toe, and pafticuiarjy a GVmj,
which nn 1 con were t he moil inveterate enemstf
of the Ap*h k anti base uiWUy hiir and tits of
thofe colours f . TbeosigirtAJ word, however,
fignifie^ alfo thofe uJil* are or even

hhn 4 ol i? fufiainL

1 ft him #fl tmito ;] viz. In he world ;
or, in the grave-

1 Al Beidaws, jAULaLo'DDtn. 2 iriW- * K N**. J 45. 4 V.

Selpin. nbi 1 Al Beidawi, Jawhahi, in Lex,

Chap. 20. Al KORAN. 263

for behaviour fhall fay. Ye have not tarried above one day. They will
aflc thee concerning the mountains : Anfwer, My Lord will reduce them to
duft, and fcatter mem abroad * ; and he will leave them a plain equally ex-
tended : thou fhalt fee no part of them higher or lower than anotner. On
that day mankind fhall follow the angel who will call them to judgment \ none
fhall have power to turn afide from him ; and their voices fhall be low before
the Merciful, neither fhalt thou hear any more than the hollow found of their
feet. On that day the imerceffion of none fhall be of advantage unto am-
tber, except the intercession of him to whom the Merciful fhall grant permif-
fion % and who fhall be acceptable unto him in what he faith. God knoweth
that which is before them, and that which is behind them •, but they comprehend
not the feme by their knowledge : and their faces fhall be humbled 4 before
the living, the felf-fubfiCting God ; and he fhall be wretched who fhall bear
bis iniquity. But whofoever fhall do good works, being a true believer, fhall
not fear any injuftice, or any diminution of bis reward from God. And
thus have 'we font down this book, being a Koran in the Arabic tongue ;
and we have infexted various threats and promifes therein, that men may fear
God, or that it may awaken fome Qonfideration in them : wherefore let God be
highly exalted, the King, the Truth 1 Be not over hail y in receiving or repenting
the Koran, before the revelation thereof be compleated unto thee * j and
fay. Lord, jocceafe my knowledge. We heretofore gave a command unto
Adam \ but he forgot the /ante f > and eat of the forbidden frujf, ; and we found
not ia hire a firm refolution. And remember when we faid unto the angels,
Worfhip ye Adam 5 and they worfhipped him : but Eblis refofed *. And
we fei<4 Q Adam, yearly th» is an enemy unto thee, and thy wife : where-
fore beware kfbhe turn, you out of paradife ; for then fhalt thou be mifera-
ble. l^eyily.;iwv hefae made &. pwvifcop for theeb that thou fhalt not hunger
themor withflcj £hak thou be naked :<And there is aho a frovifion made for
thee, that thou foak not thkft therein, neither fhalt thou be incommoded
by heat. But Satan wbifpered evil fuggejiions unto him, Laying, O Adam,
fhall I guide thee to the tree of eternity, and a kingdom, which faileth
not ? And they both eat thereof : and their nakednete appeared untc them j
and they began to few together the leaves of paradHe, to cover them-

felves.

» See the Prelira. Difc. $ . IV. p. 82. fore he had finilhed the paflage. But fome fup-

b See ibid, p- 84. pofe the prohibition relates to the pubJilhihg any

* Except tbe intercejfion tf him ;] Or, Except verfe before the fame waj perfefUy explained to
unto him. Sec. See chap. 19. p. 25c. him '.

4 Their fates JbeH be humble 3 ;] The original { He forgot ;1 Adam's fo foon forgetting the di-
word proper!) exprefles the humility anddejeft- vine command, has oecafioned tone Arab c ty-
ed loolts of captives in the prefenoe of thsir mologlfts to derive the word Jttfdn, i. e. man,
conqueror. from palha, to forger, and has al£b given rife

' ' Be not overbajly in receiving or repeating tbe to the following proverbial laying, Arnoalo ndfin
Koran, Mohammed is here commanded not awtuah 'nnafi, that is, Tbe fpft forgetful perfin was
to be impatient at any delay jn Gabriel's, bring- the firfi of mem alluding to the like fbiind of
ing the divine revelations, or not to repeat it the wares.

too faft after the angel, fo as to overtake him be- * See chap. 2. p. 4, fcfr. chap. 7. p. 1 1 7, &c.

1 Al BaiDAWl, JaLLJU.Q’»D»*.

26+ Al KORAN. C h a p. 20.

(lives \ And thus Adam became difobedient unto hk Lord, and was fedu-
t«i Afterwards his Lord accepted him, on his repentance, and wa turned un-
to him, and direfted him. And God faid. Get ye down hen re, all of sou .
the one of you jhdli be an enemy unto the other. But hereafter (hall l di-
rection come unto you from me * : and whofoever (hall follow my direction,
lhall not err, neither (hall he be unhappy *, but whofoever (hall turn afide from
my admonition, verily he lhall lead a miferable life, and we will enufe him
to appear before us on the day of re 11: r reft inn, blind s . And he (hall fay, O
Lord, why haft thou brought me before thee blind, whereas before I faw
clearly ? God (hall anfwer, Thus have nee di ne, betrnfe our figns came unto
thee, and thou didft forget them*, and in the fame manner (halt thou be
forgotten this day. Ana thus will we reward him who lhall be negligent,
and (hall not believe in the figns of his Loud : and the puniJhment of the
life to come (hall be more fevere, and more lading, than the pnmpmm of
ibis fife. Are not the Meccano therefore acquainted how many generations
we have deftroyed before them *, in whofe dwellings they walk 1 ? verily here-
in are figns unto thofe who are indued with under (landing. And unlefs a de-
cree had pievioully gone forth irom thy Lord for tbeir refpdte, verify then
dejf ration had neceffarily followed : but there is a certain time determined
by God for tbeir pumjbmrtit. Where iorv do thou, O Moslsmmsd, patiently
bear that which they lay \ and celebrate the praile of thy Lord before the
rifing of the iun, and before the letting thereof, and praife him in the hours
of the night, and in the extremities of the day *, that thou mayeft be weil-
pleafed with tbe pnfpeB of receiving favour from God. And caft not
thine eyes on that which we have granted divers of the unbelievers to enjoy,
namely, the fplcndor of this prefent life f , that we may prove them thereby :
for the pro villon of thy Lord * is better, and more permanent. Command
thy family to cbferve prayer and do thou perfevere therein. We require
not of thee that thou labour to gain neceffary provi lions for tby ftlf and family :
we will provide for thee ; for the prof per eus iflue /hall attend on piety \ The
unbelievers fay, Unkfs he come unto us with a fign from his Lord, we will
not believe on him. Hath not a plain declaration come unto them, of that
which is eoHiahud in the former volumes tj fnpiure, by the revelation of tbt
Koran ? If we had deftroyed them by a judgment before the fame bad beer,
revealed.

See chap. 7. p. 1 18.
k See chip. i. .p 6.

See the Prelim Dii'e, $ IV p. 85.

* In wks/t ewllh p thy tenth ■] Seeing the

footfteps of their deftruftion ; as of the n .t'C! of
•AS, and TbenSi.

* The extremities f the Aay ;] i. e Evening
and morning ; which times are repeated as the
principal hours of prayer. But fome fuppofe
thefe words intend the prayer of noon; the firft
half of the day ending, and the fecond half be-
ginning at that time

‘ CaJ! sft thine fyti tit tbit which tse hire
granted divert (f tbm It fnjty, &c.] That ii.
Do not envy or covet their pomp and prul’perity
in thb world *.

* The previftn tf thy Lord;] vji. The re-
ward hid up tor thee in the next life ; or the
gift of nfopjie cv , and the revelations with which
God has ‘soured thee.

h It b faid that when Mehuorntfi Family
were in any [trait or affliction, he ufed to order
them to go to prayers, and to repeat this
Verfe l .

1 Iidem.

a See that, 15.^. 213.

Chap. 2i. Al KORAN. 265

revealed, they would have laid, at the refirrcflion, O Lord, how could we believe
fince thou didft not fend unto us an apoftle, that we might follow thy figns, be
fore we were humbled and covered with fhame ? Say, Each of us wait the
ijfue : wait therefore } for ye fhall furelv know hereafter who have been the
followers of the even way, and who hath been rightly direfted.

CHAP. XXI.

' Intitled , The Prophets * ; revealed at Me cc a.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

* rp H E time of giving vp their account draweth nigh unto the people o/X VII.

1 Mecca ; while they are funk in negligence, turning afide from the
confederation thereof No admonition cometh unto them from their Lord,
being lately revealed in the Koran, but when they hear it, they turn it to
fport : their hearts are taken up with delights. And they who aft unjuftly

difoouHe privately together, faying , Is this Mohammed any more than a man
like yourfelves ? Will ye therefore come to bear a piece of forcery, when
ye plainly perceive it to be fo ? Say, My Lord knoweth whatever is Ipoken
in heaven and on earth : it is he who heareth and knoweth. But they fay, The
Koran is a confufed heap of dreams : nay, he hath forged it ; nay, he is a
poet : let him come unto us therefore with fome miracle, in like manner as

the former prophets were fent. None of the cities which we have deftroyed,
believed the miracles which they frw performed, before them : will thefe there-
fore believe, if they fee a miracle ? We fent none as our apojlles before thee,
bcher than men, unto whom we revealed our will. Afk thole who are ac-
quainted with the fcripture, if ye know not this. We gave them not a body
which could be fupported without their eating food ; neither were they im-
mortal. But we made good our promife unto them : wherefore we de-
livered them, and thofe whom we pleafed •, but we deftroyed the exorbitant
tranfereffors. Now have we fent down unto you, O Koreish, the book of
the Koran ; wherein there is honourable mention of you : will ye not there-
fore underftand ? And how many cities have we overthrown, which were un-
godly i and caufed other nations to rife up after them ? And when they felt
our fevere vengeance, behold, they fled fwiftly from thofe cities. And the angels
faid, f offer gly, unto them , Do not fly •, but return to that wherein ye delight-
ed, and to your habitations : peradventure ye will be alked b . They anfwer-

M m ed,

a The chapter bears this title, becaufe fome cerhing the prefent pofture of aflairs, by way of
pajticulars relating to feveral of the ancient pro- confutation : or, that ye may be examined as to
phets, are here recited. your deeds, that ye may receive the reward

b Peradventure ye will be ashed ;] i. e. Con- thereof 1 .

Idem , Jallalo’ddik, al Zamakh.

266 Al KORAN. Chap. 21.

ed, Alas for us ! verily we have been unjuft ». And this their lamentation
ceafed not, until we Kad rendred them like corn which is mo wen down, and
utterly exrindk. We created not the heavens and the earth, and that which is
between them, by way of fport b . If we had pleafed to take diverfion,
verily we had taken it with (bat which befeemth us c ; if we had refohtd to
have done this. But we will oppofe truth to vanity, and it (hall confound the
fame ; and behold, it fhall vanilh away. Wo be unto you, for that which ye
impm/ly utter concerning Con! fince whoever is in heaven and on earth j;
fubjebl unto him ; and the angels who are in hU prefence do not infoiently
dildain his fervice, neither are they tired therewith. They praife him night
and day : they faint not. Have they taken gods from the earth? Shall rh-y
raife the dead to life? If there were either in heaven or on earth gods befi i^
God, verily both would be corrupted A But for be that which they utter,
from God, the Lord of the throne! No account fhall be demanded of him
for what he fhall do but an account fhall be demanded of them. Have
they taken other gods befides him? Say, Produce ycnr proof thereof. This
is the admonition of thofe who are contemporary with me, and tine admo-
nition of thofe who bit ve been before me * : but the greater part of them
know not the truth, and turn afide from the fame. We have fent no npuftk
before thee, but we revealed unto him that there is no god befides niy f
wherefore ferve me. They fiy, 1 he Merciful Hath begotten iffoe j and the
angels are hit daughters*. Goo forbid \ They arc his honoured fervants : they
prevent Him not in anv thing whicluhey fay * i and they execute his com-
mand. He knoweth that which is before them, and that which is behind
them: they fhall not intercede for any t except for whom it fhall pica ft him ;

and

* Thty enjit’tretf) Wo mto nr, &c-] It is rein- Some iliink the original word, tr inflated .
ed that a prophet was fcnt to rise inhibit mis of fi-s, fignifies in Thii place, u zi'ifr, ut a this,
certain towns io Kwws, but tniiead of hearten- and that the ps&gc sa pa ft hub ri v i; ’.'clled n rmuff
ing to his remonflxances, duty tilled linn : upon the f

which God delivered them into the handa of * B/tb emlibt nrrMteSi] Thai is, she whole
Nehfttiidntzzer, who put them to the /word ; creation would nettflarify fall into etmfnkjJi nJ
.. voice at the fame time crying from heaven, be overturned, by the ^mpedtloo of fuch misli-
ftrfrw fir tbtbisid r th prrphm t Upon ly antagemifii.

whitih they repented, and tiled the w«dj of tfai* • Tbh h tit admmitm ihtfr mi* srt m-

pilfige. umf-frerj mih m, 4&i of thfi =>Jv btpt burnt

L U't boot v.t tree ted the bt. re-, n: twJiartb, h btfirt mi\ t, e Thi* li the croft) »t latrine ol
wee rf fpfti] But for the mtnlfdtadaii of our aft the fared boots} rot only of the A

power and wildorr. to people of undents ruling, but of litofe which were revealed in faros r

that they mav feriotifly caniider the ivondera of ages, all of them bearing v?irr,e''= to the saw*
the creation, and direct their aftions to the attain- and fundamental truth of the unity of Gun,
ment of tame hippinefc, negleSing the vain 1 Tins pa/fegc w» rivaled on amount of
p. mp and fleeting pleafttrrJ of this world. the KhxoSfer, 'who held the ugd> to he the

1 With I hit tohub btjtemttbm s] vis. We had daughter* of God.
fought our pie? lure in cor own pertettiunipor. in t Zirts bfm Wtt is ritw ih'igm it'd* (to

the jpiritud beings which arc ra our immediate fuyi\ i, e. They prefamc not to Jay my thing,

pretence f and not in railing of material build- until ae h.th Vpoken si * behiying *•. £ rv n%

mgr, with p tinted roots, .sid fine Boor,, winch who know their duty
is the diverilro of man.

1 Jirfaj.

Chap. 21. Al KORAN. 267

and they tremble for fear of him. Whoever of them lhall fay, I am a god
befides him ; that angel will we reward with hell : for fo will we reward the unjuft.
Do not the unbelievers therefore know, that the heavens and the earth were
folid, and we clave the fame in funder * ; and made every living thing of
water ? Will they not therefore believe ? And we placed ftable mountains on
the earth, left it Ihould move with them b ; and we made broad paffages be-
tween them for paths, that they might be directed in tbeir Journeys : and we
made the heaven a roof well fupported. Yet they turn afide from the ligns
thereof, not confidering that they are the workmanjbip of God. It is he who
hath created the night, and the day, and the fun, and the moon ; all the
celeftial bodies move fwiftly, each in its refpettive orb. We have not granted
unto any man before thee, eternal permanency in this world ; if thou die
therefore, will they be immortal c ? Every foul (hall tafte of death : and we
will prove you with evil, and with good, for a trial of you ; and unto us
(hall ye return. When the unbelievers fee thee, they receive thee only with
fooffing, faying Is this he who mentioneth your gods with contempt ? Yet
themfelves believe not what is mentioned to them of the Merciful *. Man is
created of precipitation *. Hereafter will I lhew you my ligns, fo that ye
lhall not wilh them to be haftened. They lay, When will this threat be ac-
Mtitptifhed, if ye fpeak truth ? If they who believe not, knew that the time
toill furely come , when they lhall not be able to drive back the fire of bell
from their laces, nor from their backs, neither lhall they be helped, they
would not bajlen it. But the day of vengeance lhall come upon them fuddenly,
and lhall ftrike them with aftonilhment: they lhall not be able to avert it;
neither lhall they be refpited. Other apoftles have been mocked before thee :
but the punijhment whim they fcoffcd at, fell upon fuch of them as mocked.
Say unto the /coffers. Who lhall lave you by night and by day from the Mer-
ciful? Yet they utterly negledfc the remembrance of their Lord. Have they
gods who will defend them, befides us ? They are not able to help them-
lelves ; neither lhall they be aflifted againft us by their companions. But we
have permitted thefe men and their fathers to enjoy worldly projperity , lb long
as life was continued unto them. Do they not perceive that we come unto the

M'm 2 land

a The heavens and tie earth were folid, and we
clave the fame in funder i] That is. They were
one continued mafs of matter, till we feparated
-them, and divided the heaven into feven heavens,
and the earth into as many ftoriea ; and diftin-
oiihed the various orbs of the one, and the
iflerent dimates of the other, Or, asfome
chufe to tranilate die words. The heavens and the
earth were fiat up, and we opened the fame ; their
meaning being, that the heavens did* not ram,
nor the earth produce vegetables, till Got) inter-
pofed his power 1 .
b See' chap, 16, p. *15.

■ If thou die therefore, will they he immortal

This pafiage was revealed when the inJidels laid.
We- expeft to fee Mohammed die, like the reft
of mankind.

* tit they believe not wbat is mentioned to them
of the Merciful 5] Denying his unity ; or rejeft-
ing his apoftles and the fcriptures which were
given for their iuftruAion, and particularly the
Koran.

e Man is created of precipitation i] Being hafty
and inconfiderate *. It is faid this paJTage was
revealed on account of al Nodar Ebn al Haretb,
when he defired Mohammed to haften the divine
vengeance with Which he threatned the unbe-
lievers 3 .

1 J/Beidawi, JaIlal o’odin.

* See (bap. 17 . f, 223 , (sic . 3 dl Beidaw:

268 Al KORAN. Chap. 21.

land of the unbelievers, and ftraiten the borders thereof f Shull they ihcr ore
be the conquerors? Say, I only preach unto you the revelation of (Jod . but
the deaf will not hear tby call, whenever they arc prcnclmd unto. Yet if
the kafi breath of the punifhment of thy Lord touch them* they will furely
lay, Alas for us! verily we have been unjuit. We will appoint juft balances
for the. day of refurre&ion j neither (hall any loul be injured at alt: al-
though the merit or guilt of an nil ion be of the weight of a grain of muf-
tard-leed ou/y, we will produce it ptblkkly ; and there will be fufikkm account-
ants with us. We formerly gave unto Moses and A a row the Law t being
a diftindtion 1 between good and evil, and a light and admonition unto die pious°i
who fear their Lord in fecret, and who dread the hour of judgment. And this
book iilfo is a blefied admonition ; which we have fent down from heaven :
will ye therefore deny it? And we gave unto Abraham his direction “'here-
tofore, and we knew him to be worthy of the revelations wbtr:,aith L- teas
favoured. Remember when he ft id .into hi. Jjrhtr, and lib prop!., What are
thefe images, to which ye are Jo entirely devoted * ? They anfwcred. We found
our fathers worlhipping them. He laid. Verily bocli ye and your fathers
have been in a manifeft error. They laid. Du ft thou ferktcjly tell us the truth t
or art thou one who jefteit with us? He replied. Verily your Lord is the
Lord of the heavens and the earth ; it is be who hath created them : and I
am one of thofe who bear witnefs thereof. By Goo, I will lurely tkviiij ,i
plot again)! your idols, after yt Hull have mired front them, and [hall have
turned your lucks. And in the peoples absence he v. mi into the temple where
ihe idols food, and he brake them alt in pieces, except the biggtft of them ;
thatthey might lay the blame upon that J hid when they were relumed, and fate/
the h&vatk which had been made, they fa id, Who hath done tins to our gods ?
He is certainly an impious perfon. And certain of them aniWcd, We heard
a young man fpeak reiroacifully of them: he is named Aura ham. TVy

ft id,

* The Jiftiw&i** s] V fee *he

Prelim. Difc. \ III. p 57.

« His dirt&irttt} viz. The ten bo-b of di-
vine revelations ivHdi were given Wm 1 .

See chap. 6. p. 106, chap. 19. p. 252.

and ch,ip- t. p. >1.

11 At A fa trAx U-m fitr& 9 •v. 7 ; jfo
btrff'l if tbm* &c.] Abmhtm took lit* oppor-

tLmjt f to do this while the Gk ti&sm were
abroad in the fields, celebrating a gi^l FeftivaJ ;
and fome fay he hid himfelf in the temple : r,nd
when he had a«MpU(hcd hisdefigti, that he
might the more evidently convince them of ihcif
folly in worlhlppiitg them, he hnn^ the ,ur, with
which h..d hewn and I roten do niJn: ~m -g^ ,
on i.'.u neck of the chief idol, named L--/ Jomc
wrheiLi. Baa ' ; us if he had been the author of

all the .mik-ilef * Far (Id- Hury, wlicli Uiu’

itbsfrlfc, h not 111 invented P Mtbm'wj iUi:J
indebted 10 the 7 v i who tell r: ■■ - th a Hole
variation.- Jnr they \:.y Afc .ihim performed t\m
exp it in hi* hihzth fhqp t during Lfi ibi’ence,
that Tir*hi on i.st r::im P demand" ng 1 he oc-
casion of the dJford£r t Mi fon told him tbu
the iJa': had quarrelled and (alien u^cyier by
the carsatottl an offering of Em How cr, which
had been brought them by an old wornim* md lLc
the fithcr, ending he could nut infill gn the im-
polIiblUty of wiui Ab.fi aw pretended, ivitiiu-jr
•.on felling the tmpL'icn.e of hLs gc-is id!: inio -
viukni puQiofl, and ; it el him t .
he might be aatnjpkrily* pnmihed for hh Into
Icilcc ^ t

1 Si trhPr,', Di/i i IV P 7 b 2 M Beidawi, J ail alo'fi: i *, ■e'e* f Hrai t ■

J lei. nt. Per, 2. R Gidal. it Stai-bh bskifiL / H. F. Maimw. II.

r i. u* itlA.

Chap. 2 1-* Al KORAN. 269

faid, Bring him therefore before the eyes of the people, that they may
bear witnefs againft bint. And when be was brought before, the ajfembly , they
faid unto him. Haft thou done this unto our gods, O Abraham? Heanfwer-
ed. Nay, that biggeftof them hath done it : butaflc them, if they can fpeak.
And they returned unto themfelves % and faid the one to the pther , Verily
ye are the impious perfons, Afterwards they relapfed into their former obfti-
nacy b , and faid. Verily thou kno weft that thefe fpeak not. Abraham anfwer-
ed, Do ye therefore worth ip, befides God, that which cannot profit you at
all, neither can it hurt you ? Fie on you ; and upon that which ye worfhip
befides God ! Do ye not underftand ? They faid. Burn him, and avenge your
gods : if ye do this it will be well c . And when Abraham was cajl into the burning
pile, we (aid, O fire, be thou Cold, and a prefervation unto Abraham 4 . And
they fought to lay a plot againft him : but we cauled them to be the fufferers *.

And

This ftory Teems to have had no other foun-
dation than that paffage of Mofes, where God is
faid to have brought Abraham out <f Ur of the
Chaldees *, mifunderftood: which words the
yews, the moft trifling interpreters of fcripture,
and fome^ moderns who have followed them,
have translated, out of the fire of the Chaldees ;
taking the word Ur, not for the proper name of
Rcity, as it really is, but for an appellative, fig-
11 ifying fire 6 . However, it is a fable of fome
antiquity, and credited, not only by the Jews,
but by feveral of the eaftem thrift ians ; the
twenty fifth of the fecond Canun , or January ,
being fet apart in the Syrian calendar, for the
commemoration of Abraham'* being call into the
fire 7 .

The Jews alfo mention fome other perfecu-
tions which Abraham underwent on account of
his religion, particularly a ten years imprifon-
ment 8 : fome faying he was iinpriioned by
Nimrod 9 ; and others, by his father Ter ah 10 .

e We caufed them to be the lofers ;] Some tell
us that Nimrod , on feeing this miraculous deli-
verance from his palace, cried out, that he would
make an offering to the God of Abraham % and
that he accordingly facrificcd four thoufand
kine 1 x . But, if he ever relcnted, v he foon re-
lapfed into his former infidelity : for he built a
tower that he might afcend to heaven to fee
Abraham's God; which being overthrown 1 2 ,
ffill perfifting in his defign, he would be c rried
to heaven in a cheft born by four monftrous

birds ;

1 r. D’Herbel. Bibl Orient . Art Dhokak, & Schultens, Indie . Geogr . hi t fit. Saladhh, voce
Curdi. 2 V ; D’Herbel. f. 115. 3 Al Bbidawi, Jallalo’ddin, £sV. V . Mor-

can’s Mahomet 1 fm expl v . 1 . chap. 4 . 4 The Mf Gofpel of Barnabas , eh. 28. 1 Gentfi

xv. 7. 6 V . Targ. Jonath. & Hierofil. in Genefi c. 11, tsr 15. & Hyde, dt Rel. vet. Per/, p.

74, 7 V . Hyde, ibid . 73. 8 R- Eliez. Pirke, c. 26. &e. V . Maim. More Nev.

I 3. c. 29. 9 Gkffa Talmud, in Gemar . Bava bet bra, 91. 1. 10 In Aggada 1 1 Al Bl j-

d aw i. 12 See chap 16. p

a They returned unto themfelves ;] That is,
They became fenfible of their folly.

b Afterwards they relapfed into their former
obftinaey j] Literally, They were turned down up-
on their beads.

c They faid, Bum him, &c.] Perceiving they
could not prevail againft Abraham by dint of
argument, fays al Beidawi , they had recourfe to
Jcrfecution and torments. The fame commen-
tator tells us the perfon who gave this couniel,
was a Perfian Curd 1 , named Heyyun, and that
the earth opened and fwallowed him up alive :
fome, however, lay it was Andejbdn , a Magian
prieft * ; and others, that it wag Nimrod himfelf.

d We faid, 6 fire* b? tbok coif, &c.] The
commentators relate tjiat, by Nimrod's order, a
large (pace was enclofcd at Cutf?**, and filled with

t vaft quantity of wood, which being fet on fire
irned fo fiercely, that none dared to venture near
it : then they bound db'abnm, and putting him
into an engine, (which fome fuppofe to have been
of the devil’s invention,) fliot him into the midft
of the fire ; from which he was preferved by the
angel Gabriel who was fent to his afliftance ; the
fire burning only the cords with which he was
bound 1 • They add that the fire having mira-
culously loft its heat, in refpett to Abraham , be-
came an odoriferous air, and that the pile changed
to a pleafant meadow ; tho* it raged fo furioufly
otherwife, that, according to fotne writers, about
two thoufand of the idolaters were confutntd by
it 4 .

ClIiP. 2 1

27 ® At KORAN.

! wc delivered lum, asu! Lor, by bringim them imuihe kwi wherein we
h.«vc blefll-fj .ifl tfcituiis 1 . And wc befty^fcw on him HsJUe, and j. o;^ ,

an additional gift: and we made all of than rigliieoiu pa ions, We alio
ffiUk tiicm models of religion b , that they might direct Mbrrs by our com-
mand : anti we infpired into them the doing of good works, rind the ob-
servance of prayer, and the giving of a I nv j <md they ferved os, And un to
Loi we gave wifdom and knowledge, ami wc delivered him out of the city
which committed filthy crimes *, for they were a wicked and Infolenr people c ;
t and we led him into our mercy ; for lie was a n upright perlbrw An J rmm -
r Noah, when he called fwiffipuitm on his pwpli *, before the Prtrpktft
fatWM&fr IfcWi and we heard him, and delivered him and his family from
agreatftrait: and we protefted him from the people who a ecu fed our figns
or falftiood ; for they were a wicked people, wherefore we drowned them nil
And romnhtr David, and Solomon, when they pronounced judgment con-
cerning a field, when the llieep of itriaiu people had fed therein by night,
having no ihepherd ; and we wene frftnfiflesof their judgment : and we
the undemanding thereof unto SoiofcfON ", And on alt tbm we bellowed
wifdom, and knowledge. And wc compelled the mount^ris to praifc uu with
D-\vid ; and the birds abb ' . and wc did tbu* An. I wc taught him the

art

I if -'- ; hut jut** wandering farf asif time throu l b
the #if, he Ml df rau an j mouuraJvn mih iu-.-h *
iorce, in. it ht rti^de it fhak^, wherein, fia fcm*
fancy . * pailige ; n she K*ta# 1 j tinder which
may be tr^ afljrc di * it }■■■• >/& tbtir {f.mrivxnrti ir
pd\ at tj wdfr thr m' KM4i*t t*wth+

iV’ wrpj, dl Appointed in 'usdefignof making
wur with God, turned his arms againft Abraham t
who, bring a pfe.it piinrc. rifed forces to de-
fend Umfeif; b«ji God, dUidltvj* fub-

jectSj and coi thmY Impure, dmv.«l
him of she gre-iLT pm of lib fwpie, -ind
pi i, tied th^fe who adhered io h!iti by fr-jirin- "f
gitp.T : , ithich ifcltrorcfl a 1 limit nil of them* and
one L-f thefe pnm SjvUig Laired iflfn the iiof-
mk or c-ijf r of ,Y r/-.; pcnettAied to one oF
tlie memhrjnea «t r.i. where,, growing

' ■ ■ ger every djy H i ' g j i. e h i m fiwh i u tote? j b ^
rck, dnr I- .- wa* L hliyt'j Ln cmk hit hc^d tu- be
lM-iten wich a malJct, in refer to procure lome
which <i rtnre he iu Acred four Jnmdttii
ears , G* p tt wi ling t rtiniih, by r - n‘e ot
the N 3 ii hit ul hi vi:_j.rur^. him who iiifoldisly
h- . Hi likunetf to De i * ■ ! of a]] 1 A S'* ciJen-
<br places the i tA\ of 4 , v if the time were
well know n, on rhe eighth J *Jbc **±z 9 or Jf\ ; .

a =. f'errk . i f.V . fu-

tures 5] i. e. PAfjSfw ; in \vtilda coancry the
greater vu* ot cLe prophets appeared

^ See chap, z. p. i fi-

Sm li : f j lifa'QA :: ... '■ *!•* II T' . I 8 :

* Seecblp, 8. p. 147. not c

r f i b* *- i!foy ju 4 itotxt t* mrrtofng *

Mj\ A--. ] Some ^s-?ep, in their ftephtrd'i ih.
:^rn hji mg trokrn mm another man' - field u
vuicyicdj by nthrn,) by niiiLt,. and cit up ikt
com, a -iifpyte ?rofc thereupon and 'he nimc
heiny SrQUpht before Dti&iJ md ^ -h , the Tor.

merlkfd, mat the owner of the !i nil (hmtd tike
Tin: Jli cep, in cifisptnbdan of the Jifda^c ivbka
he liitd fdlainet!; but $tUmn T who wai theri
bill eStven xeu- eld* w« of opinion e 3 ui it
xvoukl be more | u It far the cwntf of the fei'd to
tile only l he proht of the ftieep* 1 1._ ,

milk, JarnliT, and till the fiicpfcni flK/afd*

by Kii own labour ^ i .it hb own Ewnct, put
the held irctu s .mod Lonnilinn a when the
ffceep lihirtM it * after which the Jfrc-p m-ghi
be ret .lined to thek raadlcr. And this judg-
ment of SiU/ftiM ww a pi roved bf BmU him-
fciF as belter than hr* oxvrt + -

f Iff * ■ tin *' +tei* r ■ ^-.riw I-

Davie, f.i. 1 r' - - ;j j, r \r r 7n. , LUeirlTI^

j 0 t' 1 le vi lions o' thi Tahv-% ;i n ht iru'h, frz-
lievcj Uwt vi hen D ; v,-.r latigusd wi:h nag-

ln_; p li \nv^ iJ.e mount ii n . , >-"d : , an d . < ». t j p ;ri i
ul the ijr- Alton, both atiitiute .uuL iriintruate, re-
Jievci him k. chanting the divine pr lie- Thi«

COntecj i>e3,sc*

Cap . 14 / 20 O.
* V. Hydh, .

* D’Hiiuj . B'itS O'- r 1 A*t. N: Hid?j ... yvf-^

* Al j ' L-Di: j iff.

Chap. 21. Al KORAN. 271

art of making coats of mail for you that they may defend you in your
wars : will ye therefore be thankful ? And unto Solomon we fit bje fled a ftrong
wind j it ran at his command to the land whereon we had bellowed our blef-
fing c : and we knew all things. And we alfo fubjefled unto his command
divers of the devils, who might dive to get -pearls for him, and perform other
work befides this d ; and we watched over them \ And remember Job f •,
when he cried unto his Lord, faying, , Verily evil hath affli&ed me: but thou
art the moll merciful of thole who (hew mercy. Wherefore we heard him,
and relieved him from the evil which was upon him: and we rellored unto him
his family, and as many more with them, through our mercy, and for an
admonition unto thofe who ferve God. And' remember Ismael, and

consequence the Jews draw from the words of
the plalmift, when he calls on the feveral parts
of nature to join with him in celebrating the
praife of God 1 $ it being their perverfe. cuftom
to expound pifiages in the moil literal manner,
which cannot bear a literal fenfe without a trani-
feft abfurdity ; and, on the contrary, to turn the
plaineft paffages into allegorical fancies.

* The art of making coats of mail ;] Men, be-
fore his inventing them, tiling to arm them-
folves with broad plates of metal. Left this fable
fhould want fomething of the marvellous, one
writer tells us, that the iron which David ufed,
became foft in his hands like wax 1 2 * .

b A ftrong wind;'] Which tranfported his
throne with prodagiQUi fwiftnefr. Some fay,
this wind was violent or gentk, juft as Solomon
pfoafed L

c To the land whereon toe bad beftacoei our
fyjjitigi] viz. Paleftine: whither the wind
Itrought back Solomon's throne in the evening,
after having carried it to a diftant country in the
morning.

d And perform other work ;] Such as the build-
ing of cities and palaces, the fetching of rare
pieces of art from foreign countries, and the
like.

e And we watched over them ;] Left they fhould
fwerve from his orders, or do mifehief according
to their natural inclinations. Jallalo ddin fays, that
when they had finifhed any piece of building,
they pulled it down before night, if they were
not unpfoyed in fomething new.

r he Mohammedan writers tell us, that Job
was of the race of Efau , and was bleffed with
a numerous &jnily> and abundant riches; but
that God proved him, by taking away all that
he had, even his children, who were killed by
the fall of a houfe ; notwithftandrng which he

EdRis,

continued to ferve God, and to return him thanks,
as ufual : that he was then ftr uck with a filthy
difeafe, his body being full of worms, and fo
offenfive, that as he lay on the dunghil none
could bear to come near him : that his wife, how-
ever, (whom fome call SLabmat the daughter of
Ephraim the fon of Jofetb , and others Makbir
the daughter of Manaftes) attended him with
great patience, fupporting him with what (he
earned by her labour ; but that the devil appear-
ing to her one day, after having reminded
her of her paft pmjperity, promifed her that if
fhe would worlhfp him, he would reftore all they
had loft; whereupon Ihe asked her husband's
con fen t, who was fo angry at the propofal, that
he fwore, if he recovered, to give his wife a
hundred ftripes : that Job b&viag pronounced
the prayer recorded in this paflage, God fent
Gabriel, who taking him by the hand railed him
upr and a t the fame time a fountain fprang up at
his feet, of which having As Jink, the ivorms fell
off his body, and waffling therein he recovered
his former health and beauty : that God then re-
ftored all to him double ; his wife alfa becoming
young and handfoute again, and bearing him
twenty fix fons : and that Job, to fatisfy his
oath, was directed by God to ftrike her one
blow with a palm-uranch having a hundred
leaves 4 . Some, to exprefs the great riches
which were bellowed on Job after his fuffei-
ings, fay he had two threlhing floors, one for
Avheat, and the other for barley, and that God
font two clouds which rained gold on the one,
and filver on the other, till they ran over 5 . The
traditions differ as to the continuance of Job's
calamities ; one will have it to be eighteen years,
another thirteen, another three, and another
exa&ly feven years feven months and feven
hours.

1 See Pfalm. cxlviii. 2 Tarikb Montakkab. V. D’Heubel. /. 284. 3 See chap. 27

A Al Beidawi, Jallalo>din, Abused*, {tfr. See D’Hkrbeu Bib! Orient. Art . Aioub

Jallalo'ddih,

ays Al KORAN. Chap. 2i.

Ennis % and Dhu'lkefl \ All theft were patient perfons : wherefore we led
them into our mercy ; for they were righteous doers. And remember Dhu'l-
nun % when he departed in wrath - , and thought that we could not exercife
our power over him. And he cried out in the darknefs % faying , There is no
God, befides thee : praife be unto thee ! Verily I have been one of the unjuft.
Wherefore we heard him, and delivered him from afflittion f : for fo do we deli-
ver the true believers. And remember Za chari as, when he called upon his Lord,
faying', O Lord, leave me not childlefs : yet thou art the lx ft heir. Where-
fore we heard him, and we gave him John ; and we rendred his wife fit for
hearing a child unto him. Thefe ftrove to excel in good works, and called
upon us with love, and with fear ; and humbled themfelves before us. And
remember her who preferved her virginity and into whom we breathed of
our fpirit •, ordaining her and her fon for a fign unto all creatures. Verily
this your religion is one religion h * and I am your Lord ; wherefore fervc
me. But the Jews and Cbrijiiam luve made fthifms in the affair of their
religion among themfelves : but all of t lem fhall appear before us. Whofo-
ever (hall do good works being a true believer, there fhall be no denial of
the reward due to his endeavours \ and we will furely write // down unto
him. An inviolable prohibition is laid on every city which we lhill have
deftroyed ; for that they fhall not return my mre into the world i until
Gog and Magog fhall Jiave a paffige opened for them \ and they fhall
haften from every high hill k ; and the certain promife fhall draw near to
he fulfilled : and behold, the eyes of the infidels fhall be fixed with ajhm fo-
ment

a See chajx 19. p. 253.
b Dtntlkefl ;] Who this prophet was is very
uncertain. One commentator will have him to
be Elim, or JoJhut r, or Zaebarias 1 : another
fuppofes him to have been the fon of Job, and
to have dwelt in Syria ; to which (ome add,
that he was firft a very wicked man, bnt after-
wards repenting* died; upon >‘ hich thefe words
appeared mirscubufly written over his door, Nrw
baft God fr^r mirfsjmlsnt Dhu'i^efl 2 : and a
Third tells uj he was a perion of great ftriiinefs
of life,, and one who ufed to deckle can let to the
fjtisFjr^ion of all pinkf, becaufe he was never
in a piSon ; and that he was called Dbn'lktfl
from Ik 1 continual faffing, and other religious ex-
ercil-tF^.

;] This is the furname of Jems;

which wj.* gh' en him becaufe he was jwaflmtd
hy tbt fjbr See ch-rp 10. p. 1^4.

It- bin he depar t f.- rtf wrath ;J Some fuppofe
JtitM ? * anger was again#: the Niftim in t being
tired with preaching to them for io long a time,
and greatly difguflted at their and ill

ufage of him; but others, more agreeably to

feripture, fay the reafon of his iH humour was
God's pardoning of that people on their repen-
tance, and averting the judgment which Jomu
had threatned them with, fo that he thought he
had been made a liar

In tht iarhufi ;] l e. Out of the belly 0*
the fifh.

* See chap. 37,.

Her mho preferred her virginity i] Namely,
the virgin Min.

1 fhtj v ar r flight is out relight : ;] Being the
fame which was proteffed by all the prophets,
and holy men and women, any funda-

mental ditterenoe or variation,

: Unfit Gog and Magog ihati hope pitfjgr
spattd for then ;] i. e. UritiS the reurreftion ;
one fijgn of the approach whereof will be the
eruption of thole barbarians * T

k Tbe? jhalt t~jirn fti\n every thh MHi\ In
thb p.iilage fame copies, toil end of ttthsbin^ i. e.
nr. fy&r: if its eurtb* have jiJaihtt,

v hich iignidej ,-t grave} and if we ioliow the
litter reading, the pron they mull not refer
to G ■ and * but to mankind in general.

1 Al Beidawi. 2 Abu’lf* 3 Jallalo’ddin. * AI Beidawi. * Sit

Abt Fttlim* Di/s* J. IV. p. 81.

-Chap. 21 . Al KORAN. 273

menu and they Jhall fay y Alas for us ! we were formerly regardlefs of this day \
yea, we were wicked doers. Verily both ye, 0 men pf Mecca, and the idols which
ye worfhip befides Goo,' fhall be caft into hell fire : ye fhall go down

into the fame. If thefe were really gods, they would not go down into the
fame : and all of them fhall remain therein for ever. In that place fhall they
groan for anguifh ; and they fhall not hear ought therein *. As for thofe un-
to whom the moft excellent reward of paradife hath been predeftinated by us,
they fhall be tranfported far off from the fame ■* ; they fhali not hear the leaft
found thereof : and they fhall continue for ever in the felicity which their
fouls defire. The greateft terror fhall not trouble them ; and the angels fhall
meet them to congratulate tbem y faying* , This is your day which ye were pro-
mifed. On that day we will roll up the heavens, as the angel al Sijil c rolleth up
the book wherein every marts actions are recorded . As we made the firft crea-
ture out of nothing , fo we will alfb reproduce it at the refurreftion. This is a

E romife which it lietb on us to fulfil : we will furely perform it. And now
ave we written in the pfalms, after the promulgation of the law, that my fer-
vants the righteous fhall inherit the earth d . Verily in this book are contained
fuflicient means of falvation y unto people who ferve God. We have not fent
thee, O Mohammed , but as a mercy unto all creatures. Say, No other hath
been revealed unto me, than that your God is one God : will ye therefore be
refigned unto him ? But if they turn their backs to the confeffion of God’s unity %
(ay, I proclaim war againft you all equally e : but I know not whether that
Which ye are threatned with f be nigh, or whether it be far diftant. Verily
God knoweth the difeourfe which is fpoken in public ; and he alfo know-
eth that which ye hold in private. I know not but peradventure the refpite
granted you is for a trial of you \ and that ye may enjoy the profperity of this
world for a time. Say, Lord, judge between me and my adverfaries with
truth. Our Lord is the Merciful ; whole afliftance is to be implored againft
the blafpbemies and calumnies which ye utter.

N

a They jhall not bear ought therein ;] Becaufe
of their aftonifhment and the insupportable tor-
ments they fhall endure ; or, as others expound
the words. They {hall not bear therein any thing
which may give them the leaft comfort.

b As for thofe unto whom paradife bath been
predeftinated, &c.] One Ebn al Zabdri obje&ed
to the preceding words. Both ye and that which
V: worfoip bejides God, jhall be caft into bell, be-
caufe, being general, they afferted an abfolute
falihood ; fome of the objefts of idolatrous wor-
fhip being fo far from any danger of damnation,
that they were in the higheft favour with God,
as Jesus, Ezra, and the angels: wherefore
this pftfflage was revealed, excepting thofe who
were predefined to falvation *.

The angel al Sijil j] Whofe office it is to write

1 Al Bjeid aw i, Jallalo*

n CHAP.

down the adlions of every man’s life, which, at
his death, he rolls up, as completed. Some pre-
tend one of Mohammed " 5 feribes is here meant •
and others take the word Sijil, or, as it is alfo
written, Sijjill, for an appellative, fignifying a
book or written Jcroli ; and accordingly render
the paflage, as a written Jeroll is rolled up a .

d Thefe words are taken from Pfalra 37.
v. 29.

* / proclaim war againft you, &c.J Or, I baz f e
public k(y declared unto you what I was command
ed.

f That which ye are threatned with j] viz. Th^
lofTes and difgraces which ye fhall fuller hy the
future fuccefTes of the Mojlems ; or, the day of
judgment.

DDIN.

2 Iidem, fefr.

374

Al KORAN , ;

Chap. 22.

CHAP. XXII.

Intithd , The Pilgrimage * ; revealed at Mecca 1 *.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

O Men of Mecca, fear your Lord. Verily the (hock of the lajl hour * will
It a terrible thing. On the day whereon ye frail fee it, every woman
who giveth fuck frail forget the infant which fre fuckleth *, and every f ema le
that is with young frail caft her burthen ; and thou (halt fee men feemingly
drunk, yet they frail not be really drunk : but the punifrment of God will
be fevere. There is a man who difputeth concerning God without know-
ledge ', and followeth every rebellious devil : againft whom it is written,
that whoever frail take him for his patron, he lhall furely feduce him, and
frail lead him into the torment of hell. O men, if ye be in doubt concern-
ing the refurreftion, cottfider that we firft created you of the duft of the ground *,
afterwards, of feed ; afterwards, of a little coagulated blood f ; afterwards, of a
piece of flefr, perfectly formed in part , and in part imperfe&ly formed •, that
we might make our power manifeft unto you : and we caufe that which we
pleafe to reft in the wombs, until the appointed time of delivery . Then
we bring you Forth infants ; and afterwards we permit you to attain your age
of full ftrength: and one of you dieth in bis youth, and another of vou is
poftponed to a decrepit age, fo that he forgemth whatever he knew. Thou
feeft the earth fometimes dried up and barren : but when we fend down rain
thereon, it is put in motion, and fwelleth, and produceth every kind of lux-
uriant vegetables. This Jbewetb that God is the truth, and that he raifeth the
dead to life, and that he is almighty ; and that the hour of judgment will furely
come, fthere is no doubt thereof,) and that God will raife again thofe who
are in the graves. There is a man who difputeth concerning God without
either knowledge, or a direction, or an enlightening book •; proudly turning his

fide,

* Seme ceremonies ufed it the pilgrimage of a See the FftHm. Difc. $. IV. p. 82

Mecca being mentioned in this chapter, gave oc- c Tber* n a man mhe Jtfyitmh cmern^ God,

cafion to the ihlfcription. drc.] This p j ill was revealed on account or

k Some 1 except two yetfes, beginnin git thefe ai Nodar Ehn at who maintained sbt

words. There are jam men nboferve God in a the angds were the daughters of God, th* t the
mover mg matter y Sec. And others * Ax Vcrfes, Korda was a fardel of old fables, and denied the
beginning at. Theft are trot ofpofitt forties. See . refurreflioa 4 .

c The Jhock of tbe loft bour\\ Or, the earth* f See chap. 96.
ijuake which, fome fey, » to happen a little be- * Thtre . / a nan sehe dijputrtb Mcrnt > • God,
fore the fun rifes from the weft 5 one fign of the Sec ] The peribo here meant, it is ta
near approach of the day of judgment 3 . Abu Jofrf % a principal man among the KonijK

and

1 Jallalo’ddin. 2 Al Bbidawi. 3 See the Prelim * Dife J-IV 29,

jCJBeidawi. * Jailalo'ddjn.

Chap. 22 . Al KORAN. 275

fide, that he may feduce men from the way of God. Ignominy /hall attend him
in this world ; and on the day of refurreftion we will make him tafte the
torment of burning, when it Jhall he /aid unto him, This thou fuff ere Jt becaufe
of that which thy hands have formerly committed ; for God is not unjuft
towards mankind. There are fome men who ferve Goo in a wavering manner ,
Jtanding , as it were, on the verge * of the true religion. If good befal one of
them, ne refteth fatisfied therein j but if any tribulation befal him, he turn-
eth himfelf round, with the lofs both of this world, and of the life to come.
This is manifeft perdition. He will call upon that, befides God, which
can neither hurt hxm, nor profit him. This is an error remote from truth.
He will invoke him who will fooner be of hurt to bis wor/hippsr than of ad-
vantage. Such is furely a miferable patron, and a miferable companion.
But God will introduce thofe who (hall believe, and do righteous works, into
gardens through which rivers flow ; for God doth that which he pleafeth.
Whofo thinketh that God will not affift bis apoftle in this world, and in the
world to come, let him (train a rope towards heaven, then let him put an
end to his life, and fee whether his devices can render that ineffedual, for
which he was angry b . Thus do we fend down the Koran, being evident
figns •, for God direfteth whom he pleafeth. ffs to the true believers, and
thofe who judaize, and the Sabians, and the Chriftians, and the Magians,
and the idolaters i verily God (hall judge between them on the day of re-
furredtion ; for God is witnels of all things. Doft thou not perceive that all
creatures both in heaven and on earth adore God c \ and the fun, and the
moon, and the ftars, and the mountains, and the trees, and the beads, and
many men? but many are worthy of chaftifement: and whomfoever God
(hall render defpicable, there (hall be none to honour •, for God doth that which
he pleafeth. Thefe are two oppofite parties, who difpuce concerning their
Lord 4 . And they who believe not, (hall have garments of fire fitted unto

N n 2 them :

and a moft inveterate enemy of Mohammed and
his religion. His true name was Amru Ehn
Hejbam, of the family of Makhzum ; and he was
furnamed Abu'lbocm, i. e. the father of wifdom,
which was afterwards changed into Abu jail, or
the father of folly. He was ilain in the battle
of Bedr 1 .

a There are fome men who ferve God wavering-
fyt Jlanding on the verge , &c ] This expreffion
alludes to one who being polled in the skirts of
an army, if he fees the vittory inclining to his
own fide, ftands his ground, but if the enemy
is likely to prevail, takes to his heels.

The paflage, they fay, was revealed on ac-
count certain Ar/ibs of the defart, who came
to Medina , and having profcfled Mo hammed if m,
were well enough pleafed with it fo long as their
affairs profpered, but if they met with any ad-
verfity, were fure to lay the blame on their new
religion, A tradition of Abu Said mentions

another accident as the occafion of this paflage*
viz. that a certain Jew embraced but af-

terwards taking a diflike to it, on account of fome
misfortunes which had befallen him, went to
Mohammed, and defired he might renounce it, and
be freed from the obligations of it ; but the pro-
phet told him that no fuch thing was allowed in
nis religion *.

b Let him ftrain a rope towards heaven , &c.]
Or, Let him tie a rope to the roof of bis betsfe, and
hang himfelf i that is, let him carry his anger and
jtfentment to ever fo great an height, even to
be driven to the moft defperate extremities, and
fee whether with all his indcavours he will be
able to intercept the divine affiHance 3 .

c Adore God;] Confeffing his power, and
obeying his fupreme command,

4 Thefe are two oppofite parties, &c.] viz. The
true believers, ana the infidels. The paflage is
faid to have been revealed on occafion of a dis-
pute

T See chap* 8* p- 145,

* Al Bei DAW l*

3 Idem*

276 Al KORAN. Chap. 22 .

them : boiling water fhall be poured on their heads ; their bowels lhall be
diffolved thereby, and alfo their Ikins ; and iliey (hall be beaten with maces of
iron. So often as they fhall endeavour to get out of bell , becaufe of the an-
guilh. of their torments, they fhall be dragged back into the fame; and their
tormentors fhall fay unto them, Tafte ye the pain of burning. God will in-
troduce thofe who fhall believe, and a6t rigiueoufly, into gardens through
which rivers flow : they fhall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and
pearls ; and their veftures therein fhall be filk. They are di reeled unto a good
faying * ; and are diretted into the honourable way. But they who fhall dif-
believe, and obftrutt the way of God, and hinder men from lifting the holy
temple of Mecca, which we have appointed for a place of w-rfhtp unto all
men : the inhabitant thereof, and the ftranger have an equal right to viftt it :
and whofoever fhall feek impioufty to profane it, we will caufe him to
tafte a grievous torment. Call to 1 mud when we gave the flte of the houfe
of the Caaba for an abode unto Abraham h , fusing. Do not aflbeiate any
thing with me ; and cleanfe my houfe for thofe who compafs it, and who
ftand up, and who bow down to worfhip. And proclaim unto the people a
folemn pilgrimage * ; let them come unto thee on foot, and on every lean ca r ,
arriving from every diftant road ; that they may be witnefles of the advantages
which accrew to them from the nifttin g this holy place *, and may commemo-
rate the name of God on the appointed days', in gratitude lur the brute
cattle which he hath beftowed on them. Wherefore eat thereof, and feed
the needy, and the poor. Afterwards let them put an end to the negleft of

their

pute between the Jews and the Mifmamidm: ;
the former infilling that they were in greater fa-
vour with God. their prophet and revelations
feeing prior to thofe of the latter ; and thefe re-
plying* that they were more in God’s favour*
for that they believed not only in Mtfes but alfo
in and in all the ferijJture* without

exception ; whereas the Jfor. rejected Mshattt-
mtd , tho’ they knew him to be a propbcU out
of envy x .

• Unto a good /trying ;] viz. The profeffion
of God’s unity ; or thefe words, w luch they
fhall ufe at their entrance into paradife, Praift
be unto God, at bo hath fulfilled bis fremifi unto

MS 3 -

* When we govt unto Abraham the Hit /the
Caaba fir an abode,] i. c. For a place of religi-
ous worfhip ; (hewing him the fpot where it had
flood, and alfo the model of the old building,
which had been taken up to heaven at the
flood 3 .

c Proclaim unto the people a filem pilgrimage ;]

It is related that Abraham, in obedience to this
command, went up to mount Ab > kAth, ntu
Mecca , and cried from thence, O men, perform
tbi pijgrimage ^ bsufi v .vr Lord s r,nd
that God caufed thofe who were then in the
loins of Eheir fathers, ±nd c3^c wombs o 2 iheir
mothers, from eaft to wefi t and who, he *ncw
beforehand, would perform the pilgrimage, to
hear his voice, Some lay, however, that thefe
words were dire&ed to MtAasnmd t commanding
him to prodaim the pilgrimage of valedifUon 4 :
according to which expofition the paflagi mult
have been revealed at Medina .

d The aJffttMlagej wbkb actrm to them frm the
mfitlng this place i\ viz. The temporal advant-
age made by the great trade driven at Mats
during the pilgrimage, and the fpirituil advant-
age of having performed fo meritorious a wort
c The oppaisttd Jays }] Namely, Tne ten hr*:
days of Dfafl&ajja ; or the tenth day of lilt
fame month, on which they flay the %rijkc!»
and the three folio wing days 5 -

Irfcot,

1 Idem * Jdm.

Jallalo^dh*.

3 &v the Prelim- Difc . f IV.

♦ Al Bjsidawi.

Chap. 22. Al KORAN. 277

their perfons 4 ; and let them pay their vows k , and compafe the ancient
houfe. * This let them do. And whoever fhall regard the facred ordinances
of God * i this will be better for him in the fight of his Lord. All forts
of cattle are allowed you to eat , except what liath been read unto you, in
former faff ages of the Koran, to he forbidden. But depart from the abo-
mination of idols, and avoid fpeaking that which is falfe * : being orthodox
in refpeft to God, affociating no other god with him ; for whoever affoci-
ateth any other with God, is like that which falleth from heaven, and which
the birds fhatch away, or the wind bloweth to a far diftant place f . This is
fo. And whofo maketh valuable offerings unto God * j verily they -proceed
from the piety of men's hearts. Ye receive various advantages from the cattle
deftgned for facrifices , until a determined time for flaying them : then the
place of facrificing them is at the ancient houfe. Unto the profefiors of
every religion k have we appointed certain rites, that they may commemo-
rate the name of God on flaying the brute cattle which he hath provided for
them. Your God is one God : wherefore refign your felves 'wholly unto him.
And do thou bear good tidings unto thofe who humble themfelves ; whofe
hearts, when mention is made of God, are ftruck with fear ; and unto thofe
who patiently indure that which befalleth them ; and who duely perform their
prayers, ana give alms out of what we have bellowed on them. The

camels

a Let them put an end to the negleB of their
perfons ;] By fhaving their heads, and other parts
of their bodies, and cutting their beards and nails
in the valley of Mina ; which the pilgrims are
not allowed to do frotn the time they become
Mobrims , and have folemnly dedicated them-
felves to the performance of the pilgrimage, till
they have finilhed the ceremonies, and flain their
vi&ims *.

b Let tberr^ pay their vows j] By doing the
good works which they have vowed to do in
their pilgrimage. Some underftand the words
only of the performance of the re<juifite cere-
monies.

c And emtafs the ancient houfe ;] I. e. The
Caaba ; which the Mohammedans pretend was
the firft edifice built and appointed for the wor-
fhip of God *. The going round this chapel is
a principal ceremony of the pilgrimage, and is
often repeated j but the laft time of their doing
it, when they take their farewel of the temple,
feems to be more particularly meant in this place.

d Whoever Jha/l regard the facred ordinances of
God;] By obferving what he has commanded,
and avoiding what he has forbidden » or, as the
words alfo fignify, Whoever jball honour what
God hath fanftified , or commanded not to be
profaned 5 as the temple and territory of Mecca,
and the facred months, &c.

1 I idem. See chap. z.p. 23. chap . 5. p. 95. <5

chap. 3. p. 47. and the Prelim. Difc. J. IV. 3

c Avoid fpeaking that which is falfe ;] Either
by affertierg wrong and impious things of the
Deity ; or by bearing falfe witnefs againft your
neighbours.

f Like that which falleth from heaven, &c.]
Becaufe he who falls into idolatry, finketh from
the height of faith into the depth of infidelity,
has his thoughts diftra&ed by wicked lulls, and
is hurried hy the devil into the moft abfurd er-
rors J .

8 Whofe maketh valuable offerings unto God ;]
By chulrng a well-favoured and coftly vittim, in
honour of him to whom it is deftined. They fay
Mohammed once offered a hundred fat camels, and
among them one which had belonged to Abu
Jabl, having in his nofe a ring of gold : and
that Omar offered a noble oamel,for which he had
been bid three hundred dinars *.

The original may alfo be tranflated generally,
Whofo regardetb the rites of the pilgrimage , See .
But the victims feem to be more particularly in-
tended in this place.

h Unto the profeffors of every religion }] Jdl-
lak'ditn underitands this paffage in a retrained
fenfe, of the former nations who were true be-
lievers s to whom God appointed a facrifice, and
a fixed place and proper ceremonies for the offer-
ing of it.

nd Bobov, ie Peregr . Meccano, p. 1 5, 2 See

Al Bbidawi, * Idem.

27 & Al KORAN, Chap. 22.

canids fmn for facrifice have we appointed for you as fymbols of your

obedience unto Goo : ye alfo receive other advantages from* them. Where-
fore commemorate the name of God over them, when ye fiay them , ftand-
ing on their feet difpofed in right order * : and when tney are fallen down
dead, eat of them ; and give to eat thereof both unto him who is content with
w bat is given him, without askings and unto him who afketh b . Thus have
we given you dominion over them, that ye might return us thanks. Their
flelh is not accepted of God, neither their blood s but your piety is accepted
of him. Thus have we given you dominion over them, chat ye might
magnify God, for the revelations whereby he hath directed you. And
bear good tidings unto the righteous, that God will repel the ill defigns
of the infidels from the true believers; for God loveth not every perfi-
dious unbeliever. Permiflion is granted unto thofe who take arms a-
gtnnft the unbelievers , for that they have been unjuftly perfecuted by them .
(and God is certainly able to aflift them:' who have been turned out of
their habitations injurioufly, and for no other reafin than becaufe they fay,
Our Lord is God*. And if God did not repel the violence of fome men
by others, verily monafteries, and churches, and fynagogues, and the temples
of the Mofiems , wherein the name of God is frequently commemorated, would
be utterly demoIiQied*. And God will certainly aflift him who lhall be on
his fide : for God is ftrong and mighty. And he will ajfijl thofe who, if we
eftablifh them in the earth, will obferve prayer, and give alms, and com-
mand that which is juft, and forbid that which is unjuft. And unto God
fhall be the end of all things. If they accufe thee, O of im-

pofture; confider tbit, before them, the people of Noah, and the tribes if
Ad and Thamud, and the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot,
and the inhabitants of Madian, accufed their prophets of impofture: and
Mgses was alfo charged with falfehood. And I granted a long refpite unto
the unbelievers : but afterwards I chaftifed them ; and how different was the
change I made in their condition ! How many cities have we deftroyed, which
were ungodly, and which are now fallen to ruin on their roofs ? And how
many

Standing on tbdrftet diftw/tJ fa right or dir ;]
That is, as fome expound cite word, landing on
three feet, having one of their fore feet tied up,
which is the manner of tying camels to prevent
their moving from the place. Some copies in-
Head of j. read fewdjfna, from the verb
fafaua » which properly fignifies the poffure of
a horfe, when he lands on three feet, the edge
of the fourth only touching the ground.

b Unto him who is without asking , and

unto him who asketh ;] Or, as the words may alfo
be rendred, Unto him who osketh in o node/} end
humble manner , and unto him who wantotb but
dareth not ask .

c Penaijfion is granted unto thofe who take
jsrm, fsfr j This was the firft paffage of the

1 Al Beioawi, &Tr. F. the

Karan which allowed Mohammed and his fol-
lowers to defend themfelves again#: their enemies
by force, and was revealed a little before the
flight to Medina ; till which time the prophet
had exhorted his Mf/tem to fuffer the injuries
offered them with patience, which is alfo com-
manded in above feventy different places of the
Koran 1 .

4 If God did wot repel the violent* if fim men
by others , verily monaf}tri*s M cbvrtlvi, (jTr.
would be demit jhed That i^Thc public exercife
of any religion, whether true or falfe, is fupport-
ed only by force ; and therefore, as Mohammed
would argue, the true religion muff be effabliih-
ed by the fame means.

im* Dift . II /. 48, tffr.

Chap. 22. Al KORAN. 279

many wells have been abandoned*, and lofty caftles ? Do they not therefore
journey through the land ? And have they not hearts to underftand with*
or ears to hear with ? Surely as to thefe things their eyes are not blind, but
the hearts are blind which are in their breafts. They will urge thee to
haften the threatened puniftiment ; but God will not fail to perform what he
hath threatened : and verily one day with thy Lord is as a thoufand years, of
thofe which ye compute 6 . Unto how many cities have I granted refpite,
though they were wicked? Yet afterwards I chaftifed them: and unto me
lhall they come to be judged , at the lafi day . Say, O men, verily I am only a
public "preacher unto you. And they who believe, and do good works,
lhall obtain forgivenefs and an honourable provifion. But thofe who endea-
vour to make our fignsof none /hall be the inhabitants of hell. We

have fent no apoftle, or prophet, before thee, but, when he read, Satan
fuggefted fome error in his reading 6 . But God lhall make void that which
Satan hath fuggefted: then lhall God confirm his fignsj for God is know-
ing and wife. But this be pernnttethy that he may make that which Satan
hath fuggefted, a temptation unto thofe in whofe hearts there is an infirmity,
and whofe hearts are hardened : (for the ungodly are certainly in a wide difa-

S reement from the truth :) and that they on whom knowledge hath been be-
owed, may know that this book is the truth from thy Lord, and may be-
lieve therein ; and that their hearts may acquielce in the fame : for God is
furely the diredtor of thofe who belieye, into the right way. But the in-
fidels will not ceafe to doubt concerning it, until the hour of judgment
cometh fuddenly upon them * or until the punifhment of a grievous day d

overtake

* How many wells have been abandoned* £sV.]
That is. How many fpots in the defarts, which
were formerly inhibited, are now abandoned ?
a fcegleded well being the proper fign of fiich
a deferted dwelling in thofe parts, as ruins are
of a demali&ed town.

Some imagine that this paflage intends more
particularly a well at the toot of a certain hill
in the province of Hadr ament* and a caftie built
on the top of the fame hill, both belonging to
the people of Handba Kbn Safiadn* a remnant of
the jjbamudites* who having killed their Dro-
phet, were utterly deftroyed by Goo, and their
dwelling abandoned

6 See 2 Pet. hi. 8.

c We bm?efent no afoflle or prophet* but when
be read* Satan foggefied fome error in hie reading*
&c.] The oceafion of the paHage isr thus related.
Mohammed one day reading the chapter of
the Koran , when he came to thjs verfe, Wbat
think ye of Allat, and al Uzza, and of Manah
the other third goddefs ? the devil put the follow-
ing words into his mouth, which he pronounced
thro’ inadvertence, or, as fome tell us, becaufe

he was then half alleep a , viz. Thefe are the rnofi
high and beauteous damfels * whofe intercejjion is to
be hoped fir. The Koreifi , who were fitting near
Mohammed* greatly rejoiced at what they had
heard, and when he had fimflxed the chapter,
joined with him and his followers in making
their adoration : but the prophet, being acquaint-
ed by the angel Gabriel with the reafon of their
compliance, and with what he had uttered, was
deeply concerned at hi* aiftakc, till thi* vexfo
was revealed for his confection ? .

We are told however by Al Beidawl , that the
more intelligent and accurate perfons rejeft the
afore faki ftory ; and the verb, here tranfiated
read , fignifying abb to wifi fir my thing, inter*
pret the paffage of the fuggeftions of the devil
to debauch the affeftions of thofe holy perfons,
or to employ their minds in vain wirnes and
defires.

d A grievous day i] Or, a day which maketh
cbildlifs ; by which l'ome great misfortune in war
is^xprefied : as the overtliow the infidels receiv-
ed at Bedr . Some fuppoje the rcfurrcdlion is
here intended.

1 lidem. 2 Yahya. 1 Al BsiDAtirj, jAHALo'DDitf, Yahya, &c See

I 6. p 2Z3.

2$0

Al KORAN :

Chap. 22

overtake them On that day the kingdom (hall be God's : he lh.il] I stTge be-
tween them. And they who lhall have believed, and lhall have wrought righce-
oufnels, fbdl be in gardens of pleafure : but they who lhall hive dilb Heverf,
and Ih dl have charged ourfigns with falfehood, thofe lhall fuller a Ihameful
p'inilhment. And as to thofe who lhall h ive fled their country tor the fake
m Gon’s truereligi' n, and afterwards lhall have been fliin, or lhall have died;
on them will God beftpw an excellent provilion ; and God is the belt pro-
vider. He will iurely introduce them with an introduction with which they
lhall be well -plea led : for God is knowing and gracious. Ti is is fi. Who-
ever lhall take a vengeance equal to the injury which hath been done him*,
.md (hall afterwards be unjuftly treated h ; verily God willafBft h m : for God
■ t merciful, and ready to forgive. This jbaft be doin', for that Go > caufeth
r lit night to fucceed the day, and lie caufeth the day to fucceed the right ; and
for that Goo both heareth am 1 feeth. ThU, became God xs truth, and be-
caufe what they invoke befides him, U vanity *, and for that God is the high,
the mighty. Doft thou not lee that Goo lendeth down water from heaven,
and the earth become! h green ? for Goo if gracious and wife. Unto him
belengttb whaifoever is in heaven and on earth : and God is felf-fuffkienr, wor-
thy to be pratfed. Doft thou not fee that God hath fubju&ed whatever is
in the earth to your fervice, and aUb the Ihips which fall in the fea, by his
command ? And he with-holderh the heaven that it fall not on the t.vrrh,
unlefs by his permiflion* ; for God is gr.uious unto mankind, and merciful.
It is he who hath given you life, and will hereafter caul’e you to die ; after-
wards he will again raiie you to life, at the refurreSlioK : but man is furely un-
grateful. Unto the profeflbrs of every religion have we appointed certain rites,
which they obferve. Let them not therefore dilpute with thee concerning
this matter -, but invite them unto thy Lord : for thou followeft the right dir
re&ion. But if they enter into debate with thee, anfwer, God well knoweth
that which ye do: God will judge between you, on the day of refit rrecb'on,
concerning that wherein ye now difagree. Doll thou not know that God
knoweth whatever is in heaven and on earth ? Verily this is -written in the
book cf bis decrees : this is eafv with God. They worlhip, befides God,
that concerning which he hath lent down no convincing proof, and concern-
ing which they have no knowledge : but the unjuft doers lhall have none to
affift them. And when our evident ligns are rehearled unto them, thou
may eft perceive, in the countenances of the unbelievers, a difdain thereof :
it wanteth little but that they rufh with violence on thofe who rehearfe our
iigns unto them. Say, Shall I declare unto you a worfe thing than rhis ? The
fire of hell, which God hath threatened unto thofe who believe not, is worfe ,
and an unhappy journey Jhall H be thither. O men, a parable is propound-
ed unto you , wherefore* hearken unto it Verily the idols which ye invoke,

ing Turn fomc further violence.

b And Jball afterwards be unjuftly treated i] their uujull perfeendon of them.

‘By the aggneflor’s feekmg to revenge him- That itfaUm* &c ] Which it will do at the
• ’fclf again of the perfon injured, by offer- laft day.

The paffage feems to relate to the vengeance
which iht Mftems fhould tiskt of the infidels, for

Chap. 23. Al KORAN. 281

befides God, can never create a Angle fly, although they were all afiembled
for that purpofe : and if the fly fnatch any thing from them, they cannot
recover the fame from it*. Weak is the petitioner, and the petitioned.

They judge not of God according to his due eftimation : for God is power-
ful aftd mighty. God choofeth meffengers from among the angels b , and
from among men : for God is he who heareth and feeth. He knoweth that
which is before them, and that which is behind them : and unto God fhall
all things return. O true believers, bow down, and proftrate your felves,
and worlhip your Lord ; and work righteoufnefs, that ye may be happy :
and fight in defence of God’s true religion, as it behoveth you to fight for
the fame. He hath chofen you, and hath not impofed on you any diffi-
culty in the religion which he hath given you, the religion of your father
Abraham: he hath named you Moderns heretofore, and in this book •,
that our apoftle may be a witnefs againft you at the day of judgment , and
that ye may be witnefles againft the reft of mankind. Wherefore be ye
conftant at prayer ; and give alms : and adhere firmly unto God. He is
your matter ; and he is the beft matter, and the belt protestor.

* If the fly fnatcb any thing from them, &c.] rufalem, and the facrificej there offered to the
The commentators f iy, that the Arabs ufed true God, were never annoyed by flies 1 j
to anoint the images of their gods with ferae Whereas fwarms of thoie infefls infefied the
Odoriferous compofition, and with honey, which heathen temples, beipg drawn thither by the
the flies cat, tho' the doors of the temple were fleam of the facrifices *.
earefully flint, getting in at the vjindows or b God choofeth meffengers from among the
creyices. angels Who are the bearers of the divine re-

Perhaps Mohammed took this argument from relations to the prophets ; but ought not to
the Jews, who pretend that the temple of Je- be the objefts of worlhip.

1 Fir be Aboth, e, 5. $. 6, 7; * F. Selden. it Dtis Syr is, Synt. 2. c. 6.

CHAP. XXIII.

Inti tied) The true Believers ; revealed at Mecca,

In the name of the moft merciful God.

* XT O W are the true believers happy : who humble themfelves in their XVIII.

X w prayer, and who efchew all vain difcourfe, and who are doers of alms-
deeds ; and who keep themfelves from carnal knowledge of any women ex-
cept their wives, or the captives which their, right hands poffefs (for as to
them they fhall be blamelefs ; but whoever coveteth any woman beyond thefe,
they are tranfgreflSh : ) and who acquit themfelves faithfully of their truft,
ana juftlyferform their covenant •, and who obferve their appointed times of
prayer : thefe fhall be the heirs, who fhall inherit paradife they fhall con-
tinue therein for ever. We formerly created man of a finer fort of clay ;

Q 0 after-

282 Al KORAN. Chap. 23.

afterwards we placed him in the form of feed in a fure receptacle* : after-
wards we made the feed coagulated blood ; and we formed the coagulated
blood into a piece of flelh : thfo we formed the piece of flelh into bones;
and we cloathed thofe bones with flelh : then we produced the fame by ano-
ther creation b . Wherefore blefted be God, the tuoft excellent Creator'!
After this (hall ye die : and afterwards lhall ye be reftored to life, on the
day of refurredtion. And we have created over you feven heavens 4 : and
we are not negligent of What we have created. And we fend down rain
from heaven, by meafuTe ; and we caufe it to remain on the earth : we are
alfo certainly able to deprive you of the fame. And we caufe gardens of
palm-trees, and vineyards, to fprirtg forth for you by means thereof ; where-
in ye have many fruits, and whereof ye eat. Ana we alfo rmfe for you a
tree fpringing from mount Sinai * ; which produceth oil, and a fauce for
thofe who eat. Te have likewife an inftrudHdn in the cattle: we give you
to drink of the milk which is in their bellies, and ye receive many advan-
tages from them ; and of them do ye eat : and on them, and on fhips, are
ye carried 1 . We fent Noah heretofore unto his people, and he faid, O
my psople, ferve God : ye have no God befid-s him ; will ye not there-
fore Tear toe confequence of yvttr uiorjhippwg other goth ? And the chiefs of his
people, who believed not, (aid, This is no other dun a man, as ye are :
he feeketh to raife himfelf to a fitperioriry over you. If God had pleafed
to have fent a mcjfenger unto you, he would furdy have fent angels : we have
not heard this of our forefathers. Verily he is no other than a man dif-
turhii with frenzy : wherefore wait concerning him J bra time. Noah faid,
O Lord, do thou protect me ; for that they accufe me of faHhood. And
we revealed our orders unto him, faying. Make the ark in our fight; and
according to our revelation. And when our decree cometh to be executed, and
the oven Ihall boil and pour forth water, carry into it of every fpecies of
animals one pair; and alio thy family, except fuch of them on whom a
previous fentence of defrttcHm hath palled* : and fpeak not unto me in
behalf of thofe who* have been unjUft ; for they fistU be drowned. And
when thou and they who Jhall be with thee, Ihall go up into the ark, fay,
Praife be unto God, who hath delivered us from thi ung6dly people! And
fay, O Lord, caufe me to come down from this ark with a bleficd de-
feent ; for thou art belt able to bring me down/row the fame with fafety.

Verily

* A fufe fittptaiiei] Viz* The womb. * A tret fpriajbg from mount Sind viz. The

k By another erettlion ;} i.o. Producing a peifoft ollv*. The gar Jem near this mountain arc yet

man, wwnpofed of fobl and body. famous for the excellent fruit-trees of almoft all

c See chap. 6 p. 108. not. e. forts which grow there*.

* Seven heavens ;] Literally, font paths ; by On titan, aul enfbip are pt carried;] The beaft

Which the heavens are memf, becaufc, iteotding more particular! 7 meant In this place, is the
to fome eatpofitOri, they are the paths of the camel, which b chiefly ufed for carriage in
aageb and of the cel filial bodies : tho’ the ori- the eaft j being called by the Arabs, the A* */-
ginal Word alfo flgnifies things which are fslJ- Jbip, on which they pals thofe feai efjaai , the
ad or plated tike Jiories one above another', as delarts.

the Mobammtdins fuppofc the heavens to be. * See chap. 1 1. p. 178, &c.

* V Voyages de Theyehot, th- 2. tb, 9.

Chap. 23. Al KORAN. • 283

Ycrily herein were figns of our omnipotence ; and we proved mankind thereby.
Afterwards we raifed up anodier generation * after them j and we fent unto
them an apoftle from among them ", who feud, Worfhip God : ye have no
Gop befidcs him ; will ye not therefore fear bis vengeance? And the chief$
of his people, who believed not, and who denied the meeting of the life to
come, and on whom we had bellowed affluence in this prefent life, faid.
This is no other than a man, as ye are ; he eateth of that whereof ye
eat, and he drinketh of that whereof ye drink : and if ye obey a man like
unto your felves, ye will furely be fufferers. Doth he threaten you that
after ye fhall be dead, and fhall become duft and bones, ye fliall be brought
forth alive from your graves ? Away, away with that ye are threatened
with! There is no other life befides our prefent life : we die, and we live •, and we
fhall not be raifed again. This is no other than a man, who devifeth a
lie concerning God : but we will not believe him. Tbeir apoftle faid, O
Lord, defend me ; for that they have accufed me of impofture. God an-
fwered. After a little while they fhall furely repent tbeir obftinacy. Where-
fore a fevere punifhment was juftly inflifled on them, and we rendred them
like the refufe which is carried down by a Jlream. Away therefore with the
ungodly people! Afterwards we raifed up other generations' after them.
No nation fhall be punifhed before their determined time; neither fhall
fliey be refpited after. Afterwards we fent our apoftles, one after another.
So often as their apoftle came unto any nation, they charged him with im-
pofture : and we caufed them fuccellively to follow one another to deft me.
tion i and we made them only fubjeSts of traditional ftories. Away therefore
with the unbelieving nations ! Afterwards we font Moses, and Aaron his
brother, with our figns and manifeft power, unto Pharaoh and his princes:
but they proudly refilled to believe on him ; for they were a haughty people.
And they faid. Shall we believe on two men like unto our felves ; whofe
people are our fervants? And they accufed them of impofture: wherefore
they became of the number of thofe who were deftroyed. And we hereto-
fore gave the book of the law unto Moses, that the children of Israel might
be directed thereby , And we appointed die fon of Mary, and his mother,
for a fign : and we prepared an abode for them in an elevated part of the
earth 4 , being a place of quiet and fecurity , and watered with running fprings.
O apoftles, eat of thofe things which are good • ; and work righteouf-

Oo 2 nefs:

* Another generation ;] Namely, the tribe of But perhaps the paflage means the hill to
Ad, or qF ‘Ihamud. which the virgin Mary retired to be delivered,

b An apoftle ;J viz. The prophet Hud, or according to the Mohammedan tradition a .

Saleh. e O apoftles, eat of thofe thing t which are good,

c Other generations i\ As the Sodomites, Mi- £sV-] Thefe words are addrefied to the apoftle*
dianites, lee. , in ^general, to whom it was permitted to eat

4 An elevated part of the earth i] The com- of all clean and wholfome food j and were Ipoken
mentators tell us the place here intended is J«- to them feverally at the time of their rejpeftivq
nfa lent, or Damfeus, or Ramlab, or Paleftinc, miffion. Some however, think them Airefled
or Egypt *. particularly to the virgin Mery and Jefus, or

fingly

1 Al BhJDAWI, jALLAtO’DDIN.

* See (hep. 19. f. 250.

284 A KORAN. Chap. 23.

nefs : fof I well know that which ye do. This your religion is one reli-
gion • ; and I am your Lord : wherefore fear me. But men hive rent the
affair of their religion into various fefts : every party rejoiceth in that which
they follow. Wherefore leave them in their eonfufion, until a certain time b . Do
they think thac we haften unto them the wealth and children which we have
abundantly bellowed on them, for their good ? But they do not under-
ftand. Verily they who ftartd in awe, for fear of their Lord, and who
believe in the figns of their Lord, and who attribute not companions unto
their Lord •, and who give that which they give in aim, their hearts being
(truck with dread, for that they muft return unto their Lord : thefe haften
unto good, and are foremoft to obtain the fame. We will not impofe any
difficulty on a foul, except according to its ability ; with us is a book,
which fpeaketh the truth ; and they (hall not be injured. But their hearts
are drowned in negligence, as to this matter ; and they have works different
from thofe we have mentioned ; which they will continue to do, until, when
we chaftife fuch of them as enjoy an affluence of fortune, by a fevere punifh-
ment% behold, they cry aloud for help : but it Jhall be artfwcred them, Cry
not for help to day: for ye (hall not be aflifted by us. My figns were
read unto you, but ye turned back on your heels : proudly dating your
felves becaufe of your poffejftng the holy temple', dilcourfing together by night,
and talking foolifhly. Do they not therefore attentively confide r that which
is fpoken unto thm\ whether a revelation is come unto them which came
not unto their forefathers? Or do they not know their ajpoftle ; and there-
fore rejett him ? Or do they fay. He is a madman ? Nay, he hath come
unto them with the truth ; but the greater part of them deteft the truth.
If the truth had followed their defires, verily the heavens and the earth, and
whoever therein is, had been corrupted *. But we have brought them their
admonition ; and they turn afide from their admonition. Doll thou a(k of
them any maintenance for tby preaching? fince the maintenance of thy Lord is
better; for he is the mod bounteous provider. Thou certainly invited them
to the right way : and they who believe not in the life to come, do furely
deviate from that way. If we had had compaflion on them, and had taken off

from

fingly to the (Utter, in which cafe the plural
number muft be ufed out of reipe& only), pro-
pofing the r raftice of the prophets for their imi-
tation. Mt bammed probably defigned in this
paflage to condemn the abtfmence obfervcd by
the Cbrifiittn monks
* See chap. 21. p* 272.
b Until a attain time; j 1 e. Till they (hall be
flam, or Oiall die a natural death.

c A fever* punijbment ;] By Which is intended
either the overthrow at Beir , where feveral of
Che chief Korajbites loft their lives ; or the fa-

mine with which the Merauu were affii&ed,
at the prayer of the prophet, conceited in thefe
words, O God, fet th fftt jhvttgly on Modar,
( an anceftor of the 'K&rdfb ) and give them
years like the years ef Jol'cpb : 'whereupon fo
great a dearth ra filed, (hat they were obliged
to feed on dogs, carrion, and burnt bones a .

d If the truth bad ftitixstd tMr &c ]

That is. If there had been a plurality of gods,
as the idolaters contend 3 : or, if the do6trine
taught by Mabammd had been agreeable to
their inclinations, &V.

1 -^/Beidawi*

* Idem,

3 See tb*f- 2i- pi 266.

Chap. 23. Al KORAN. 285

from them the calamity -which had befallen them % they would furely have
more obftinately perfifted in their error, wandring in covjujion. We for-
merly chaftifed them with a punifhment b : yet they did not humble them-
felves before their Lord, neither did they make fupplications unto him \
until, when we have opened upon them a door, from which a fevere punifli-
ment* bath ijfued, behold, they are driven to defpair thereat. It is God who
hath created in you the fenfes bf hearing and of fight, that ye may perceive
our judgments, and hearts, that ye may feriottjly conjtder them : yet how few of
you give thanks ! It is he who hath produced you in the earth ; and be
fore him (hall ye be affembled. . It is he who giveth life, and putteth to
death •, and to him is to be attributed the vicifiitude of night and day : do
ye not therefore underftand ? But the unbelieving Meccans fay as their pre
decefiors faid : they fay. When we fliall be dead, and fhall have become

duft and bones, fhall we really be railed to life? We have already been

threatened with this, and our fathers alfo heretofore: this is nothing but
fables of the ancients. Say, Whofe is the earth, and whoever therein is ;
if ye know ? They will anfwer, God’s. Say, Will ye not therefore con-
fider? Say, Who is the Lord of the feven heavens, and the Lord of the
magnificent throne ? They will anfwer. They are God’s. Say, Will ye
not therefore fear him ? Say, In whofe hand is the kingdom of all things \
who prote&eth whom he pleafcth, but is himfelf protected of none ; if ye
know ? They will anfwer. In God’s. Say, How therefore are ye be-
witched ? Yea, we have brought them the truth ; and they are certainly

liars in denying the fame. God hath not begotten iffue; neither is there any

other god with him : otherwife every god had furely taken away that which
he had created d ; and fome of them had exalted themfelves above the others*.
Far be that from God, which they affirm of him l He knoweth that which
is concealed, and that which is made public: wherefore far be it from him to have
tbofe flj&rers in his honour, which they attribute to him ! Say, O Lord, If thou
wilt furely caufe me to fee the vengeance with which they have been threatened ;
O Lord, fet me not among the ungodly people : for we are furely able to make
thee to fee that with which we have threatened them. Turn afide evil with that
which is better f : we well know the calumnies which they utter againft thee. And

fay.

* The calamity which bad hef alien them ;] via.
The famine. It is faid that the Meccans be-
ing reduced to eat ilbiz , which is a fort of
miferable food made of blood ind camels hair,
ufed by the Arabs in time of fcarcity, Abu
Soft an came to Mohammed* and faid, fell me , I ad-
jure thee by God and the relation that is between
us, doft thou think thou art fent as a mercy unto all
creatures j jince thou haft jlain the fathers with
the Jmrd, and the children with hunger 1 ?

b We formerly chaftifed them with a punijhmtnt\\
Namely, the daughter at Bedr .

C -A fevere punijhment i] viz. Famine; which
is more terrible than the calamities of war*.

According to thefe explications, the paflage
mull have been revealed at Medina ; unleft it
be taken in a prophetical fenfe.

A Every god bad taken away • that which he had
created ;J And fet up. a <Min& creation and
kingdom of his own.
e See ebap. 17. p. 231.
f Turn afide evil with that which is better ;]
That is, By forgiving injuries, and retaining
of good for them : which rule is to be qualified,
ho wever, with this provifo ; that the true reli-
gion receive no prejudice by fuch mildnefs and
clemency 3 .

1 Al Bbidawl

* Idem.

3 Idem.

286 Al KORAN. Chap, 23.

fay, OLord, I fly unto thee for refuge, againft the fugged ions of the de-
vils : and I have recourfe unto thee, O Lord, to drive them away, that they
be not prefent with me *. Tbe gainfaying of the unbelievers ceafetb not until, when
death overtaketh any of them, he faith, O Lord, fuffer me to return to life ,
that I may do that which is right •, in prof effing tbe true faitb which I have
neglected b . By no means. Verily thefe are the words which he fhali fpeak :
but behind them there fhali be a bar *, until the day of refurrc&ion. When
therefore the trumpet fhali be founded, there fhali be no relation between
them which fhali he regarded on that day ; neither fhali they afk affiance
of each other. They whofe balances fhali be heavy with good works, fhalj
be happy : but they whole balances fhali be light, are thole who fhali lofe
their fouls, and fhali remain in hell for ever a . The fire fhali fcorch their
faces, and they fhali writhe their mouths therein for anguifh: and it fbaU
be foid unto them, Were not my figns rebearfed unto you ; and did ye
not charge them with falfhhood? They fhali anfwer, OLord, our unlup-
pinefs prevailed over us, and we were people who went aftray. O Lord,
take us forth from this fire : if we return to our former vetekedsiejs, we fhali
furely be unjuft. God will fay unto them. Be ye driven away with ignomi-
ny thereinto : and fpeak not unto me to deliver you. Verily there were a par-
ty of my fervants, who faid, O Lord, we believe : wherefore forgivL us,
and be merciful unto us *, for thou art the beft of thole who fhew mercy.
But ye received them with feoffs, fo that they differed you ro forget my
admonition*, and ye laughed them to horn. I have this day rewarded
them, for that they fuffered tbe injuries ye offered them with patience : veri-
ly they enjoy great felicity. God will fay. What number of years have ye

con*

* That they te nit freftst teitb me ;] To befiege
me . or, as it may alfo be tranflatea. That they
hurt me net.

b In preftfing tbe true fA$b which 1 have
ncgltiUdi] Or, as the word* may alfo import.
In tie world which I have Itft ; that h, during
the further term of life which fhali be granted
me, and from which I have been cut flfF r .

c Behind them there Jbeil be a bari] The origi-
nal word barzakh , here tranflated W, prima-
rily figniiks any partition* or fatrrjtfcji M which di-
vides one thing firm another ; but is ufed by the
Arabs not always in the fame, and fo me times
in an obfeure fenfe. They feem generally to
exprefs by it what the Gre* jU did by the word
Hades s one while ufing it for the place of the
dead, another while for the time of their con-
tinuance in that ftate, and another while for the
Hate it felf. It is defined by their critics to be the
interval or fpacc between this world and the next,
or between death and the re (unc&ions every per-

fon who dies, being {aid to enter into al £ rr-
xai 5 or, as the Greek exprefles it, KajoiCiHU
lie fP* * One Sodcographtr 3 tells us that
in the KorAn it denotes the grave : but the com-
mentators on this pafTage expeund it a &rr, or
imintihk ebfade* cubing off all pofTsblliry 0 f
return halo the world, after death* See chap.
25. where the word agrin occurs.

Some interpreters underftaud the words we
have rendred behind thim 3 to mean htfeu them*
(it being one of thofe words* of which there are
leveralinthe Arabic tongue, that have direft
contrary fignificatbn^J confidering A B.rrzakb
as a future fpace, and lying It/rc, and not bt-
him ; them.

d See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. 89.

• They jifjered yxi eo forget my aim turnon i\

Being unable to prevail on you by their remon-
flranccs, becaufe of the contempt wherein ye
held them.

1 Idem. 2 V 1 Pococx. net. in Pant. Mofis, p. 248, &c. and the Prelim. Difc. § IV. f. p;.

* Ebn Ma mjf, apudGol. Lex. Arab. cel. 254.

Ghap. 24. Al KORAN. 287

continued on earth? They will anfwer, We have continued thert a
day, or part of a day * : but alk thofe who keep account b . God will
fay. Ye have tarried but a little, if ye knew it. Did ye think that
we had created you in fport, and that ye fhould not be brought again be-
fore us? Wherefore let God be exalted, the King, the Truth! There is
no God befides him, the Lord of the honourable throne. Whoever toge-
ther with the true God lhall invoke another god, concerning whom he hath
no detnonftrative proof, fliall fur'ely be brought to an account for the fame
before his Lord. Verily the infidels fliall not profper. Say, O Lord, par-
don, and Ihew mercy •, for thou art the belt of thofe who fhew mercy.

* A day or fort of a day ;] The time wHl feem diflike, as of loDg continuance,
thus (hort to them in comparlfon to the eternal b Ask thofe tobo keep account i] That is, the
duration of their torments , or becaufe the time angels, who keep account of the length of mens
of their Being in the world was the time of their lives and of their Works, or any other who may
joy and pleafure ; it being ufual for the Arabs to have leifure to compute; and not us, whofc tor-
defcribe what they like as of Ihort, and what they meats diltraft our thoughts and attention.

<$ H A P. XXIV.

Intitled \ Light * ; revealed ^Medina.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

T HIS Sura have we lent down from heaven % and have ratified the
fame : and we have revealed therein evident figns, that ye may be
Warned. The whore, and the whoremonger, fliall ye fcourge with an hun-
dred ftripes b . And .let not companion towards them prevent you from exe-
cuting the judgment of God c •, if ye believe in God and the laft day : and
let fome of the true believers be witneffes of their puniflimem*. The
Whoremonger fliall not many any other than a harlot, or an idolatrefi. And
a harlot fliall no man take in marriage, except a whoremonger, or an ido-
later.

* This title is taken from an allegorical com-
parifon made between light and God, or faith
in him, about the middle of the chapter,

b The where and tbe whoremonger Jb*U ye ftourge
with an hundred frip?s, &c.] This law is not to
be tinderftood to relate to married people, who
are of free condition ; becaufe adultery in fuchi
according to the Senna, is to be punished by Hon-
ing*.

c Let not companion prevent you, &c,] i t. Be
not moved by pity, either to forgive the offen-
ders, or to putigate their puniihmeirt- Moham-

med was for fo flrift and impartial an execution
of the laws, that he is reported to have faid, If
Fateraa the daughter of Mohammed fieal, let her
hand be firuck off 2 *

A Let /me tf the true believers be witneffes of
their pun\ foment .] That is, Let the punifnineiit
be inflated in public, and not in private ; be-
caufe the ignominy of it is more intolerable than
the fmart, and more likely tp work a reformation
on the offender. Some fay there ought to be
three perfons prefent at the leafl; but otherf
think two, or even one, to be fufficient 3 .

1 See chap* 4. p. 62, and 64.

* Al Bejdawt,

3 Idem.

a88 Al KORAN. Chap. 24,

liter* Ai\A this i/nfi' * f marriage is forbidden the true believers \ B it as to
thofe who accufe women of reputation of wharafarH*, and produce not four
witnc ties of the fall % fcourge them with fourfeore ftripcs, and receive not
their teftimonv for ever; for fuch are infamous prevaricators: excepting
thofe who fhail afterwards repent, and amend ; for unto fuch will God be
gracious and merciful. They who fhail accufe their wives of adultery, and
fhail have no witneffes thereof befides themfelves; the teftimony which /ball
he required of one of them Jh&li be t that he fwear four times by God that
he fpcaketh the truth: and the fifth time that h* imprecate the curfe of
God on him, if he be a liar. And it fhail avert the punifhment from the
wife t if Ihe fwear four times by God that he is a liar ; and if the fifth
time Jhe imprecate the wr.sth of God on her, if he fpcaketh the truths If
it were not fir the indulgence of God towards you, and his mercy, and that
God is eafy to be reconciled, and wife ; be would immediately d( lover pur
e nines. As to the party among you who have pubUlhed the falfhood cm-
cerning AmutA% think it not to be an evil unto you : on the contrary, it

is

* AffJ this kind tf wutrttftigt ij fir&idds* lit
frsi Afttipcrri} The preceding re-

vealed on account oF the meaner and more indi-
gent MxMjeriah or refugees, who fought to
murv the who res nf tike infidel;, taken capfivci
in war, for the (fake of the gain whkh they
made by proflitufing fhtmftlves. S >rae thiuk
the prbhi bition wa= ftieciJ, and regarded only
the Mobajtrins be lore mentioned; and others
are of ^ppriop k was general 1 but it \s agrefed
to have been ahrcjpttrd, by the words which fol-
low in this chapter, Marry tb, futjk women among
hatlots being comprized under the appella-
tion Of dngii watt f ft l .

It is lup'-pofed by fome that not but

i-aiawfyJ ■ MstshTCt’ with fuck v. omen ia here

forbidden.

1 Ptfpvtcxt fftwatfo a ;] The ArcMi word*

mfbjfttfftj properly fignifies x rzrx sf tnlUme-

aJtJg imtde/bi ; but to bring the chaft Tement af-
rermentioned on the calumniator, it is alfo re-
quire thi: they be free women, of ripe age,
having their underfhndings perfoft, ana or the
Mobu religion. Tho 1 the word he of the

feminine Render, yet men are alfb fuppofed to
be comprized in this law.

Abu Hanifa Was of opinion that the flanderer
ought to be fcourged in public, as well as the
fornicator ; but the generality are againft him *.

c See chaD. 4. p. 62.

d In cafe both fwear, the man's oath difeharges
him from the imputation and penalty of flander,
aifd the woman’s oath frees her from the impu-
tation and penalty of adultery : but tho’ the

woman do fwear to her innocence, yet thermr-
rlige b actually void, or ought he dcd'rei
void by the judge ; bmuie it is mr fit 1'my
thoald continue. together after they nave came
to thefe extremities 1 .

* Ai ip the pertj among jcu tuba have pxbft sh-
ed the fc&itd imemiUE Ayriha, faff.] For the

undeiflmJing ■ f this priTige, it is neceiiarv to
relate the tblfo wing frary.

MibimmtJ haying undertaken an carped itjen
againft the tribe of Mojfelek* in the fixth year of c he
Hejra* took his wife Ajejka with him, to accom-
pany him. In their return, when they jvere
not far fr m AMfc, the army removing by
night, Aujbft t on the mad, alighted from her
nmel, and flopped afide on a private occafion 2
but, on her return, perceiving (he had dropped
htv tafecklicr, which w.is of oni xes of DbxfSr*
ihe went b;cfc to look for it ; and in the mean
time her attend faking it for granted that
ihe was got into her pavilion (or little tent
furrounded with curtains, wherein women are
carried in the eaft 1 fet it again on the camel, and
led it away. When (he came beck to the road,
and £aw her camel was gone, (he fat down there,
expe&ing that when (he lv,v milled fome would
be fent back to fetch her ; and in a little time
(he fell afleep. Early iq the morning, Stfman
Ebn al Moattel , who hid (laid behind to reft
himfelf, coming by, and perceiving fome body
afleep, went to fee who it was, and knew her to
be Ajejba ; upon which he waked her, by twice
pronouncing with a low voice thefe word f. We
are God r, <md unto bits sw ft tern. Then

Jyep*

1 Idem !, jALtALO^DIH.

% Idem .

? J wn*

Chap. 24. Al KORAN. 289

is better for you*. Every man of them Jball be punijhed according to the
injuftice of which he hath been guilty k ; and he among them who hath under-
taken to aggravate the fame 6 , fhall fuffer a grievous punilhment. Did not
the faithful men, and the faithful women, when ye heard this, judge in
their own minds for the beft ; and fay, This is a manifeft fallhood ? Have
they produced four witnefles thereof? wherefore fince they have not pro-
duced the witnefles, they are furely liars in the fight of God. Had it not
been for the indulgence of God towards you, and his mercy, in this world
and in that which is to come, verily a grievous punilhment had been in-
flicted on you, for the calumny which ye have fpread : when ye publilhed
that with your tongues, and fpoke that with your mouths, of which ye
had no knowledge •, and efteemed it to be light, whereas it was a matter
of importance in the fight of God. When ye heard it, did ye fay, It
belongeth not unto us, that we fliould talk of this matter : God forbid !
this is a grievous calumny ? God warneth you, that ye return not to the
like crime for ever ; if ye be true believers. And God declareth unto you
bis figns > for God is knowing and wife. Verily they who love that fcan-
dal be publilhed of thofe who believe, lhall receive a fevere punilhment
both in this world, and in the next. God knoweth, but ye know not.
Had it not been for the indulgence of God towards you, and his mercy,
and that God is gracious and merciful, ye bad felt bis vengeance. O

true believers, follow not the fteps of the devil : for whofoever lhall fol-
low the fteps of the devil, he will command him filthy crimes, and

that which- is unlawful. If it were not for the indulgence of God, and

his mercy towards you, there had not been fo much as one of you cleanfed

P p from

Ayepa immediately covered herfelf with her expert in the next world, God had done them
vail ; and Safwdn let her on his own camel, and the honour to dear their imputations by reveal-
led her after the army, which they overtook ing eighteen verfes cxprelly /or that purpofe 2 .
by noon, as they were reding. h Every man of them pall be puniped , ac -

This accident had like to have ruined Ayepa, cording to the injuftice of which he hath been
whofe reputation was publickly called in quefti- guilty . ] The perfons concerned in fpreading the
on, as ir Ihc had been guilty of adultery with fcandal, were Abdallah EbnObba,(Yi\\o firft railed
Safwdn: and Mohammed himfdf knew not what it, and inflamed the matter to the utmoft, out of
to think, when he reflected on the circumftances hatred to Mohammed) Zeid Ebn Ref da, Hajfdn
of the affair, which were improved by fome Ebn Thabet, Me ft ah Ebn Otbatha , a great grand-
malicious people very much .to Ayepa ' s difhon- fon of Ab<T almotalleb's, and Hamna Bintjabap :
our ; and notwithftanding .his wife’s protefla- and every one of them received fourfeore ftripes,
tionsofher innocence, he could not get rid of his purfuant to the law ordained in this chapter,
perplexity, nor flop the mouths of the cenfo- except only Abd'allab, who was exempted, being
nous, till about a month after, when this paf- a man of great confideration
fage was revealed, declaring the accufation to It is faid that, as a farther punilhment, Haffdn
be unjuft x . and Meftab became blind, and that the former of

1 Think it not to be an evil unto you ; on the them alfo loft the ufe of both his hands + .
contrary , it is better for you .] The words are c He who hath undertaken to aggravate the
directed to the prophet, and to Abu Beer , Ayepa, fame ;] viz. Abd'allab Ebn Obba , who had not
and Safwdn , the perfons concerned in this falfe the grace to become a true believer, but died
report ; fince, bendcs the amends they might an infidel 1 .

1 Al Bokhari in $onna , Al Beidawi, Jallalo’ddiw, &c. V . Abu’lf. vit, Moh.p. $2,
ttr. fcf Gacnier, Vie de Mahomet y lib . 4. c. 7. a Al Beidawi, * Abvifeda, vi(.
Mob. p . 83. 4 ^/Beidawi. 1 See (bap, 9. p . 159, 160.

2go Al KORAN. Chap. 24.

from his guilt for ever : but God cleanfeth whom he pleafeth ; for God
both hearcth and knoweth. Let not thofe among you who poffds abundance
of wealth , and have ability, fwear that they will not give Unto their kindred,
and the poor, and thofe who have fled tncir country for the fake of God’s
true religion : but let them forgive, and a& with benevolence towards them.
Do ye not defire that God ftiould pardon you * ? And God is gracious
and merciful. Moreover they who falfly accufe modeft women, who be-
have in a negligent manner% and are true believers, lhall be curfcd in
this world, and in the world to come j and they (hall fuffer a fevere pu-
nifhmenc e . One day their own tongues fhall bear witnefs againft them,
and their hands, and their feet, concerning that which they have done.
On that day fhall God render unto them their juft due ; and they fhall
know that God is the evident truth. The wicked women jhsuld be join-
ed to the wicked men, and the wicked men to the wicked women ; but
the good women Jhould be married to the good men, and the good men to
the good women. Thefe fhall be cleared trom the calumnies which flmderers
fpeak of them * : they fhall obtain pardon, and ,in honourable provifion.
Otrue bplieveps, enter not any houles, betides your own houfes, until ve
have afked leave, and have faluted the family thereof*: this is better (or
you *, peradventure ye will be admohifhed. And if ye Hull find no per-
lon in the houfes, yet do not enter them, until leave be granted you ;
and if it be faid unto you, Return back ; do ye return back. This will
be more decent for you r j and God knoweth that which ye do. It lhall

be

• Let not thfi among you who have ability*
fioear that they mill not give unto their kindred 9
£37.] This paffage was revealed on account of
Abu Beer ; who ffrore that he would not for
the future beftow any thing on Meftah, tho’ he
was his mother’s fitter’s ion, and a poor Mcba-
jer or refugee, becaufe he had joined in fcanda-
lizing his daughter Ayejha. But on Mohammed*
reading this verfe to him, he continued Mif-
tab' s penfion *.

b Who behave m a negligent manner i] i e.
Who may be left careful in their conduit, and
more free in their behaviour, as being confcious
of no ill.

c Tho’ the words be general, yet they prm-
cipaHy regard thofe Who fhould calumniate
the prophfifs wives According to a faying
of Ebn Abbas , ti the threats contained in the
whole Koran be examined, there are none fo
fevere as tho e occafioned by the falfe accusation
of Ayejba ; wherefore he th might even repen-
tance would Hand her flandercr: in no Head 2 .

d Thefe Jbdll be cleared* &ed] Al Beldam ob-
serves, on this paflage, that God cleared four

pafons, by four extraordinary teftimonies : for
he cleared Jofepb by the teftimony of a child
in his miftreftes family 3 ; Mqfei M by means of
the ftone which fled away with his oarrnenta 4 ;
Miiry, by the teflimany nf her infant 1 ; and
Afejhfft by thefe verfes of the Korda.

Enter *t£ any fatt/ei bejidet )cur mv, till
ye hate ailed -W, t?V. ] To enter MdaHy
or abruptly into any man’ r houfc or apartment,
is reckoned a -reat incivility in the eaft; be-
caufe a perfon nny poflibly be furprized in
an indecent alHon or pofture, dir mny have
fomething difeovered which he wnuld conceal.
It is faid, dut a man came to MohdxmJ* and
wanted to know whether he mutt ask leave to
go in to his After ; which being anfwered in
the affirmarive* he told the prophet that his
After had no body elk to attend upon her,
and it would be troubtefome to zik let re every
time he went in to her : replied Mo-

hammed, m*lde0 then fee her waked d ?

f This will bf mire demtt ;] Than to be im-
portunate for admiihon * or to wait at the deer,

1 Al Beidawi, Jallalo’ddi*. 1 Al Beidawi.
ehaf. a. f . 8. and e tap. 33. * See thap. 19. /. 251.

3 See ehap, 12 . f 9 1 90

6 Al Beidawi.

4 Set

Chap. 24 . Al KORAN. 291

be no crime in you, that ye enter uninhabited houfes * , wherein ye may
meet with a convenience. God knoweth that which ye difcover, and that which
ye conceal. Speak unto the true believers, that they reftrain their eyes,
and keep themfelves from immodeft aftions : this will be more pure for
them } for God is well acquainted with that which they do. And (peak
unto the believing women, that they reftrain their eyes, and preferve their
modefty, and difcover not their ornaments b , except what tieceffarily ap-
peareth thereof': and let them throw their vails over their bofoms d , and
not Ihew their ornaments, unlefs to their hulbands % or their fathers, or
their hulbands fathers, or their Tons, or their hufbands fons, or their bro
thers, or their brothers fon9, or their fitters fons f , or their women *, or
the captives which their right-hands fhall poflefs h , or unto fuch men as at-
tend them, and have no need of women 1 * , or unto children, who diftinguifh
not the nakednefs of women. And let them not make a noife with
their feet, that their ornaments which they hide may thereby be difcover-

P p 2 ed.

a Uninbabittd houfes ;] i. c. Which are not
the private habitation of a family; fuch as
public inns, fhops, fheds, &V.

b And difcover not their ornaments ;] As their
doaths, jewels, and the furniture of their toilet;
much lefs fuch parts of their bodies as ought not
to be feen.

c Except what nccejfiu'ily appear eth ;] Some
think their outward garments are here meant ;
and others their hands and faces : it is gene-
rally held, however, that a free woman ought
not to difcover even thofe parts, unlefs to the
perfons after excepted, or on fome unavoidable
occafion, as their giving evidence in public,
faking advice or medicines in cafe of ficknefs,

t*.

d Let them throto their vails over their bo -
fims ;] Taking care to cover their heads, necks,
and breads.

e Unlefs to their husbands ;] For whofe fake
it is that they adorn themfelves, and who alone
have the privilege to fee their whole body.

f Or their fathers, &c] Thefe near relations
are alfo excepted, becaufe they cannot avoid
feeing them frequently, and there is no great
danger to be apprehended from them. They
are allowed, therefore, to fee what cannot well
be concealed in fo familiar an intercourfe 1 , but
no other part of their body, particularly what-
ever is between the navel and the knees
Uncles not being here particularly mentioned,
it Is a doubt whether they may be admitted to
fee their nieces. Some think they are includ-
ed under the appellation of brothers ; but others

are of opinion that they are not comprized in
this exception ; and give this reaion for it, viz.
left they fhould deferibe the perfons of their
nieces to their fons 3 .

* Or their women;] That is, fuch as are of
the Mohammedan religion; it being reckoned
by-fome unlawful, or, at leaft, indecent, for a
woman, who is a true believer, to uncover
her felf before one who is an infidel, becaufe
file will hardly refrain deferibing her to the
men ; but others fuppofc all women in general
are here excepted ; for, in this particular, doc-
tors differ 4 :

h Or the (apt foes, &c/} Slaves of either fex
are included in this deception, and, as fome
think, domeftic fervants who are not fbves s as
thofe of a different nation. It is related, that
Mohammed once made a prefent of a man-flave
to his daughter Fatema ; and when he brought
him to her, fhe had on a garment which was
fo fcanty that fhe was obliged to leave either
her head or her feet uncovered : and that the
prophet, feeing her in great confufion on that
account, told her, fhe need be under no con-
cern, for that there was none prefent befidei
her father and her flave

{ And have no need of women ;] Or have no
defire to enjoy them ; fuch as decrepit old men,
and deformed or filly perfons, who follow peo-
ple as hangers - on, for their fpare vkftuals,
being too defpiqable to raife either a woman s
paffion, or a man’s jealoufy. Whether eunuchs
are comprehended under this general defigtu
tion, is a queftion among the learned 6 .

1 Idem. 1 Jallalo’duim. 5 Al Beidawi. * Ida r, Jallalo’ddin. < Idem.

6 Idem, Jallalo’ddin* Yahya,

Al KORAN.

Chap. 24,

292

cd\ And be ye all turned unto God, O true believers, that ye may be
happy. Marry thofe who are fingle* among you, and fuch as are honeft
of your men-fervants, and your maid-fervants : if they be poor, God will
cnnch them of his abundance ; for God is bounteous and wife. And let
thofe who find not a match, keep themfelves from fornication , until God
(hall enrich them of his abundance. And unto fuch of your (laves* as de-
fire a written inftrument allowing them to redeem themfelves on paying a cer-
tain fum d , write <?»r, if ye know good in them* ; and give them of the
riches of God, which he hath given you*. And compel not your maid-
fervants to proftitute themfelves, if they be willing to live chaftly •, that ye
may feek the cafual advantage of this prefent life *: but whoever (hall
compel them thereto , verily God will be gracious and merciful unto fuch
women after their compulfion. And now have we revealed unto you evi-
dent figns, and a biftory like unto fome of the biftories of thofe who have gone
before you h , and an admonition unto the pious. God is the light of
heaven and earth : the fimilitude of his light is as a nich in a wall,
wherein a lamp is placed^ and the lamp inclofed in a cafe of glaft ; the glafe
appears as it were a Ihining ftar. It is lighted with the oil of a blefied
tree, an olive neither of the eaft, nor of the weft 1 : it wanteth little but that the
oil thereof would give light, although no fire touched it. This is light ad-
ded unto light k : God will diredt unto his light whom he pieafcch. God

1 Lit them not make a noife with their feet ^ &c.] to have a lhare in the public alms ? .

By {hating the rings, which the women in the * Compel not jour maid-fervants to projlitute
eaft wear about their ancles, and are ufbaUy of themfelves , &c.] It feems Abdallah Ebn Obba
gold or filver *. The pride which the JewiJb had fix women flaves, on whom he laid a certain
ladies of old took in making a tinkling with tax, which he obliged them to earn by the pro-

thefe ornaments of their feet , is (among other ftiturion of their bodies : and one of them made

things of that nature) fcvcrely reproved by the her complaint to Mohammed, which occafioned

prophet 1/aiah *. the revelation of this paflage *.

b Thofe who are Jingle $] i. e. Thofe who are k A biftory like unto feme of the biftories of
unmarried of either fex ; whether they have

4 A written inftrument , &c.] Whereby the _ j

mafter obliges himfdf to fet his Have at Ii- a more excellent kind. Some think the mean-
berty, on receiving a certain fum of money, ing to be that the tree grows neither in the
which the flave undertakes to pay. eaftem nor the weftern parts, but in the midft

c If ye know good in them ,] That is. If ye of the world, namely in Syria , where the bell
have found them Faithful, and have reafon to olives grow 6 .

believe they will perform their engagement. k This is light added unto light ;] Or a light

* Give them of the riebes which God hath whofe brightnefs is doubly increased by the cir-
given you ;] Either by bellowing fomething on cum fiances abovementioned.
them of your own fubfiance, or by abating The commentators explain this allegory, and
them a part of their ranfom. Some fuppofe every particular of it, with great fubtilty ; in-
thefe words are dire&ed, not to the mafiers terpreting the light here deferibed, to dc the
only, but to all Mcftems in general ; recom- light revealed j n the Koran , or God’s in-
mending it to them to affift thofe who have lightening grace, in the heart of man; and in
obtained their freedom, and paid their ranfom, divers other manners,
cither out of their ownftock,or by admitting them

pro-

been married before or not
c Your flaves j] Of either fex.

* Idea. 4 * Idem .

1 ft dm* * Ifaiab iii, 16 and 18.

3 J/Bbidawi.

4 Idem > Jallalo'ddin.

Chap. 24. Al KORAN. 293

propoundeth parables unto men j for God knoweth all things, In the houfes
which God hath permitted to be railed*, and that his name be commemora-
ted therein : men celebrate his praife in the fame morning and evening, whom
neither merchandizing, nor felling diverteth from the remembring of God,
and the obfervance of prayer, and the giving of alms ; fearing the day whereon
men's hearts and eyes fball be troubled ; that God may recompenfe them ac-
cording to the utmoft merit of what they lhall have wrought, and may add
unto them of his abundance a more excellent reward ; for God beftoweth
on whom he pleafeth without meafure. But as to the unbelievers, their works
are like the vapour in a plain b , which the thirfty traveller thinketh to
be water, until, when he comech thereto, he findeth it to be nothing ;
but he findeth God with him c , and he will fully pay him his account ;
and God is fwift in taking an account : or, as the darknefs in a deep fea,
covered by waves riding on waves, above which are clouds, being additions of
darknefs one over the other ; when one ftretcheth forth his hand, he is far
from feeing it. And unto whomfoever God fhall not grant bis light, he
lhall enjoy no light at all. Doft thou not perceive that all creatures both
in heaven and earth praife God j and the birds alfi., extending their wings?
Every one knoweth his prayer, and his praife : and God knoweth that
which they do. Unto God belongetb the kingdom of heaven and earth ;
and unto God fball be the return at {be loft day. Doft thou not fee that
God gently driveth forward the clouds, and gathereth them together, and
then layeth them on heaps ? Thou alfo feeft the rain, which falleth from
the midft thereof ; and God fendeth down from heaven as it were moun-
tains, wherein there is hail i he ftriketh therewith whom he pleafeth, and
turneth the fame away from whom he pleafeth : the brightness of his light-
ning wanteth but little of taking away the fight. God Ihifteth the night,
and the day : verily herein is an inftrudiion unto thole who have light.
And God hath created every animal of water - j one of them goeth on his

belly,

* In the houfes , &c.] The connexion of thefe the eaftem countriesjs often feen in Tandy plains
words is not very obvious. Some fuppofe they about noon, rcfembling a large lake of water in
ought to be joined with the preceding words, motion, and is occafioned by the reverberation
Like a stub , or It is lighted in the houfes, of the fun- beams. It fomedmes tempts thirfty

and that the companion is more ftrong and travellers out of their way, but deceives them
juft, by being made to the lamps in Mofques> when they come near, either going fbrward,(for
which are larger than thofe in private houfes. it always appears at the fame diftance,) or quite
Some think they are rather to be cocne&ed with vanilhing a .

the following words, Men praife » &c. And o- c He findeth God with him j] That is. He
thers are of opinion they are an imperfed be- will notefcape the notice or vengeance of God.
ginning of a fentence, and that the words, d Of water i] This aflbrtion, which has al-
Praife ye God, or the like, are to be underftood. ready occurred in another place being not
However the houfes here intended are thofe fet true in ftridnefs, the commentators fuppofe
apart for divine worlhip ; or particularly the that by water is meant feed; or elfe that
three principal temples of Mecca* Medina , and water is mentioned only as the chief caufe of the
Jentfakm 1 * . growth of animals, and a confiderableand ne-

b The vaptur in a plain ;] The Arabic word cefTary conftituent part of their bodies.

Serab fignihes that falfe appearance which, in

1 Al Beidawi. 2 V. Qi Curt, de rebus Alex, lib . 7 . 1$ Gol. in Alfrag . p» lit , (A in

AJag. Arab . ad cakem Gram . Erp. p. 93. 3 Chap . zx. /. *67.

394 Al KO R A N. Chap. 24 .

belly, and another of them walketh upon two feet, and another of them
walketh upon four feet : God createth that which he pleafeth ; for God is
almighty. Now have we fent down evident figns : and God diredlcth
whom he pleafeth into the right way. The hypocrites fay. We believe in
God, and on his apoftle ; and we obey them: yet a part of them turneth
back, after this ; but thefe are not really believers. And when they are
fummoned before God and his apoftle, that he may judge between them ;
behold, a part of them retire : but if the right had been on their fide,
they would have come and fubmitted themfelves unto him. Is there an in-
firmity in their hearts ? Do they doubt ? Or do they fear left God and his
apoftle ad unjuftly towards them? But themfelves are the unjuft doers*.
The laying of the true believers, when they are fummoned before God
and his apoftle, that he may judge between them, is no other than that
they fay, We have heard, and do obey : and thefe are they who fhall
profpex. Whoever fhall obey God and his apoftle, and lhall fear God,
and lhall be devout towards him ; thefe lhall enjoy great felicity. They
fwear by God, with a moft folemn oath, that if thou commanded them,
they will go forth from tbtir boufet and paffejfions. Say, Swear not to a
fdjhocd: obedience is more requifite : and Gop is well acquainted with that
which ye do. Say, Obey God, and obey the apoftle : but if ye turn back,
verily it ts expeSei of him that be perform his duty, and of yon that ye per-
form your duty ; and if ye obey him, ye (hall be directed : but the duty
of our apoftle b only public preaching. God promifcth unto fuch of you
as believe, and do good works, that he will caufe them to fucceed the
unbelievers in the earth, as he caufed thofe who were before you to fuc-
ceed the infidels of their time*', and that he will eftablifh for them their
religion which pleafeth them , and will change their fear into fecurity. They
lhall worfhip me; and lhall not afiociatc any other with me. But who-
ever lhall ddbelieve after this ; they will be the wicked doers. Obferve
prayer, and give alms, and obey the apoftle ; that ye may obtain mercy.
Think not that the unbelievers lhall fruftrate the defigns cf God on earth :
and their abode hereafter lhall be hell fire ; a mifcrable journey Jhall it be
thither l O true believers, let your (laves and thofe among you who lhall
not have attained the age of puberty, alk leave of you, before they come into
your preftn, cc, three times in the day * ; namely , before the morning

prayer.

* The hypocrites fay, We btliwt in God jW
his dpo/ik,&e~] This paffage was occalioned by
Bajbir the hypocrite, who having a controver-
fy with a Jew, appealed to Ceab Ebn aJ AJb-
raf, whereas the Jew appealed to Mohammed r i
or, as others tell us, by me their a Ebn WayeU
who refilled to fubmit a diJpute he had with
Ali to the prophet’s decifion a .

b As bt caufed thofe who were before pm* to
fucceed the infidels rf their time ;] i. e. As he

1 See chap. 4. p. 69.

caufed the Ifraefites to difpoffefi the Canaan-
ties. See,

c Let ywr fovesaud thefe who jbatt not Me
attained the age cf puberty, asi Jean beftre they
come ymr preftsrcy See.} Becaufe there are
certain times when it is not convenient, even
for a domefhc, or a child, to come in to one
without notice. It is laid this paiTage. was re-
vealed on account of Jfm^ Bint Mortbtd,
whofe fervant entred fuddcnJy upon her, at an

a ^/Beioawi.

Chap. 24* Al KORAN* 295

prayer*, and when ye lay afide your garments at noonS and after the
evening prayer c . Tbefe are the three times for you to be private : it fhall
be no crime in you, or in them, if they go into you without asking pcrmijfion
after thefe times 9 while ye are in frequent attendance, the one of you on the
other. Thus God declareth bis figns unto you ; far God is knowing and
wife. And when your children attain the age of puberty, let them a(k leave
to come into your prefence at all times*, in the fame manner as thofe who have
attained that age before them, afk leave. Thus God declareth his figns un-
to you j and God is knowing and wife. As to fuch women as are paft
child-bearing, who hope not to marry again, btcaufe cf their advanced age \ it
fhall be no crime in them, if they lay afide their outer garments, not
lhewing their ornaments 4 ; but if they.abftain fropi this d *7 will be better for
them. God both heareth and knoweth. It fhall be no crime in the blind,
nor fhall it be any crime in the lame, neither fhall it be any crime in the
Tick, or in your felves, that ye eat in your houfes*, or in the houfes of
your fathers, or the houfes of your mothers, or in the houfes of your
brothers, or the houfes of your fiffers, or the houfes of your uncles
oa jhe father’s fide, or the houfes of your aunts on the father’s fide, or the
houfes of your uncles on the mother’s fide, or the houfes of your aunts on
the mother’s fide, or in thofe houfes the keys whereof ye have in your pof-
feflion, or in the houfe of your friend. It fhall not be any crime in you
whether ye eat together, or feparately f . And when ye enter any houfes,
falute one another g on the part of God, with a bleffed and a welcome fa-

lutation.

improper time ; bat others fa y e ft was occa-
fioned by Modraj Ebn A?nru, theti a boy, who
being fent by'Mohdmhted to call Omar to him,
went diretfly into the room Where he was.
Without giving notfce, and found hfm taking
his noon’s nap, and in no very decent pof-
ture ; at which Omdr was fo ruffled, that he
wilhed God would forbid even their fathers,
and children, to come in to them abruptly, at
fuch times *.

a Before the morning prayer ;] Which is the
time of peoples riling from their beds, and dref-
frng themfeives for the day.

0 When ye lay afde year garmtnfs at noon 5]
That is, when ye take off your upper garments
to lleep at noon ; which is a common cuftom
in the call, and all warm countries.

c And after evening prayer ;] When ye un-
drefs your felvps to prepare for bed. Al Bei-
dazvi adds a fourth feafon, when permiffion to
enter moil be asked, viz* at night : but this
follows of courfe.

d See before, p. 29 1 .

e That ye eat in your boufes ;] 1. e. Where
your wives or families are ; or in the hoUfes
of your Ions, which may be looked on as
your own.

This paffage w r as designed to remove fom«
ferupted or ftiperfUfiohs of the Arabs in 'Mobam-
rriefis time rfome of ' whom thought their eating
with maimed or fick people defiled them ; 0-
ther$ imagined they ought not to eat in the
houfe of another, tho’ ever fd nearly related
to them, or tho* they were intruded with the
key and care of the houfe in the mailer’s ab-
fence, and might therefore conclude it would
be no offence 1 ; and others declined eating with
their friends tho* invited, left they fhould be bur-
thenfome 3 . The whole paffage feems to be no
more thafc a deflation that the things feru-
pled were pfcrfeflty innocent; however the com-
mentators fay it is now abrogated, and that it
related onl y to the old Arabs, in the infancy
of Mobdnfmedifm*

f It fhall be no crime , whether ye eat together
er fepatate ;] As the trike of Leith thought it un-
lawful for a man to eat alone; and fome of
the Anf&rst if they had a gueft with them,
never eat but in ihis company 1 fo there were
others who refufed to eat with any, out of a
/uperftitiou* caution left they Ihould be defiled,
or out of a hoggilh greedinefs 3 .

e Salute one another ;) Literally your Jdfads \
that is, according to al Beidawi , the people of

the

1 Idem.

* Idem , Jallalo’ddin.

3 lidem*

i<)6 Al KORAN. Chap. 25.

lutation. Thus God declareth his figns unto you, that ye may under-
ftand. Verily chey only are true believers, who believe in God and his apoftle,
and when they are affembled with him on any affair \ depart not, until
they have obtained leave of him. Verily they who afk leave of thee, are
thofe who believe in God and his apoftle. When therefore they alk leave
of thee to depart , on account of any bulinels of their own, grant leave
unto luch of them as thou ihalt think fit, and alk pardon for them of
God b ; for God is gracious and merciful. Let not the calling of the apoftle
be efteemed among you, as your calling the one to the other'. God knoweth
fuch of you as privately withdraw themfelves from the affembl-j , taking (helter
behind one another. But let thofe who with-ftand his command, take heed}
left fome calamity befal them in this world, or a grievous punifliment be
inflifted on them in the life to come. Doth not whatever is in heaven and
on earth belong unto God ? He well knoweth what ye are about : and on
a certain day they fhall be affembled before him *, and he lhall declare
unto them that which they have done} for God knoweth all things.

the houfe, to whom ye are united by the ties
of blood, and by the common bond of religion.
And if there be no body in the houfe, lays JW-
laldidiM , lalote your selves, and fay, Peace be
on us, and on the righteous firvants of God : fox
the angels will return your falutation.

* On any affair j] As, at public prayers, or
a folemn feait, or at council, ox on a mili-
tary expedition.

* Aik pardon for them of God;] Becaufe fuch
departure, tho 1 with leave, and on a reasonable
excufe, is a kind of failure in the exa& per-
formance of their duty; feeing they .prefer
tbeir temporal affairs to the advancement of
the true religion *.

c Let not the colling rf the apoftle of God
he efteemed among yon as your (ailing tba one to

1 Al Beidawi. *

the ethr*] Thefe words are varioully inter-
preted ; for their meaning may be, either. Make
not light of the apoftle’s fommoas, as ye would
of another perion’s of equal condition with
your felves, by not obeying it, or by depart-
ing out of, or coming into his prefence without
leave firft obtained ; or. Think not that when
the apoftle calls upon God in prayer, it is with
him, as with you, when ye prefer a petition
to a fuperior, who fometimes grants, but as of-
ten denies your fait ; or. Call not to the apoftle,
as ye do to one another, that is, by name, or
familiarly and with a loud voice ; but make ufe
of fome honourable compelkdoai, as, Q apoftle
of God, or, O prophet of God, and fpeak in an
humble modeft manner

f, JaLL ALO*DD lff, £» ft.

CHAP. XXV.

In titled, Al Forkan; revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

B LESSED be he who hath revealed the Forkan * unto his fervant,
that he may be a preacher unto all creatures : unto whom belongetb
the kingdom of heaven and of earth : who hath begotten no iffue •, and
hath no partner in bis kingdom : who hath created all things } and difpo-

1 the Forkan ] Which it one of the names of the Karan. See the Prelim. Difc. i III. p. 57.

Chap. 25. Al KORAN. 297

led the fame according to his determinate will. Yet have they taken other god*
befides him ; which have created nothing, but are themfelves created *:
and are able neither to avert evil front, nor to procure good unto themfelves t
and have not the power of death, or of life, or of railing the dead. And
the unbelievers lay. This Koran is no other than a forgery which he hath
contrived ; and other people have alfifted him therein b : but they utter an
unjull thing, and a fallhood. They alfo fay, Thefe are fables of the an-
cients, which he hath cauled to be written down i and they are dictated
unto him morning and evening. Say, He hath revealed it, who kooweth
the fecrets in heaven and earth : verily he is gracious and merciful. And they
fay. What kind of apoftle is this ? He eateth food, and walketh in the
ftreets % as we do : unlefs an angel be fent down unto him, and become a
fellow preacher with him ; or unlefs a treafure be caft down unto him ;
or he have a garden, of the fruit whereof he may eat *, we will not believe.
The ungodly alfo fay. Ye follow no other than a man who is diftradted.
Behold, what they- liken thee unto. But they are deceived ; neither can
they find a juft occafion to reproach tbee. Bleffed be he* who, if he pleaf-
eth, will make for thee a better provifion than this which they fpeak of j
namely , gardens through which rivets flow : and he will provide thee palaces:
But they rejeft the belief of the hour of judgment, as a fallhood : and we
have prepared for him, who fliall rejea the belief of that hour, burning
fire j when it lhall fee them from a diftant place, they lhall hear it furi-
oully raging, and roaring. And when they lhall be caft bound together
into a ftrait place thereof, they lhall there call for death: but it ftjall le
anfwered them , Call not this day for one death, but call for many deaths.
Say, Is this better, or a garden of eternal duration, which is promifed un-
to the pious ? It lhall be given unto them for a reward, and a retreat :
therein lhall they have whatever they pleafe; continuing in the fame for e-
ver. fbis is a promife to be demanded at the hands of thy Lord. On a
certain day he lhall afiemble them, and whatever they worlhip, befides
God ; and. lhall fay unto the worfhipped. Did ye feduce thele my fervants j
or did they wander of themfelves from the right way ? They lhall anfwer,
God forbid ! It was not fitting for us, that we Ihould take any protestors
befides thee : but thou didft permit them and their fathers to enjoy abundance ;
fo that they forgat tby admonition, and became loft people. And God fhall
fay unto their worjhippers , Now have thefe convinced you of fallhood, in

Q_ q that

* But are (hemftlves created Being either the
heavenly bodies, or idols, the works of men’s
hands.

b See chap. 16. p. 223. It is fuppofed the
ferns are particularly intended in this place ;
becaufe they ufed to repeat palTages of ancient
hiflory to Mohammed, on which he ufed to dif-
courfe and make obfemtionsj' .
c He eateth food, and mlketb in tbtftreets ;]

Being fubjeft to the lame wants and infirmities
of nature, and obliged to Ihbmit to the fame
low means of fupportine himfelf and his fa-
mily, with ourfelves. The Meccans were ac-
quainted with Mohammed , and with his cir-
cumftances and way of life, too well to change
their old familiarity, into the reverence due jo
the meflenger of God : for a prophet hath no
honour in his own country.

1 Al Beidawj.

% gS Al KORAN. Chap. 25.

that which ye fay : they can neither avert your j punijhmteh nor gbe you any
afliftance. And whoever of you (hall be guilty of injuftice, him will we
caufe to tafte a grievous torment. We have fent no mdlengers before thee,
but they eat food, and walked through the ftreets : and we make fome of
you an occaGon of trial unto others \ Will ye perfevere with patience ?

XlX.fince your Lord regardeth your perfeveranee . * They who hope not to

meet us at the refurrcEHon fay, Unlefs the angels be font down unto us, or
we fee our Lord him/elf we will not believe. Verily they behave themfehres
arrogantly j and have tranfgrefiedwith an enormous tranlgreflion. The day
whereon they fhall fee the angels b , there (hall be no glad tidings on that
day for the wicked 5 and they (nail (ay. Be this removed far from us 1 and we
will come unto the work which they (hall have wrought, and we will make
k as duft fcattered abroad. On that day (hall they who are deftined to
paradife be more happy in an abode, and have a preferable place of repofe
at noon c . On that day the heaven (hall be cloven in funder by die clouds,
and the angels (hall be fent down, defeending vtfibly therein *. On that day
the kingdom fhall of right belong wholly unto the Merciful ; and that day
fliall be grievous for the unbel ieve rs. On that day, the unjuft perfon •
fhall bite his hands for angtijh and dbfpmr, and fhall fey, O that l had taken
the way of truth with the apoftfe ! Alas for me 1 O that I had not taken
foch a one f for my friend \ He fedueed me from the admonition of Gorr, af r
ter it had come unto me : for the devil is the betrayer of man. And the
apoftle fhall fay, O Lord, verily my people efteemed this Koran to be a
vain compofttion . In like manner did we ordain unto every prophet an ene-
my

1 We bet ve made fome of yea aneccofhn if trial
unto others 5] Giving aecafew of wy, repining*
and malice ; to the poqr, pi>eau, and fick* for ex-
ample, when thejr compare their own condition
with that of the rich, the noble* and thofe who
are in health : and trying the people to whom
prophet? arc fent, by thofe prophets f .

b The a*} wberem they pall fee the angels ;]
viz. At their death, or ai the rcfarro&ion*
c A friftrjfh plait f repofe at. noon 5] For
the bufinefc of the d*y of judgment wiB be
over by that time; and the k defied will vob
their noon in paradife, and the damned in
hell *.

d The heavens Jbail be doom in funder* dec ]
i. e. They fhall part and make way for the
clouds whkb fluff defeend with the anjjelr,
bearing the books wherein every man’s attionS
are rccorded-

* The anjuft perfonl ] It is foppofed by fome
that thefe words parriodarly relate to Okba Ebn
Abi Moait , who ufed to be much in Moham-
pud's company, and having once invited him to
an entertainment, the prophet refufed to tafte of

his meat, unlefs he would profefs Ejl&m ; which
accordingly he did. Soon after, QhAa, meeting
Okba Ebn Mbfdf, fck intimate friend, and being
reproached by him for changing his religion, af-
fured him that he had not, bur had only pro-
nounced the prafeffionof frith to engage Afe-
tamned to eat with him, hecanfe he could) not
for fhamn let him go out of hie houfe without
eating. However, Obha protnfted that he would
not be fatisfied*, unlefs he went to Mohammed* and
fet his foot on his neck, and t in his race :
which Okba* rather than break with his friend,
performed in the public hall, where he found
Mohammed fitting ; whereupon the prophet told
him that if era: he met him out of Mecca, he
would cut off his head. And he wa« as good
as his word ; for Okba, being jffterwards taken
ptifoner at the battle of Bedr , had his head
muck off by Ali, at Mohammed's command. As
for Obba % he received a wound from the pro*
phet’s own hand at the battle of Obod 9 of which
lie died at his return to Mecca 3 .

f Such a cue »] According to the preceding
note, this was Obba Ebn Khafl

1 Mem, j.Ai.1- At. 2 l idem . * Al Bkidawi. V. Gagniei, Vic de Mahom. vol 1. /. 362.

Chap. 25. Al KORAN, 299

my from among the wicked : but thy Loud is a fufficient director, and de-
fender. The unbelievers fay, Unleft the Koran be fent down unto him en-
tire at once % we will not believe. But in this manner have we revealed it,
that we might confirm thy heart thereby b , and we have diftated it gradually,
by diftinft parcels. They lhall not come unto thee with any ftrange queftion &
but we will bring thee the truth in anfwer , and a mod excellent interpre-
tation. They who lhall be dragged on their faces into hellj lhall be in the
worft condition, and lhall ftray moft widely from the way of falvaiion. We
heretofore delivered unto Moses the book of the law ; and we appointed him
Aaron his brother for a counfellor. And we faid unto them. Go ye to the
people who charge our figns with fallhood. And we deftroyed them with a
fignal deftrO&ion. And remember the people of NoArt, when they accufed
our apoftles of impollure : we drowned them, and made them a fign unto
mankind. An'd we have prepared for the unjuft a painful torment. Remem-
ber alfo Ad, and Thamud, and thofe who dwelt at al Rass c j and many
other generations, within this period . Unto each of them did we propound
examples for their admonition j and each of them did we deftroy with an tit-
ter ddtruftion. The Korejsb have palled frequently near the city which was
rained on by a fatal rain * : have they not feen where it once flood? Yet have they
not dreaded the refurre&ion. Wlien they fee thee, they will receive thee on-

Q^q 2 ly

* Unkfs the Korin bt revealed at once ;] As tioiu, the prophet Sboaib was fent to preach to
were the Pentateuch, Pfalms, and GorpeJ, them ; but they not believing on him, the well
according to the Mohammedan notion ; whereas fell in, and they and their houfes were all fwal-
it was twenty three yeai* before the Koran was lowed up. Another fuppofes It to have been a
oompleatly revealed *. town in Yarndma* where a remnant of the Tha*

b That we might confirm thy 1 heart ;] Both to mudites fettled, to whom a prophet was alfo
infufe courage and conftancy into thy mind, and fent; but they flaying him. Were utterly de-
to ftTengthen thy memory and underffandlng. (frayed. Another thinks ft was a well near An -
For, fay the commentators, the prophet’s reeeiv- tiech, where the prophet Habib al Nejjif
ing the divine dir eft ion, from time to time, how (whofe tomb is ft ill to be feen there, being fre-
to behave, and to fpeak, on any emergency, qucntly viflted by the Mohammedans) was mar-
aud the frequent vifits of the angel Gabriel* tyred 3 . And a fourth takes al Rafs to be a well
greatly incouraged and fuppOrted him under all in tiadramaut , by which dwelt feme idolatrous
his difficulties : and the revealing of the Koran Thamudites 9 whofe prophet was Handha, or
by degrees was a great, and, to him, a neceffa- Kkantala (for I find the name written both
ry help for his retaining and undemanding it ; Ebn Safwdn \ Thefe people were firft

which it would have been impoflibfe for him to annoyed by certain monflrous birds, called Anlo*
have done, with any exaftnefe, had it been re- which lodged in the mountain above them, and!
vealedat once; Mohammed r s cafe being intirely ufed to fnatch away their children, when they*
different from that of Mofes, David , and Jefus % Wanted other prey ; but this calamity was fo far
who could all read and write* whereas he was from humbling them, that on their prophet's call*
perfeftly illiterate 1 2 . mg down a judgment upon them, they killed

c Thofe who dwelt at al Rate 3] The commen- him, add were all deftroyed *.
tators are at a lofs where to place al Rafs* Ac- # d The city which was rained on by a fatal rain
cording to one opinion it was the name of a Sodom ; For the Korcifh^ often palled by the
well (as the word fignifies) near Midi an , about place where it once flood, in the journeys they
which feme idolaters haying fixed their habita- took to Syria for the (ake of trade.

1 See the Prelim . Dife . J. III. p. 64, * Al Beidawi, £*. 3 Abjj’lf. Gug m

V. Fit. Saladini , p . 86. 4 See chap. 22. p. 279. not. a. 5 Al Beidawi, Jae-.

laeo’ddin*

$oo dl KORAN. Chap. 25.

ly with fcofnrrg, /dying. Is this he, whom Gob hath fent as bis apoftje ?
Verily he had almoft drawn us ' slide from the ivorjbip of our gods ; if we
had not firmly perfevered in our devotion towards them. But they fhall
know hereafter, when they fhall fee the punilhment prepared for them , who
hath ftraycd more widely from the right path. What thinkeft thou ? He who
talteth his luft for his god ; canft thou be his guardian * ? Doft thou imagine
that the greater part of them hear, or underftand ? They are no other than
like the brute cattle ; yea, they ftray more widely from the true path. Doft
thou not confider the works of thy Lord, how he ftretcheth forth the fhadow
before fun-rife ? If he had pleafed, he would have made it immovable for
ever. Then we chufe the fun to rife, and to fhew the fame ; and afterwards
we contract it by an eafy and gradital contraction. It is he who hath ordained
the night to cover you as a garment ; and fleep to give you refti and hath or-
dained the day for waking. It is he who fendeth the winds, driving abroad
the pregnant clouds, as the forerunners of his mercy * : and we fend down
pure water * from heaven, that we may thereby revive a dead country, and
give to drink thereof unto what we have created, both of cattle and men,
in great numbers * ; and we diftribute the fame among them at various times,
that they may confider : but the greater part of men refufe to confider, only
out of ingratitude 8 . If we had |i[i*afed, we had fent a preacher unto every
Cjty r : wherefore do not thou obey the unbelievers; but oppofe them here-
with, with a ftrong oppofition. It is he who hath let loofe the two feas ;
this frefh and fweet, and that fait and bitter : and hath placed between them a
bar *, and a bound which cannot be paffed. It is he who hath created man
of water k ; and hath made him to hear the double relation of confauguinity and
affinity ; for thy Lord is powerful. They worfliip, befides God, that which
can neither profit them ncr hurt them : and the unbeliever is an afliftant of
the devil againft his Lor d We have fent thee to he no other than a bearer
of good tidings, and a denouncer of threats. Say, I afk not of you any

reward

I Canft then bt bis pur.Ua > 1 7 ] !. e. Doft thou influence of fome particular ftars *.

erpeft to reclaim fuch a one from idolatry and f Wt bad fret a prettier ditto ever) city ;] And
infidelity? had not given thee, O Mobtrimti, the honour

II See chap. 7. p. 12a. There is the fame and trouble of being a preacher to the whole
various reading here, as is mentioned in the world in general.

notes to that paflage. * A bar j] To keep them afunder, and prevent

1 Pure tauter ;] Properly, purifying water; their mixing with each other. Thfe original
which epithet may perhaps refer to the cleanfing word is barzetkb ; which has been already ex-
quality of that element, of fo great ufe both on plained *.

religions and on common occafions. k Of tetter i] With which Adam's primitive

= To tattle and to men in great numbers ;] That day was mixed; or, of feed. See chap. 24.
is, To fuch as live in the dry deferts, and are p. 293.

obliged to drink rain water s which the inhabi- * An ajfiftant of tbt devil againft bis lord ;]
tants of towns, and {daces well-watered, have no Joining with him in Ids rebellion and infidelity,
eccaiion to do. Some think Abu J.tbl is particularly ftruck at in

* Out of issgratitttde i] Or, out of infidelity : this paflage. The words may alfo be tranflated,
for the old Arabs ufed to think themfdves in- Tbt unbeliever is etniempsibit in the fight of bis
debted for their rains, not to God, but to the Lord.

* Set tbt Prelim- Dife. }. I. p. 31.

* In not ad esy. 23. f. 286.

Chap. 2$. Al K 0 RA N. 301

reward for this my peaching •, befides the unverjion of him who fhall defire to take
the way unto his Loro *. And do thou truft in him who liveth, and dieth not ;
and celebrate his praife : (he is fufficiendy acquainted with the faults of his
fervants :) who hath created the heavens and the earrh, and whatever is between
them, in fix days ; and then afcended bis throne ; the Merciful. Afk now the
knowing concerning him. When it is faid unto (be unbelievers. Adore the Merci-
ful ; they reply. And who is the Merciful b ? Shall we adore that which thou com-
mandeft us ? And this precept caufeth them to fly the fafter from the faith. Blefied
be he who hath placed the twelve figns in the heavens ; and hath placed therein a
lamp * by day , and the moon which fhineth by night ! It is he who hath ordained
the night and the day to fucceed each other, for the obferyation of him who
will confider, or defiredi to Jhew bis gratitude. The fervants of the Merci-
ful are thofe who walk meekly on the earth, and, when the ignorant fpeak
unto them, anfwer. Peace d : and who pafs the night adoring their Lord,
and Handing up to pray unto him ; and who fay, O Lord, avert from us the
torment of hell, for the torment thereof is perpetual ; verily the fame is a
miferable abode, and a wretched ftation : and who, when they beftow, are nei-
ther profufe, nor niggardly ; but obferve a juft medium between thefe * ; and
who invoke not another god together with the true God ; neither flay the
foul, which God hath forbidden to be Jlain , unlels for a juft caufe : and who
are not guilty of fornication. But he who fhall do this, fhall meet the re-
ward of his wickednefs : his puniihment fhall be doubled unto him on the day
of refurreftion •, and he fhall remain therein, covered with ignominy, for ever :
except him who fhall repent, and believe, and fhall work a righteous work ;
unto them will God change their former evils into good r -, for God is ready
to forgive, and merciful. And whoever repenteth, and doth that which is
right ; verily he turneth unto God with an acceptable converfion. And they
who do not bear falfe witnefi j and when they pafs by vain difcoqrfe, pafs by
the fame with decency : and who, when they are admonifhed by the figns of
their Lord, fall not down as if they were deaf and blind, but ftand up and
are attentive thereto : and who fay, O Lord, grant us of our wives and our
offspring fuch as may be the fatisfaftion of our eyes s and make us patterns
Onto thofe who fear thee. Thefe fhall be rewarded with the higheft apartments
in paradife, becaufe they have perfevered with conftancy ; and tney fhall
meet therein with greetbg and falutadon ; they fhall remain in the fame for

ever :

* Befides the converfion of him who Jball take * A Limp ; ] i. e, The fun.

the nay unto bis Loud ;] Seeking to draw near * Peace}] This is intended here not asataiu-

unto him, by embracing the religion taught by tarion, but as a waving all farther difcourfe and
me his apoftle ; which is the beft return I expeft communication with the idolaters,
from you for my labours 1 . The paflage, how- * See chap,. 17. p. 230.

ever, is capable of another meaning, viz- That f God will change tbeir former nits into good 5}

Mohammed delires none to give, but him who Blotting out their former rebellion, on their re-
fhail contribute freely and voluntarily towards pentance, and confirming and encreafing their
the advancement of God’s true religion. faith and obedience *•

b Sec chap. 1 7. p. 237.

1 Al Beidawi.

* Idea.

302 Al KORAN. Chap. 26.

ever: it fhall be an excellent abode, and a delightful ftation. Say, My
Loan is not follicitous on your account, if ye do not invoice him : ye have
already charged bis apoftle with impofturc > but hereafter fhall there be a
lafting puaifhment inf ixed on you.

CHAP. XXVI.

Intitled , The Poets a ; revealed at M e c c a b .

In the name of the moft merciful God.

f | '\ S. M e . Thefe are the figns of the perfpicuous book. Peradventure

I thou {iffii&eft thy fell unto death, left the Meccans become not true
believers. If we pleafed, we could fend down unto them a convincing fign
from heaven, unto which their necks would humbly fubmit. But chere
dometh unto them no admonition from the Merciful, being newly revealed
as occgfidns require , but they turn afide from the fame i and they have charg-
ed it with falfhood j but a meflage fhall come unto them, which they fhall
not laugh to fcorn. Do they not behold the earth, how many vegetables we
caufe to fpring up therein, of every noble fpecies ? Verily herein is a fign :
but the greater part of them do not believe. Verily thy Lord is the
mighty, the merciful Gop. Remember when thy Lord called Moses,
flying. Go to the unjuft people, the people of Pharaoh ; will they not
dread me ? Moses anfwered, O Lord, verily I fear left they accufe me of
falfhood, and left my breaft become ftraitened, and my tongue be not ready
in fpeaktng * : fend therefore unto Aaron, to be my afliftant . Alfo they have
a crime to object againft me * ; and I fear they will put me to death. God laid,
They flail by no means put tbee to death t wherefore go ye with our figns j
for we will be with you, and xvitl hear what paffes between you and them. Go ye
therefore unto Pharaoh, and fay. Verily we are the apoftle f of the Lord of
all creatures : fend away with us the children of Israel. And when they bad.
delivered their meflage , Pharaoh anfwered. Have we not brought thee up
among us, when a child ; and haft thou not dwelt among us for fevered
years of thy life * ? Yet haft thou done thy deed which thou haft done : and thou

art

* The chapter bears this iafeription, becaufe f Tbt Apofile ;} The word is in the fiogolar

at the conclufion of it the Arabian poets axe £e- number in the origini] ; for which the commen-
verely ccnfured. utors give (everal reafons.

•* The five lift verier, beginning at thefe s For Jtvtrai yarn} It is Dud that Majet
words, And thole tobo err fallm the pottt, $cc . feme dwelt among the Egyptian) thirty yean, and
take to have been revealed at Midi ho. then went to Midian. where he fetid ten years ;

c See the Prelim. DUfc. $. ILL p. £9, £jfr. after which he returned to Egypt, and fpent

* See chap. 20. p. 257. thirty years in endeavouring to convert them ;

* A irimt 5] via. The having killed an Egjp- and that be lived after the drowning of Pbaratb

tian *. fifty years *.

* Al Beidawi.

1 Set ebap. 28 .

Chap. 264 Al KORAN. 303

art an ungrateful perfon. Moses replied, I did if indeed, and I was one
of thofe who erred * ; wherefore I fled from you, becaufe I feared you : but
my Lord hath bellowed on me wifdom, and hath appointed me one of bit
apoftles. And this is the favour which thou haft bellowed on me, that thou
haft enflaved the children of Israel. Pharaoh faid, And who is the Lord
of all creatures ? Moses anfwered. The Lord of heaven and earth, dnd of
whatever is between them : if ye are men of fogacity. Pharaoh faid unto
thofe who were about him. Do ye not hear P Moses laid* Your Lord, and
the Lord of your forefathers. Pharaoh faid unto thofe who were prefent ,
Your apoftle, who is fent unto you, is certainly diftrafted b . MosAs faid.
The Lord of the eaft, and of the weft, and of whatever is between them ;
if ye are men of undcrftanding, Pharaoh f aid unto him, Venly if thou take
any god befides me % I will make thee one of thofe who are imprifoned *.
Moses anfwered. What, although I come unto you with a convincing ?

Pharaoh replied, Produce it therefore, if thou fpeakeft truth. And he call
down his red, and behold, it became a viflble ferpenc : and he drew forth his
hand out of his bofom ; and behold, it appeared, white unto the fpeclators;
Pharaoh faid unto the princes who were about him. Verily this man is a
fkilful magician : he feeketh to difpo fiefs you of your land by his forcery ; what
therefore do ye direct ? They anfwered. Delay him, and his brother by good
words far a time ; and fend through the cities men to aflemble and bring un-
to thee every fkilful magician. So the magicians were afiembied at an ap-
pointed time, on a lolemn day. And it was faid unto the people. Are ye
affembled together ? Perhaps we may follow the magicians, if they do get tne
vfebory. And when the magicians were come, they faid urito Pharaoh,
Shall we certainly receive a reward, if we do get the vidbory ? He anfwered,
Yea •, and ye fliall furely be of thofe who approach my perfon. Moses laid
unto them, Call down, what ye are about to caft down. Wherefore they
call down their ropes and their rods, and faid. By the might of Pharaoh,
verily we Jhall be the conquerors. And Moses caft down his rod, and be-
hold, it fwallowed up that which, they had caufed falfely to appear changed into
firpents. Whereupon the magicians proftraced themfelves, worlhipping, and
laid. We believe in the Lord of all creatures, the Lord of Moses and of
Aaron. Pharaoh faid unto them. Have ye believed on him, before I

have

* I mat one of tbofe mho erred i] Having killed and a parallel expreffion in the 28th chapter, it is

the Egyptian Undefignedly. inferred that Pbaraob claimed the worlhip of his

b Your apoftk is diftraBed ;] Pbaraob, it feems, fubjeds, as due to his fupreme power,
thought Mofes had given but wild an fivers to d / mill make thee ont of tbofe who are itotpri-
his queltion ; for he wanted to know the perfon fined s] Thefe words, lays al Beiddmi, were a
and true nature of the God whofe meflenger more terrible menace than if he had (kid I mill
Mofes pretended to be; whereas he fpokc of his imprsfisr tbee ; and gave Mofes to underitand that
' work* only. And becaufe this anfwer gave fo he mutt exp eft to keep company with thofe
little fatisfadion to the king, he is therefore ftp- wretches whom the tyrant had thrown, as was
pofed by fome to have been a Dabrite, or one his cuftom, into a deep dungeon, where they
who believed the eternity of the world 1 . remained till they died.

* If thou take asp god befides me;] From this

1 Idem.

304 Al KORAN. Chap. 26.

have given you pcrmiffion ? Verily he is your chief, who hath taught you
magic a : but hereafter ye fhall furely know my power. I will cut off your
hands and your feet, on the oppofite fides, and [ will crucify you all. They
anfwered, It will be no harm unto us ; for we fhall return unto our Lord.
We hope that our Lord will forgive us our fins, fince we are the firft who
have believed \ And we fpake by revelation unto Moses, faying* March forth
with my fervants by night ; for ye will be purfued. And Pharaoh fent offi-
cers through the cities to afiemble forces , faying* Verily thefe are a fmall
company ; and they are enraged againft us : but we are a multitude well
provided So we caufed them to quit their gardens, and fountains, and trea-
sures, and fair dwellings : thus did we do •, and we made the children of
Israel to inherit the fame *. And they purfued them at fun-rife. And when
the two armies were come in fight of each other, the companions of Moses
laid. We fhall furely be overtaken. Moses anfwered. By no means: for
my Lord is with me, who will furely direct me. And we commanded Moses
by revelation, faying , Smite the fea with thy rod. And when be bad fmitten
it* it became divided into twelve parts* between which were as many paths*
and every part was like a vaft mountain. And we drew thither the others ; and
we delivered Moses and all thofe who were with him : then we drowned the
others. Verily herein was a fign; but the greater part of them did not be-
lieve. Verily thy Lord is the mighty, and the merciful. And rehearfe unto
them the ftory of Abraham : when he faid unto his father, and his people.
What do ye worfhip ? They anfwered. We worfhip idols ; and we conftantly
ferve them all the day long. Abraham faid, Do they hear you, when ye in-
voke them ? Or do they either profit you, or hurt you ? They anfwered.
But we found our fathers do the fame. He faid. What think ye ? The gods
which ye worfhip, and your forefathers worjbipped , are my enemy : except
only the Lord of all creatures, who hath created me, and dire&eth me •, and
who giveth me to eat, and to drink, and when I am lick, healeth me ; and
who will caufe me to die, and will afterwards reftore me to life s and who,
I hope, will forgive my fins on the day of judgment. O Lord, grant me
wifdom ; and join me with the righteous : and grant that I may be fpoken
of with honour * among the lateft pofieri/y ; and make me an heir of the
garden of delight : and forgive my father, for that he hath been one of thofe
who go affray *. And cover me not with fhame on the day of refurreftion ;

on

» If bo both toughs you utngit ;] But has re-
ferred the mod efficacious fecrets to himfelf *.
b 'See chap. 7. p. 128. (Ac.
c We made the children ef Ifrael to inherit tbt
jam ;] Heace feme fuppofe the Ifraelitu, after
the definition of Pharaoh and his hofi, returned
to Egypt , and poffcflcd themfelves of the riches
of that country *. But others are of opinion
that the meaning is no mare than that God gave
them the like pofTcifions and dwellings in ano-
ther country

* Idem . * Jallalo’ddin, Yahya.
chap. 9 . f. 164 . aid chap. 14 . p. 209 .

11 Grant that I nay it if-sitn of with honour i\
Literally, Grant me a tongue of truth, that is,
a high encomium. The fame expreffion is nfed
in chap. 19. p 252.

* And forgive my father, &c,J By difpofing
him to repentance, and the receiving of the true
faith. Some fuppofe Abraham pronounced this
prayer after his father's derh, thinking that pof-
fibly he might have been inwardly a true believer,
but have concealed his conversion for fear of Nim-
red, and before he was forbidden to pray for him *.

3 At Za m axh. See chap. 7. p. iji. * See

Chap. 26. Al KORAN \ 305

on the day in which neither riches nor children (hall avail, unlefs unto him
who fhall come unto God with a fincere heart : when paradife fliall be brought
near to the view of the pious, and hell fliall appear plainly to thofe who fliall
have erred ; and it fliall be faid unto them, Where are your deities which ye
ferved befides God ? will they deliver you from punijhment, or will they
deliver themfelves ? And they fliall be cafl: into the lame, loth they % and
thofe who have been feduced to their worjhip ■, and all the hoft of Eblis. The
feduced lhall difpute therein with their falfe gods , faying. By God, we were
in a manifeft error, when we equalled you with the .Lord of all creatures :
and none feduced us but the wicked. We have now no interceflbrs* nor any
friend who careth for us. If we were allowed to return once more into the
world , we would certainly become true believers. Verfly herein was a fign :
but the greater part of them believed not. Thy Lord is the mighty, the
merciful. The people of Noah accufed God’s mefleogers of impofture : when
their brother Noah faid unto them, Will ye not fear God 2 Verily I am a
faithful mefienger unto you ; wherefore fear God, and obey me. I aik no
reward of you for my preaching unto you } I expeit my reward from no other
than the Lord of all creatures : wherefore fear God, and obey me. They an-
fwered, Shall we believe on thee, when only the mod abjedt perfons have fol-
lowed thee ? Noah faid, I have no knowledge of that which they did * ; it
oppertaineth unto my Lord alone to bring them to account, if ye under (land ;
wherefore I will not drive away the believers': I am no more than a pub-

g : preacher. They replied, Afiuredly, unlefs thou defift, O Noah, thou

alt be ftoned. He faid, O Lord, verily my people take me for a liar :
wherefore judge publickly between me and them ; and deliver me and the true
believers who are with me. Wherefore we delivered him, and thofe who were
with him, in the ark filled with men and animals s and afterwards we drowned
the reft. Verify herein was a fign : but the greater part of them believed not.
ij’hy Lprd is the mighty, the merciful. The tribe of Ad charged God* s
meffengers with falfhood : when their brother Hud faid unto them. Will ye
not fear God ? Verily I am a faithful meflenger unto you ; wherefore fear
God, and obey me. I demand not of you any reward for my preaching
unto you : I expert my reward from no other than the Lord of afi creatures.
Do ye build a Jand-mark on every high place, to divert yourfelves i ? And
do ye eredt magnificent works, hoping that ye may continue in their pqfejjion
for eyer ? And when ye exercife your power, do ye exercife it with cruelty
and rigour*? Fear God, by leaving thefe things', and obey me. And fear

R r him

« See chap. 2t. p. 273; gen; who direA themf?Jve>. jo their journeys

* lb We no knowledge bfibnt vfbicb they lid }] by the ffars, and have so heed of fitth build-
i.e. Whether they have embraced the faith which ings 1 ?

I have preached, oat of the fincerity of their * Do ye exercife it with cruelty and rigour ?]
hearts, or in profpeft of foipe wqrl$y advan- Putting to death, Mid infli&ing other cotpflral
tage. punifhments without mqfcy, 2nd rather for the

c See chap. ti. p. 177. fatisfaflirin of your paffio# than .the amendment

* Do ye build a land-mark on every high flau 3 of tbe Merer ■».
to divert your felves ? ] Or to moclc the pa/fen-

* At Bkidawi.

* Idea.

306 Al KORAN. Chap. 26.

him who hath bellowed on you that which ye know : he hath bellowed on
you cattle, and children, and gardens, and fprings of water. Verily I fear for
you the pUnifhment of a grievous day. They anfwcred, It is equal unto
us whether thou admonilh us, or doft not admonilh vs : this which thou
preacbejl is only a device of the ancients , neither lhall we be punilhed for what
we have done. And they accufed him of impofture: wherefore we deftroyed
diem. Verily herein was a fign: bat the greater part of them believed not.
Thy Lord is the mighty, the merciful. The trite of Thamdd alfo charged
the meflengers of God with fallhood. When their brother Saleh faid unto
them. Will ye not fear God ? Verily t am a faithful tneffenger unto you :
wherefore fear God, and obey me. I demand no reward of you for my
preaching unto yon ; I expect my reward from no other than the Lord of all
creatures. Shall ye be left: for ever fecure in the pojfeffion of the things
which are here j among gardens, and fountains, and com, and palm-trees,
whole branches Ih cache their flowers ? And will ye_ continue to cut habitations
for your [elves out of the mountains, behaving with infolenoe * ? Fear God,
and obey me ; and obey not the command of the tranfgreflors, who aft cor-
ruptly in the earth, and reform not the fame. They anfwered. Verily thou
art diftrafted : thou art no other than a man like unto us : produce now fome
fign, if thou fpeakeft truth. Saleh faid. This Ihe-camcl Jball be a fign un-
to you: Ihe fhall have her portion of water, and ye lhall have y our portion
of water alternately, on a fever al day appointed for yen b ; and do her no hurt,
left the puni foment of a terrible day be inflifted on you. But they flew her*
and were made to repent of their impiety : for the punilhment which bad been
threatened overtook them. Verily herein was a fign ; but the greater part
of them did not believe. Thy Lord is the mighty, the merciful. The
people of Lot likewife accufed God’s meflengers of impofture. When their
brother Lor faid unto them. Will ye not fear God ? Verily I am a faithful
meflenger unto you : Wherefore fear God, and obey me. I demand no reward
of you for my preaching : I txpeB my reward from no other than the Lord
of all creatures. Do ye approach unto the males among mankind, and leave
your wives which your Lord hath created for you ? Surely ye are people who
trartfgrefa. They anfwered, Unlefs thou defift, O Lot, thou fbalt certainly
be expelled our city . He faid. Verily I am one of thofc who abhor your
doings : O Lorb, deliver me, and my family, from that which they aft.
Wherefore we delivered him, and all his family ; except an old woman, his
wife, who penfbed among thofe who remained behind : then we deftroyed the
reft ; and we rained on them a fhower of ft ones i and terrible was the fhower
which fell on thofe who had been warned in vain. Verily herein was a fign •,
but the greater part of them did not believe. Thy Lord is the mighty,

the

* Behaving with infolemt ;] Or, as the origi- were to have the ufc of the water by turns, the
txal word may alio be rendred, Jbtwbtg art and camel drinking one day, and the Tbamdites
ingenuity m your work. drawing the other day ; for when this camel

b She jball have her portion of wottr , and yo drank, foie emptied the wells or brooks for that
f>all have yotar portion of water alternately, on dsv. See chap. 7 p. 124.
a jeveral day appointed fir you i] That is. They

Chap. 26. Al KORAN. 307

the merciful. The inhabitants of the wood 1 alfo accufed Gob’s meficngers
of Impofture. When Shoaib faid unto them. Will ye not fear God ? Verily
I am a faithful me&nger unto you : wherefore fear God, and obey me. i
alk no reward of you for my preaching : I expeft my reward from no other
than the Lord of all creatures. Give juft meafure, and be not defrauders ; and
weigh with an equal balance *, anddiminiih not unto men ought of their matters ;
neither commit violence in the earth, afUng corruptly. And fear him who
hath created you, and dfo the former generations. They anfwered. Certainly
thou art diftra&ed : thou art no more than a man, like unto us ; and we do
furely efteem thee to be a liar. Caufe now a part of the heaven to fall upon
us, if thou fpeakeft truth. Sboaib faid. My Lord belt knoweth that which
ye do. And they charged him with fallbood : wherefore the punifhment of
the day of the fhadowing cloud b overtook them ; and this was the punilh-
ment of a grievous day. Verily herein was a fign ; but the greater part of
them did not believe. Thy Lord is the mighty, the merciful. This
hook is certainly a revelation from the Lord of all creatures, which the faithful
fpirit c hath caufed to defcend upon thy heart, that thou mighteft be a preacher
to thy people, in the perfpicuous Arabic tongue : and it is born witnefs to in the
fcriptures of former ages. Was it not a fign unco them, that the wife men
among the children or Israel knew it ? Had we revealed it unto any of the
foreigners, and he had read the fame unto them, yet they would not have be-
lieved therein. Thus have we caufed obfiinate infidelity to enter the hearts of
the wicked : they fhall not believe therein, until they fee a painful punilhment.
It lhall come fuddenly upon them, and they (hall not forefee it : and they
fhall fay. Shall we be refpited ? Do they therefore defire our punilhment to
be haftened 4 ? What thinkeft thou ? If we fuffer them to enjoy the advan-
tage of this life for feveral years, and afterwards that with which they are
threatened come upon them ; what will that which they have enjoyed profit
friem ? We have dcftroyed no city, but preachers were firfi fent unto it, to
admonifh the inhabitants thereof ; neither did we treat them unjuftly. The de-
vils did not defcend with the Koran, as the infidels give out : it is not for their
purpofe, neither are they able to produce fucb a book 5 for they are far re-
moved from hearing the difiourfe of the angels in heaven \ Invoke no other
god with the true Gqd, left thou become one of thofe who are doomed to

Rr 2 punilhment.

* See chap. 15. p 213. Sboaib being not called and were all deflroyed by a hot wind and fire
the brother of thefe people, which would have which proceeded from it *.
preferred the conformity between this paflage and 1 Tbt faithful fpirit ;] i. e. Gabrieli who i*

the preceding, it has been thought they were not intruded with the divine fecrets and revela-
Midimita, but of another race : however we find tions.

the prophet taxes them with the fame crimes as d Do they defire our funifiment to be btfttnei
he did thofe of Uidiatt *. The infidels were continually defying Mobam-

b The Jbadominz flood.] Go d firfi plagued them pied to bring fome fignal and miraculous deftruc-
with fudli intolerable heat for feven days, that tion on them, as a fhower of ftones, (ste.
all their waters were dried up ; and then brought * See chap. 15* P* ** >♦
a cloud over them, under whofe fhade they ran.

1 See (lap. 7. p. 126.

* atfBEIDAWt.

308 Al KORAN. Chap. 26.

punilhmentr And admonifh thy more near relations *. And behave thy
felf with meeknefs b towards the true believers who follow thee : and if they
be difobedient unto thee, fay. Verily I am clear of that which ye do. And
truft in the moft mighty, the merciful God •, who feeth thee when thou rifeft
up, and thy behaviour among thofe who worfliip * •, for he both heareth and
knoweth. Shall I declare unto you upon whom the devils defcend ? They
defcend upon every lying and wicked perfon * : they leam what is heard * ;
but the greater part of them are liars. And thofe who err follow the fteps
of the poets : doll thou not fee that they rove as bereft of their [cafes through
every valley ; and that they fay that which they do not f ? except thofe who
believe, ana do good works, and remember God frequently ; and who de-
fend themfelves, after they have been unjuftly treated *. And they who

aft

* Truth to tbj near relation ;] Tbeeommen-
tators fuppofe tie fame command to have been
Virtually contained in the fcventy fourth chapter,
which is prior to this in point of time It is
faid that Mohammed on receiving the pallage be-
fore us, went up immediately to mount
and having called the feveral families to him,
one by one, v hen they were all aflemhled, ask-
ed them, whether if he fhould tell them that
mountain would bring forth a fmaller mountain,
they would believe him ; to which they 4 nfw fir-
ing in the affirmative, IWify* fiys he, 1 am a
toarner feat unit yon, before a /were ehjjhje-
meat *.

h Behave thy felf with mttkrtffi »] Literally,
VAwer thy t*ing.

c Who fifth thee when them rifeft np, and thy
behaviour among thofe who worfbip ;] i- e. Who
leech thee when thou rifeft up to watch and
fpend the night in religious exercifes, and ob-
ferveth thy anxious care for the Hf-ms exad
performance of their dfcty It is faid that the
night on which the precept of watch ng was
abrogated, Mohammed went privately from one
houfe to endthef, to fee how his companions fpent
the time; and that he found them fo intent in
reading the Koran, and repeating their prayers,
that their houfes, by reafon of the humming
noife they made, feemed to be fo many nefb of
hornets 3 . Some commentators, however, fup-
pofe that by the prophet's behaviour* in this
place, are meant the various poftures he ufed in
paying at the head of his companions; as Hand-
ing, bowing, pro ft ration, and fitting *.

d The devils defcend upon every lying and niched
perfon ;] The prophet, having vindicated himfelf
from the charge of having communication with

1 See the notes thereon , and the Prelim . Difc,
4 Idem, Jallalo’ddui 1 Jidem.

the devils, by the apportion between his doc-
trine and their designs, and their 1 nihility to
compofe fo confident a book as the Koran, pro-
ceeds to lhew that the pcrlbns moft likely to
a correspondence with thofe evil fpirit% were li-
ars and ftanderers, that is, his enemies -nd op-
poiers.

1 Thty leam nbat it hearii] l e. They are
taught the fetrte mfpi ration of the devils,
and receive their idle and tncondflrnt fuggeftiems
for truth- It being uncertain w hether the fhn-
defers or the depth be the nominative cafe to the
verb, the words may alfo be xeedred, They im-
part whas they W; that is. The devils ac-
quaint their correspondents on earth with fuch
incoherent ferapt of the angels difeourfe, as
they can bear by Health *.

f They rove as bereft f their fenfes through *-
veryvtdh 7, Sec ] Their competitions being as
wild as the actions of a diftra&ed man r for moft
of the ancient poetry Was foil of vain imagina-
tions ; as fabulous ftories and deferiptions, love-
verfcs, Eaitny, exceffive commendations of their
patrons, and as exceffive reproaches of their
enemies, incitements to vicious adions, vain-
glorious vaultings, and the like 6 .

* Except thofe who I ffin'i* See ] That is. Such
poets as had embraced Mobamaedifa 5 whofe
works, free from theprophanenefs of the former,
run chiefly on the pratfes of Gon, and the
efUblifhmg his unity, and contain exhortations
to obedience and other religious and moral ver-
tues; without any fatyrical inve&rvcs, unlefs
againft fuch as have given juft provocations, by
having firft attacked them, or fome others of
the true believers, with the fame weapons. In
this laft cafe Mohammed law it was necefiary

lor

II p. 43, * Al Beidawi. 3 Idem .

6 I idea .

Chap. 27. Al KORAN. 309

aft unjuftly fhall know hereafter, with what treatment they fhall be
treated.

for him to borrow affiflance from the poets of and the two Caabs. It is related that Mohammed
his party, to defend himfelf and religion frbm once faid to Caab Ebn Make. Ply them with
the infults and ridicule of the others i for which fatirtsi for, by him in whofe band my foul is, they
purpofe he employed the pens of Labid Ebn Ra- wound more deeply than arrows *.
bio 1 , Abdallah EbnRawsba, HaJfanEbn Tbobet ,

1 See the Prelim. Difc. p . 61 . * Al Bbidawi.

CHAP. XXVII.

Intitled \ The Ant a ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T Ij, S. Thefe are the figns of the Koran, and of the perfpicuous book :
a <}ireftion, and good tidings unto the true believers ; who regularly
perform tbeir prayer, and give alms, and firmly believe in the life to come.
As to thofe who believe not in the life to come, we have prepared their works
for them b ; and they fhall be ftruck with aftonifhment at tbeir dif appointment,
when they fhall be raifed again : thefe are they whom an evil punifhment await-
etb in this life ; and in that which is to come they fhall be the greateft
lolers. Thou haft certainly received the Koran from the prefence of a
wife, a knowing God , Remember when Moses faid unto his family. Verily
I perceive fire : I will bring you tidings thereof, or I will bring you a lighted
brand, that ye may be warmed *. And when he was come near unto jc, a
Voice cried unto him, faying, B Idled be he who is in the fire, and whoever is
about it d ’, and praife be unto God, the Lord of all creatures ! O Moses,
verily I am God, the mighty, the wife : caft down now thy rod. And when
he faw it, that it moved, as though it had been a ferpent, he retreated and
fled, and returned not. And God faid , O Moses, fear not ; for my meflengejs
are not difturbed with fear in my fight: except he who fhall have done
amifs, and fhall have afterwards fubftituted good in lieu of evil ; for I am
gracious and merciful '. Moreover put thy hand into thy bofom j it fhall

come

* In this chapter js related among o-
ther ftrange things, an odd ftory of the ant,
which has therefore been pitched on for the
title.

b We have prepared tbeir mrb Jar them i]
By re idring them pleafing and agreeable to their
corrupt natures and inclinations,
l See chap. 20. p- 256.

d Bit Jed be be wb$ is in the fire, and about
it ;] Some fuppofe God to be intended by the
former words, and by the latter, the angels who
were prefent 1 ] others think Mofes and the an-
gels arc here^ meant, or all perfonf in general in
this holy plain, and the country round it *.
c Except be wbo Jball bave done amifs, &c.]

This exception was deiigned to qualify the pre-

—

1 Yahy/u

* Jallam/ddih, ^/Beidawi,

310 Al KORAN, Chap. 27.

come forth white, without hurt : this Jhall he one among the nine ftgns a unto
Pharaoh and his people ; for they are a wicked people. And when our
vifible figns had come unto them, they faid, This is manifeft forccry. And
they denied them, although their fouls certainly knew them to be from God ,
out of iniquity and pride : but behold what was the end of the corrupt doers.
We heretofore beftowed knowledge on David and Solomon ; and they laid,
Praife be unto God, who hath made us more excellent than many of his faithful
fervants! And Solomon was David’s heir b ; and he faid, O men, we have
been taught the fpcech of birds % and have had all things beftowed on us ;
this is manifeft excellence. And his armies were gathered together unto So-
lomon, confifting of genii and men, and birds ; and they were led in dif-
tinft bands, until they Came unto the valley of ants *. And an ant, feeing
the bofts approaching^ faid, O ants, enter ye into your habitations* left Solo-
mon and his army tread you under foot, and perceive it not. And Solo -
mon fmiled, laughing at her words, and faid, O Lord, excite me that I may
be thankful for thy favour, wherewith thou haft favoured me, and my pa-
rents ; and that I may do that which is right, and well-pleafing unto thee :
and introduce me, through rhy mercy, into paradife, among thy fervants the
righteous. And he viewed the birds, and Cud, What is the reafon that I fee
not the lapwing f ? Is Ihe abfent ? Verily I will chafhTc her with a fevere

chaftife-

ceding attrition, which Teemed too general : for
feveral of the prophets have been fubjefl to fins,
tho* not great ones, before their million ; for
which they had realbn to apprehend God’s an-
ger, tho* they are here a flu rod that their fobfe-
quent merits intide them to his pardon. It Is
fappofed that Mojtst killing the Egyptian unde-
fignedly is hinted at

» See chap. 17. p. 236.

* Solomon was David*/ heiri] Inheriting not
«nly his kingdom, but alfo the prophetical office,
preferably to his other Cons, who were no lefs
than nineteen*.

c We have ben taught ihe frtttb of birds j]
That is, The meaning of their feveral voices,
tho’ not articulate ; of Solemn'* interpretation
whereof the commentators give feveral in-
ftances J .

d His army confifting of genii, fire.] For this
fincy, as well as the former, Mebanssned was
obliged to the Yalmudifts + , who, according to
their manner, have interpreted the Hebrew words
of Solemn ' , which the Englijb verfion ren-
ders, 1 gat menfisgers, and m^nftigeri r as if
chat prince had forced damns or /firsts to ferve
him at his table, and in other capacities ; and

particularly in his vail and magnificent build-
jngj t u-hich they could not conceive he could
□thermfe have performed.

* The valley of antsi] The valley feema to be
fo called from the great numbers of ants which
are found there. Some place it in Syria, and
others in TAyif 6 .

f Jnd he viewed the birds, &c.] The Arab
hiftorians tell us, that Solemn, having finiftied
the temple of 7erufalen, went in pilgrimage to
Mecca, where having faid as long &s he pleafcd,
he proceeded towards Ymn ; and leaving Mec-
ca in the morning, he arrived by noon at Sanaa,
and being eztmroly delighted with the country,
relied there; but wanting water to make the
ablution, he looked among the birds for the
bp wing, called by the Arabs alHudbmi, whofe
bufinefs it was to find it ; for it is pretended ihe
was fagacioua or fharp-lightcd enough to discover
water under ground, which the devils ufed to
draw, after fhc had marked the place by digging
with her bill : they add, that this bird was then
Caking a tour in the air, whence, feeing one of
her companion* alighting, fhc dcfccndcd alfo,
and having had a defeription given her by the
other of the city of Saba, whence fhe was juft

arrived.

1 Idem. * Idem. 3 See Ma*xcc. not. in lee. p. 51 1. * V. Midrap, Yalkut

Shmmtij p. 11./. 29. & as Mfbammedijme ante Mabammi. p- 232. 1 Eakfi il 8.

< Al Beioawi, J a l £ a l u'y jj ik .

Chap. 27* Al KORA If. 311

chaftifement *, or I will put her to death ; unlefs file bring me a juft ex-
cufe. And (he tarried not long before Jbe prefented berfelf unto Solomon^ and
faid, I have viewed a country which thou haft not viewed ; and I come
unto thee from Saba, with a certain piece of news. I found a woman ‘
to reign over them, who is provided with every thing requifite for a prince ,
and hath a magnificent throne *. I found her and her people to worfhip the
fun, befides God : and Satan hath prepared their works for them, and
hath turned them afide from the way of truth, ( wherefore they are not rightly
dire&ed,) left they Ihould worfliip God, who bringeth to light that which
is hidden in heaven and earth, and knoweth whatever they conceal, and
whatever they difcover. God ! there is no God but he •, the Lord of the
magnificent throne. Solomon faid. We fliall fee whether thou haft fpoken
the truth, or whether thou art a liar. Go with this my letter, and caft it
down unto diem ; then turn afide from them, and wait to know what anfiver they
will return. And when the queen of Saba had received the letter d , ihe faid, O
nobles, Verily an honourable letter hath been delivered unto me ; it is from
Solomon, and this is the tenor thereof: In the name of the moft merciful
God, Rife not up againft me: but come, and furrender yourfelves unto
me *. She faid, O nobles, advife me in my bufinefs : I will not refolve on

any

arrived, Aey both went together to take a view
of the place, and returned foon after Solomon had
made the enquiry which occafioned what fol-
low* *.

It may be proper to mention here what the
eaftem writers fable of the manner of Solution's
travelling. They fay that he hid a carpet of
green filk, on which his throne was placed, be-
ing of a prodigious length and breadth, and
fwiHdcnt for all his forces to Hand on, the
men placing themfelves on his right hand, and
the (pints on his left ; and that when all were in
order, the wind, at his command, took up the car-
pet, and tranfported it, with all that were upon
it, wherever he pleafed * ; the army of birds at
the fame time flying over their he^ds, and form-
ing a kind of canopy, to (hade them from the
fun.

• I toil l tbaftife ban &c ] By plucking off
her leathers, and letting her in the fun, to be
tormented by the infefts » or by lhutting her up
in a cage

b 1 found a woman to reign over them 1 ] This
queen the Arabs name BaJkh : fame make her
the daughter of alHodbdd EbnSbarbabil and
others of SbaraW Ebn Malec * ; but they all
agree fhe was a defeendant of Yarah Ebn Kahtdn*
She is placed the twenty fecond in Dr. Pocock *s

2 lidem.

Pococ*.

6 Ubi fif.

lift of the kings of Taman 6 .

c A magnificent throne i] Which the commen-
tators fay was made of gold and filver, and
crowned with precious ftones. But they differ
as to the fize of it ; one making it fourfeore cu-
bits long, forty broad, and thirty high ; while
fome fry it was fourfeore, and others, thirty
cubits every way.

d And when Jbe bad received the let ter , &c.]
Jallalo'&din fays that the queen was farrounded
by her army when the lapwing threw the letter
into her boiom ; but */ Beiddwi fuppofeslhe was
in an apartment of her pakce, the doors of
which were /hut, and that the bird flew in at
the window. The former commentator gives a
copy of the epiftle fomewhat more full than
that in the text; viz . From the fervantof Go©,
Solomon the fon of David, unto Balkis queen of
Saba. In the name of the mqft merciful Go d.
Peace be on him who folkmtb the true direfthn.
Rife not up againft me, but come and Jurrenier
yourfehes unto me . He adds that Solomon per-
fumed this letter with moak, and foiled it with
his fignet

e Come and fnrnndtr yourfelves unto me »] Or,
Come unto me and re/ign yourfehts unto the dh*
vine direction, and profefs the true religion
which I preach,

* See ( bap . at. p. 271. 3 Al Beidawi, Jallalo’ddin; 2 * 4 V .

Spec. /. 59. 1 ^/Beidawi, (ife* T. D’Herbil, Bibl. Orient , 1*182*

3*2 Al KORAN* Chap. 27.

any thing, until ye be witneffes and approve thereof. The nobles anfwered.
We are indued with ftrength, and are indued with great prowefc in war;
but the command appertained unto thee : fee therefore what thou wilt

command *. She faid, Verily kings, when they enter a city by fane, wafte
the fame, and abafe the moft powerful of the inhabitants hereof : and fo will
tbefe do with us. But I will fend gifts unto them ; and will wait for what
farther information thofe who fhall be feflt, fhall bring back. And when
the queen's embajfador came unto Solomon b , that prime laid. Will ye prefent
me with riches ? Verily that which Gqh hath given me, is better than what
he hath given you : but ye do glory in ypur gifts. Return unto the people of
Saba. We will furely come unto them with forces, which they fliall not
be able to withftand ; and we will drive them out from their city, humbled ;
and they fhall become contemptible. And Sououou faid, O nobles, which
of you will bring unto me her throne, before they come and furrender
themfelves unto me ? A terrible genius e anfwered, I will bring it unto
thee, before thou arife from thy place d : for I am able to perform it, and
may be t rutted. And one with whom was the knowledge of the feriptures *
laid, I will bring it unto thee, in the twinkling of an eye f . And when
i Sow non faw the. throne placed before him, he faid. This is a favour of my
Lord, that he may malke trial of me, whether I will be grateful, or whe-
ther I will be ungrateful : and he who is grateful, is grateful to his own

advantage* but if any fhall be ungrateful, verily my Lord is felf-fufficienc
and munificent And SoLo.wA'faid unto bis /truants. Alter her throne, that
fhe may not know it, to the end we may fee whether lhe be rightly dire&ed, or

whether

» What thou wilt command ;] i. e. Whether
thou wilt obey the fummons of Srhmn P or give
us orders to mike head agamft him.

b When the erskaffkdtr tarte imls Solomon ;]
Bearing the prefents, which they fry were five
hundred young flives of each fex* ail habited in
the fame manner, five hundred bricks of gold,
a crown inriched with prccitm: Hanes, be fide*
a large qtiamky of mm t* amber, and other
things of value J . Some add, Um Ba/Ms % to
try whether Srftmta was a prophet or no, dreff
the boys like girls, add the girls like buys and
fent Mm* in a casket, a pearl not drilled, and an
onyx drilled with a crooked hole ; and that
mn diflkvguifticd the boys from the girls by the
different manner of their taldng water, and or-
dered one worm to bore the peart., and another
to pafs a thread through the onyx *. They allb
tell ns, that Solomok, having notice of this enabaf-
fy, by means of the lapwing} tve?. before they
fet our, ordered a large jqiilt to be indoied
with a wall built of gold and filt er -bricks*
wherein he ranged his forces and atte ndants to

receive them 3 .

! A terrihk gmiut ;] This was an ffnt t or
one of the wkked :.nd rebellious genii ; and his

rt 3 iriL\ fay s Beid£mi t Wii DiamSt; or
Sit* hr,

d Before thi 1 arife frees thy jlaa ;] i. e.

From thy feat of' suffice, For ufed to

fit in judgment every day lifl noon

* Os. T with whm rear the krmnfad? 1 of the
firif turret ;] This pen on, as it generally (bppof-
ed, was Afif the Con of Baradin* Stkmm's
wjizsr (or vitsrj, who knew^the great or ineffable
name ot G 0 d, by prorcemndng which he
per r'V: ird th h wonderful expldr *_ Others
however fuppoic a: wai A Kbfjr, or elfe Ga~
Mil w or fome other angel ; and fome imagine
it to have been Solmm himleif 15 .

1 Iw ibi tmiuHfyg f an rre ;] The original
it, Biftre tkw fa rtf A *i at any sbjtS, and take
try ne rjf it It is (aid tfcu: Sod'cmw f. at Jfaf s
defirc T looked up to heaven, and before I-c oaik
bis eye downwards, the throne made its way
under ground, and appeared before him.

1 Jalla^o’pdin. * AI Bbidawj. 3 Jallalg'jddin 1 lidtm Intirf

5 Jallalo’ddin. 6 AIB eidawi.

Chap. 27 . Al KORAN. 313

whether fhe be one of thofe who are not rightly dire&ed. And when fhe was
come unto Solomon *, it was faid unto her , Is thy throne like this? Shean-
fwered, As though it were the fame. And we have had knowledge bellowed
on us before this, and have been refigned unto God b . But that which fhe wor-
fhipped, befides God, had turned her afide from the truth ; for Ihe was of an un-
believing people. It was faid unto her. Enter the palace c . And when lhe faw
it, lhe imagined it to be a great yater ; and fhe difcovered her legs, by lifting up
her robe to fafs through it*. Whereupon Solomon h.\d unto her. Verily this isn palace
evenly floored with glafs. ^Then faid the queen, OLord, verily I have dealt Unjuftly
with my own foul *, and I refign my felf, together with Solomon, unto God, the
Lord of all creatures e . Alfo we heretofore fent unto the tribe of T hamud
their brother Saleh ; who faid unto them. Serve ye God. And behold, they
were divided into two parties, who difputed among themfelves f . Saleh faid,
O my people, why do ye haflen evil rather than good * ? Unlefs ye afk par-
don of God, that ye may obtain mercy, ye are loft. They anfwered. We prefage
evil from thee, and from thofe who are with thee. Saleh replied. The evil
which ye prefage is with God fc : but ye are a people who are proved by a
viciffitude of prafperity and adverfity. And there were nine men in the city,
who afted corruptly in the earth, and behaved not wich integrity. And they
faid unto one another , Swear ye reciprocally by God, that we will fall upon
Saleh and his family by nignt : and afterwards we will fay unto him who
hath right to avenge his blood, We were not fo much as prefent at the de-
flrudlion of his family } and we certainly fpeak the truth. And they deviled
a plot againft him : but we devifed a plot againft them j and they perceived

Sf it

* When jbt was come unto Solomon;] For, on
the return of her ambaflador, the determined to
go and fubmit herfelf to that prince ; but before
departure, lhe fecured her throne, as Ihe
thought, by locking it up in a ilrong caftle, and
fcctlng a guard to defend it ; after -which Ihe fet
out, attended by a va ft army 1 .

b We have bad knowledge beftowed on us before
this, &c] It is uncertain whether thefe be the
words of Ba/JnSy acknowledging her convi&ion
fey the wopdcrs Ihe had already feen ? or of So-
lomon and his people, acknowledging the favour
of God, in calling them to the true faith before
her.

c Enter the palaces] Or, as fome underftand
the word, the court before the palace, which So-
lomon had commanded to be built againft the ar-
rival of Balkts ; the floor or pavement being of
transparent glafs, laid over running water, in
which fifh were fwirn tiring. Fronting this pave-
ment was placed the royal throne, on which
Solomon fat to receive the queen 2 ,
d She iifcovtred ber legs> &c.] Some Arab
■writers tell us, Solomon had been informed that

Balkis's legs and feet were covered with hair,
like thofe of an aft, of the .truth of which he had
hereby an opportunity of being fatisfied by ocu-
lar demonftration.

e I re J*& n m J unt0 God ;] The queen of
Saba having by thefe words profefled IJldm, and
renounced idolatry, Solomon had thoughts of
making her his wife 5 but could not relolve to
do it, till the devils had, by a depilatory, taken off
the hair from her legs 3 . Some * however will
have it that Ihe did not marry Solomon , but a
prince of the tribe of Hamddn .

f Who dijputed among tbemfehes ;] Concerning
the do&rine preached by Saleh ; one party be-
lieving on him, and the other treating him as
an impoftor.

8 Why da ye baftin evil rather than good ?] 1. e
Why do ye urge and defy the divine vengeance
with which ye are threatned, inftead of avert-
ing ii by repentance ?

h We prefage evil from thee , &c.] See thap.
7. p. 130. where the Egyptians in the fame
manner accufe Mofes as the caufe of their cala-
mities.

x Jallalo’ddin.

2 Idem, Al Beidawi, * Jalialo'ddin. * Apud Al Beidawj.

314 JQ KORAN. Chap. 27.

it not. And fee what was the iffue of their plot * : we utterly deftroyed them
and their whole people ; and thefe their habitations remain empty, becaufe of
the injuftice which they committed. Verily herein is a fign, unto people who
underiland. And we delivered thofe who believed, and feared God. And re-
member Lot *, when he faid unto his people. Do ye commit a wickednefs,
though ye fee the batnoufnefs thereof? Do ye approach luftfuliy unto men,
XX. leaving the women ? Ye are furely an ignoraqt people. * But the anfwer of
his people was no other than that they faid. Call the family of Lot out of
your city : for they are men who preferve themfelves pure from the trims of
which ye are guilty. Wherefore we delivered him and his family, except his
wife, whom we decreed to be one of thofe who remained behind to be deftroy-
ed. And we rained on them a fhower of Jlones : and dreadful was the lhower
which fell on thofe who had been warned in vain b / Say, Praife be unto God ;
and peace be upon his fcrvants whom he hath chofen ! Is God more worthy, or
the falfe gods which they aflociate with him ? Is not he to be preferred, who
hath created the heavens and the earth, and fendeth down rain for you from
heaven, whereby we caufe delicious groves to fpring up ? It is not in your
power to caufe the trees thereof to fhoot forth. Is there any other god
partner with the true God ? Verily thefe are a people who deviate from the
truth. Is not he more worthy to be adored, who hath eftablifhed the earth, and
hath caufed rivers to flaw through the midft thereof and placed thereon im-
movable mountains , and fet a bar tie tween the two feas * r Is there any other
god equal with the true God ? Yet die greater part of them know it not.
Is not be more worthy who heareth the afflidrd *, when he calleth upon him,
and taketh off the evil which diflrejfed him ; and who hath made you the fuc-
ceflors of your forefathers in the earth ? Is there any other god who can be
equalled With the true God ? How few confider thefe things ! Is not he snore
worthy who dire&eth you in the dark paths of the land and of the fea ; and
who iendeth the winds driving abroad the clouds, as the forerunners of his
mercy * ? Is there any other god who can be equalled with the true God ? Far
be God from having thofe partners in bis power, which ye aflociate with him !
Is not be more worthy , who produceth a creature, and after it bath been dead
reftoreth it to life *, and who giveth you food from heaven and earth? Is there
any other god with the true God, who doth this ? Say, Produce your proof
thereof, if ye fpeak truth. Say, None either in heaven or earth knowethdiat

which

* See what teas the iffue of their flat s'] ft is rock, which fell down at the month of the Units,
related that Saleh, and thole who believed on lb that they perifhed there in a mifcrable man-
him, nfnally meeting to pray in a certain narrow ner.

place between the mountains, the infidels laid, b See chap. 7. p. 126, and chap. 11. p. 184.
Be thinks to make an end tf tu after three dans*, c See chap. 2;. p. 300. The woid larzakb
but we will be before-bated with him ; and that a is not qfed here, out another of equivalent im-
party of them went direflly to the ftraits above- port.

mentioned, thinking to execute their defign, but 4 The ufthdeJ i] Literally, Him who it .tripes
were terribly difappointed ; for, iaftead of catch- by diitrefs to implore God’s affiftance.
mg the prophet, they were caught themfelves, * See chap. 7. p. 1 22, and chap. 25. p. 300.
their retreat being cut off by a Urge piece of

• Set eboft 7. f, 125. not. c.

Chap. 27.

r M KORAN.

SIS'

which is hidden, befides God : neither do they underftand when they lhali
be raifed. However their knowledge attaineth Jome notion of the life to
come * : yet they are in an uncertainty concerning the fame ; yea, they are
blind as to the red eirctmjianees thereof. And the unbelievers fay. When
we and our fathers fhall have been reduced to dull, fhall we be taken forth
from the grave? Verily we have been threatened with this, both we and our
fathers, heretofore. This is no other than fables of the aHcients. Say unto
them, Pafs through the earth, and fee what hath been the end of the wicked.
And be not thou grieved for them ; neither be thou in any concern on ac-
count of the plots which they are contriving againji thee. And they fay.
When will this threat be accompli/bed, if ye fpeak true ? Anfwer, Peradven-
ture Ibme part of that pum foment, which ye defire to be haftened, may fol-
low clofe behind you : verily thy Lord is endued with indulgence towards
mankind; but the greater part of them are not thankful. Verily thy Lord
knoweth what their breads conceal, and what they difeover : and there is no-
thing hidden in heaven or on earth, but it is written in a clear book. Verily
this Koran declareth unto the children of Israel moft of thole points con-
cerning which they difagree b : and it is certainly a direction, and a mercy
unto tne true believers. Thy Lord will decide the conrroverfy between them,
by his definitive fentence : and he is the mighty, the wife. Therefore put
thy trull in God ; for thou art in the manifeft truth. Verily thou fhalt not
make the dead to hear, neither fhalt thou make the deaf to hear thy call to
the true faith, when they retire and turn their backs : neither lhalt thou di-
rect the blind to extricate tbemfehes out of their error. Thou lhalt make none
to hear tbee, except him who lhali believe in our figns: and they are wholly
refigned unto us. When the fentence lhali be ready to fall upon them, we
will caufe a bead c to come forth unto them from out of the earth, which
fhall ipeak unto them * : verily men do not firmly believe in our figns. On
the day of refurrettion we will afiemble, out of every nation, a company
of thofe who lhali have charged our figns with fallhood ; and they fhall be
prevented from mixing together, until they lhali arrive at the place of judgment .
And God lhali fay unto them , Have ye charged my figns with fallhood, although
ye comprehended them not with your knowledge ? Or what is it that ye were
doing ? And the fentence of damnation lhali fall on them, for that they have
a&ecl unjuftly : and they lhali not fpeak in their own excufe. Do they not

* However their knowledge attaineth feme nth c A beajt ;] The Mohammedans call this beaft,
tion of the life to com : yet, &c.] Or the words whole appearance will be one fign of the*p-
nuy be tranflated thus i Yea, their knowledge

“ 1 Moft ef tboft points smerning whieb they
difagree j] Such as the comparing of God to to have two wings.

Jenfible things, or to created beings ; there- d Which Beall fpeak unto them ;] Or, accord-
moving all imperfections from the defeription of ing to a different reading, (viz. taclimobm ia-
the divine Being ; the date of paradile and hell • Bead of toealiimbom) who pall wound them 3 .
the ftories of Ezra and Jesvs Christ, tdc

fee

4 Prelim . Dift, J. lV. p- 75. &c.

1 etlBi iDAWt.

3 V. ibid . p. 80.

3*6 Al KORAN. Chap. 28.

fee that we have 6 retained the night, that they may .reft therein, and the
day giving open light ? Verily herein are figns unto people who believe. On
that day the trumpet lhall be founded ; and whoever are in heaven and on
earth (hall be ftruck with terror, except thofe whom God lhall plea fc to exempt
therefrom * ; and all lhall come before him, in humble guife. And thou
lhalt fee the mountains, and lhalt think them firmly fixed ; but they lhall
pals away, even as the clouds pals away. ’This will be the work of God, who
hath rightly difpofed all things : and he is well acquainted with that which ye
do. whoever lhall have wrought righteoufnefs, lhall receive a reward be-
yond the defert thereof; and they mail be fecure from the terror of that
day b : but whoever lhall have wrought evil, lhall be thrown on their faces
into bell fire. Shall ye teceive the reward of any other than of that which
ye lhall have wrought ? Verily I am commanded to worlhip the Lord of
this territory of Mecca , who hath fan&ified the fame : unto him belong all
things. And 1 am commanded to be a Modem, and to rehearfe the Koran :
he who lhall be dire died thereby , will be directed to his own advantage ; and
to him who lhall so aftray, fay, Verily I am a wamer only. And fay,
Prailib be unto God T he will Ihew you his figns*, and ye lhall know them:
and thy .Lord is not regardlefs of that which they do.

* See the Prelim* Difc. IV. p. 3 z, iAt. a.:y i] Tliat is, from die fear of darana’ .n r and
Some (ay the perfcns exempted from this gene- the other tenors which wH! difturb the wicked;
ral confternation, will be the atigds Gabriel, not from the geaenl terror or c nftemation be-
Michael, IfrtjUo and h srmt 1 : others fuppofe forementioiied.

them to be the virgins of paradifc, and the angels £ He will jbew yyj bis figns ;] viz. The fuc-

who guard that place, and carry Goo's throne * ; cefTes of the true believers again!! the infidels ;
and others will have them to be the martyrs *. and particularly the viflory of Bedr*
b Tb/j Jbeil be fecure f rob the terror of that

1 Jal laud'd* in, Al Beidawi. * Mm * * Ebn Abbas.

CHAP. XXVIII.

Intit led y The Story * ; revealed at Mecca b .

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T . S. M *. Thefe are the figns of the perfpicuoxls book. We will diftate
unto thee, O Mohammed , fame partf of the hiftory of Moses and
Pharaoh, with truth; for the fake of people who believe. Now Pharaoh
lifted himfelf up in the land of Egypt ; and he caufed his fubjefts to be

divided

» The title is taken from the a 6 th verfe, beginning with thefe words, He whs bath given
where Mofes is faid to have related the fiery of thee the Koria for a rule sf feith end freftice,
his adventures to Sboeib . See.

* Some except a verfe, towards the latter e& 4 > f See the PrdinL Difc. §. III. p. $ 9 .

Chap. 28 . Al KORAN. 317

divided into parties * : he weakened one party of them k , by Haying their
male-children, and preferving their females alive •, for he was an oppreffor.
And we were minded to be gracious unto thofe who were weakened in the
land, and to make them models of religion ; and to make them the heirs of
the wealth of Pharaoh and bis people % and to eflablilh a place for them in
the earth •, and to fliew Pharaoh, and Haman ", and their forces, that
definition of their kingdom and nation by them, which they fought to avoid *.
And we dire died the mother of Moses by revelation, faying , Give him fuck :
and if thou feareft for him, caft him into the river ; and fear not, neither
be affiided ; for we will reftore him unto thee, and will appoint him one of
our apoftles f . And when Jhe had put the child in the ark, and bad caff it into the
river , the family of Pharaoh took him up ; providence defigning that he
fhould become an enemy, and a forrow unto them. Verily Pharaoh, and
Haman, and their forces were finners. And the wife of Pharaoh faid.
This child is a delight of the eye to me, and to thee 1 : kill him not •, per-
adventure it may happen that he may be ferviceable unto us ; or we may
adopt him for our fon. And they perceived not the confequence of what they
were doing. And the heart of the mother of Moses became oppreffed with
fear ; and Hie had almoft difcovered him, had we not armed her heart with
conftancy, that Hie might be one of thofe who believe the promifesof God.
And fhe faid unto his lifter. Follow him. And fhe watched him at a dis-
tance ; and they perceived it not. And we Suffered him not to take the breafts
of the nurfes who were provided before bis Jifter came up h : and fhe laid. Shall I di-
red you unto fome of his nation, who may nurfe him for you, and will be care-

* He divided bis fubjiHs into parties ;] i. e. Ei-
ther into companies, that they might the better
attend his order and perform the fervices he ex-
afied of them ; or into oppofite factions, to pre-
vent their attempting any thing againft him, to
deliver themfelves from his tyranny r .

b One party of them ;] viz. The Ifraelites .
c See chap. 26. p. 304.
d Haman ;] This name is given to Pharaoh's
chief roinifte* ; from whence it is generally in-
ferred that Mohammed has here made Haman ,
the favourite of Abafuefus king of Perfidy and
who indifputably lived many ages after Mo/es,
to be that prophet’s contemporary. But how pro-
bable foever thi9 miftake may feem to us, it will
be very hard, if not impoffible, to convince a Mo-
hammedan of it ; for, as has been obferved in a
parallel cafe a , two very different perfona may
bear the fame name 3 .

brew nation lhould be the ruin of his kingdom ;
which prophecy is fuppofed to have been the
occaiion df his cruelty to them *. This circum-
ftance is owing to the invention of the Jews s .

f It is related that the midwife appointed to
attend the Hebrew women, terrified by a light
which appeared between the eyes of Mofes at his
birth, and touched with an extraordinary affec-
tion for the child, did not difeover him to the
officers, fo that his mother kept him in her
houfe, and nurfed him three months; after which
it was impoilible for her to conceal him any
longer, the king then giving orders to make the
fearches more ftridlly

* This child is a delight of our eyeQ This fud-
deo affeftion or admiration was railed in them
either by his uncommon beauty, or by the light
which Ihone on his forehead, or becaufe, when
they opened the ark, they found him fucking his
thumb, which fupplied him with milk 7 .

h See chap. 20. p. 258.

e That deftruSion by them , which they fought to
avoid}] For Pharaoh had either dreamed, or
been told by fome diviner#, that one of the He -

1 Al Beidawi, 2 Seep. 38. not. b. 3 V . Reland. deRel. Moham.-p. 21 7.

4 See chap, 7. p. 130. < V \ Sbalfhel hqkkab , 11. & R. Eliez. Pirke, e . 48. 6 Al

Beidawi. See the notes to chap. 20. 258. 7 Idem> Jallalo’ddin.

318 Al KORAN. Chap. 28.

fol of him ? And t at tbcir dftre, Jbe brought his mother to them. So we reftored
him to his mother, that her mind might be fet at eafe, and that fhe might not
be afflicted ; and that fhe might know that the promife of God was true : but
the greater part of mankind know not the truth. And when Moses had attain-
ed his. age of full ftrength, and was become a perfedt man, we beftowed on
him wifdom and knowledge : and thus do we reward the upright. And he
went into the city, at a time when the inhabitants thereof obferved not what
puffed in the ftreets * .* and he found therein two men fighting ; the one being
or his own party, and the other of his enemies b . And he who was of his
party, begged his affiftance againft him who was of the contrary party j and
Moses ftruck him with his fift, and flew him : but being firry for what bad
happened, he faid. This is 1 of the work of the devil c j for he is a feducing and
an open enemy. And he faid, O Lord, verily I have injur’d my own foul:
wherefore forgive me. So God forgave him ; for he is ready to forgive, and
merciful. He faid, O Lord, by the favours with which thou haft favoured
me, I will not be an afliftant to the wicked for the future. And the next
morning he was afraid in the city, and looked about him, as one apprehenfive
ef danger : and behold, he whom he had aflifted the day before, cried out
unto him for help a fecond time. But Moses faid unto him. Thou art plain-
ly a quarrelfome fellow. And when he fought to lay hold on him who was
an enemy unto them both, he faid, O Moses, doft thou intend to kill me,
as thou killedft a man ycfterday 4 ? Thou feekeft only to be an opprcflbr in
-the earth* and feekeft not to be a reconciler of quarrels. And a certain man •
came from the farther part of the city, running haftily, and faid, O Moses,
verily the magiftrates are deliberating concerning thee, to put thee to death :
depart therefore ; I certainly advife thee well. Wherefore he departed out of
the city in great fear, looking this way and that, left be Jbould be purfued
And he faid, O Lord, deliver me from the unjuft people. And when he
was journeying towards Madian, he faid, Peradventure my Lord will direft
me in tjie right way f . And when he arrived at the water of Madian, he

found

• When the inhabitants ebfirrtd a i t, Ac.] fix.
At noon 2 at which time it is ufual, in thole coun-
tries. for people to retire to deep : or, as others
rather fappofc, a little within night

b The one hang rf bis cwn pm rty, and the
other of bis enemies 2] i. e. The one being an
Ifraelite, of his own religion and nation, and
(he other an idolatrous Egyptian.

c This is the work of the dev :i i] Mohammed
allows that Mojes killed the Egypt*** wrongfully 2
but, to cxcufc it, fuppofes that he ftruck him
without defigning to kill him.

d He faid, O Moles, milt thorn kill me, Ac.]
Some fuppofe thefe words to hare been fpoken
by the Ifraelite, who, becaufe Mefes had repri-
manded him* imagined he was going to ftrike
him 2 and other** by the Egyptian, who either

knew or fufpeQed tr.it Mofcs had killed his coun-
tryman the day before.

^ c A tetuin man ;] This perfon, fays the tra-
dition, was an Egyptian, and Pharaoh's uncle’s
(bn, but a true believer ; who finding that the
king had been informed of what Mofes had done,
and defigned to put him to death, gave him im-
mediate notice to provide for his fafety by flight.

f Peradvatture my Lord will direS me, Ac.]
For Mofes knew not the way, and coming to a
place where three roads met, committed him-
fclf to the guidance of God, and took the
middle road, which Was the right 2 providence
likewife fo ordering n, that his purfuers took the
other two mads* and miffed him *. Some fay
that he was led hy an angel in the appearance of
a traveller

1 Al fiaiDAWt.

* Jallalo'ddik.

Chap. 28. Al KORAN. 3*9

found about the t veil a company of men, who were watering their flocks.
And he found, befides them, two women, who kept off their Jheep at a dis-
tance. And he faid unto them , What is the matter with you ? They anfwer-
ed. We (hall not water our flock , until the fhepherds fhall have driven away
theirs ; for our father is an old man, ftricken in years. So Moses watered
their /beep for them a ; and afterwards retired to the lhade, faying, O Lord,
verily I ftand in need of the good which thou lhalt fend down unto me.
And one of the damfels b came unto him, walking bafhfully, and faid, My
father calleth thee, that he may recompence thee for the trouble which thou
haft taken in watering our Jheep for us. And when he was come unto Sboaib,
and had told him the (lory of bis adventures , he faid unto him , Fear not ,
thou haft efcaped from unjuft people. And one of the damfels faid, My father,
hire him for certain wages : the belt fervant thou canft hire, is an able and
trufty perfon c . And Sboaib faid unto Moses, Verily I will give thee one of
thefe my two daughters in marriage, on condition that thou fcrve me for hire
eight years : and if thou fulfill ten years , it is in thine own bread: ; for I feek
not to irapofe a hardfhip on thee : and thou fhalt find me, if God pleafe, a
man of probity. Moses anfwered, Let this be the covenant between me and
thee : whichfoever of the two terms I fhall fulfil, let it be no crime in me if I
then quit tby fervice ; and God is witnefs of that which we fay. And when
Moses had fulfilled the term 4 , and was journeying with his family towards
Egypt, he faw fire on the fide of mount Sinai. And he faid unto his family,
T arry ye here ; for I fee fire : pcradventure I may bring you thence fome tidings
of the way e , or at leaft a brand out of the fire, that ye may be warmed.
And when he was come thereto, a voice cried unto him from the right fide
of the valley, in the facred bottom, from the tree, faying , O Moses, verily
I am God, the Lord of all creatures : caft down now thy rod. And when
he faw it that it moved, as though it had been a ferpent, he retreated and
$ed, and returned not. And God faid unto him , O Moses, draw near, and
fear not } for thou art fafe. Put thy hand into thy bofome, and it fliall

• come

1 Mofes watered their jheep far them ;] By rol-
ling away a ftone of a prodigious weight, which
had been laid over the month of the well by the
fhepherds, and required no left than (even men
(tho’ fome name a much larger number) to re-
move it 1 .

b One of the damfels ;] This was Sefura (or
Zipporah ) the elder, or, as others fuppofe, the
younger danghter of Sboaib, whom Mofes after-
wards mi tried.

c An able and trufty perfon i] The girl, being
asked by her father how Ihe knew Mofes de-
ferved this character, told him that he had re-
moved the vaft ftone aboveroentioned, without
any affiftance ; and that he looked not in her

face, but held down his head till he had heard her
meflage, and defired her to walk behind hin\,
becaufe the wind ruffled her garments a little,
and difcovered fome part of her legs 2 .

* When Mofes bad fulfilled the term )] viz.
The longeft term of ten years. The Moham-
medan) by, after the Jews J , that Mofes receiv-
ed from Sboaib the rod of the prophets (which
was a branch of a myrtle of paradife, and had
delcended to him from Adam) to keep off the wild
beafts from his fheep ; and that this was the rod
with which he performed all thofp wonders in
Soft.

t See chap. 20; p. 256.

1 liiem Interp. Yahya.
Pirie, c. 40. (j tc.

* Iidem.

3 V. Shalf. bakkab. p. 12. R. Elut,

320 Al KORAN. Chap. 2fl.

come forth white, without any hurt : and draw back thy hand 1 unto thee
which tbou Jlretcbefi forth for fear. Thefe (hall be two evident figns from
thy Lord, unto Pharaoh and his princes *, for they are a wicked people.
Moses faid, O Lord, verily I have flain one of them ; and I fear they will

? ut me to death : but my brother Aaron is of a more eloquent tongue than
am wherefore fend him with me for an affiftant, that he may gain me
credit •, for I fear left they accufe me of impofture. God faid. We will
ftrengthen thine arm by thy brother, and we will give each of you extraor-
dinary power, fo that they fhall not come up to you, in our figns. Ye two,
and whoever lhall follow you, fhall he the conquerors. Ana when Moses
came unto them with our evident figns, they faid. This is no other than a
deceitful piece of forcery : neither have we heard of any thing like this among
our fore-fathers. And Moses faid. My Lord beft knoweth who cometh
with a direttion from him ; and who lhall have fuccels in this life, as well
as the next : but the unjuft fhall not profper. And Pharaoh faid, O princes,

I did not know that ye had any other god befides me b . Wherefore ao thou,
O Haman, bum me clay into bricks ; and build me a high tower % that I
may afcend unto the God of Moses : for I verily believe him to be a liar.
And both he and his forces behaved themfelves infolently and unjuftly in the
earth ; and imagined that the)- fhould not be brought before us to he pdged
Wherefore we took him and his Forces, and call them into the fea. Behold,
therefore, what was the end of the unjuft. And we made them deceitful guides,
inviting their followers to hell fire ; and on the day of refurreftion they lhall
not be 1'creened/rcw punijhment. We purfued them with a curfe in this Hfe ; and
on the day of refurreftion they pall be lhamefully- rejetted. And we gave
the book of the law unto Moses, after we had aeftroyed the former gene-
rations, to enlighten the minds of men, and for a direttion, and a mercy j
that peradventure they might confider. Tbou, O prophet , waft not on the
»weft fide of mount Sinai, when we delivered Moses his commiflion : neither
waft thou one of thole who were prdent at bis receiving it : but we raifed up
feveral generations after Moses ; andP life was prolonged unto them. Neither
didft thou dwell among the inhabitants of Madian, rehearfing unto them
our figns ; but we have fent thee fully injlruffed in every particular. Nor
waft ’ thou frefenl on the fide of the mount, when we called unto Moses : but
tbou art feat as a mercy from thy Lord > that thou might eft preach unto a

people

* Draw Seri iH ban Literally, tby wing:
the expreffion allude; to the aflion of biros,
which ftretch forth their wings to fly away
-when they are frighted, and fold them together
again when they think themfelves fccurc *.
b See chap. 46 . p. 303.
c A high tower j] It is faid that Homan, hav-
ing prepared bricks and other materials, employ-
ed no lefs than fifty thou (and men, befides la-
bourers, in the building ; which they carried to

fo immenfe a height that the workmen could no
longer Hand on it: that Pharaoh, amending
this tower, threw a 'javelin towards heaven,
which fell back again ftained with blood, where-
upon he impioufly boaited that he had killed the
God of M.fes ; but at fun-fet God fent the
angel Gahrirf, Who with one flroke of his wing
demolifhed the tower, a part whereof, filling
on fhe king’s army, deftroyed a million of
men *.

1 af/BEIDAWS.

* Al Zamakhsh AM.

Chap. 28 . Al KORAN. 321

people to whom no preacher hath come before thee*, that peradventure they
may be warned ; ana left, if a calamity had befallen them, for that which
their hands had previoufly committed, they fliould have faid, O Lord,
fince thou haft not lent an apoftle unto us, that we might follow thy ligns,
and become true believers, are we not excufable? Yet when the truth is
come unto them from before us, they fay, Unlefs he receive the fame
power to work miracles as Moses received, we will not believe. Have they
not likewife rejected the revelation which was heretofore given unto Moses ?
They fay, Two cunning impoftures * have mutually aflifted one another:
and they fay. Verily we rejeft them both. Say, Produce therefore a book
from God, which is more right than thefe two,, that I may follow it } if ye
fpeak truth. But if they return thee no anfwer, know that they only fol-
low their own defires : and who erreth more widely from the truth than
he who followeth his own defire, without a direction from God ? verily God
direfteth not the unjuft people. And now have we caufed our word to oome
unto them, that they may be admonifhed. They unto whom we have
given the feriptures which were revealed before it, believe in the fame ; and
when it is read untp them, fay. We believe therein 5 it is certainly the truth
from our Lord: verily w£ were Modems before this*. Thefe lhall receive
their reward twice d , becaufe they have perfevered; and repel evil by good,
and diftribute alms out of that which we have bellowed on them ; and
when they hear vain difeourfe, avoid the fame, faying. We have our works,
and ye have your works : peace be on you e ; we covet not the acquain-
tance of the ignorant. Verily thou canft not direct whom thou wilt : but
God diredleth whom he pleafeth ; and he bell knoweth thofe who will fub-
mit to be directed. The Meccans fay. If we follow the fame direction
with thee, we lhall be forcibly expelled our land f . Have we not eftablilh-
ed for them a fecure afylum.*; to which fruits of every fort are brought, as
a provifion of our bounty ? but the greater part of them do not underiland.
How many cities have we deftroyed, wbofe inhabitant lived in eafe and plen-
ty? and thefe their dwellings are not inhabited after them, unlefs for a

T t little

1 Veto a people to •whom no priatber bath come
before thee :] That is, to the Arabians rto whom
no prophet had been fent, at leaft fince Ifmael.

b Two cunning impoftures ;] V/z._ The Penta-
teuch and the Koran • Some copies read. Two
impoftors, meaning Mofes and Mohammed.

c IPe were Moftems before tbit 5] Holding the
fame faith in fundamentals, before the revela-
tion of the Korin, Which we receive becaufe it
is eGnfonant to the feriptures, and attefted to
by them. The pallage intends thofe Jews and
Chriftians who had embraced Mobajumedi/m.

d Thefe Jhall receive tbeir reward twice :} Be-
caufe they have believed both in their own
feriptures, and in the Korin,

* See chap. *5. p. 301. not. d.
f If we follow t by direction, we Jball be foreibly
expelled our land}] This objection was made by
Al Haretb Ebn Otbntan Ebn Nawfal Ebn Abi
Menaf, who came to Mohammed ahd told him,
that the Koteijb believed he preached the truth,
but were apprehenfive, that; if they made the
Arabs their enemies by quitting their religion,
they would be obliged likewife 'to quit Mecca,
being but a handful of men, in comparifon to
the whole nation 1 .

a Have we not eftablijbed for them a fecure afy-
lum ?] By giving them for their habitation the
{acred territory of Mecca, a place protected by
Cod, and reverenced by man.

Al Beidawu.

322 Al KORAN. Chap. 28 .

little while* *, and we were the inheritors of tbeir wealth b . But thy Lord
did not deftroy thofe cities, until he had fent unto their capital an apoftle,
to rehearfe our figns unto them : neither did we deftroy thofe cities, unlefs
their inhabitants were injurious to their apojlle. The things which ate given
you, are the provifions of this prefent lite, and the pomp diet cos ; but that
which is with God, is better and more durable: will ye not therefore under-
fland ? Shall he then, unto whom we have promifed an excellent promife
of future bappinefs , and who fhall attain the lame, be as he on whom we
hive bellowed the provifionof this prelent life, and who, on the day ofre-
fbrredtion, fhall be one of thole who are delivered up to eternal pumfhment ?
On that day God fhall call unto them, and £hali fay. Where are my part-
ners, which ye imagined to be fa ? And they upon whom the fentence of
damnation fhall be juftly pronounced, fhall anfwer, Thefe, O L ord, are
thofe whom we feduced ; we feduced them as we alfo had been frduced :
but now we clearly quit them, and turn unto thee. They did not wor-
Ihip us, but their own lufli *. And it fhall be laid unto the idolaters , Call
now upon thofe whom ye alfociated with G (, d : and they fhall call upon
them, but they fhall not anfwer them*, and they fhall fee the punilhment pre-
pared fur them, and fhall wijb that they had fubmitted to be directed.
On that day God fhall call unto them, and fhall lay. What anfwer did ye
return to cur imflengers ? But they fhall not be able to give an account
thereof on that day J ; neither Ihall they afk one another for information.
Howbeit whofo fhall repent and believe, and fhall do that which is right,
may expect to be happy, i fay Lord create th what he plcafcth ; and choofeth
freely : but they have no free choice. Praife be unto God ; and far be he
removed from the kioh which they aflociate with him ! Thy Lord knoweth
both the fecret malice which their breads conceal, and the open hatred which they
difeover. He is God; there is no God but he. Unto him is the praife
due, both in this life and in that which is to come : unto him doth judg-
ment belong i and beflfte him fhall ye be afiembled at the iafi day. Say,
What think ye? Ii God lhould cover you with perpetual night, "until the
day t F refurredtion ; what god, befides God, would bring you light? Will
ye not therefore hearken? Say, What think ye? If Gop fhouldgive you
continual day, until the day of refurredtion ; what god, befides God, would
bring you night, that ye might reft therein ? Will ye not therefore confi-
dtr ? Of his mercy he hath made for you the night and the day, that ye
may rcll in the one, and may feek to obtain provifon for your f ives of
his abundance, by your hidujlry, in the other ; and that ye may give thanks.
On a Lc-rtahi day God fhall call unto them, and fhall fay. Where are my
partners, which ye imagined to jhare the divine power with me? And we
* will

being none left to etijoy it after them

c See ctuip- 10 p. 169.

J > fi'Al be etkh rfv gfat a* sttteixh
tl’ffijft] Literally, Tbe aa <nt three/ 1 $48 6i
xjfk *rrta ffato ; for the conftcmation they /hall
then be under, will render them flupid, and an
able to return m ;,n!wer

■ Wdejif&r a HttkwbUe ;] Tliat if* lor a day,
or a few hoaw only, while travellers flay there
to reft End rdrdU ihemleJves ; or, as the 0 «-

pti^l may ; .io figntfy, wfc/t fcj a fine iitbd&iiairtsi
fome of iturfc ancient dtiei and dwellings being
■jttedy d-dblate, Qjftsrl clxinJv inhabited.

thishritefs ■-/ thir wealth ;] There

Chap. 28. At KORAN. 323

will produce a witnefs out of every nation % and will fay, Bring hither your
proof of what ye have afferted. And they (hall know that the right is God’s
alone ; and the deities which they have devifed lhall abandon them. Karun
was of the people of Moses b ; but he behaved infolently towards them : for
we had given him fo much treafure, that his keys would have loaded feveral
ftrong men e . When his people faid unto him, Rejoice not immoderately for
God loveth not tbofe who rejoice in their riches immoderately : but feek to attain,
by means of the wealth which God hath given thee, the future manfion of
paradife \ And forget not thy portion in this world; but be thou bounteous
unto others, as God hath been bounteous unto thee : and feek not to aft cor-
ruptly in the earth ; for God loveth not the corrupt doers. He anfwered,
I have received tbefe riches, only becaufe of the knowledge which is with me e .
Did he not know that God had already deftroyed, before him, feveral gene-*
rations, who were mightier than he in flxength, and had amaffed more abun-

Tt 2 dance

1 A teitnefs out cf every nation ;] viz. The
prophet who fluff have been fent to each na-
tion*

b Karun was of the people of Mofes;] The
commentators fay, Karun was the fon of Yefhar
(or JzharJ the uncle of Mofes ; and confequent-
h make him the fame with the Korah of the
icriptures. This perfon is reprefented by them
n the moft beautiful of the If rat life s, and fo far
furpaffing them all in opulency, that the
riches of Karun have become a proverb. The
Mohammedans are indebted to the Jews for this
laft circumftance, to which they have added fe-
veral other fables : for they tell us that he built
a large palace overlaid with gdd, the doors
whereof were of maffy gold ; that he became
fo infolent, becaufe of his immenfe riches, as to
raife a fedition againft Mofes \ tho’ fome pretend
the occafion of his rebellion to have been his
Jmwillingne fs to give ahns, as Mofes had com-
manded ; that one day, when that prophet was
preaching to the people, and, among other
f*ws which he publiihed, declared that adulterers
lhould be ftoned, Karin asked him, what if he
fhould be found guilty of the fame crime ? to
which Mofes anfwered, that in fuch cafe he
would iuffer the fame punifhment; and there-
upon Karun produced a harlot, whom he had
hired to fwear that Mofes had lain with her, and
charged him publickly with it 5 but onMofes's ad-
juring the woman to fpeak the truth, her refo-
lution failed her, and fhe confeffed that fee was
fubomedby Karun to accufe him wrongfully;
that then God dire&ed who had com-

plained to him of this ufage, to command the
earth what he pleafed, and it Should obey
him; whereupon he faid, O earth, fw allow them

r and^ that immediately the earth opened un-
Karun and his confederates, and fwallowed
them up, with his palace and all his riches
There goes a tradition, that as Karin funk gra-
dually into the ground, firlk to his knees, then
to his waift, then to his neck, he cried out four
feveral times, O Mofes, have mercy on me / bat
that Mofes continued to fay, 0 earth , /wallow
them up, till at laft he wholly difappeared : upon
which God faid to Mofes, Ihm hadft no mercy
on Karfin, tho' be ashed pardon of thee four times ;
hut I would have had compajjion on him, if be had
asked pardon tf me but once *.

c feveral men ;] The original word properly
fignifies any number of perfons from ten tofor-
ty. Some pretend thefe keys were a fufficient
load for feventy men; and Abulfeda fays forty
mules ufed to be employed to carry them.

d This paflage is parallel to that in the New
Teftaroent, Make to yourfebes friends of the
mammon of unrighteovfnefs \ that when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlafting habitations 3 .

0 Becaufe if the knowledge which is with me ;]
For feme fay he was the moil learned of all the
Ifraelites , and the bed verfed in the law, after
Mofes and Aaron ; others pretend he was skilled
in chyoiillry, or in merchandizing, or other
arts of gain ; and others fuppofe (as the Jew
alfo fable 4 ,) that he found out the taafures of
Jofepbln Egypt

T Abu’lfeda, Jallalo’ddin, ^/Beidawi, He. * Al Beidawi. V. D’Herbel.

Bibl Orient . Art . Carun. 3 Luke xvi. 4 V. R. Ghedal. Sbaljb . hakkab . p, 13,

1 Jallalo’ddin, ^/Beibawi.

3 H 41 KORAN. Chap. 28 .

dance of riches t And the wicked fhall not be afked to difcover their
crimes. And Karvn went forth unto his people, in his pomp \ And they
who loved this prefent life, faid. Oh that we had the like wealthy as hath been
given unto Karun ! verily he is mailer of a great fortune. But thofe on
whom knowledge had been bellowed, anfwered, Alas for you ! the reward
of God in the next life , will be better unto him who fhall believe and do
good works : but none fhall attain the fame, except thofe who perfevere
with conllancy. And we caufed the ground to cleave in funder, and to fwal-
low up him and his palace : and he had no forces to defend him, befides
Gob *, neither was he refcucd from pumjbmcnt, And the next morning, thofe
•who had coveted his condition the day before, faid. Aha ! verily God be-
lloweth abundant provilion on fuch of his fervants as he pleafeth j and he is
fparing unto whom be pleafeth. Unlefs God had been gracious unto us, cer-
tainly the earth had fwallowed us up alfo. Aha ! the unbelievers (hall not
profper. As to this future man lion of paradife, we will give it unto them who
feek not to exalt themfelves in the earth, or to do wrong ; for the happy iffue
fhall attend the pious. Whofo doth good, fhall receive a reward which fhall
exceed the merit thereof : but as to him who doth evil, they who work evil fhall
be rewarded according to the merit only of that which they fhall have wrought.
Verily he who hath given thee the Koran- for a rule of faith and praffice y
will certainly bring thee back homv unto Mecca *. Say, My Lord belt
knowceh who cometh with a true direction, and who is in a manifeft error.
Thou didft not expect that the book of the Koran fhould be delivered unto
thee : but thou haft received it through the mercy of thy Lord. Be not there-
fore a Gifting to the unbelievers ; neither let them turn thee afide from the
fjgns of God, after they have bam fent down unto thee : and invite men unto
thy Lord. And be not thou an idolater i neither invoke any other god,
together with the true God : there is no god but he. Every thing fhall perifb,
except himfelf : unto him belongetb judgment j and before him fhall ye be
afiembled at the left day.

CHAP.

* In bss p. j] It is laid he rode on a white
mule adorned with trappings of gold, and that
he was doathed in purple, and attended by four
thoulhnd men. all welt mounted and richly
dreft

fc Hi t mb* bath given tbu the Koran, will
bring tbet back mu Mecca ;] This verfe, fome
fay, was revealed to Mohammed when he arrived
at y*bfa, in his flight from Mecca to Medina, ta
comfort Kim, and fUll his complaints.

Chap. 29.

Al KORAN.

325

CHAP. XXIX.

bit itled> The Spider a ; revealed at M e c c a b .
In the name of the mod merciful God.

r A • L. M e . Do men imagine that it (hall be fufficient for them 1 to fay,
_/\ We believe j while they be not proved * ? We heretofore proved thofe
who were before them ; for God will furely know them who are fincere, and
he will hiuly know the liars. Do they who work evil think that they (hall
prevent us from taking vengeance on them ? An ill judgment do they make.
Whofo hopeth to meet God, verily God’s appointed time will certainly come j
and he both heareth and knoweth. Whoever ftriveth to promote the true
religion, ftriveth for the advantage of his own foul ; for God needeth not anv
of bis creatures : and as to thofe who believe and work righteoufnefs, we will
expiate their evil deeds from them •, and we will give them a reward accord-
ing to the utmoft merit of their adtions. We have commanded man to Jhew
kindnefs towards his parents : but if they endeavour to prevail with thee to
afibciate with me that concerning which thou haft no knowledge, obey them
not f . Unto me (hall ye return ; and I will declare unto you what ye have
done. Thofe who fhall believe, and (hall work righteoufnefs, we will furely
introduce into paradife, among the upright. There are fome men who fay,
We believe in Gop : but when fuch a one is affl idled for God’s fake, he
efteemeth the perfection of men to be as grievous as the punilhment of Goa.
Yet if fuccefs cometh from thy Lord, they fay. Verily we are with you.
Doth not God well know that which is in the breads of bis creatures ? VeriJy
God well knoweth the true believers, and he well knoweth the hypocrites'.

The

* Tranfient mention is made of this infeft,
towards the middle of the chapter.

b Some think the firft ten verfes, ending with
thefe words. And be well knoweth the hypo-
crites, were revealed at Medina , and the reft at
Mecca s and others believe the reverie.
c See the prelim. Difc. §. III. p. 59,
d That i( pall be fufficient for them ij Liter-
ally, That they pall be lei alone , See.

e While they be not proved ,} This paffage
reprehends the impatience of fome of the pro-
phet’s companions, under the faardfiiips which
they fuftained in defence of their religi-
on, and the Ioffes which they fuffered from
the infidels ; reprefenting to them that, fuch
trials and afiii&ions were neceflary to diftinguifti

the fincere perfon from the hypocrite; and the
fteady from the wavering. Some fuppofe it to
have been occaftoned by the death of Mabja*
Omar's Have, killed by an arrow at the battle of
Bedr , which was deeply lamented and laid to
heart by his wife and. parents 1 .

f If they endeavour to prevail with thee to official?
with me, that concerning which thou baft no know-
ledge i] That is, If they endeavour ta pervert
thee to idolatry. The pafiage is faid to have
been revealed on accou nt of SaadEbnAbi Wakkds>
and his mother Hamna, who, when /he heard
that her fon had embraced Mobammedifm , fwore
that Die would neither eat nor drink till he re-
turned to his old religion, and kept hefi oath fot
three days *.

1 ^f/BElDAWX,

* Idea.

326 Al KORAN. Chap. 29.

The unbelievers fay unto thofe who believe. Follow our way ; and we will
bear your fins. Howbeit they fiiall not bear any part of their fins ; for they are
liars: but they fhall finely bear their own burdens, and other burdens befides
their own burdens* ; and they fhall be examined, on the day of refurrefiion,
concerning that which fhey have falfely devifed. We heretofore fent Noah
unto his people ; and he tarried among them one thoufand years, fave fifty
years b : and the deluge took them away, while they were adting unjuftly ;
but we delivered him and thofe who were in the ark, and we made the
fame* a fign unto all creatures. We alfo fent Abraham ; when he faid un-
to his people, Serve God, and fear him : this will be better for you •, if y e
underftantL Ye onlv worfhip idols befides God, and forge a lie. Verily
thofe which ye worflnp, befides God, are not able to make any provifion
for you : feek therefore your provifion from God ; and ferve him, and give
thanks unto him ; unto him fhall ye return. If ye chaige me with impofture d ,
verily fundry nations before you likewise charged tbdr prophets with impofture :
but public preaching only is incumbent on an apoftle* Do they not fee how
God produoeth creatures, and afterwards reftoreth them c ? Verily this is
eafy with God. Say, Go through the earth, and fee how he originally pro-
duceth creatures : alter wards will God reproduce another production j for God
is almighty. He will punifh whom he plcafeth, and he will have mercy on
whom he plesUctL Before him fhall ye be brought at ihe day vf judgment :
and ye fhall not cfcape his remh^ either in earth, or in heaven ; neither
fhall ye have any patron or defender befides God. As for thofe who be-
lieve not in the ilgns of God, or that they fhall meet him at the refur -

retlkn*

* Other Burthens beftdes their own i] viz. The
guilt of fedudng others, which fhall be added
to the guilt of their own obftinaev, without di-
nuniihmg the guilt of fuch as fhall be feduced
by them.

b Noah iarrifj asz. a£ his ft- apt? Bizi bvr.JriJ

nttj fifty t eon Q This is true, if the whole
life of V^i!- be 1^: L ^ned ; and accordingly Awi*
J'tJxi fays he was Lent 10 peach in hii two hun-
dred and fiftieth year, ard that he lived in all
nine hundred and fifty : bar the text feemlng to
fpcak of thofe yens only* which he fpefit in
preaching to the vicked aniedi|uvians, the com-
mentators fuppofe him to have lived much
longer. Some fay the whole length of his life
was a thoufand ana fifty yean ; that his miffion
happened in the fortieth year of his age, and
that he lived after the flood Tixiy years 1 : and
others give different numbers ; one, in particular,
pretending that Noah lived near fix teen hundred
years *.

Thu circumflance, fay* At Beu.ht'^ was
mentioned to incourage M Summed* and to if-
lure him that God, who fupported Nash fo

many years againft the oppofltion and plots of
the antediluvian infidels, would not fail to de-
fend him agamft all attempts of the idolatrous

AfiiYifjj and their partii ns.
c *Th£ jimt ;] I. e. ThearL
d If y d *rg£ me with impafiitre* Sec.] This
fee ms to be part of Abrah fpeech to his peo-
ple: but feme fuppofe that God here fpealts,
by way of jpofoophe, firtf to the Ksreijb, and
after wank to and that the paren-

thefis is continued to thefe words, Anti tt? an-
jhir zf ht peeplt mi tti sthr M See In which
cafe ■ e fhouM have faid + ff yt ehnrge Moham-
med your ppaiUc with impfiare , &c.

e Do they n ft- fit bzm God prtduafh creatures,
unJ j/temurJi rtfioreth theta f] The infidels are
bid to confider how God caufeth the fruits of
the earth to iprtflg forth, and rene a eth them
every year, as in ibc preceding ; w hi is an
argument of his power to raife man, whom he
created at firii, to life Again after death, at his
own appointed time

bee nfalm cxxxix. 7, See

1 ./Am* A/Zjlmaslu*

= Caajt- Yahyam

Chap. 29

Al KORAN.

327

region, they (hall defpair of my mercy, and for them is a painful punish-
ment prepared. And the anfwer of his people was no other than that they
faid. Slay him, or burn him. But God faved him from the fire \ Veri-
ly herein were figns unto people who believed. And Abraham faid. Ye
have taken idols, befides God, to cement affeftion between you in this life :
but on the day of refurre&ion, the one of you ihall deny the other, and the
one of you ihall curfe the other ; and your abode fhall be bell fire, and
there ihall be none to deliver you. And Lot believed on him. And
Abraham faid. Verily I fly from my people , unto the place 'which my Lord
bath Commanded me ; for he is the mighty, the wife. And we gave him
Isaac, and Jacob; and we placed among his defeendants the gift of pro-
phecy and the feriptures : and we gave him his reward in this world ; and
in the next he ihall be one of die righteous. We alfo fent Lot ; when
he faid unto his people. Do ye commit filthinefs which no creature hath
committed before you ? Do ye approach lujlfully unto men, and lay wait
in the highways k , and commit wickednefs in your aflembly c ? And the
anfwer of his people was no other than that they faid. Bring down the ven-
geance of God upon us, if thou fpeakeft truth. Lor faid, OLord, de-
fend me againft the corrupt people. And when our mefiengers came unto
Abraham with good tidings 4 , they faid, We will furely deftroy the inha-
bitants of this city ; for the inhabitants thereof are unjuft doers. Abraham
anfwered. Verily Lot dwelleth rhere. They replied. We well know who
dwelleth therein : we will furely deliver him and his family, except his wife ;
fhe fhall be one of thofe who remain behind. And when our mefiengers
came unto Lot, he was troubled for them, and his arm was ftraitened con-
cerning them *. But they faid. Fear not, neither be grieved ; for we will
deliver thee and thy family, except thy wife ; for fhe fhall be one of thofe
who remain behind. We will furely bring down upon the inhabitants of
this city vengeance from heaven, for that they have been wicked doers:
and we have left thereof a manifeft fign ‘ unto people who underftand.
And unto the inhabitants of Madian we fent their brother Shoaib ; and he
faid unto them , O my people, ferve God, and expeft the laft day ; and
tranfgrefs not, atfting corruptly in the earth. But they accufed him of im-
pofture ; wherefore a ftorm from heaven * affailed them, and in the morn-
ing they were found in their dwellings dead and proftrate. And we alfo de-
Jlroyed the tribes of Ad, and Thamud ; and this is well known unto yoq
from what yet remains of their dwellings. And Satan prepared their works
for them, and turned them afide from the way of truth ; although they

11 Aui lay wait in the highway ;] Some fup- its deftruftion, handed down by common tra-
pofe tne Sodomites robbed and murdered the dition ; or elfe its ruins, or Tome other footfleps
paffengers ; ethers, that they unnaturally a- of this fignal judgment : it being pretended that
bufed their bodies. feveral of the Hones, which fell from heaven on

c And commit toickedueft in your affembly i] thofe cities, are Hill to be feen, and that the
Their meetings being feenes of obfeenity and ground where they flood appears burnt and

were

See chap. 2 1 . p. *69.

{ We have left thereof a jigr,-,] viz. Theftory of

blackilli.

s See chap. 7. p. 1 vj .

328 Al KORAN. Chap. 29.

were fagacious -people. And we likewife dejlroyed Kariw, and Pharaoh,
and Hamah. Moses came unto them with evident miracles ; and they be-
haved themfelves infolently in the earth : but they could not efcape our
vengeance. Every of them did we deftroy in his fin. Againft fome of them
fft fent a violent wind * : fome of them did a terrible noife from heaven de-
troy k : fome of them did we caufe the earth to fwallow up c : and fome
of them we drowned 4 . Neither was God dijpofed to treat themunjuftly ; but
they dealt unjuftly with their own fouls. Tne.likenefs of thofe who take 0-
4 her patrons befides God, is as the likenefs of the fpider, which maketh
herfelf a houfe : but the weakeft of all honfes furely is the houfe of the
fpider ; if they knew this. Moreover God knoweth what things they in-
voke, befides him ; and he is the mighty, the wife. Thefe fimilitudes do
we propound unto men : but none underftand them, except the wife. God
hath created the heavens and the earth in truth : verily herein h a fign un-
XXI. to the true believers. * Rehearfe that which hath been revealed unto thee
of the book of tbe Koran: and be conftant at prayer ; for prayer preferv-
cth a man from filthy crimes, and from that which is blamable ; and the
remembring of God is furely a mod important duty. God knoweth that
which ye ao. Difpute not againft thofe who have received the fcriptures,
unlefs in the mildeft manner*; except againft fuch of them as behave in-
jurioufly towards you : and fay. We believe in the revelation which hath be«j
tent down unto us, and al/o in that which hath been fent down unto you ;
our God and your God is one, and unto him are we rrfigned. Thus have
we fent down the book of tbe Kor.im unto thee: and they unto whom we
have given the former fcriptures, believe therein ; and of thefe Arabians aU
fo there is who believeth therein : and none rejeft our figns, except the cb-
Binatr infidels. Thou couldeft not read any book before this ; neither
couldeft thou write it with thy right hand : then had the gainfayers jujlly
doubted of tbe divine original thereof. But the fame is evident figns in the
breads of thofe whn have received underftanding : tor none rejeft our figns,
except the unjuft. They fay, Unlefs a fign be fent down unto him from
his Lord, we will not believe. Anfwer, Signs are in the power of Gon
alone; and I am no more than a public preacher. Is it not fufficient for
them that we have fent down unto thee the book of tbe Koran ; to be
read unto them ? Verily herein is a mercy, and an admonition unto peo-
ple who believe. Say, God is a fufficient witnels between me and you:
he knoweth whatever is in heaven and earth ; and thofe who believe in

vain

5 Agortjt fiw* 'f tifPT x/ .£*# f vio&at

The original prop-tJ> Rgnifics a wind that
drives thi gr# vA Jhmi before it; by

which the form, or Ihowcr of fion« p which
defrayed Soirn and truth, fee m to be in-
tended.

S mr ef thin did a terrible mife fr:m i hea-
ven iejiroy i] Which was the end of Ad and
ttamttd.

c Some *f thm d:d we usufc th e*rtb tr/rivt-

hat srp ;] As it did forS*-

4 Saw of them fflf drm&eJ -] As the unbe-
lievers in Nterb '. s time, and Bi bar job and his

h tbtmSdefi nt/ssneri} i« e. Without ill lan-
guage, or pilfiorL This verfe is generally fup-
pofed to hive been abrogated by that dF tbe
[word i do” fome think it relates nnlv to thofe
who are in alliance with the Moftmf*

Chap. 29 . r Al KORAN. 329

vain idols, and deny God, they fhall periftt. They will urge thee to haften the
punilhment which they defy thee to bring down upon them': if there had
not been a determined time for their refpite , the punilhment had come
upon them before this •, but it fhall furely overtake them fuddenly, and they
fhall not forefee it. They urge thee to bring down vengeance fwiftly upon
them: but hell fhall furely encompafs the unbelievers. On a certain day
their punifhment fhall fuddenly affail them, both from above them, and
from under their feet *, and God fhall fay, Tafte ye the reward of that
which ye have wrought. O my fervants who have believed, verily my
earth is fpacious *, wherefore ferve me \ Every foul fhall tafte death :
afterwards fhall ye return unto us } and as for thofe who fhall have
believed, and wrought righteoufnefs, we will furely lodge them in the higher
apartments of paradife } rivers fhall flow beneath them, and they fhall con-
tinue therein for ever. How excellent will be the reward of the workers of
righteoufnefs ; who perfevere with patience, and put their truft in their Lord !
How many beafts are there, which provide not their food ? It is God who
provideth food for them, and for you *, and he both heareth and knoweth.
Verily, if thou afk the Meccans , who hath created the heavens and the earth,
and hath obliged the fun and the moon to ferve in their courfes ; they will
anfwer, God. How therefore do they lye, in acknowledging of other gods ? God
maketh abundant provifion for fuch of his fervants as he plealeth ; and is fparing
unto him, if he pleafetb: for God knoweth all things'. Verily if thou afk
them, who fendeth rain from heaven, and thereby quickeneth the earth, after it
hath been dead ; they will anfwer, God. Say, God be praifed ! But the grea-
ter part of them do not underftand. This prefent life is no other than a
toy, and a play -thing} but the future manfion of paradife is life indeed:
if they knew this, they would not prefer the former to the latter. When they
fail in a fhip, they call upon God, fincerely exhibiting unto him the true
religion : but when he bringeth them fafe to land, behold, they return to
their idolatry } to fhew themfelves ungrateful for that which we have be-
ftowed on them, and that they may enjoy the delights of this life } but they
fhall hereafter know the iffue. Do they not fee that we have made the ter-
ritory of Mecca an inviolable and fecure afylum, when men are fpoiled in
the countries round about them ? Do they therefore believe ‘ in that which
is vain, and acknowledge not the goodnefs of God ? But who is more un-
juft than he who devifeth a lie againft.GoD, or denieth the truth, when it
hath come unto him ? Is there not in hell an abode for the unbelievers ? Who-
ever do their utmoft endeavour to promote our true religion, we will dired
them into our ways } for God is with the righteous.

Uu CHAP

* See chap. 6. p. 104. That whoever flies for the fake of his religion,

b My earth it fpadeus; wherefore ferve me.] tho’ he ftir but the diftance of a fpan, merits
That is. If ye cannot ferve me in one city or paradife, and fhall be the companion of A Ira-
country, fly unto another, where ye may pro- bam and of himfelf 1 .

fefs the true religion in fafety 5 for the earth is c God knozoetb all things i] And particular-
wide enough, and ye may eafily find places of ly who will make a good, and who will make
refuge* Mohammed is faid to have declared, a bad ufe of their riches.

1 Al Beidawi.

330

A KORAN.

Chap. 30.

CHAP. XXX.

Int tiled, The Greeks*; revealed at Mecca 1 * *.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

L. M e .

The Greeks have been overcome by the Ptrf.jm \ in t he

neareft

#

• The original word is ARtf * ; by which
the later Greeks, or fubjelts of th* CcrianAtte-
filitaz empire, are here meant; tho 1 the Aralt
give the fame name alfo to the Ra cist, and
other

b Some except the verfe beginning at theie
wonlsj Prai/e h mta God.
c See the Prelim. Difc § III. p 59, £ffr.
a Tte Greeks b. tv* been stwvy*.* fa tbe Fer-
fliRai ■.] The Jtceomplilhmcnt of the pra^
phecy contained in this piEage, which h very
famous among the M. being infilled

on by their dodors as a convincing pmof due
the K -‘an realty came down from heaven, it
may be excufable to he a little particular,

The paflage is bid to have been revealed on
pccafion of a great vidory obtained by the Per-
sians over the Greets, the news whereof coming
to Mecca, the infidels became Arangety elated,
and began to abofe Mohammed and his followers,
imagining that this foccefs of the Per haw, w ho,
like themfelves, were idolaters and fappofed to
have no feriptures, againft the Cbrifilans, who
pretended, as well as Msbammed, to worfhip
one Gbo, and to have divine feriptures, was an
earn eft of their own future fhccefTes againft the
prophet and thofe of his religion: to check
vhich vain hopes, it was foretold, in the words
of the text, that how improbable foever it
might lean, yet the fcale lhoold be turned in
a few years, and the vanquilhed Greeks prevail
ii remarkably againft the Perfiaus
That this prophecy was exadty fulfilled the
commentators fail not to oblerve, tho* they do
not exadly agree in the accounts they give of
its atjfcomplifhment ; the number of years be-
tween the two adions being not predlcly deter-
mined. Some place the vidory gained by the

Pt'-jUm in the fifth year before the Htjrt, and
their defeat by the Grech in the fecund year af-
ter it,, when lie battle of Bfir wi$ fought 1
others place the former in the third or fourth
y«f before the tfrjra, and the Inter in the end
of she fixthp or beginning of the feventh rear
after iEp when the expedition of Hade W jab

was undertaken V

The dare of the vi£tary gained by the Ga«{j,
in the hr ft oi thefe accounts, interferes with a
ft«Y which ihc commeutitoii tell, of a wager
Easd by Ah Beer with Oh.t E ■ v Kbalf, who
1 jrned this prophecy into ridicule. Ah Beer at
firft laid ten young camels that the PerjiMi
ihould receive an overthrow within three year*;
but on his acquainting Mohammed with what he
had done, that prophet told him that the ;void
bh\ nude ufc of in this pai? jge, fignified no
determinate number of year?, b^if an? number
from three to nine, (tho' fame fcppofe the tenth
year is included; and therefore sdrifed him to
rolong the time, and to raife the wager; which
e accordingly propoled to OHa, and they
agreed that the time aligned ftvcmld be nine
years* and the Wager a hundred camels. Before
the time was clapicd,, Obb ; died, of a wound
he had received at Qhvi, in the third year of the
Hgra 3 » but the event afterwards fhewing that
Abu Beer had wem, he received the camels of
Obba's heirs, and brought them in triumph to
McbapauJ

Hiftory informs us that the fuccefles of Kbof-
ru Parvix , king of PerSa, who carried on a ter-
rible war againft the Greek empire, to revenge
the death of Mem* *:t his fathe^in-law, flain by
P bee as, were very great, and continued in an
unmteffijpitJ conile for two and twenty yean.
Partk’uiiiJy in Ehe yea t c* Christ 615, about

the

1 Jallalo'ddin, &c. 9 Al Zamakh. JBeidawi

4 ^Bxidawi, Jali .slo’ddiv, (A*

' S/e /■. ^98 net . e.

Chap. 30* KORAH, 331

neareft part of the land * ; but after their defeat, they fhall overcome the
others in their turn , within a few years. Unto God helongeth the difpofal iff tbit
matter , both for what is paffc, and for what is to come: and on that day
fhall the believers rejoice in the fuccels granted by God ; for he granteth fuc-
cefs unto whom he pleafeth, and he is the mighty, the merciful, this is
the promife of God : God will not ail contrary to his promife ; but the
greater part of men know not the veracity of God. They know the out-
ward appearance of this prefent life ; but they are carelefs as to the life to
come. Do they not confider within themfelves that God hath not created the
heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them, otherwife than in truth,
and hath fet them a determined period ? Verily a great number of men re-
jedl the belief of their future meeting their Lord at the refurreftion. Do they
not pafs through the earth, and fee what hath been the end of thofe who were
before them ? They excelled the Meccans in ftrength, and broke up the
earth b , and inhabited it in greater affluence and prosperity than they inhabit
the fame : and their apoftles came unto them with evident miracles and God
was not difpofed to treat them unjuftly, but they injured their own fouls by
their objlinate infidelity ; and the end of thofe who had done evil, was evil,
becaule they charged die figns of God with falfhood, and laughed the fame
to fcorn. God produceth creatures, and will hereafter reftore them to Itfe :
then fhall ye return unto him. And on the day whereon the hour fhall come,
the wicked fhall be ftruck dumb for defpair : and they fhall have no inter-
ceffors from among the idols which they aflociated with God •, and they fhall
deny the falfe gods which they aflociated with him. On the day whereon the
hour fhall come, on that day fhall the true believers and the infidels be fepa-

U u 2 rated :

the beginning of the fizth year before the tJtjra, the lift extremity, and ipoiled the capital city
the Perfians, having the preceding year conquer- if I Malay en ; Heraclius enjoying, thence forward,
ed Syria, made themfelves matters of Paleftine , a continued feries of good fortune, to the depo-
and took Jerufalem ; which feems to be that fidon and death of Kbofru. For more exa£k in-
fignal advantage gained over the Greeks mention- formation in thefe matters, and more nicely tip*
ed in this paflage, as agreeing bed with the terms ing the dates, either fo as to correfpond with, or
here ufed, and moll likely to alarm the Arabs by to overturn this pretended prophecy, (neither of
xeafon of their vicinity to the feene of aftion : which is my bulinefs here,) the reader may have
and there was fo little probability, at that time, recouxfe to the hiftorians and chronologerp *.
of the Greeks being able to retrieve their Ioffes, * In the neareft part of the land ;] Some inter-
much lefs to dittrefs the Per fans , that in the preters, fuppofing that the land here meant is the
following years the arms of the latter made ftilj land of Arabia , or elfe that of the Greeks , place
farther and more confiderable progreifes, and at the feene of a£lion in the coniines of Arabia
length they laid fiege to Conftantinople it (elf. and Syria, near Boftra and Adbraat 1 2 ; others
But in the year 625, in which the fourth year imagine the land of Perfia is intended, and lay
of the Hejra began, about ten years after the the feene in Mefopotanfia , on the frontiers of that
taking of Jerufafem 9 the Greeks , when it was kingdom 3 : but £bn Abbas , with more probabi-
leaft eype&ed, gained a remarkable viilory over lity, thinks it was in Paleftine .
the Perfians, and not only obliged them to quit b And broke up the earth j] To dig for water
the territories of the empire, by carrying the and minerals, and to till the ground for feed,
war into their own country, but drqve them to tyfc 4 «

1 V. etiam Assjman. BibL Orient. /. 3. part . 1. /. 411, tftc. W Boulainv. Pie de Mahom.

p. 333, (2 tc. 2 Yahya, ^/Bbxdawi. 3 Mqjah£d, apud Zamakh. Jallalq’ddin.

4 Al Beidawi.

33 2 Al KORAN. Chap. 30.

rated: artd they who fhall have believed, and wrought righteoufncfs, lhall r*kc
their pleafure in a delightful meadow ; but as for thofe who (hall have di(be-
lieved, and rejected our figns, and the meeting of the next life, they fhall
be delivered up to punifhment. Wherefore glorify God, when the evening
overtaketh you, and when ye rife in the morning : and unto him be praife in
heaven and earth •, and at fun-fet, and when ye reft at noon *. He bnngeth
forth the living out of the dead, and he bringeth forth the dead out of the
living b ; and he quickenech the earth after it hath been dead : and in like
manner (hall ye be brought forth from your graves. Of his figns one is, that
he hath created you of dull ; and behold, ye are become men, fpread over
the face of ihe earth. And of his figns another is, that he hath created for you,
out of your felves, wives, that ye may cohabit with them ; and hath put
love and compaflion between you : verily herein are figns unto people who
confider. And of his figns are a[fo the creation of the heavens and the earth,
and the variety of your languages, and of your complexions* : verily herein
are figns unto men of undcrtlanding. And of hts figns are your deeping by
night and by day, and your feeking to provide for pttrfehes of his abundance:
verily herein are figns unto people who hearken. Of his figns ethers are, that
he (heweth you the lightening, to jirike terror, and to give hope of rain, and
that he fendeth down water from heaven, and quickeneth thereby the earth,
after it hath been dead : verily herein are figns unto people who underliand.
And of his figns this alfo is one, namely, that the heaven and the earth Hand
firm at his command : hereafter, when he (hall call you out of the earth at
one fummons, behold, ye (hall come forth. Unto him are fubjeft whom-
ever are in the heavens and on earth : all are obedient unto him. It is he
who originally produceth a creature, and afterwards reftoreth the fame to
life : and this is moft eafy with him. He juftly challengeth the moft exalted
companion, in heaven and earth * ; and he is the mighty, the wife. He pro-
pounded unto you a companfon taken from yourfelves. Have ye, among
the Jlaves whom your right hands pofl’di, any partner in the fubjiatsce which
we have beftowed on you, l'o that ye become equal fharers then in with
them, or that ye fear them as ye fear one another* ? Thus do we diftindlly
explain our figns, unto people who underftand. But thofe who a& unjuftly
by attributing companions unto God , follow their own 1 lifts, without knowledge:
and who (hall direft him whom God (hall caufe to err? They fhall have
none to help them. Wherefore be thou orthodox, and fet thy face towards

4 G&rifj God in tht &c.] Some are

of opinion that the five times of prayer are in-
tended in this paffage ; tbt including the

time both of the prayer of fun-fe£, and of the
evening prayer properly lb called j and the word
I have rendered *t fun-fct, marLiag the hour of
afternoon prayer, mice it may be applied alfo to
the time a little before fun-fcL
* See chap 3. p. 38.

c The va+ietj vfjittr languages md tmpfcxim
Which are .rr-jibiy moft wenderfb. and, as I

conceive, tett hard to be accounted for, if we
allow the fcveral nations in the world to be all
the offspring of one man, as we are allured by
frriptute they are, wstheut having recourie to

the immediate ommpaESTtcy of God~

He fxjlh thulkngtfh the atJIurjrft,- -fiseb
Jen, See j That i*. in fvczkmz tj: him we ought
to make ufe of the moll noble and magnificent
cjprdfions we cm poffibly dcviic
l Sec chap, 16. p. 220.

Chap. 3®* KORA AT. 333

the true religion, the inftitution of Gob, to which he hath created mankind
difpofed : there is no change in what God hath created \ This is the right
religion ; but the greater part of men know it not. And he ye turned unto
him, and fear him, and be conftant at prayer, and be not idolaters. Of
thofe who have made a fchifm in their religion, and are divided into various
fefts ; every feft rejoice in their own opinion. When adverfity befalleth men,
they call upon their Lord, turning unto him: afterwards, when he hath
caufed them to tafte of his mercy, behold, a part of them alfociate other deitiei
with their Lord ; to Ihew themfelves ungrateful for the favours which we
have beftowed on them. Enjoy therefore the vain pleafures of this life •, but
hereafter fhall ye know the conference. Have we fent down unto them any
authority, which fpeaketh of the fdfe gods which they alfociate with him k ?
When we caufe men to tafte mercy, they rejoice therein ; but if evil befall-
eth them, for that which their hands have before committed, behold, they
defpair'. Do they not fee that God beftoweth provifion abundantly on whom
he pleafeth, and is fparing unto whom he pleafeth ? Verily herein are figns
unto people who believe. Give unto him who is of kin to tbee his rcafon-
able due ; and Hlfo to the poor, and the ftranger : this is better for thofe
who feek the face of God ; and they fhall profper. Whatever ye fhall give
in ufury 4 , to be an increafe of men's fubftance, fhall not be increafed by the
hlefftng of God : but whatever ye fhall give in alms, for God’s fake, they
fhall receive a twofold reward. It is God who hath created you, and hath
provided food for you : hereafter will he caufe you to die •, and after that will
he raife you again to life. Is there any of your falfe gods, who is able to do
the leaft of thefe things ? Prajfe be unto him and far be he removed from
what they affociate with him ! Corruption e hath appeared by land and by
fea, for the crimes which men’s hands 'have committed ; that it might make
item to tafte f a part of the fruits of that which they have wrought, that
Jcradventure they might turn from their evil ways. Say, Go through the
earth, and fee what hath been the end of thofe who have been before you :
the greater part of them were idolaters. Set thy face therefore towards the
right religion, before the day cometh, which none can put back from God.
On that day fhall they be feparated into two companies : whoever fhall have
been an unbeliever, on him fhall his unbelief be charged •, and whoever fhall

have

* The inftitution of God, to which be bath
created mankind difpofed, &c.] i. e. The immu-
table law, or rule, to which man is naturally
difpofed to conform, and which every one would
embrace, as mod fit for a rational creature, if it
were not for the prejudices of education. The
Mohammedans have a tradition that their prophet
ufed to fey. That every ptrfon is born naturally
difpofed become a Modern s but that a man's pa-
rents make him a Jew, a Chriitian, or a Magian.

b Have we fent down unto them any authority ,
Speaking of the falfe gods, &c.] That is. Have
we either by the mouth of any prophet, or by
any written revelation, commanded or iucourag-

ed the worfhip of more gods than one ?

€ They defpair ;] And feek not to regain the
favour of God by timely repentance.

4 In ufury-,} Or by way of bribe. The word
may include any fort of extortion or illicit
gain.

e Corruption}} viz. Mifchief and public cala-
mities j fuch as famine, peltilence, droughts,
lhipwracks, (ftc. Or erroneous do&rines, or a
general depravity of manners.

f That it might make them to tafte , &c.] Some
copies read, in the firft perfon plural. That we
might caufe them to tafte, &c.

334 Al KORAN. Chap. 30.

have done that which is right, lhall fprcad themfelves touches of repofe in
paraSfe that he may reward thofe who (hall believe, and work righteouf-
nefs, oi his abundant liberality ; for he lovcth not the unbelievers. Of his
figns one is, that he fendeth the winds, bearing welcome tiding3 of rain ,
that he may caufe you to tafte of his mercy ; am! that Ihips may fail at his
command, that ye may feek to inrich 'four fehes of his abundance by com-
merce i and that ye may give thanks. We lent apoftles, before thee, unto
their rejpeflivc people, and they came unto them with evident proofs : and
we took vengeance on thofe who did wickedly ; and it was incumbent on
us to afllft the true believers. It is God who fendeth the winds, and raif.
eth the clouds, and fpreadeth the fame in the heaven, as he pleafeth j and of.
towards difperfeth the fame : and thou mayeft fee the rain iffuing from the
midft thereof ; and when he poureth the fame down on fuch of ha fervants
as he pleafeth, behold, they are filled with joy ; although before it was fent
down unto them, before fttcb relief . they were despairing. Confider there-
fore the traces of God’s mercy ; how he qukkencth the earth, after its Jtote
of death : verily the fame will raife the dead j for he is almighty. Yet if
we fhould fend a hlajling wind, and they fhould fee their ' corn yellow and
burnt up, they would furely become ungrateful, after our former favours. Thou
canft not make the dead to hear, neither canft thou make the deaf to hear
tby cal!, when they retire and turn their backs ; neither canft thou direct the
blind out of their error: thou fhalt make none to hear, except him who lhall
believe in our figns •, for they are refigned unto us. It is God who created
you in weaknefs, and after weaknefs hath given you ftrength j and after
ftrength, he will again reduce you to weaknds, anti grey hairs : he created)
that which he pleafeth j and he is the wife, the powerful. On the day whereon
the lafi hour fhall come, the wicked will fwear that they have not tarried*
above an hour : in like manner did they utter lies in their life-time. But
thofe on whom knowledge hath been bellowed, and faith, will fay. Ye have
tarried, according to the book of God b , until the day of refurredtion : for
this is die day of refurredlion ; but ye knew it not. On that day their ex*
cufe fhall not avail thofe who have adted unjuftly ; neither fhall they
be invited any more to make themfelves acceptable unto God. And now have
we propounded unto men, in this Koran, parables of every kind: yet if
thou bring them a verfe thereof, the unbelievers will furely lay. Ye are no
other than publilhers of vain falfhoods. Thus hath God fealed up the hearts
of thofe who believe not. But do thou, 0 Mobammed, perfevere with
conftancy, for the pro mile of God is true; and let not thofe induce thee to
waver, who have no certain knowledge.

CHAP.

4 That they boot tut ttrrit&l vir. In the world preferred Table; or according to wiut is faid
or in their grave*. See chap. *3. p. 287. in the Karin, where the Hate of the dead is ex-

b According to the book sf God;] That b, preffed by thefe (rank 1 , Btb:r.J tbm then pall
Accordingto his fore-knowledge and decree in the be a hr, until the duj if refmreBitn*.

* Chef. 43. /. 286.

* j/fBllDsWI

Chap. 31.

Al KORAN.

335

CHAP. XXXI.

Int tiled, Lokman 1 ; revealed at Mecca 1 *.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

A . L: M c . Thefe are the figns of the wife book, a direction, and a
mercy unto the righteous ; who obferve the appointed times of prayer,
and give alms, and have firm affurance in the life to come : thefe are diredted
by their Lord, and they fhall profper. There is a man who purchafeth a
ludicrous ftory d , that he may feduce men from the way of God, without
knowledge, and may laugh the fame to fcorn : thefe fhall fuffer a lhameful
punifliment. And when our figns are rehearfed unto him, he difdainfully turn-
eth his back, as though he heard them not, as though there were a deafhels
in his ears : wherefore denounce unto him a grievous punifhment. But they
who fhall believe, and work righteoufnefs, fhall enjoy gardens of pleafure ;
they fhall continue therein for ever : this is the certain promife of God ; and
he is the mighty, the wife. He hath created the heavens without vifible pillars
to fuftatn them , and hath thrown on the earth mountains firmly rooted, left it
fhould move with you e ; and he hath replenifhed the fame with all kinds of
beafts : and we fend down rain from heaven, and caufe every kind of noble veget-
able to fpring forth therein. This is the creation of God : fhew me now what
they have created, who are worjbipped belides him ? verily the ungodly are
in a manifeft error. We lieretofore beftowed wifdom on Lokman f , and com-
manded

a The chapter is fo entitled from a perfon of
this name mentioned therein, of whom more
immediately.

* Some except the fourth verfe, beginning at
thefe words, Who abferve the appointed times of
prayer x and give aims, &c. And others three
verfes* beginning at thefe words, Jf ail the trees
in the earth were pens. See.
c See the Prelun. Difc. 5 * HI. p. C9,
d A ludicrous ftory ;] i. e. Vain and filly fables.

W®The palfage was revealed, it is faid, on occafion
of al Nodar Ebn at Haretb, who having brought
from Perfta the romance of Roftam and Iftandi-
yar, the two heroes of that country, recited it
in the aflemblies of the KoreiJb % highly extolling
the power and fplendor of the ancient Perjian
kings, and preferring their ftories to thole of
Ad and Tbamud , David and Solomon t and the reft
which are told in the Koran . Some fay that al
Nodar bought finging-girls, and carried them

to thofe who were inclined to become Moftems ,
to divert them from their purpofe by fongs and
tales *.

e He hath thrown on the earth mountains firm*
ly rootedi See.'] See chap. 16. p. 2x5. A learn-
ed writer in his notes on this palfage, fays
the original word rawafiya t which the commen-
tators in general will have to fignify ft able moun-
tains , feems properly to exprefs the Hebrew word
mecbonim% i. e. bafts , or foundations \ and there-
fore he thinks the Koran has here tranflated that
palfage of the Pfalms, He laid the foundations of
the earth , that it fhould not be moved for ever *.
TTiis is not the only inftance which might be
given, that the Mohammedan doftors arc not al-
ways the beft interpreter! of their own ferip-
tures.

f Lokman ;] The Arab writers fay, that Lok-
man was the ion of Baira f who was the fon or

grandfon of a filler or aunt of Job ; and that he

live 4

Gol. in Append \ ad Erpenii Gram . p. 187. 3 Pfal. civ.' 5.

1 Idem.

336 'A KORAN. Chap. 31.

mamkit him* faring* Be thou thankful unto God : for whoever is thankful,
(hall be thankful 10 the advantage of his own foul ; and if any (hall be un-
thankful, verily God is felf-fufficienc, and worthy to be praifed. And re -
member when Lokman faid unto his fon \ as he admomfhed him, O my
fon, Give not a partner unto God ; for polytheifm is a great impiety. We
have commanded man concerning his parents \ (his mother carneth him in
her Xiotnb with weaknefs and faintnels, and he is weaned in two years,) faying.
Be grateful unto me, and to thy parents. Unto me (hall all come to be judg-
ed. But if thy parents endeavour to prevail on thee to alTociate with me
that concerning which thou haft no knowledge, obey them not : bear them
company in this world in what fhall be reafonable c ; but follow the way of
him who fmcerely tumeth unto me d . Heitafter unto me (hall ye return
and then will I declare unto you that which ye have done. O my ion* verily
every matter* whether good or W, though it be of the weight of a grain of
muftard-feed, and be bidden in a rock* or in the heavens, or in the earth, God

will

lived feveral centuries, and to the time of David,
with Whom he was converfant in Pateflim*
According to the defertpriem they give of hij
perfon. he mult have deformed enough ;

tor they ftv he was of a black complexion p
(whence fome nil him an with thick

]■]*!, inJ fpUy feet but in return, he received
frtijn Go n wifdom and eloquence in a great de-
gree ; which fome pretend were given him in a
video, on lib making choice of wifdom prefer* -
hlv to the gift of prophecy, either of which
were offered Mm. T*o generality of the Mo-
kmrGtdaw therefore hold bsm to have been no
prophet, but only a wife man. As to his con*
dition, they fay ne was a Have, but obtained his
liberty on the following occafion. His mailer
having one day given him a bitter melon to eat,
he paid him fuch exaft obedience a to eat it all ;
at which hi* miter being futprlzcd, asked him
how he could eat fo naufeous a fruit r To w hich
he replied, it was no wonder, that he fhouldfor
r nee accept a bitter fruit from the fame hand
from which he had received fo many favours r .
The commentators mention fcvcral quick repar-
tees of Libwaji t which, together with the ar-
rtunJbnees above mentioned, agree fo well with
\\ hat M&cimsk Pfamtiei has written of Ejlp w that
from thence, and from the fables attributed to
JLokadn by the orientals, the latter has been ge-
nerally thought to have been no other than the
Efop of the Greeks However that be, (for I
think the matter will bear \ di Spate,) I am of
opinion that Plaruu n borrow ed great part of his

life of Efip frem the traditions be met with
in rhceiff'conceniihg Lehnjn, ccmduilmg them
to have been the ikmt per Jon* bcn-jJe they
were both fbvcj, and fupp&fcd to be lire writers
of thole fables which go upJer their ndpecHve
mines, and bear i great refentbUnce to one Ano-
ther ; for st bar lung line* been obfeired bj, karn-
ed men, that the greater far; uS tint tatmki
pciformansre is an ablurd romance, and fopport-
ed by no evidence of the ancient writers a .

- His /is j] Whom fome name At&m, {which
comes pretty near the Ennus of Pianudej,) fome
Ajb^rn, and others Mat ban .

fc W > bart r&nmitMdiJ mat CtnttrMiflg bit fa-
rents, &c ] The two verfes which begin at thefe
v oids, and end with the following, r/z- And
:sfn &HI l dutert ust* jaw that mbitb y h*z<i
m no part of Lokstks^ advice to Eis fon, but
are inserted by Way of par tnfi thefw, as very per-
tinent and proper to he reputed here, to /hew
the hatnoufoefs of idolatry : they arc to be read
(excepting lome additions) in the twenty ninth
chapter* and w ere ongkally revealed on account
□t Eb.i Ail Wiibkhi as has been already
obferved i 1

■ Beet them esmfmy in mhm fini, . ■ re ■

That Is, Shew them s'l deference
obedience, fo far as may be confident with thy
duty l o wards God.

* FrAW the may of him is jht&rHi
unit me ?] The perfon jMidcukrlv meant here
was Ahs Beer* at w hofe perfuafion SaaJ had be-
come a ftLjim*

* ^/Zamaxh. 4 /Beidawi, F. D’Herbel. BibL Orient, / ji 6 . Marracc in
Jfr. f . 547 . 2 V. I* vie iFEjipit f*r Mr de Meziriac, & Bay le, D &. Hr? Art. if ft,

Rim . 5 - 3 See ebttp. 29 . p. 325 . mi tbt mm sterna

Chap. 3T. Al KO R A N. 337

will bring the fame do light ; for God ft clear-fighted and knowing. r O my
fon, be conftant at prayer, and command that which is juft, and forbid that
which is evil : and be patient under the affiiElions which ihall befall thee ;
for this is a duty abiolutely incumbent' on all men. Diftort not thy face out
cf contempt to men, neither walk in the earth with infolence ; for God loveth
no arrogant, vain-glorious perfon. And be moderate in thy pace : and lower
thy voice for the moft ungrateful of all voices furely is the voice Of affes *.
Do ye not fee that God hath fubje&ed whatever is in heaven and on earth to
your fervice, and hath abundantly poured on you his favours, both outwardly
and inwardly b ? There are fome men who difpute concerning God without
knowledge, and without a direction, and without an inlightening book. And
when it isfaid unto them. Follow that which God hath revealed ; they anfwer.
Nay, we will follow that which we found our fathers to pradtife. What,
though the devil invite them to the torment of hell ? Whoever refign-
cfh himfelf unto God, being a worker of righteoufnefs, takdth hold on a
ftrong handle ; and unto God belongetb the iflue of all things. But whoever
fhall be an unbeliever, let not his unbelief grieve <hee : unto us fhall they re-
turn i then will we declare unto them that which they have done, for Goo
knoweth the innermoft: parts of the breafts of men. We will fuffer them to
enjoy this world for a little while : afterwards we will drive them to a fpvere
punifhmcnc, If thou afk them who hath created the heavens and the earth,
they will furely anfwer, God. Say, God be praifed ! But the greater part
of them do not underftand. Unto God belongetb whatever is in heaven and
earth : for God is the felf-fufficient, the praife-worthy. If whatever trees are
in the earth were pens, and he fhould after that fwell the fea into feven feas
cf ink t the words of <*00 would not be exhaufted * *, for God is mighty, and
wife. Your creation and your refufcitation are but as the creation and re-
fufcitation of one foul * : verily God both heareth and feeth. Doit thou not fee
rjhat God caufeth the night to fucceed the day, and caufeth the day to fue-
led the night, and compelleth the fun and the moon to ferve you ? Each of
tbofe luminaries hafteneth in its courfe to a determined period : and God is well-
acquainted with that which ye do. This is declared concerning the divine
knowledge and power , for that God is the true Being, and for that whatever
ye invoice, befides hinv« vanity, and for that God is the high, the great
Cod. Doft thou not fee that the fhips run in the fea, through the favour of
God, that he may fhewyouof his figns? Verily herein are figns, unto every pa-
tient grateful perfon. When waves cover them, like overfhadowing clouds ,

’ B Xx they

1 The pahtrtf ttffts j] To the braying of which
animal the Arabs liken a loud anddifagreeable

voice.

b

^ L e. Ail kinds

of bldfipgs, regarding as welTthe mind as the
body.

c If whatever trees are in the earth were fern,
&c.] This paffage is faid to have been revealed

in anfwer to the Jews, who infilled that all
knowledge was contained in the law 1 .

d As the creation and refufcitation of one foul{\
God being able to produce a million of worlds
by the fingle word Kstn , i. e. Be, and to raife
the dead in general by the fingle word Kstm, i. e.
Arife .

1

%

33® A 1 KORAN. Chap. 32.

they call upon God, exhibiting the pure religion unto him ; but when he
bringeth them fafe to land, there is of them who halteth between the true faith
and idolatry. Howbeit, none reje&eth our figns, except every perfidious, un-
grateful perfon. O men, fear your Lord, and dread the day whereon a fa-
ther (hall not make fatisfadion for his fon, neither (hall a fon make fatisfa&ion
for his father at all : the promife of God is affuredly true. Let not this
prefent life, therefore, deceive you neither let the deceiver 1 deceive
you concerning God. Verily tne knowledge of the hour of judgment is
with God : and he caufeth the rain to defeend, at bis own appointed time ; and
he knoweth what is in the wombs of females. No foul knoweth what it (hall
gain on the morrow ; neither doth any foul know in what land it (hall die
but God is knowing and fully acquainted with all things.

* 7 bt itctwtr i] viz. The devil.
b In this pafiage five things are enumerated
which are known to God alone: The

time of the day of judgment ; the time of rain ;
what is forming in the womb» as whether it be
male or female, what (hall happen ; nthe mor-
row ; and where any perfon Iball die. Thefe
the Arabs, according to a tradition of their pro-
phet, call rtv Jire ifjj if fi/rtt kntthdgt- The
pa flag e T it it iaid, was occifn>ned by si H,irftb
K&» Amnt, who propounded qucttiuiu of this
nature to MAatmted.

As to the laft particular, tti BeidJwi relates the
following ftory. The angd ot death paffiag
once hy Sdmmt in a liable fhape* and looking
at one who Was listing with hirp p the man asked
who he was, and upon Sf&m.v'z acquainting
him that it waj the angel of deith, find, He
feems to want me ; where tore order the wind to
carry me from hence into I* Jit : which bemg ac-
cordingly done, the angel ft id to ll oked

fo earodUy at the man owe of wonder ; becaufel
w as commanded to take hi* foul in India* and
found him with thee in Pa/fiwt.

CHAP. XXXII.

Infilled , Adoration*; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

A . L. M b . The revelation of this book, there is no doubt thereof, it
from the Lord of all creatures. Will they fay, Mohammed hath forg-
ed it? Nay, it is the truth from thy Lord, that thou mayeft preach to a
people, unto whom no preacher hath come before thee * ; peradventure they
will be directed. It is God who hith created the heavens and the earth, and
whatever it between them, in fix days ; and then afeended bis throne. Ye
have no patron or lntercdlbr befidcs him. Will ye not therefore confider?
He govemeth ait things from heaven even to the earth : hereafter (hall they
return unto him, on the day whofc length (hall be a thoufand years d , of

thofe

c See ebsp. 28 p. 321
d A ihiujAnd yeMri ;] As to the reconciliation
of this pillage with another 1 , which feems

» The title is taken from the middle of the
cht pier* where Ji - believers are faid down

ttdirtng.

* Sec the Prelim Difc, f. HI. p. 59, tfr.

1 Cta/v 70.

contradictory.

Chap. 32. Al KORAN 339

thofe which ye compute. This is he who knoweth the future, and the prefent *
the mighty, the merciful. It is be who hath made every thing which he hath
created exceeding good; and firft created man of clay, and afterwards
made his pofterity of an extra# of defpicable water # ; and then formed him
into proper fhape y and breathed of his fpiric into him ; and hath given you
the fenfes of hearing and feeing, and hearts to underjland. How fmall thanks
do ye return ! And they fay. When we fhall lie hidden in the earth, fhall
we be raifed thence a new creature ? Yea, they deny the meeting of their Lord
at the rtfurreffion . Say, The angel of death b , who is fee over you, fhall
caufe you to die : then fhall ye be brought back unto your Lord. If thou
couldeft fee, when the wicked fhall bow down their heads before their Lord,
faying-* O Lord, we have feen, and have heard : fuffer us therefore to return
into the worlds and we will work that which is right ; fince we are now cer-
tain of the truth of what bath been preached to us : thou wouldjt fee an amaz*
ing fight . If we had pleafed, we had certainly given unco every foul its di-
reftion : but the word which bath proceeded from me mull neceffarily be ful-
filled, when I faid y Verily I will fill hell with genii and men, altogether
Tafte therefore the torment prepared for you y becaufe ye have forgotten the
coming of this your day : we alfo have forgotten you ; tafte therefore a
pnnilhment of eternal duration, for that which ye have wrought. Verily
nicy only believe in our figns, who, when they are warned thereby, fall
down adoring, and celebrate the praife of their Lord, and are not elated
with pride : their Tides are raifed from their beds, calling on their Lord
with fear and with hope ; and they diftribute alms out of what we have be-
flowed on them. No foul 4 knoweth the complete fatisfaftion ° which is
fecretly prepared for them, as a reward for that which they have wrought.
Shall he therefore, who is a true believer, be as he who is an impious tranf-
greffor ? They fhall not be held equal. As to thofe who believe, and do
that which is right, they fhall have gardens of perpetual abode, an ample re-
compenfe for that which they fhall have wrought : but as for thofe who im-

X x 2 pioufly

cflirtradiilory, fee the Preliminary Difccurfe,
i TV. p. 84.

Some, however, do not interpret the paflage be-
fore us of the refurre&ion, but fuppofe that the
words here deferibe the making and executing of
the decrees of God, which are fent down from
heaven to earth, and are returned (or afitnd,
as the verb properly fignifies,) back to him, after
they have been put in execution, and prefent
thcmfelves, as it were, fo executed, to his
knowledge, in the fpace of a day with God, but
with man, of a thoufand years. Others ima-
gine this fp^ce to be the time which the angels,
who carry the divine decrees, and bring them
back executed, take in defeending and reafeend-
ing, becaufe the diftance from heaven to earth is
a journey of five hundred years : and others fan-

cy that the angels bring down at once decrees
for a thoufand years to come, which being ex-
pired, they return back for frefh orders, &c r .
a An extra# of deftncable water ;] i. e. Seed.
b See the Prelim. Jbifc. J. IV. p. 72.
c See chap. 7. p. 118. and chap. 11. p. 187.
d No foul ;] Not even an angel of thofe who
approach neareft God’s throne, nor any pro-
phet who hath been fent by him *.

e The complete fatisfaSlion ;] Literally, The
joy of the eyes. The commentators fail not, on
occafion of this paflage, to produce that faying
of their prophet, which was originally none (5
his own 5 God faitk* I have prepared for my
righteous fervants, what eye bath not feen, nor bath
ear beard , nor bath entred into the heart of man
to conceive.

1 Al Reid aw 1.

2 2 dm .

34° Al KO RAN. C h a p. 32.

pioufly tranfgrcfs, their abode /ball be bell fire ; fo often as they (hall endea-
vour to get thereout, they {hall be dragged back into the fame, and it {hall
be faid unto them, Tafte ye the torment of bell fire, which ye rejected as a
falfhood. And we will caufe them to tafte the nearer puniflunent of this
world, befides the more grievous punifhment of the next ; peradventure they
will repent Who is more unjuft than he who is warned by the figm of ha
Lord, and then tumeth afide from the fame? We will furely take vengeance
on the wicked. We heretofore delivered the book of the law unto Moses ;
wherefore be not thou in doubt as to the revelation thereof* : and we ordained
the fame to be a direction unto the children of Israel ; and we appointed
teachers from among them, who fhoulJ direft the people at our command,
when they had perfevered with patience, and had firmly believed in our figns.
Verily thy Lord will judge between them, on die day of refurredtion, con-
cerning that wherein they have difagreed. Is it not known unto them how
many generations we have deftroyed before them, through whofe dwellings
they walk b ? Verily herein are figns; will they not therefore hearken? Do
they not fee that we drive rain unto a land bare of graft and parched up,
and thereby produce com, of which their cattle cat, and t he ml t Ives alfo ?
Will they not therefore regard ? The inf dels fay to the true believers, When
will this decifion he tktiJe between us, if ye 1 peak truth ? Anfwer, On the
day of tbiti decifion % the faith of thole who {hall have diftx-lieved {hall not
avail them ; neither {hall they be refplted any longer. Wherefore avoid
ihcm, and txoefl thtijfne: verity they expect to obtain Jam advantage mer
tbeti

C H AP.

» Ft ■ V- j: .a &i ft fl *e: ; r

Or , -- finntiarerpriE U, sf t»: *&£-
frttk* tbf Karat-, u sit} >vY; fine* ilwc Mi ve-
ry 0 f the law w Ms fa prows that ihc revehnna
of the Mt to ihtc it not the fit ft mJlance of
the Mud. Other* think ihe wnd* fhould be
tT* nfbied dull* Be w* th* in 't

"Kiting ;f prtf&l * fiEpphng thi= ifi* in*
tervicrv between Myi? and jp line

iUth ibeivEtip when the _:ter took hU n^ht*
:gumey thither, u here intended 1

T&iwgl* wbt.fr ir.-y The

Mecwm cXy faffing by she ptaeu w hire the

AJiith TJwt ► JittJi Abdimtut), SsJjfriUi 9 &c
once dwelt

4 Qa um Jay tint x\ ft i]TUn Iu On the
day of judgment : tho' !ome hippo le ih£ day
here intended w be that ot the vkt&ry it Bear,
or die dtat of the taking of Mma* when feve-
r-1 of ;:io»'c who had fceto profexihd v. ere ;■ 1
to death without temlfEon

1 See rfv Prrkn. D^. i- il ? ^

Chap. 33.

Al KORAN.

3 +>

CHAP. XXXIII.

Intitled \ The Confederates 3 ; revealed at Med in a.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

O Prophet, fear God, and obey not the unbelievers and the hypocrites
verily God is knowing and wife. But follow that which is revealed
unto thee from thy Lord \ for God is well-acquainted with that which ye do :
and put thy truft in God ; for God is a fufficient profo&or. God hath ndt
given a man two hearts within him \ neither hath he made your wives (fome of
whom ye divorce, regarding them thereafter as your mothers) your true mothers ;
nor hath he made your adopted fons your true fons c . This is your faying in
your mouths : but God fpeaketh the truth ; and he direfteth the right way.
Call fuch as are adopted , the fons of their natural fathers : this will be more
juft in the fight of God. And if ye know not their fathers, let them be as
your brethren in religion, and your companions : and it fhaJl be no crime
in you, that ye err d in this matter j but that Jball be criminal which your

hearts

a Part of this chapter was revealed on occa- forward to me, as the back of my mother 5 after
fion of the war of the Ditch, which happened which Words pronounced he abftained from her
in the fifth year of the Hejra , when Medina was bed, and regarded her in all tffpf&s as his
fcefieged, lor above twenty days, by the joint and mother, and fhe became related to all his kin-
toiifederate forces of feveral JetoiJh tribes, and dred in the fame degree as if fhe had been really
of the inhabitants of Mecca, Nard, and Tehama, at fa. The other cuftom was the holding their
the inftfgation of the fetes of tne tribe of Nadhlr, adopted fons to be as nearly related to them as
who had been driven out of their fettlement their natural fons, fo that the fame impediments
near Medina, by Mohammed, the year before 1 * . of marriage arofc from that flip po fed relation,
b Obey not the unbelievers and hypocrites ;] It is in the prohibited degrees, as it would have
related that Abu Sofidn , Asrrna Ebn'Abi JabJ , done in the cafe of a genuine fon. The latter
and Abu'l A'war al Salafni having an amicable Mohammed had a peculiar reafon to abolifh. v?z.
Interview with Mohammed , at which were pre- his marrying the divorced wife of his freed.man
fent alfo Abdallah Ebn Obba % Moatteb Ebn~K<r Zeid, who was alfo his adopted fon ; of which
finir , and Jadd Ebn Kais , they propofed to the more will be faid by and by. By the declara-
prophet, that if he would leave oft* preaching tion which introduces this j>affage, that God
againft the worihipof their gods, and acknowledge has not gftnh 'a man two hearts , is meant, that *
them to be mediators, they would give him and man cannot have the fame affeflion for fuppofed
his Lord no farther difturbance i upon which parents, and adopted children, as for thofe who
thefe woids were revealed *. are really fo. They tell us the Arabs ufed to fay,

c God hath not given a man two hearts, &c.] of a prudent and acute perfon, that he had two
This paflage was revealed to abolifh two hearts ; whence one Abu Mamet, or, as others
cuftoms among the old Arabs . The firft'was wHte, Jemil Ebn Afad a l Fthrt, Was furnamed
their manner of divorcing their wives, when Dbu'lkalbein, or the man with two hearts*.
they had no mind to let them go out of their d That ye err j] Through ignorance or mif
houfe, or to marry again : and this the husband take s or, That ye have erred for the time
did by faying to the woman. Thou art hence - paft.

1 V. Abu’lfedae Vit. Mot. f. 7$. fcf Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, L 4. r. 1*’ * A

Beidawi. 3 Idem, jALfcAio'ooiN,

342 Ai KORAN. Chap. 33,

hearts purpofely deGgn \ for God is gracious and merciful. The prophet is
niglier unto the true believers than their own fouls * > and his wives are their
mothers b . Thofe who are related by confanguinity are nighcr of kin the one
of them unto the others, according to the book of God, than the other true
believers, and the Mohajer&n * : unlefs that ye do what is fining and reafon-
able to your relations in general. This is written in the book of God *.
j member when we accepted their covenant from the prophets *, and from thee,
O Mohammed, and from Noah, and Abraham, and Mosis, and Jesus
the fon of Mary, and received from them a firm covenant f ; that God may
examine the fpeakers of truth concerning their veracity * : and he hath prepared
a painful torment for the unbelievers. O true believers, remember the fa-
vour of God towards you, when armies of infidels came againft you h , and
we fent againft them a wind, and hofts cf angels which ye faw not * : and

God

* 72’/ prsfhtt it nigbtr nnt the trg Siiitvtn
f ".fi* tbe\r cmf jlAi i] Commanding them no-
thing but what is for their intereft and j rf van-
tage, and being more folticitous for their prelent
and future hipplitefi even than themldves ; for
whfth r. -LlVjpj he oughf to be dear to Them, *nd
deferves thdr utmoit love and refpefL In fame
copies ihrfc wotM ire added, A*J hr is a fa-
ther zvi .-' r .Vi I every propbve being the fpirimal
father of his people, who are therefore brethren-
It 3 Laid chat this r iflhge wis revealed on fcme
of lb! lower* telling him* whets he

ftunmoned tiem to attend him in the expedition
of Tabic *, that they would ask leave of their
fathers and mothers *.

b His wives an tbeir mothers ;] Tho % the fpi ■
fitoal relation between Mobarmed -ifpl his peo-
ple, declared in the preceding words, created
no impediment to prevent b s taking ta wife
fuch women among them a* he thought fit » yet
the commentators are of opEnian that they ac
here forb-dden to many any of hir wives J .

c Tbtfe tufa aft rtlittrJ by j rsofsaptiaitj an
Tfigltr cf f-.ff etfc a* ether* amrliug it the
r k if God, that she true ie/ievers anJ tie
Mohijerin } Thefe words, w hich alfo occur,
excepting tbe latter part of the sentence, in the
eighth chapter, ahrogate that law concerning
inheritances, publfhed in the fame chapter,
whereby the Mobajfrh ind Anjin were to be
the heirs of one another, exdufive of their near-
er relations who w etc infidels

6 Im the hfk of God i] i e. In the preferred
Table, or the Karats i or. at cth^s luppofc, in
the Pentateuch.

e When tv* received that emtxmt /nut she

1 See chop. 9. p- 154. * Al Beidaws.

jt. 148. 1 Sitebap. 7. 135 6

prspbett 1} Jttkh'ddb ftippofcj this cuitnut
wit made when Adams posterity were drawn
forth from hit loins, and appeared before Gid
like ten all inta 1 * ; bat Alarrxu i conjc^lura
that the covenant here meau: + was the ftmc
which the Taimtdijt pretend all the p rnph^
entred into with God on mount Sixai, where
they were all aUcmbkd in per ion with MA*t I
1 A firm cv&m*xt 5] Whereby they imdcrtooi
to execute their fever j1 com miUion:?, and pro-
niLftrd to preach ue religion commanded them
by God

: T£" r s God may examine she fpeakers cf truth
Chirring ibeir veracity ;] i. e. That he may at
the day of judgment demand of the propheu in
whit manner they executed their fcveral com-

mifEona, and how they w ere received jy tbeir
people ■ ar, as the \xori Tiiy alfo import, that
he may examine Uidfe who bdteved on them,

concern! ng their belief, and reward them ac-

cordingly*

fi iflea armies cf mJUAs cams agatwf jex ;]
Thefe were the forces of the Koreifis and the
tribe of Gbaffhe* confederated with the Jetts
df alXadblr and KsmiJhj^ ivho befieged Me-
dina to the number ot twelve rhoiiftftd men, in
the expedition edited the war of the ditch*

1 H e fens agaiafi them a mad and k$h sf an-
§tb, &c.] On the enemies approach, Mnum-
e wi t by the advice of SAmda ikt Pcrfas, or-
dered a deep ditch or iatrenchment- tea be dug
round Medita* for the fescritj' ot the city, and
went out to defend it with three thoufandmen.
To’ hlidei remained in their amps near a month,
without any ocher a iU of hulULity ihan {hooting
of arrows, and flinging of ftoijer ; till, in a

winter’s

1 See the PrAim* Df* §. V+ 4 Ar chap. 8,

3 ’ A + 6 .

Chap. 33. Al KORAN. 343

God beheld that which ye did. When they came againft you from above
you, and from below you \ and when your fight became troubled, and
your hearts came even to your throats for fear , and ye imagined of God va-
rious imaginations b . There were the faithful tried, and made to tremble
with a violent trembling. And when the hypocrites, and thofe in whofe heart
was an infirmity, faid, God and his apoftle have made you no other than a
fallacious promife c . And when a party of them d laid, O inhabitants of
Yathreb % there is no place of fecurity for you here ; wherefore return home .
And a part of them afked leave of the prophet to depart , faying, Verily our
houfes are defencelefs and expofed to the enemy : but they were not defenceleft ;
and their intention was no other than to fly. If the city had been entred upon
them by the enemy from the parts adjacent, and they had been afked to defert
the true believers , and to fight againft them ; they had furely confented thereto :
buc they had not, in finch cafe, remained in the fame f , but a little while.
They had before made a covenant with God, that they would not turn
their backs 1 : and the performance of their covenant with God fhall be ex-
amined into hereafter . Say, Flight fhall not profit you, if ye fly from death
or from Qaughter : and if it would, yet fhall ye not enjoy this world but a
little. Say, Who is he who fhall defend you againft God, if he is pleafed
to bring evil on you, or is pleafed to Jhew mercy towards you ? They fhall

find

wintefi night, God fent a piercing cold call
wind, which benummed the limbs of the confede-
rates, blew the ddft in their faces, extinguifhed
their Bits, overturned their tents, and put their
horfes in diforder, the angels at the fame time
wiring Allah aebar round about their camp;
Whereupon Toleiba Ebn Khowailtd the Afadite
faid aloud, Mohammed is going to attack you
with inebantments , wherefore provide for your
fafety by flight: and accordingly the Koreijb
firft, and afterwards the Ghatf&nites , broke up
the fiege, and returned home ; which retreat
was alfo not a little owing to the diflenfions
among the confederate forces, the railing and
fomenting whereof the Mohammedans alfo aferibe
to God. It is related that when Mohammed
heard that his enemies were retired, he faid, I
have obtained fuccefs by means of the eaft wind ;
and Ad perijbed by the weft wind \

a When they came againft you from above you ,
and from below you."] The GbatfSnites pitched
on the eaft fide of the town, on the higher
part of the y^Iley ; and the Koreijb on the weft
fide, on the lower part of the v^ljey 2 .

b Ye imagined of God various imaginations
The fincere and thofe who were more firm of
heart fearing they fhould not be able to ftand
the trial j and the weaker-hearted and hypocrites

thinking themfelves delivered up to flaughter
and deftru&ion.

c When the hypocrites faid , God and bis apof
tie have made you no other than a fallacious pro-
tnifel ] The perfon who uttered thefe words,
’tis faid, was Moatteb Ebn Kojbeir , who told his
fellows that Mohammed had promifed them the
fpoila of the Per fans and the Greeks , whereas
now not one of them dared to ftir out of their
intrenchment 3 .

d When a party of them faid , &c.] viz, Axos
Ebn Keidhi, and his adherents.

c Yathreb ;] This was the ancient and proper
name of Medina , or of the territory wherein it
ftands. Some fuppofe the town was fo named
from its founder, Yathreb the fon of KJsbiya , the
fon of Mahlayei \ the fon of Aram , the fon of
$em, the fon of Noahs tho’ others tell us it was
built by the dmalekites 4 .

f In the fame;] i. e' In the city; or, in their
apoftafy and rebellion, becaufe the Moflms
would furely fucceed at laft.

s They had made a covenant with God, life.'}
The perfon s meant here were Banu Haretba,
who having behaved very ill and run away on
a certain occafion, promifed they would do fo
no more

1 ^/Bbidawi# Abulf. pit. Mob. p. 77, life. 2 Idem . * Idem. V. Abul t

ubi fup. p . 76. * Ahmed Ebn Yvsqf, *See the Prelim Dift • p» 4 ’ 1 ^/Bsidawi,

34 ^ KXDHAlf. €ha?. 33 .

nnd none to jratrom . e or protect them, bdfidei Goo. Goo already knoweth
thofe among you who hinder ethers from following his npopltj and who fay
unto their brethren, Come hither unto us; and who come not to battle, ex-
cept a little * ; being covetous towards you b : but when fear cometh on
thm> thou fl ed them look unto thee for qfftfimee* their eyes rolling about,
like the ty> o( him who kinteth by reafon of the agonies of death: yet
when ibeir h-ar is p-sft, they inveigh agiiinft you with llvirp tongues; being
covetou- of the be ft and rnofi valuable pan oft he f polls • Theft believe not
el* ; w Is l fore God hath rtmdred dieir works of no avail ; and this is
tiily with Goi>. They imagined that the confederates would not depart and
• uf i the ^ j .v iind if the confederates ihould come another iimt y they would
wi!h to live in the JeULts among the Arabs who dwell in tents', and there
to inquire affe* news concerning you ; and although they were with you this
tim/y yet they fought not, except a little* Ye have in the apoftlr of God
an excel lent example * B unto him who liopeth in God, and the laft day,
and rememhn th Gnu frequently. When the true bd fevers few the confede-
rates, they laid) This u what Goo and his apoftle have foretold us r •, and
God and Ins a peril If have fpoken die truth and it only encreafed their feith
and rcllgni&bn. Of the true bdfevers fame men jufUy performed what they
hid promhi-d unm G<>n ; and Come of them have tinifhed their courfe *, and
fome of them wait t advantage - i and they dunged not their promfe %

by deviating therefrom h; the Icajl : that Goo may reward die jut! performers
oj th . n 'covenant tor their fidelity; and may punifh the hypocritical, if he
pfeafrth, or may be turned unto them * for God is ready to forgive, and
merciful. God hath driven back the infidels in their wrath: they obtained no
advantage ; and God was a fufficient protestor unto the faithful -in battle ; for

God

1 whitneem t* ftfitpi * tilth i]

Either coning to the irmy in fasti number* t
or flaying with them hui a little wbi1* T -'nil then
retur: i : n g on feme feign m excufe t or - : h a v i v g
ill in titueuf afftou* Someespolfars t At liieie
word* m be part of the fptc.h oi the Hypo-
crite. rcflefiirvg c for

Sving «d!e :n lie tjejarhej, and not alueklAg
the enemy,

i tmfmt ttmarJs yrt i}~i< e. Sparing
of their a HHance either in perfon or WttS their
pkirfe , or r being greedy after the booty.

c Tki fr-i'/j mjb t* life m th .tWart*, &c,]
Ti. ht they might be abl'ent, and not obliged to
go to war.

Ye hmi m th ■;/:■?& if Gop tm aw/Aaj --
*wp!f ;] vk. t ii r.rmnds in time of -ianger, of
confidence in the divine aFiUsnctv and of piety

by fervent prayer for the fame.

e nit ts what God and bh apfik him fm-
rold as ;] Namely, That we muft not exped to

etst^r piridife> without undergoing fome trials
and tribulations f . There I? a tradition that
fthhammed aftually J'urcioM this expedition of
the confederates lome time before, and the foe-

ceft of it

' £•?«/ V/,\’ perform ft sbdt thi isij p c -

rfitfij ft fit# God ;] By tlitpdtpg firm ivith the pro*
p^et, and fataugiliSy appofing the enemies of

the -rue religion, uncording to their engage-
ment

B Sme if ihm tom JnijhtJ tMr nurfi ;]
Or, *a the wwdi n»y be franOj.iBd, bsct fulfilled
r ■ . or paid h s to nature, rv fell-

ing ttyrtyrs in battle; as did Htwzfi* W&ham-
fflA unde* MapS EH Omasr, and A/ E'ttal
Nkdr 3 , who were flasn at the battle Ohod.
r I'he maltpra at the war of the ditch were x, in-
el udiu g Sand E ^ Mxtdi*, w ho died of his wound
about a nuunth after ♦.

t And um wait fir sto Oms advantage;] As
Others and Telha \

1 Set chap. z. p. 24, thsp, 3. p 52, ehap. 29. fi 325, 1 Ai Beidawi. ? Idea

* Abulf. fit. PM . /. .yg, * ^ Beida^ i,

Chap. 33. Al KORAN. 3^

God is ftrong and mighty. And he hath caufed fuch of thofe who have re-
ceived the fcriptures, as affifted tbe confederates , to come down out of then
fortreffes;, and he caft into their hearts terror and difmay b : a part of them ye
flew, and a part ye made captives ; and God hath caufed you to inherit their
land, and their houfes, and their wealth «, and a land on which ye have not
trodden a ; for God is almighty. O prophet, fay unto thy wives, If ye
feek this prefent life, and the pomp thereof, come, I will make a handfome
proviflon for you, and I will difmifs you with an honourable difmiffion ' : but

Y y if

1 Such of thofe who have received tbe fcriptures,
as affifted tbe confederates ;] Thefe were the Jews
of the tribe of Koreidba , who, tho’ they were
in league with Mohammed, had, at the inceflant
perfiiaion of Caab Ebn Afad, a principal man
among them, pcrfidioully gone over to his ene-
mies in this war of the ditch ; and were fevere-
ly punilhed for it. For the next morning after
the confederate forces had decamped, Moham-
med and his men returned to Medina, and laying
down their arms, began to refreih themfelves af-
ter their fatigue j upon which Gabriel came to
the prophet, and asked him whether he had fuf-
fered his people to lay down their arms, when
the angels had not laid down theirs ; and order-
ed him to go immediately againft the Raradbites ,
a /Turing him that himfelf would lead the way.
Mohammed , in obedience to the divine command,
having caufed public proclamation to be made
that every one fliould pray that afternoon for
fuccefs againft the fons of Koreidba , fet forward
on the expedition without lols of time; and be-
ing arrived at the fortrefs of the Koradbiies, be-
fieged them for twenty five days, at the end of
which thofe people, being in great terror and dif-
trefs, capitulated, and at length, not daring to
truft to Mohammed's mercy, fnrrcndred at the
diferetion of Saad Ebn Moadb 1 , hoping that
he, being the prince of the tribe of Am , their
old friends and confederates, would have fome
regard for them : but they were deceived ; for
’ Saad being greatly incenfed at their breach of
faith, had begged of Goo that he might not die
of the wound he had received at the ditch, till
he faw Vengeance taken on the Koradbitet, and
therefore adjudged that the men fliould be put
to the fword, the women and children made
Haves, end their goods be divided among the
Mo ferns ; which fentence Mohammed had nofoon-
tf heard, than he cried out, That Saad bad pro-
nounced the fentence cf God : and thefomewas ac-
cordingly executed, the number of the men who

1 See ebap. 8. p, 142.
Vie ete Mab. /. 4. c. 2.

were (lain, amounting to fix hundred, or, as
others fay, to feven hundred, or very near >
among whom were Hoyai Ebn Akbtab a great
enemy of Mohammed's, and Caab Ebn Afad,
who had been the chief occafion of the revolt of
their tribe : and foon after Saad, who had given
judgment againft them, died, his wound, which
had been skinned over, opening again a .

b And caft into their hearts terror and difmay ]
This was the work of Gabriel, who, according
to his promife, went before the army of Mof
lems. It is faid that Mubammed, a little before
he came ro the fettlement of the Roradbiter,
asking fome of his men whether any body had
pafTed them, they anfwercd, that Dobya Ebn
Kboleifa the Calbite had juft palled by them,
mounted on a white mule, with houlings of
fattin : to which he replied, That perfon was the
angel Gabriel, wheels fent to tbe Jons of Korei-
dha, to jbake their caftles , and to ftrikt their hearts
with fear and confiernalion i .

c And God bath caufed you to inherit their
land » Ac.] Their immoveable potfciHons Mo-
hammed gave to the Mohdjerin , laying, that the
Anfdrs were in their own houfes, but that the
others were deftitute of habitations. The move-
ables were divided among his followers, but he
remitted the fifth part, which was ufual to be
taken in other cafes *\

d A land on which ye have not trodden ;] B>
which fome fuppofe Perfia and Greece are meant ;
others, Kbaiban and others, whatever lands the
Mojlems may conquer til J the day of judgment f
e O prophet , fay unto tby wives. If ye feek this
prefent lift , Ac. J This paflage was revealed on
Mohammed's wives asking for more fumpttious
cloaths, and an additionalallowance for their cx-
pences : and he had no fooner received it, than
he gave them their option,either to continue with
him,or to be divorced, beginning v/WiAyeJba, who
chofe Gon and bis apoflle , and the reJt followed
her exan^ple ; upon which the prophet thanfccd

them,

V . Gacniir,

1 ^/Beidawi, Abulf. ViU Mob . p . 77. &Tr.

3 Ebn Is h ak. ^^/Beidawi. * Idem

Al KO R A N. C h ap. 33.

if ye feek Gun mil his apofllc, and the life to com r, verily Gun hath ji re-
pa red For Inch of you an work Hgkteoufhds, :i great reward. O wives of
c wli lever of 1 (ball comti it man ' ' ttickt^l &, the

pnmfhffient th fh a U be daub led unto her twofold * \ and this ir eafy with
XXII. ( ■ -d : * but ■ ■ r of you flu) I be obedient unto God and hit apoftb,

and ftwtl do th.it which is right, we will give her her reward twice*, and we
have prepared For her ,ui honourable provilinn O p,i>‘ !•>•?. O wives of the
prophet, \e are not ss other women : if ye tear (V-iO, be not too complaifant
in fpeech, left he Jhmtkl covet, in whole heart is a difrafe t/f mm\hr,tn;i ; but
l^eak the ipceth which b convenient. And fit ftill in your ho >fe •, and fet
not out your five? with the ollcnntion of the krnner time t>f ignorance*; and
obferve tlu- appoint td times ot prayer, and give alms; and obey Go-, and
Ids a poll I e i for God defireih <>.dy to remove From you the abomination o i
vatntu jt*:ct ye are the htmlhold of the prophets find to purify you by a pet.
tee. 1 punficti ion J . And remember tint v, l.idi k road in your houfes, of the
IlgtVi of God, and of the wifdcwn revealed in the Kopjn % For Goo is clear- lighted,
oiii wdl-at quaint- d with ytur aliens. Verily the Modems of • itlwr lex, and
the true 1> 'it vc rs of cither fete, and the devout men, and du: devout women,
and the men of veracity, and the women of veracity, and the patient rim,
and flic- patient tcwwt'W, and the humble then and the humble women, and
the alms-givers ol eidur lex, ami the m,u who fa ft. and tin iQvmtn who fill,
mil the cn.ifh: w, and the 'italic ooww#, and thole of ' iihrr lex who re-
memlier Goo frequently*, for them ha r b Ci-jo prepared forgivenefi., anil i
great reward, It is no. ft lor .1 true believer or either (be, when God
, uid hi:. tpofUe have decreed a thing, that they ibonld have tlie liberty of
chooHjjg a, Mjfercut man. • r or their ow n*: and whoever is difob? dim unto

God

stem* <ar t the t«A mwf

pvit, hjtuKmiie

L ■ '• r. j-'.F 1 fc A-..- Fr-mhcii kiiuchive
t jr.riu.Lc L ibdu *Wi fz * Li • h*f h:r option ^ven
her 4 ifci cTtriafej r«i thy with fur fcu$£»viid t dull
uni divuictd £ tba «ibrt* ire of * ccdIfji y

Ojl s-/it.n *

‘ Hit fifS'v+t it ■ ... *3 ^ 7 *'“ :

crime ■ ■ i l : be m ir ? i(ir.rnj'jjf 2 ex 4 imp krdon-
41 ic IB ih*n« ( l - .-'-id .1 . : :'.s Inferior iundi-
t :-n, Hii«i Trie gf.ica IfOirch they Uve rtCfill'ed
from Qqd } a hetice u : rhst th* py mrtmic&E of
* fret i mdaitlM tr> double to (lut

4 1 3 JI^t ; . ar.d pruplic m:Me ieverdy re-
Glided f'.y their hilt: rK.iit g tht*r muz

{(' Iff,' r j tv - l.. rr^jrJ y„:,. Vlt-
Oilft f r cr f<v. Jli-ir-ve, ilid a 1 . r i Limn Jqj
her com i viirVa.jn Ilp ikt if-d hdibl-

iome bctuvkrur to him.

1 He- ,'b rc-ff, f. JH.

daw i 1 hu*t- 4 JJtm,

€ f - ... A ih # fermtt Lg-

tt ' r 3R£i ;] j b it ii H Jri 1 he -s!j timt-ji idojjjrfy,,
S-.rif mppt-iie 1 bcJr.re il-e tiood, or n-e

[■mil: j.f J rdj'vT. ro be hicre ifU^^ed, ^vUcn
urmrei iilaniftl rhcrFfifeho ivjtti ill tbeir hurry,
d 0«9i jbn.id iaioihc drctu gn &£«¥ them-
klvfra to tbe men ,

C'f'D til* i* l* .'J rfjiK'J ''^ r .ifii.Tti-

'tt*: 1 ;, Ai: J The prong yin "t la- no pcrion
in iliU piet gf the pj.ilj£c beiriv ^ t/,e mafeu-
bine gfmdcr T the S&tin prdrend the icntcnce has
no ioutwiiqii wish the iutzg o-mg or the fbjlo w-
iogwoxdsi and will hi\£ it ty tr/ h&fi-
him A J*Y ,* r. . .ire | Ai ficiklirSy m*~* f
inJ AS. , ini- ihdi- nv... ion* 4nt3 Ff.ia#,
t L’ 'A hkinn : neft word* -re dirfiftod £ .

/y f.' mt Jit J ■ ' t * /wju '.-.-vr r 3 God

■' • ' -i/’to (/A-Tii-J X f b&t shy

/ \A*S :i.'t S.lirtv &f 4*.. a's 3 \ &c.j Tlda ver*e

was

* .t Si DAV. i.

4 Be*

Chap. 33. Al KORAN 347

God and hi* apoftle, fimely erreth with a manifeft error And remember
when thou foklft to him unto whom God had been gracious *, and on
whom thou alfo hadft conferred favours", Keep thy wife to. thy fclf, and
fear God : and thou didft conceal that in thy mind which God had determined
to difcover % and didft dear men \ whereas it was more juft that thou fhouldft
fear God. But when Zbid 4 had determined the matter concerning her, and
bad refolved to divorce her , we joined her in marriage unto thee ' ; left a
crime lhould be charged on the true believers, in marrying the wives of their
adopted fins , when they have determined the matter concerning them f : and

Y v 2 the

was revealed on account of Zeinab (or Zenobia )
the daughter of Jahajh , and wife of Zeid, Mo-
hammed's free&nwm, whom the prophet fought
in ptam4ge r but received a repulfe from the lady
and her brother Abdallah* they being at firft
averfe to the nfttch ; for which they are here re-
prehended. The mother of Zeinab , it is laid,
was Amin** the daughter of Abd'almotalleb, and
aunt 5$ Mohammed x .

51 When thou fa'tdft to him unto whom God
had beep gracious ;] viz. Zeid Ebn Haretha, on
whom God had bellowed the grace early to be-
come a MoJlem.

b And on whom thou hadft conferred favours ;]
By giving him his liberty, and adopting him for
tlyr fon, {ffr.

Zeid was of the tribe of Calb, a branch of the
Khodaites , defended from Hamyar the fon of
Saba ; and being taken in his childhood by a
party of free-bpoters, wa3 bought by Mohammed ,
or, as others fay, by hjs wife Khadijfh before
fhe married him. Soffit years after, Haretb a,
hearing where his fon was, took a journey to
Mecca , and offered a confiderable fum for his
ranfom ; whereupon Mohammed laid. Let Zeid
come hither s and if be choofee to gKtvitb yen*
take him without raujM; but if it be bis choice

f t with me, toby (beuld I not keep him ? And
being come, declared that he would flay
his Maher, who treated him as if he were
his only Ion. Mohammed no looner heard this,
but he took Zeid by the hand, and led him to
the black ftone of the Caaba, where he publick-
ly adopted him for his fon, and conftituted him
hkhsir j with which the father acquiefced, and
returned home well-fatisfied. From this time
Zeid was called the fon of Mohammed, till the
publication of If dm ; after which the prophet
gave him to Wife Zeinab 3 .

c And thou didft conceal that in thy ydnd which
God had determined to difcooer ;] Namely, thy
affeftion to Zeinab. The whole intrigue is art*
fully enough unfolded in this paffage ; the ftory

is as follows.

Some years after hy marriage, Moham^rl
going to Zell's houfe on fome affair, and not
Sailing him at home, accidentally call his eyes
on Zeinab, who was then in a drefs which dif-
covered her beauty to advantage, and was fo
fmitten at the fight, that he could not forbear
crying out, God be fraifed, who turnetb the
hearts of men as he pleafethl This Zeinab failed
not to acquaint hqr hoaband with, on his return
home ; whereupon Zeid, after mature reflexion,
thought he could do no lefs than part with his
wife, in favour of his benefa&or ; and therefore
refolved to divorce her, and acquainted Moham-
med with his refolutkm : but he, apprehending
the fcandal it might taife, offered to diffuade
him from it, and endeavoured to flifle the
flames which inwardly confumed him ; bat at
length, his love for her being authorized by this
revelation, he icquiefccd, and after the term of
her divorce was expired, married her, in the lat-
ter end of the 5th year of the Mejra 3 .

d Zeid i] It is obferved that this is the only
perfoh, of all Mohammed's companions, whole
name is mentioned in the Karan,
e We joined her in marriage unto thee ?] Whence
Zeinab ufed to vaunt hcrfelf above the prophet's
other wives, laying, that God had made the
match between Mohammed and hcrfelf, whereas
their matches were made by their relations 4 *.

f Left a crime Jhould be charged on the true be-
Uevers, in marrying the wives of their adopted
fins, &c,] For this feigned relation, as has been
obferved^ created an impediment of marriage
among the old Arabs within the prohibited de^
grees, in the fame manner as if it had been real s
and therefore Mohammed's marrying Zeinab, who
had been his adopted Ton's wife, occafioned great
fcandal among his followers, which was much
heightened by the Jews and hypocrites : but the
tuftom is here declared unrcafonable, and abo
lifhed for the future*

1 Al Be j d awi, Tallalo’dpui. 3 ^/Jannabi V, Gacnjer, Vie de A% L 4. c. 3

3 Al Beidawi, al Jaawab i, (Ac * * Idem,

34-3 Al KORAN. Chap. 33.

the comrmtHi oi Gon is co be performed. No mme h bt chur^d on tl n.-
propbei, as to wh*{ Gut) luth allowed him* i$nf$rmfihte fa the ordinance

1 if Gap vv^h regard to tltofe who preceded him, (for the command of Goo
h a determinate decree*) who brought the metises of God, and feared him,
jjil! fen rt i none betides God : and Goo is a fuffivient accountant. Moham-
ied is not the father of aijy man among you ; but the apoftle of God, and
the foil of the prophets: ml God knoweth all things- O true believers,
remember God with a Frequent remembrance, and celebrate his pmifc morn-
ing and evening. It is he who is gracious unto you, and his angels Mtrttdt
for yw, that he may lead you forth From d&rknefs into light and he is mer-
ciful towards the true believers Their Salutation, on the day whmm they
fliall meet him* jhdl be % Peace 1 and he hath prepared tor them an honour-
able recompenfo. O prophet., verily we have r ent d*ec fa be a wicnek, and
a bearer ot good tidings and a denouncer of ebreats and an mviter unto
God, through his good pkafars and a fhining light, Bear good tidings
i hi relore unto the true belie Vers that they In all receive givac -bundame
from God + And obey not the unbelievers, and the hyp oc Tires, and nfmd
not their evil treatment: but imEt in God ; and God is t fofFkknt proteftor.
O true believers when ye marry tfk n are believers and afterwards

pur them away, before ye have touched them, ibere i* no term j reftribrd you
tu ftiliil mwards them # a/hr ihfk iv&rc* * but make them a rr. Lru % and
djfmifs them Freely, with an honourable (Ufa)] titan, O pr>.-: int, we have
wed thee thy wives unto whom thou haft given their dower, and alio
the jlm?& wkfeh thy right hand poffcflcihi of the fapiy which God hath grant-
ed thee c * and the JaugUleis of thy uncle, and the daughters of thy aunts
both on thy father's fide, and on thy mother's fide, who have fled with rhtf
from Mecca*, anJ any pf/vr believing woman, if (he give herfelf unto tie
prophet • ; in cafe the prophet ddireth to take her to wife. T is is a pecu-
liar

• fkftre U iff fNv jm te fh

Tim i», Yc jri n-.t aWltyd to
«etp tticm any certiin t me betore dilnrife
ip cm, a-- vc are thole with whum 4l : c
h_.- been con fumma c-. d Sec v Si i p 2 p it

* V/4f thn * fr, ffit t] i-e. It no d-wer
u,r. been sffigfttd tbejn : for it jl dower Il*± b. n
aLbpesf the mutunJ is obliged, a E gro di ng to
th t to. to give the woman hill the dower
agreed oh, hefides a prefent *. Tliii k EldJ to
be undcrlLuchd or larii v-omen ivitii whom die
ETiinri -ge hn hoi been cwkturumaied.

4 n Ttt p/ the iwtiy mhkb God bath

fmKttJ fate ;] 1 e is uii. theref : rr, ih«t the ^omcn
!kver which he Lnonki buy are not included in
this crint.

- if • i -rjFif j?/I (bn /.'■ ri s Mtca 5] But
not the uthers It k related of O* 1*1 Hihn, the

daughter af A&< Td.rr f tlmfUe fhuMld fjy, Tty
*p *fltt if God mtrtod m# * ■ , fat I

mjf(f fj / my f#-

£** i dfimwrd * mu t *trj? uut ift be

-f i berth j/Awj tu njrry ^ „ ^-v IJlfd

mt mtb * .

It may be ob.erved Lhiit Dr Prints*,* ..much
m i ih ten , W hen he p (T en Hi, at n .■ J in this

cluster brings Jra Gl-d tiemptlng bidi from the
IiW in ihe tuurdt chapter 3 , wr.ereby the Mo/-

Jem are iorhlddco to mzny w i thin certain de-
gtew, and giving him in ei^eciiJ pr vil.pe to
eifce in wife Li e Slighter of Mi bruiLir ca the
diughter of hi* fillet

c jfv/ 4itfT FCi-.'Trfl. if

th prtpfti .] Ho lit demindragany dower.

According to .j a:-i i cs uf Ahi*n* the pro-
phtr, how cttr, mm:cd no woman withe utsi-

figning

£j™

* iJtvr.

I*.!, 63

K £. r Pa id L'P r AM. ; lib

Chap. 33. Al KORAN. 34.9

liar privilege granted unto thee, above the reft of the true believers \ We
know what we have ordained them concerning their wives, and the ftaves
whom their right hands pofiefs : left it fhould be deemed a crime in thee to
make ufe of the privilege granted thee \ for God is gracious and merciful.
Thou orayeft poftpone the turn of fuch of thy wives as thou fhalt pieafe, in
being called to thy bed \ and thou mayeft take unto thee her whom thou ftalt
pieafe, and her whom thou fhalt defire of thofe whom thou fhalt have before
rejedted : and it jbdl be no crime in thee b . This will be more eafy, that they
may be intirely content, and may not be grieved, but may be wejl pleated
with what thou (halt give every of them : God knoweth whatever is in your
hearts and God is knowing and gracioys. It fhall not be lawful for thee
to take other women to wife hereafter % nor to exchange any of thy wives for
them d , although their beauty pieafe thee 5 except the ftmes whom thy
right hand fhall poffef$: and God obferveth all things. O true belie
veis, enter not the houfes of the prophet, unlefs it be permitted you to eat
meat with him , without waiting his convenient time: but when ye are
invited, then enter. And when ye fhall have eaten, difperfe yourtelves ;
and ft ay not to enter into familiar difeourfe: for this incommodeth the
prophet. He is alhamed to bid you depart ; but God is not afhamed
of die truth. And when ye afk of the prophet's wives what ye may have oc-

cafion

figning her a dower. The commentators are
not agreed who was the woman particularly
meant in this paiTage ; but they name four who
are foppofed to have thus given tbtmfelves to the
prophet, viz. Maimuna Bint at H/tretb , Zeinab
Bint Kbuzaima, Ghozia Bint Jaber , furnamed
Omm Sboraic, (which three he actually married,)
and Kbatola Bint Hakim, whom, as it feems, he
^ejc£ted.

a This is a peculiar privilege granted thee,
above the reft rf the true believers ;J For no Moftem
can legally marry above four wives, whether
free women or flaves; whereas Mohammed is, by
the preceding paf&ge, left at liberty to take as
maijjrai he plea fed, tho’ with fome reftri£lion$.

D Thou in ay eft poftpone the turn of fuch of tby
wives as thou (ball pieafe, &c.] By this paflage
fome farther privileges were granted unto Mo-
hammed ; for, whereas other men are obliged to
carry themfclves equally towards their wives
in cafe they had more than one, particularly as
to the duties of the marriage bed, to which each
has right to be called in her turn, (which fight
w s i^cknowledged in the moft early ages *,} and
cannot tike again a wife whom they have di-
vorced the third time, till fhe has been married
to another and divorced by him 3 , the prophet

was left abfolutely at liberty to deal wfth them
in thefe and other refpefts as he thought fit.

c It * fhall not be lawful for tbee to take other
women to wife hereafter , &c.] The commenta
tors differ as to the exprefs meaning of thefe
words. Some think Mohammed was thereby for-
bidden to take any more wives than nine, which
number he then had, and is fuppofed to have
been his flint, as four was that or other men ;
fome imagine that after this prohibition, (ho* any
of the wives he then had mould die, or be di-
vorced, yet he could not marry another in her
room ; fome think he was ohty forbidden from
thb time forward to marry any other worn m
than one of the four forts mentioned ib the rre^
ceding pafTage 5 and others 4 are of opinloq thjt
this verfc is abrogated by the two pre. edinj
verfes, or one of them, arid was revealed l dor*
them, tho’ it be read after them *
d Nor to exchange any of tby wives for fl cm,;]
By divorcing her ajndf marfying another. Al
Zamdkbjbari tells us,that fbme are of opinion this
prohibition is to be underftood of a particular
kind of exchange ufed among the idolatrous
Arabs, whereby two men made a mutual ex-
change of the'r wives without any other forma
lity.

4 See Genef. xxx. 14, . 3 See clap 2. p. *7

1 ^/Zamakh. ii/Budavu, Jali alo’ddim, £sV

1 See Kor . chap. 4. /• 60, & t,

4 As Abu’l Kasem Hebatallah.

M KORAN. Chap. 33.

‘.a-fiun (or, i'k ■ 01 them from lx- hind ,t vum : n *, Tins will iv more mi rr
' your iv arts m\ (heir lucres. Ntkhw k ic to for you to give m/m-
to t,w 9P*>ttlc of lion, or to marry his aucr him f r>r rv u

rot this would he: a grievous thing in rhu fight of Goa, Wither <, e dfoufot
a thing, or conceal it, verily God knowedt nil things. It fat! .> no crime
in them as to tiuir fathers, c. their ions, ortheii brother^ or their brothers
ions, or i Hr ir Often ibm, or their women, or the fkvn which their
hands poftrfc. 1 . ; k ft im uwaiUJ*; and fen ye God 4 j for Go?h

wiincls of all bungs. \ erily God an d his angel* bk/s the prophet: O tnj"
believers, do y Jfo blcfs him, and ft lift him with n * .7 /7jW fiforation*
f \ thoir v- ! : o tji'eml God and his ajioftlr, God ftwll' curie riiem in mi’
won t and in the n u ; and he hath prepared tor them a ftwT.efol mini !ii merit.
.Vnd they who foaJl Injure the true believers of chirr ft x, without their rd-
i.rving it, fo.dl^fupcfy bear /iv guilt of calumny and a mo ni felt imuftice *.
O prophet, fpeak unto thy wives, and thy daughters, and the wives of the
^ , L bt-lievm, that they call: their outer garments « over them wbm . ‘
T**") thls fk more proper, that riiey may be koowr.
rfrnl4ti6n, and may not b a fl ranted fry fry wrdt or 1 n:lk>ns. Gor> i :

gracious and mercifoj, Verily if the hypocrite#, and Chofe in .Imf hearts k
•m infirmity v and they who wife diHurbamvs in M- : : i, do not defift } ^
will iurely fhr thee up againft f,<- . 1 , ■■ • tbrni hen n. forth they (had

not fc Jufferw u> awcjl near thcc tlmftiji, except for a liuie an J beinc

actrurfed ; wherever they are found tuey foalf ' bv aken, and kilh d wit
.hrtn< flaughtrr* m*or to (he 1 rmng tiioiV who have

| e . * liritl Lhtv ‘ ! ifuvlt not find any ciw, p in the fenretice of Goo,
-M^i] wj], .Life; thee L'oncernuig th e aft>r<ucb of tfrt taj) hour: ani'wer, Verilf

the

’ Jit it tf tbt*> fc- Iri-h.l a r.'A • ,] T

M, Let there be n cumm dm a bsrwect! . yod*
or let them be viEed, wh * U >e nfl writli ihr-n.
As the ddSfn of the former §*<*epE mt to pre-
sent lift impertinence \?f rroifki£iofii£* , T%ert J (he
dru^n of Ah wr M ?/.;.•■ I fis-mul n.-jr an
or fiEduUirify brtiff ccr [J* wivo And
hu i and vns, ccnfofrfi it 3r laid* hj

f,-.' h n.! ol' t ne nf hi- cjfnp " : -m i r^cLtlentilSj'
tf- ictiing iii#t if Jr * VI JJca rne ike pr«>
p-?T kmc kiLij-ant^ \

3 A 1 ' i - . i ' if iff ■ *■ v s fj ""/pff hh wivij
] ]. C ititfscr t'lJCtt ii Jir !m,J( divorce

i 1 ■ hi' i ‘ c - IT Cj Q ! h is Wj i * 'Jt45 h 15 ftc.i r .h ,

Tl,.£ t 20 inorkcr p-:v peculTif the pi j-
fJjct-

It i. rd:tel B iJlil in th* KinS frit r-j rr +
£f r .’ A"*^r rrjMTJ^d !h>r vk ifn -m bin .1/>
dHmiffed vrSthouil hi*

tnatmgc wkh her 2 ; upon which The ^TA.f Jtf ni

firft was thi n king to Atone her* but after w4kU

d.in-t.i his miPtd. on in being revrefen^d -o
b:m LL.t tiih ptohSbltion rented r to iLcts
v-:,mdr. ;n whom (lie prophet had -ciu tm r
s See chip, 3:4. p. 2t;.i

t, Gi'iF ,] The 'vo.tii i| C
to ^he prophet*! ws^\

' ^'v rAf/rv^-A, An Hen e

it? |r Jdom fnmilr.n h ; t^iuc

v. iddirtg, Ot . -> ^ ;■ j„. ■■/ tic 1 .

r/tJ r ffmi f nr [he lii.e ^^5,

-AifoTvj ij.fe fo T tej
verfc was. reT: .i_ , according r 1 u
G^rjGon of ceiuii h;pocrif« ■ ;. J JLisctfed
■ » or, flccoramg 10 , on 1.: !, ii of

tl.L-ic who utl t'y icrtifisd j
^ i] The

pr.rpe-, - fignitse* rhe w^ppen, U u: . of

:e ]*nnen fc whll V i:: !, l\c women m ‘the
c.ft • vtf themfelvti Tinm LziJ to toot tvhift
thei gu* sbtivd-

24-

1 Al Beidax i.

* Stt / 548 e

At Beid • v. .

* &tt.i ;

Chap. 33. Al KORAN.

35 1 *

the knowledge thereof is with God alone ; and be will not inform thee : per
adventure the hour is nigh at band. Verily God hath curfed the infidels, and
hath prepared for them a fierce fire, wherein they lhall remain for ever : they
(hall find no patron or defender. On the day whereon their faces lhall be
rolled in bell fire, they lhall fay, O that we had obeyed God, and had obeyed
bis apoftle I And they lhall fay, O Lord, verily we have obeyed our lords,
and our great men •, and they have feduced us from the right way. O Lord,
give them the double of our punilhrtient; and curffe them with a heavy
curfe ! O trOe believers, be not as thofe who injured Moses ; but God cleared
him from the /caudal which they had fpoken concerning him * •, and he was of
great confideration in the fight of God b . O triie believers, fear God, and
fpeak words well-diredted ; that God may correct your works for you, and
may forgive you .ye»ur fins : and whoever lhall obey God and his apoftle,
lhall enjoy greac felicity. We propoled the faith unto the heavens, and the
earth, and the mountains : and they refilled to undertake the fame, and were
afraid thereof *, but man undertook it e : verily he was unjuft to himfelL and

roolilh :

* Be not as theft who inland Masts*

The commentators are not agreed what this in-
jury was. Soxnp fay that bfofes tiling; to wafli
himfelf apart, certain malicious people gave out
that he had a rupture (or, fay others^ that he
was a itper, or an hermaphrodite,) and for that
reafon was alhajned to wifh with them : but
God cleared him from this afpeyfiqq, ijy chafing
the ffone on Which he had laid *Kis cloaths whife
he Vrgffied, to run away with them irtto ‘the
Camp, whither Mojjrs followed it baked ; and by
that means the J/raf/iteXi in the midft of whom
he was gotten ere he was apvarc, plaii^y 'per-
ceived the falfhood of the report. Others fup-
pofe Karun'i accufation of Mvfes is here intend-
ed 1 , or elfe the fufpitibn o$Aarsn\ tfwder*whteh
was cift on Mofti becayfe he warmth him when he
died pnmount Hor * of which latter he was jutted
by the angels bringing Kis bpdy and exiting it
to public View, or, fay feme, by the te^inibriyof
Aaron himfelf, who was raked to life for that
purpofe 3 .

Thepaflnge is faid to have been occasioned by
feme refleflions which were cafe on
on his dividing certain fpoils ; and thaf When
they catfie to his ear* hefeidy Goo be rt&tifkl
unto my brother Mofes : be was wronged more than
this , and bore it with patience 3 .

b He was <f great confideration in the fight of
God ;] Some copies for inda read abda % accord-
ing to which the words fhouldbe tranflated, And
he was an Uhfirious fervent <f God,

c We prtpofed the faith unto the bfytnans, a$i
the earth, and the mountains , See.] By faith is
here undcrflood entire obedience to the law of
GTod, which is reprefenfed to be of fo high con-
cern, (ho left than eeeraal happmeftririnSfciy
depending ott the dbfervance or negleft thereof/)
and fp difficult in the p^r^wniance, that if Gpu
fhould prqp^fe feme* m conditions an-
nexed, tp the yaller parts of the creatiotf, and
fhey had unddrfbndihg to dom^reheftd the offer,
they would decline it* and not dare to take on
them a duty, the wieitin mud hd attend-
ed with fe terrible a a>u£tquence ; and yet UUP
Is laid to have undertaken U, nptwitblbfcaing hl$
weaknefs and the irtfirrtiitids of his fnlttife. Sovhk
imagine this ^ro^fat fa hot hypothetic*!, b\j:
was afosarlly made to tta hefyfrfe earth* and
mountains, which at their firft jercatian su
dued with reafon, and that Goo tofd them K ■
had made a tw, and had ctditod paridlfe fbt tht
teeompehfe of fuch as were obedient to r, .1 sd
hell For the pumftwnent of the difobedient i to
which they an/wered, they were content to fcc
obliged to perform the fervicea F01 which they
were crt$ 4 i!ed, but Mold not undertake to fidPil
the divfoe law on thofe fcotodltionsy and tberefw
defired neither reward nor punilhnient j they
add, that when Adam was created, the fame of-
fer was made hiip* and he acjjcptcd^ it The
commentators hatfe other explications of thi
paflage, which it would be too frolix to tr*n
icribe.

1 See chap. 28. p. 323.

4 Jallalo’ddin, ^/Beidawi.

3 Jallalo’ddin* At & uwAvn .

Al Bok.uru

35 2 At KORAN. Chap. 3^

foolith ‘ . due God may punifh the hypocritical men, and the hypocritical
women, and the idolaters, and the idolacrefles ; and that God may hr turned
unto the true believers, both men and women , for God is gracious and

merciful.

* Hi sat tiuinft to bimftlf esi fulip :] Un- in not wnfiieriag the coui*qoence of his dif-
uft to himfelfi in not fulfilling hit engagement* obedience mj negted,
ind obej ing the L'v he had iccepird j andioulifh.

CHAP. XXXIV.

Inti tied j Saba*; revealed at M t c c a.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

P RAISE be to God, unto whom bebngetb whatever is in the heavens
and on earth : and unto him be p:*aife in the world to come ; for he is
wife and intelligent. He knoweth whatfoever entreih into the card i \ and
whatfoever comcth out of the fame % and whatfoever defcendech from heaven 4 ,

and whatfoever afeeadeth thereto * : and he is merciful and ready to forgive.
The unbelievers fay. The hour of judgment will not come unto us. Anfwer,
Yea, by my Lord, it will furely come unto you \ it is he who knoweth
the hidden fee ret : the weight of an ant, cither in heaven or in earth, is not ab-
fent from him, nor any thing lefler than this or greater, but the fame is writ-
ten in the perfpicuous book of bis decrees ; that he may recompenie thofe who
fhall have believed, and wrought righteoufnefs : they fhall receive pardon,
and an honourable provifion. But they who endeavour to render our figns of
none e fifed, fhall receive a pundhment of painful torment. Thofe unto whom
knowledge hath been given, fee that the book which hath been revealed unto
thee from thy Lord is the truth, and diredeth into the glorious and laud-
able way. The unbelievers fay to one another. Shall we fhew you a man who
(Kail prophefy unto you, that when ye fhall have been difperted with a total dif-
perfion, ye fhall be rmfed a new creature ? He hath forged a lie concerning
God, or rather he is diuractcd. But they who believe not in the life to come,
lhall fail into pumfbment and a wide error. Have they not therefore confider-
ed what is before them, and what is behind them, of the heaven and the earth ?
If we pleafe, we will caufe the earth to open and fwaJJow them up, or will

caufe

* Mention is made of the people of Seta in
the fifteenth verfe.

h Wbdtfoever entrtth sitfz tfa t*rsb ;] As the
rain, hidden urea fures, the dead, (Ac.

c And %'hatfefvrr cmrtb $Mt *f fbe Jkmt ;] Ai
jiuiniiS, planes, metals, fpring- water, (Ac

d JF&di “h w Aif&nJtth brmfn ;] As the

feript ures, decrees of Gop* ram, thun-
der find ligfiTning^

* And wbaffimr uxftStlh ihriift] As the
angels* m tui wor vapoim, fiiigic, (Ac 1 .

1 Ai Be ID AW 1.

Chap. 34. Al KORAN. 353

caufe a piece of the heaven to fall upon them : verily herein is a fign unto
every fervant, who turneth unto God. We heretofore beftowed on David
excellence from us ' and we fetid , O mountains, ling alternate praifes with
him i and we obliged the birds alfo to join therein *. And we foftened the iron
for him, faying, , Make thereof complete coats of mail b , and rightly difpofe
the finall plates which compofe the fame : and work ye righteoufnefs, O fami-
ly of David j for I fee that which ye do. And we made the wind fubjett unto
Solomon * : it blew in the morning for a month, and in the evening for a
month. And we made a fountain of molten brafs to flow for him 4 . And
fome of the genii were obliged to work in his prefence, by the will of his Lord ;
and whoever of them turned afide from our command, we will caufe him to
tafte the pain of hell fire e . They made for him whatever he pleafed, of
palaces, and ftatues r , and large difhes like fifhponds *, and cauldrons ftanding
firm on their trevets b ; and we f<nd y Work righteoufnefs , 0 family of David,
with thanklgiving ; for few of my fervants are thankful. And when we had
decreed that Solomon lhould die, nothing difcovered his death unto them, ex-
cept the creeping thing of the earth, which gnawed his ftaff 1 . And when

Z z his

* See chap, 21. p. 270.

b See ibid. p. 271.

c See ibid, and chap. 27. p. 31 1.

d A fountain of molten brafs ;] This fountain
they fay was in Taman , and flowed three days in
a month

e We toil l caufe him to tafte the fain of bell
fire\\ Or, as fome expound the words. We
caufed him to tafte the fain of burning ; by which
they underffcand the correction the difobedient
genii received at the hands of the angel fet over
them, who whipped them with a whip of Are.

f Statues ;] Some fuppofe thefe were images
of the angels and prophets, and that the making
of them was not then forbidden ; or elfe that
they were not fuch images as were forbidden by
the law. Some fay thefe fpirits made him two
lions, which were placed at the foot of his
throne, and two eagles, which were fet above it ;
and that when he mounted it the lions lbetched
out their paws, and when he fat down the
eagles /haded him with their wings 2 .

8 Difhes like fifhponds j] Being fo monftroiifly
large that a thoufend men might eat out of each
of them at once.

h And cauldrons ftanding firm on their trevets ;]
Thefe cauldrons, they lav, were cut out of the
mountains of Taman , and were fo vaftly big that
they could not be moved ; and people went up
to them by fteps 3 .

* Nothing difcovered bis death, but the creeping
thing of the earth , which gnawed bis fiaff ij

* Idem , Jallalo’ddin. * Idem*

lalo’ddin. * 1 Kings , vi. 7.

fef ScHicKARtn Tarich reg * Perf p. 6z.

The commentators, to explain this paffage, tell
us, Tha t David, haying laid the foundations of
the temple of Jerufalem* which was to be in
lieu of the tabernacle of Mofes , when he died,
left it to be finilhed by his fon Solomon ; who
employed the genii in the work : that Solomon ,
before the edifice was quite compleated, perceiv
ing his end drew nigh, begged of God that his
death might be concealed from the genii till they
had intirely finifhed it : that God therefore fo
ordered it, that Solomon died as he flood at his
prayers , leaning on his Aaff, which fupported
the body in that pofture a full year; and the ge-
nii) fuppofing him to be alive, continued their
work during that term, at the expiration where-
of the temple being perfectly compleated, a
worm, which had gotten into the fiaff, cat it
through, and the corps fell to the ground and
difcovered the king’s death

Poflibly this fable of the temple’s being built
by genii , and not by men, might take its rife
from what is mentioned in feripture, that thehoufe
was built of ftone made ready before it was brought
thither ; fo that there was neither hammer , nor
ax, nor an y tool of iron heard in the boufe while
it was building 1 : the Rabbins indeed tell us of
a worm, which might aflift the workmen, its
vertue being fuch as to caufe the rocks and
ftones to fly in funder 6 . Whether the worm
which gnawed Solomon'* ftaff, were of the fame
breed with this other, I know not ; but the ftory
has perfeClly the air of a Jetoifb invention.

3 Jallalo’ddin. + ^/Bbidawi, Jal-
6 V* Kimhj, in loc. Buxt. Lex . Talm . p* 2456*

35+ >47 KORAN. Chaf. 34.

bis body fell down, the genii plainly < perceived that if they had known that
which is fee ret, they had not continued in a vile punifliment *. The dtfcendmts
of Saba b had heretofore a Cgn in their dwellings ; ndmely, two gardens, on
the .right hand and on the left * : and it was /aid unto them. Eat ye of the
provifioa of your Lord, and give thanks unto him } ye have a good country,
and a gracious Lord- But they turned afide from what we bad commanded
them -, wherefore we fent againft them the inundation of al Arbm *, and we
changed their two gardens for them into two gardens producing bitter fruit, and
tamarilks % and fome little fruit of the lore-tree. This we gayp them in
reward, becaufa du_7 were ungrateful : is any thus rewarded except the

ungrateful ? And we placed between them and the cities which we have
blefled f , cities fituate near each other ; and we made the journey eafy be-
tween them *, faying. Travel through the fame by night and by day, in fecu-
rity. But tliey faid, O Lord, put a greater diftance between our jour-
neys h : and they were unjuft unto themfelves ; and we made them the fub-
je& of difeourfe, and difperfed them with a total difperfron . Verily herein
are

* Then b$J not itt 4 vfk ptmjhmw

i. e. They had not tmnimuirii in ten die fubj ac-
tion to the comm md of S ■ nor had gout?
on witb the work of the temple.

b The dtftttfddnU of Sjhi ] S.^.7 vs** the ■ ftn
of y.ijhhj& k the fon of KinaS, she fan of h -A'crfl,
Vfholff puflerity dwelt )u in the city of

Mir jit* culled alfo about fhrCc dvyi jour-
ney from Sr Mil ^

c Tied T4rdim 9 on right bawd* tbt
tibtr on w left ;] Thm is, two trails of had,
one on this fide of their city, and the other on
that*. planted ^ith trust, afcd made into garde ru,
whioh lajf fo thick =»d dofe tegeihrt, tlyit each
traft feemed lot be one cammued garden : or,
it mar -- c p every houfe had a garden on each
band of it *-

d The imtudtiiiiti tfi il Arem The commen-
tators Les d'J-vo feuc/ir of the word

jJ Arm, which are fcarct worth mentioning :
ii m -ll prpperiy iigni&ei mWf or cam for the
Lapping or containing of witur, and is h fR
u[cd for t !i.'-t ftupendo 1 ,^ rottnJ ot building which
f rmed -he vaft refervotr ab ore the city of $sh'ti 3
dekribed in nother a , and which, for the
gruit impiitTi priie, and infoJence of ihc 10 -
baldtJUitJ, >v.is anibeto dowa in the night by &
nnfihty Band, and dcaiioQcd a tetribte deftrnc-
i on 3 At Betti <hei teppotea thv mo and mi'
wsrh af queen Itelkii, and that the aboVe-
mens'ioned enatapii* happened afttr the time
of jaai?s Curut j wherein he fetms to be

mi ttakciL

Ld-fjHi hi) A 1 « w ili rub hearing np f, mt,
md delighting ip falttfh and barren ground,

1 Tbr ii.'ti? toi'irf* m kavc ibpj ;] viz. The
criira of Sy n'j,.

W V xi.ut ih jgfrtrr tnfy hmtm thm i] By

reafon uf their ne^r dilhcice, ip that during the
whole ;ourney a tra\*eller mighr rell in one town
during the heat of the d^v* aid in another at
night; nor was he obJfgt-J to carry pravifion*
with him*.

b Phi a grtaitr dr$**te between csr joar/seyt i |
This ^-cErtiotf EEfccy made out of covetourieis,
that ifie px,r bdrt|[ obliged to be longeron the
rtMdp ihey might make greater ad.i-im,ige in let-
ting out their ciftk, md farmihiug the travel-
ler vriih provisiau r and God wa* pleafcd to
p^niih them by mg iliem their wifh* and
permittsng tiioft of the dties, which Jwere be-
tween SsIj md Syrt,i w to be ruined and aban-
doned \

1 Wf th:fo it* fubje* gf
difpirfid tbits tttiib /cfj/ Jijferjisp Q For the
neigh i' During naif ns juftly tvocdmj, at fo hid-
den isd un'orefeen-a revoftition in the affairs of
this once flouriftdog people : whence it became
^proveifiEd Lay mg, rn eipreli a zozil dlipcTfion,
that ft iv teff'fjom wJ /? s rr:rm/ S ,l^ *■

Of tie dc\ Lsum mi ot Sfp*t v, ha ^mited their
Country, md Ibught new tetri cmcn>= on ih\z inun-
dation, the tribe of Gba$fin went into Siru 3 the
tribe of An^Jr to last rib ^ the tribe ot J&tb&w

to

4 J^LtAI

1 Af Bbida a’ l * See iht Pretim. Dije- §. I. r. io, J $&&&
AiJLfiohwi 1 tilm. f - Al Be id aw i l\ Got, ftci, fa Jiff rig, p,

Chap. 34 * Al KORAN. 355

are figns, unto every patient, grateful perfon. And Eblis found his opinion
of them to be true * : and they followed him, except a party of the true
believers b : and he had no power over them, unlefs to tempt ibitit , that we
might know him who believed in the life to come, from him who doubted
thereof. Thy Lord obferveth all things'. Saly unto the idolaters. Call upon
thofe whom ye imagine to be gods , befides Goo* 'they are not matters of the
weight of an ant tin -heaven or on earthy neither hive' they any fhare in the
creation or gbvtrtttoent of' the fame *, nor is any of them aflillant to him
therein. No intdrccffion will be of fervice in his prdeh&,' except the inter-
cept on. of. him to iwhom he fhall grant permifiiort to intercede fir others c : and
they fhall wait tmr fufpenfe ’ uritil,' when the terror fhall be taken oft from their
hearts \ they ftjidl* l£y to one another , What doth your Lord fay ? They
fhall anfwer. That which is juft : and he is the high, the great God. Say,
Who provideth food for you from heaven and earth ? Anfwer, God : and
either we, or ye, follow the true direction, or are in a manifeft error.
Say, Ye fhall not be examined concerning what we fhall have committed .
neither fhall we be examined concerning what ye fhall have done. Say, Our
Lord will affemble us together at the lajt da j f then will he judge between
us with faith ; and he fc the judge, the knowing. Say, Shfew me thofe
whom ye have joined as partners #ith him ? Nay ; rather he is the mighty,
the wife God* We have not lent thee otherwife than unto mankind in ge-
neral, a bearer of good tidings, and a denouncer of threats: but the greater
part of men do not onderftand. And they fay. When will this threat be
fulfilled , if ye fpeak- truth ? Anfwer, A threat is denounced unto you of a
day which ye fhall not retard one how, neither fhall ye haften. The unbe-
Jievers fay. We will by no means believe in this Koran, nor in thdt which
hath been revealed before it*. But if thotf CoUldeft fee when the uhjuft
doers fhall be fet before their Lord J They will ftefate dtftoiirfe with one
Another : thofe who were efteemed weak fhall fhjf uriftJ .thufe Who' Behaved
Ihemfelves arrogantly r , Had it not been fir you, verily we had been true be-

Z z 2 licvers.

to Tfbamabj t^e tribe of al Azd to Omanf «
fhe tribe of fax to Najd,,fit tribe of Kbozaab
to Bntn lHarr near Meet a, Banu Amela to a
jrtototaift, t&erice oalled the iiribBntain of jffriela,
near fpgmofcus, a«d others went to Hit* in
Irak 1 -, te c.

Eblis found bis opinion of them to be true ;]

Either his opinion of the Sab# arts, when he law
them addi&ed to pride and ingratitude, and the
farisfying their lofts ; or ^eflfe the Opiftidit he en-
tertained of all mankind at the Adam, or

at his creation, when he heard the angels fay.

Wilt thou plate in the earth one who will do evil
therein x and fired blood 3 ?

b Except a party of the true believers Who
were faved from the common deftrudlion.

c See chap. 19* p. 255.

1 Al Beidawi. * V. Vocu fpec . p. 42* 45 ’ &r 66 . 3 See chap. 2 . p. 4. chap. 7.

«. 117. and chap. 15. p . 21a, fsV< 4 ^/Beidawi.

d When the terror fhall be taken off from thdt
hearts j] i, e. F{pm the hearts of the intercdTors,
and pf tliofe for whom God fhall allow them
to intefeide/ bf the perm iiiion which he fhall
then grrfht tfifem ; for no angel or prophet fhall
dare to ipeak at the iaft day without tnc divine
leave.

e Nor in that which hath been revealed before
itfi\ If 5 s faid that the infidels of Mecca 9 having
inquired of the Jews and Chriftidns concerning
the million of Mohammed , were allured by them,
that they found him described as the prophet
who fhould come, both in the Pentateuch and
m the Gofpel ; at which they were very angry,
and brake out into the words here recorded 4 .
f See chap. 14* p* 207. not. a.

356 Al KORAN. Chap. 34,

lievers. They who behaved themfelves arrogantly lhall fay unto thofe who
were efteemed weak. Did we turn you afide from the true dire&ion, after it
had come unto you ? On the contrary, ye a&ed wickedly of your own frn
choice. And they who were efteemed weak lhall fay unto thofe who be-
haved with arrogance, Nay, but the crafty plot which ye devifed by night
and by day, occaftoned our ruin ; when ye commanded us that we Ihould
not believe in God, and that we Ihould fet up other godt as equals unto him:
And they lhall conceal their repentance*, after they lhall have feen the
puniihment prepared for them. And we will put yokes on the necks of thofe
who lhall have dilbelicved : lhall they be rewarded any otherwife than accord-
ing to what*they lhall have wrought ? We have fent no wamer unto any city,
but the inhabitants thereof who lived in affluence faid, Verily we believe not
that with which ye are fent. And thofe of Mecca alfo fay. We abound in
riches and children more than ye ; and we lhall not be punilhed hereafter.
Anfwer, Verily my Lord will beftow provifion in abundance unto whom
he plcafeth, and will be fparing unto whom be pleafetb : but the greater
part of men know not this. Neither your riches nor your children are the
things which (hall caufe you to draw nigh unto us witn a near approach :
only whoever believeth, and worketh righteoufhefs, they lhall receive a double
reward for that which they lhall have wrought ; and they lhall dwell in fe-
curity, in the upper apartments of paradife. But they who lhall endeavour
to render our figns of none effcft, lhall be delivered up to puniihment. Say,
Verily my Lord will beftow provifion in abundance unto whom he pleafcth
of his fervants, and will be Iparing unto whom be pleafetb : and whatever
thing ye lhall give in alms, he will return it s and he is the beft provider of
food. On a certain day he lhall gather them all together : then lhall he fay
unto the angels, Did thefe worlhip you ? And the angels lhall anfwer,
God forbid ! thou art our friend, ana not thefe : but they worlhipped de-
vils ; the greater part of them believed in them. On this day the one of
you lhall not be able either to profit or to hurt the other. And we will
fay unto thofe who have a died unjuftly, Tafte ye the pain of bell fire, which
ye rejected as a falfhood. When our evident figns are read unto them, they
fay ef thee , O Mohammed, This is no other than a man, who feeketh to
turn you afide from the gods which your fathers worlhipped. And they fay
of the Koxan, This is no other than a lie blafphemoully forged. And the un-
believers fay of the truth, when it is come unto them. This is no other than
manifeft Ibrcery : yet we have given them no books of fcripture wherein to
exercife themfelves, nor have we fent unto them any warner before thee.
They who were before them in like manner acculed their prophets of im-
pofture : but thefe have not arrived unto the tenth part of the riches and
frengtb which we had beftowed on the former: and they accufed my apoftles
of impofture i and how fever e was my vengeance 1 Say, Verily I advife you
unto one filing, namely , that y e ftand before God by two and two, and Gngly b ;

' and

■P

* See chap. 10. p. 1 71. not, a. or fingty* <kc,] L e. That ye fet your felves

h That ye Jia*d before God by two ami two, to deliberate and judge of me aad my preten-
tions

Chap. 35 * K 0 RAN* 357

and then confider ferioufly, and you will find that there is no madnefs in
your companion Mohammed ; he is no other than a wamer unto you, fcnt
before a fevere punilliment. Say, I afk not of you any reward for my preach-
ing 1 » it is your own, either to give or not b : my reward is to be expelled
from God alone ; and he is witnefs over all things. Say, Verily my Lord
fendeth down the truth to his prophets : he is the knower of fecrets. Say,
Truth is come, and falfhood is vaniflied, and fhall not return any more . Say,
If I err, verily I fhall err only againft my own foul : but if I be rightly di
refted, it will be by that which my Lord revealeth unto me ; for he is ready
to hear, and nigh unto thofe who call upon him . If thou couldft fee, when the
unbelievers fhall tremble % and Jhall find no refuge, and (hall be taken from
a near place d , and fhall fay. We believe in him ! But how fhall they receive
the faith from a diftant place e : fince they had before denied him, and reviled
the myfteries of faith, from a diftant place ? And a bar fhall be placed be-
tween them and that which they fhall defire ; as it hath been done with thofe
who behaved like them heretofore : becaufe they have been in a doubt which
hath caufed fcandal.

fions coolly and fincerely, as in the fight of God,
without pafEon or prejudice. The reafon why
they are ordered to confider either alone, or by
two and two, at moft, together, is, becaufe in
larger aflemblies, where noife, paffion, and pre-
judice generally prevail, men have not that free-
dom ofjudgment which they have in private 1 .

a I ask not of you any reward, &c.] Moham-
med, having in the preceding words anl'wered the
imputation of madnefs, or vain enthufiafro, by
appealing to their cooler thoughts of him and
his actions, endeavours, by the/e, to clear him-
fclf of the fufpicion of any worldly view or in-
tereft, declaring that he defired no falary or fup-

1 JiB%lT)KWU

port from them, for executing his commiffion,
but expeded his wages from God alone.
b See chap 25. p. 301.
c When the unbelievers Jhall tremble ;] viz.
At their death, or the day ofjudgment, or the
battle of Bedr 2 .

d And pall be taken from a near plate ;] That
is, from the Outfide of the earth to the infide
thereof ; or, from before God’s tribunal to hell
fire ; or, from the plain of Bedr to the well into
which the dead bodies of the flain were thrown 3 .

c From a diftant place ;] i. e. When they are
in the other world i whereas faith is to be re-
ceived in this.

2 Idem . 3 Idem*.

CHAP. XXXV.

Intitledy The Creator a ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

P R A I SE be unto God, the Creator of heaven and earth •, who maketh the
angels bis meffengers, fumilhed with two, and three, and four pair of wings 4 :
3 God

1 Some intitle this chapter The Angels: both b Furnijbed with two , three , and four pair of

words occur in the firft verfe. wings * 3 That is, Some angels have a greater,

and

35 8

Al KORAN.

Chap. 35.

God maketh what additibn h<* pleaTeth tfhtb bis creatures ; for God is almigh-
ty. The mercy which God mill freely teeftow on mankind, there is none
who can with-hold ; artd what he fhall with-hdld, there ts none who can
beftow, befideR him : and We is ‘the rfilghty, the' wife. O men, remember
the favour of God towards you s h there any crtfattir, befides God, who pro-
videth food for you from heavdn arid earth ? There Is no God but he : how
thdreForO are ye turned afide from aeknowlrdgittg his unity ? If they accufe
thee of impofture, apoftles before thee have' alfo'been accufed of impofture :
ahd urito God frill aH things return. O meff, Eerily the promife or God is
true: let not therefore the prefent life deceit you, neither 1 let the deceiver
deceive you concerning God: for Satan is an enemy unto you ; wherefore
hold him for an enemy : he only inviteth his confederates to be the inha-
bitants of hell. For thofe who believe not there is prepared a ibvere torment :
but for thufd who (hall believe and do that which is right, is prepared mercy
and a “great reward. Shall he therefore for whom his evil work hath been
prepared** 'fc’hd who imagineth u to be good, be as be who is rightly difpef-
ed, and difeernetb the truth ? Verily God will caufe to err whom lit phifith,
and will direct whom he pleafeth. Let not thy fquj therefore be fpent in fighs
for tHeir fakes, on account efthdr otfinapj ; for God wcllknowerh that which
they do. It is God who fondeth the winds, and ntiiech a cloud •, and wc
drive the fame unto a dead .country, and thereby quicken rite earth after it
hath been dead : fo JbaU the refiirreet&n h .*>. Whoever dcliredi excellence ;
unto God doth all excellence bekng . unto htm afendeth the good fpeech;
and the righteous work will he exalt, But as for them who devife wicked
plots k , they (hall fuffer a fevere pun i Armen t ; and the device of thofe mitt
fhall be rendred vain. God created ydi rft of the duft, and afterwards
of feed c : and he hath made you. man dfid wife. No female conceiveth, or
bringeth forth, but with his knowledge,' Nor is any, thing added unto the
age of him whofe life is prolonged, neither is any tiling diminifhed from
his age, but the fame is written in the book of God's decrees. Verily this is eafy
with God. The two IWs ire not to be held irt comparison : this is frelh and
fweet, pleafant to drink ; but that is fait and bitter ,l : yet out of each of
them ye eat filh % and take ornaments f for you to wear. Thou feeft the
fhips alfo plowing the waves thereof, that ye may feek to enrich you f elves by
commerce , of the abundance of God : peradventure ye will be thankful He
caufeth die night to fucceed the day, and he caufeth the day to fucceed the
night *, and he obligeth the fun and the moon to perform their fervioc: :

and fame a letter number of wings, according did againft Mshammi. See chap. 8. p. 142.

to their different ordets ; the words not being not-h-

dtfigned to exprefs the particular number. Ga~ c See *bap. zz p. 374,

Ifief h ’faid t ohaye appeared to BfabitfBtfttdy on 11 Tbt tm fus* Ac ] Ifhat is, The two coi-

the tJght hfc made his journey to heaven, with leftive bodies of fait water and fireih. Sec chap.

each

jio lefs than flf hundred wings 1 .

\* the Kereijb

25 p. 300.

« See chap. 16. p. zi$. not. e.
f Or mounts ;] A* pearls and co**l.

chap. 16. p. 21J. not. e.

1 Al Bsidawi*

Chap. 35 - Al KORAN. 359

each of them runneth an-appoihtecj co'uVfe. This is God, vour Lord : his is
the kingdom. But tift! idols which ye invoke befides him, have not the power
even over the flcirt of a date-ftone : if ye invoke them, they will not hear
your calling ; ahdf although they fhould hear, yet they would not anfwer you.
On the day Sf reft rre& ion they fhall difclaiirrypur having aflociated them
with God : Sad’ none fhall declare unto thee the truth, like ohd who is wetl-
acquaftited thifpvfttb. O men, ye have need of God > but God ii felf-fuffi-
cient, and to ht pralfcch If he pleafeth, he can take you away, and pWdtfce
a fiew creature in y bur Ji tad: neither will this be difficult with God. A bur-
thened foul fhall not -beat the burthen of another: and if a heavy-burtheried
foul call on another to bekr part of its burthen, no part thereof fhall be born
by the perfon who fhall be called on, although he be ever fo nearly related.
Thou fhalt admonifh thofe who fear their -L ord in fecret, and are conftant
at prayer : and whoever cleanfeth himfelf from the guilt of di fob lidlehce, cleanf-
eth himfelf to the advantage of his own foul for all /half beafrembled before
God at the lift. day. The blind and the feeing fhall not be H£1{1 'equal *, nei-
ther darknefs and "light *, nor the cool lhade ind the fcorching wind : neither
fhall the living and the dead be held equal*. God fhall caule him to hear
whom Ke pleafeth : but thou fhalt not make thofe to hear who are in their
graves b . Thou art no other than a preafcber: verily we have fent thee with
truth, a bearer of good tidings, and a denouncer of threats. There hath
been no nation, but a preacher hath in paft times been converfant among them :
if they charge thee with impofture, they who were before them likewife
charged their apoftles with impofture. Their apoftles came unto them with
evident miracles, and with divine writings % and with the inlightening book * :
afterwards I chaftifed thofe who were unbelievers •, and how fevere was my ven-
geance ! Doft thou not fee that God fendeth down rain from heaven ; and
mat we thereby produce fruits of various colours * ? In the mountains alfo
{here are fome tracks white ahd ned, of Various colours f ; and others are of a
deep black : and of men, and beafts, and cattle thert are whole colours are
in like manner various. Such only of his fervand feir Goo, as are indued
with underftanding : verilyGoD is mighty;’ dnd ready to fojgWt', Verily they
Who’ffcSfl the book of God, and are conftartt at'prayer, and. give 'alms out of
'What we havd beftowed on them, both in ftcfet dnd openly, ‘hope for a mer-
chandize which ffialfflot perifh : that God may-fulhr pay them their wages,
an‘d fnake them a 'fttfterMpndhnl addition bf his liberknf y , for he is ready, fo For-

give

and to other prophets before

< ^ •>, \ u *. ' 1 ' d ■; '

» The Mini and the feeing ■ fhall fiat be held f to Abraham ,
equal,’ ’fee.]' 'Phis paiage expriflfc* die great dtft Mu/cf
ferenca between a true believe® and an infidftL
truth and vanity* and their future reward and
funiiKfhehl

b Thofe who are in their graves ;] i. e. Thofe
who ohftinately "perfift in their unbelief, who
are compared to the dead, . "

c Divine writings ;] As the volumes delivered

+ Tbt tnfrgblemng booki] vifis: The Law, or

e ($f ^various colours That is. Of different
kinds. Sec chap. 16/p. 215.

f Of various colours ;] Being more or lefs in-
tenftr *t

1 uf/BEItlXWI.

360 Al KO R A N. C h ap. 35.

give the faults of his fervants , and to requite their endeavours. That which
we have revealed unto thee of the book of the Koran, is the truth, confirm-
ing the fripiures which were revealed before it : for God knoweth and regard-
eth his icrvants. And we have given the book of the Koran in heritage ua-
to fuch of our fervants as we have chofen : of them there is one who injureth
his own foul * ; and there is another of them who keepeth the middle way 5 ;
and there is another of them who out-ftrippeth others in good works , by the
permiflion of God. This is the great excellence. They (hall be introduced into
gardens of perpetual abode ; they foall be adorned therein with bracelets of
gold and pearls, and their cloathing therein Jhall be of filk : and they fhall fay,
Praife be unto God, who hath taken away forrow from us 1 verily our Lord
is ready to forgive the finntrs, and to reward the obedient : who hath caufed us
to take up our reft in a dwelling of eternal {lability, through his bounty,
wherein no labour (hall touch us, neither {hall any wearinels affeft us. But
for the unbelievers is prepared the fire of hell : it fhall not be decreed them
to die a fecond time ; neither {haH any part of the punifoment thereof be made
lighter unto them. Thus fhall every infidel be rewarded. And they {hall
cry out aloud in bell, facing. Lord, take us hence, and we will work righte-
oufnefs, and not what we have formerly wrought. But it jball be anjwered
them. Did we not grant you lives of length hint dent, that whoever would
be warned might be warned therein ; ana did not the preacher « come unto
you ? tafte therefore the pains of bell. And the unjuft {hall have no pro-
teiftor. Verily God knoweth tne fecrets both of heaven and earth, for he
knoweth the innermoft parts of the breafts of men. It is he who hath made
you to fucceed in the earth. Whoever {hall difbelieve, on him be his unbelief:
and their unbelief {hall only gain the unbelievers greater indignation in the
fight of their Lord ; and their unbelief fhall only increafe the perdition of
the unbelievers. Say, What think ye of your deities which ye invoke befides
God ? Shew me what part of the earth they have created. Or had they
any {hare in the creation of the heavens ? Have we given unco the idolaters any
book of revelations , fo that they may rely on any proof therefrom to au-
thorize their practice ? Nay : but the ungodly make unto one another only de-
ceitful promifes. Verily God fuftaineth the heavens and the earth, left they
fail : and if they (hould fail, none could fupport the fame befides him ; he is
gracious and merciful. The Koreish fwore by God, with a moft folemn oath,
that if a preacher bad come unto them, they would furely have been more
willingly directed than any nation : but now a preacher is come unto them,
it hath only increafed in them their averfion from the truth, their arrogance in
the earth, and their contriving of evil ; but the contrivance of evil {hall only
encompafe the authors thereof. Do they expeft any other than the punifli-
ment awarded againft the unbelievers of former times ? For thou lhalt not find
any change in the ordinance of God *, neither lhalt thou find any variation

in

* Who injur etb bis own fid 7j] By not p«c- meaneth well, and perfonneth his duty for the
tiling what he is taught and commanded in the moft part, but not pcmftly
Ktran. c The preutbt 5 ) viz, Mtbmm&L

b Who keefetb the middle tvaj ;] That is. Who

Chap. 3^ ^ ICO RAN. 361

in the ordinance of God. Have they not gone through the earth, and feen
what hath been the end of thofe who were before them ; although they were
more mighty in ftrength than they ? God is not to be fruftrated by any thing
either in heaven or on earth ; for he is wife and powerful. If God fhould
punifli men according to what they deferve, he would not leave on the back
of the earth fo much as a beaft : but he refpiteth them to a determined time i
and when their time fhall come, verily God will regard his fervants.

CHAP. XXXVI.

Intitled , Y. S ; revealed at M e c c a.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

Y , S a . I /wear by the inftru&ive Koran, that thou art one of the mef*
fengers of God , fent to Jhew the right way. This is a revelation of the
moft mighty, the merciful God : that thou mayeft warn a people whofe
fathers were not warned, and who live in negligence. Our fentence b hath
juftly been pronounced againft the greater part of them ; wherefore they
lhall not believe. We have put yokes c on their necks, which come up to their
chins; and they are forced to hold up their heads : and we have fet a bar
before them, and a bar behind them 4 ; and we have covered them with dark-
nefs ; wherefore they fhall not fee e . It fhall he equal unto them whether
thou preach unto them, or do not preach unto them ; they fhall not believe.
But thou fhalt preach with effeft unto him only who fblloweth the admonition
cf the Koran, and feareth the Merciful in fecret. Wherefore bear good tidings
unto him, of mercy, and an honourable reward. Verily we will reft ore the

A a a dead

» The meaning of tliefe letters is unknown 1 * :
feme, however, from a tradition of Ebn Abbas,
pretend they fltand for Ya infdn f i. e. 0 man.
This chapter, it is faid, had federal other titles
given it by Mohammed himfelf, and particularly
that of Yhe heart of the Koran. The Moham-
med ms read it to dying perfona in their laft
agony a .

b Our /entente ;] viz. The fentence of dam-
nation, which God pronounced againft the
greater part of genii and men, at the fall of
Adam 3 .

c Yokes j] Or collars, fuch as are deferibed
pag. 20i. not, a.

d We have fet a bar before them^ and a bar

behind them ;] That is. We have placed obfta-
cles to prevent their looking either forwards or
backwards. The whole paftage reprefents the
blindnefs and invincible obftinacy, with which
God juftly curfes perverfe and reprobate men.

• It is faid that when the Koreijh, in pursu-
ance of a refolution they had taken, had fent a
felefl number to befet Mohammed l s houfe, and
to kill him the prophet, having caufed Ali to
lie down on his bed to deceive the aflaffins*
went out and threw a handful of dull at them,
repeating the nine firft verfes of this chapter,
which end here ; and that they were thereupon
ftricken with blindnefs, fo that they could not
fee him f .

1 See the Prelim . Difc . $. HI. p. 59, &(•

3 See chap. 7. p. 118 , efrap. 11 . /. 187, &e.

Abulf, viU Mdb. p . 50.

* V . Bobov. De tnjst . agrot. p. 17 .
4 See the Prelim . . Difc . p- 50. 1 F.

362 Al KORAN. Chap. 36 .

dead to life, and will write down their works which they lhall have fent before
them, and their fbotfteps which they Jball have left behind them 1 ; and every
thing do we fet down in a plain regider. Propound unto them as an exam-
ple the inhabitants of the city of Antioch, when the a pottles of J svs came
thereto b : when we fent unto them two of the fetid apojlhs c ; but they charged
them with impofture. Wherefore we (Lengthened them with a third 4 . And
they faid, Verily we are fent unto you by God. The inhabitants anfwercii.
Ye are no other than men, as we are v neither hath the Merciful revealed
any thing unto you: ye only publifh a lye. The apofles replied. Our Lord
knoweth that we are really fent unto you : and our duty is only pi blic
preaching. Tbofe of Antioch laid. Verily we prelage evil from you : if ye
defift noc from preaching , we will furely ftone you, and a painful punilhment
lhall be in flitted on you by us. The a/ofles aniwered, lour evil jrefage is
with yourfelves e : although ye be warned, will ye perffl in your mors ?
Verily ye are a people who tranfgrels exceedingly. And a certain man f came

haftily

a And ib* [ a R if t which tht j hope fcft

fahisd thm ;] As their good or evil example,
do&r nt* .

b Wbin tht -s^i tfkijf Jpiftfl tftmt t: Antioch A
To explain this p iuge* the commentator* tell
the following Uory.

The people or Anthchb ing idolaters, Jeiuji
fent two of hti diicipk* thither to pieach to
them : and when they drew near ^he city, they
found Hu nt i furnamed A Mdfir* or the tfrpcn
frr m feeding flieep, and acq ainted him w ith
their errand ; whereupon he asked them what
proof they had of their veracity, and they told
him they could cure the (Jck, and the blind ^ nnJ
the lepers ; and to demondnte the truth of wkat
they faid, they lud their Isands on a child of ftls,
who was fiCrc, and immediately rc^oreu him to
health. HtihU w.u convinced by this miracle,
:n0 believed ; after v, hich they went ini, tins city
and, predied the worship "of one true Gor»i
curia. .. great number ot people oi fevenJ i fi-
brin ifies : hut at length, the affair coming io
i he prince a car, he entered them to ’c iropri-
Jbned* r'or imkavottiing to fcduce the people.
When Jesus heard of liria, he fent iaathpT of
his dfrdplc** generally fuppofed to have bean
Si mtt Peter i who coining ta Jttimhi and ap-
pearing as a *ealous idolater, i'ggls ijvilnvuie l
Jbimfelf into the £avunr of the iahjiiitants and of
theif prince, and at ie.ngrh took an □pporttmilr
to ifoifre the prince wodd order the two per Toni*
who, as he Vos informed, Ixrud been pnt in prh
fon for broaching new options, to be brought
before tuna to be examined; and accordingly

they were brought : when F/ftr„ having py e -
vkmtfy wi tried rhatn to m-I-c no mmt that uicy
knew him* 3$Ud them who font thenu to
which they W>vl\ ,|, Goo, who had crested
-.I! tldngs ^ and ]• «i nu ranipftiiion : he then re-
quired fome eottvmdfig proof of their nMflion,
upon which they idlured a blled perfon Ea hi.
fight, and performed i* mi* other miracle*, wnli
Which Fttcr Icemcd not En be ftttihed, Gr ihnt-.
according to fume, he did the very Cune mira-
cles himfelf, but declared that if their God
could- enable them to tiiife the Je.uU be would
believe them ; ivhich com j Mon the t '\ a ipLiUt*
accepting* 1 lid ivji brought v«hph*d been dc.iu
fevcndiys, and at their p ayci he wu nifel
fp Hie* and theitupon Peirr jci&awfedgca him-
fdf convinced* and thm and demalUbai the
hL! , a great many of the people firtlowing him,
and embracing the true tilth ; h it rh. wb . be-
lieved not, were de&foyed % the cit of she
angti Gflfrir/ J .

* WV fefit tmtte thm tm ;] Some fiiy

ihc e two vnzrc Jzhfi xtid liUt otJiCrs name

diderent pcsfalii,

i A third viz. Simttf Ptttr*

* T$#r ttrif prtf&gt h miir ywrft'rn ;] i c.
If Any evil beta I ysa* i: will be the coniv.iuence
of your own ohffifHcy and unlwlief. See chip,
27 P-3M nor. k.

' A itritin This was HahU ALNMjSr §

whofe nunyrdam li here deferred . hi» tumb
is iitll Osewn neT Am , &h 9 and b mjui vifitcit
by the ",

, 1 Ai?\'ib%r, Al Bsitmwi,, £frr. F itUm Mar ft acc* 'vAl 5 2 F

f.ths, Iwhti trltyt'* 4 it cAm/h Fit* Snlstliafi V 4 & Anted hi ii*

Chap. 36. Al KORAN. 363

haftily from the farther parts of the city, and faid, O my people, follow the
meffengers of God ; follow him who demandeth not any reward of you : for
thefe are rightly directed. * What reafon have I that I Ihould not worfhip XXIII.
him who hath created me ? for unto him lhall ye return. Shall I take other
gods befides him ? If the Merciful be pleafed to afflidt me, their interceffion
will not avail me at all, neither can they deliver me : then fhould I be in a
manifeft error. Verily I believe in your Lord *, wherefore hearken unto me.

But they Jloned him : and as be died , it was faid unto him , Enter thou into
paradife. And he faid, O that my people knew how merciful God hath
been unto me 1 for he hath highly honoured me. And we fent not down
againft his people, after they bad Jla\n him, an army from heaven, nor the
other injlruments of definition which we fent down on unbelievers in former
days * : there was only one cry of Gabriel from heaven , and behold, they be-
came utterly extindh O the mifery of men ! No apoftle cometh unto them,
but they laugh him to from. Do they not confider how many generations
we have deftroyed before them ? Verily they fhall not return unto them : but
all of them in general fhall be affembled before us. One lign of the refur-
retion unto them is the dead earth b : we quicken the fame by the rain ,
and produce thereout various forts of grain, of which they eat. And we
make therein gardens of palm-trees, and vines ; and we caufe fprings to gulh
forth in the fame : that they may eat of the fruits thereof, and of the labour
of their hands. Will they not therefore give thanks ? Praife be unto him
who hath created all the different kinds, both of vegetables , which the earth
bringeth forth, and of their own fpecies, by forming the two fexes , and alfo the
various forts of things which they know not. The night alfo is a lign unto
them : we withdraw the day from the fame, and behold, they are covered
with darknefs : and the fun hafteneth to his place of reft c . This is the difpo-
lition of the mighty, the wile God. And for the moon have we appointed
certain manfions d , until lhe change and return to be like the old branch of a
palm-tree e . It is not expedient that the fun Ihould overtake the moon in her
courfe \ neither doth the night outftrip the day : but each of thefe luminaries
moveth in a peculiar orbit. It is a fign alfo unto them, that we carry their
offspring in the fhip filled with merchandize f ; and that we have made for

A a a 2 them

» Nor the other infiruments of defiruBitm, dred, The Jan runneth his courfe without ceafing,
tobich we Cent down on unbelievers in former and hath not a place of ref.
das ;] As a deluge, or a Ihower of Hones, or a d Certain manfions ;1 viz. Thefe are twenty
fufibcating wind, &c. The words may alfo eight conftellations, through one of which the
be uanflated, Nor did we determine to fend down moon pafles every night, thince called the man-
fuch executioners of our juiltce. fioeti or houfes of the moon

b See chap. 29. p. 326. not e. ' Until /be return to be like the branch of an

c The fun baftenetb to his place of refti ] That old p»lm-ireei] For when a palm-branch grows
is, he bafteneth to run his daily courfe : the fet- old, it ihrlnks, and becomes crooked and yellow*
ting of the fun refembling a traveller’s going to not ill reprefeating the appearance of the new
reft. Some copies vary in this place, and in- moon.

Head of limfiakarrin laba, read la mofiakarra laba j f That we carry their offspring in the Jbip fill-

according to which the fentence Ihould be ren- cd with merchandize ;] Some fuppofe that the
‘ “ deliverance

1 See the Prelim. Di/c. 5 - I. /. 31.

364 Al KORAN \ Chap. 36 .

them other e smteniendes like unto it \ whereon they ride. If we pleafe, we
drown them, and there is none to help them ; neither are they delivered, un-
lefs through our mercy, and that they may enjoy life for a feafon. When it
is faid unto them. Fear that which is before yoo, and that which is behind
you b , that ye may obtain mercy ; they withdraw from thee : and thou doft
not bring them one Ggn, of the figns of their Lord, but they turn afide
from the fame. And when it is faid unto them, Give alms of that which
God hath bellowed on you ; the unbelievers fay unto thofe who believe, by
way of mockery. Shall we feed him whom God can feed, if he pleafeth'? Ve-
rily ye are in no other than a manifeft error. And they fay. When will this
promife ofthe refurreQion he fulfilled, if ye fpeak truth? They only wait for
one founding of the. trumpet which Jfhail overtake them while they are difput-

ing together ; and they lhall not have time to make any difpofition of their
effects, neither lhall they return to their family. And the trumpet lhall be
founded again * \ and behold they lhall come forth from their graves, and
hallen unto their Lord. They lhall fay, Alas for us ! who hath awakened
us from our bed f ? This is what the Merciful promt fed us •, and bis apoftles
fpoke the truth. It lhall be but one found of the trumpet, and behold,
they /ball he all aflembled before us. On this day no foul lhall be unjulTly
treated in the leaft ; neither lhall ye be rewarded, but according to what ye
lhall have wrought. On this day the inhabitants of pamlife lhall be wholly
taken up with joy : they and their wives jhall reji in lhady groves, leaning
on magnificent couches. There lhall they have fruit, and they lhall obtain
whatever they lhall defire. Peace jhall he the word fpoken unto the righte-
ous , by a merciful Lord : but be jhall fay unto the wicked. Be ye fepa rated
this day, O ye wicked, from the righteous. Did I not command you, O fons
of Adam, that ye Ihould not worlhip Satan ; becaufe he was an open
enemy unto you ? And did I not fay, , Worlhip me ; this is the right way ?
But now hath he feduced a great multitude of you : did ye not therefore un-
derftand ? This is hell, with which ye were threatened : be ye call into
the fame this day, to be burned ; for that ye have been unbelievers. On
this day we will fcal up their mouths, that they jhall net open them in their
own defence ; and their hands lhall fpeak unto us, and their feet lhall bear

witnefe

deliverance of Nseb and his companions in the
ark, is here Intended : and then the words Ihould
be tranflated, That toe ckrrM tfofr progeny in
the ark fitted with living creators*

* Otur unvonimUs like it 5] As camels,
which axe the LirJ-jbipi ; or lciTer veiTcls and
boats.

b Fear that which is before yon, and that to tub
is behind you ;] i. e. The poniihment of this
world and of the next.

c Shall toe feed him whim God can feed if
be pleafis ?] When the poor Mojlems asked alms
of the richer Kareijb , they told them that if

God could provide for them, as they imagined,
and did not, it was an argument that they de-
fer ved not his favour fo well as themfdves :
whereas God ‘permits fome to be in want, to
try the rich and exeictfe their charity.

d See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. 82, 83.
and the notes to chap. 39.
c See ibid.

f Wh: bath mnkened US frm oar i .ip] For
they (hall fleep during the interval between
thefe two blafb of tkc trumpet, and lhall feel
no pain *.

I

1 Jallalo'dbim.

Chap. 36. Al KORAN. 365

witnefs of that which they have committed*. If we pleafed we could put out
their eyes, and they might run with emulation in the way they ufe to take ;
and how fliould they fee their error ? And if we pleafed we could transform
them into other Jhapesy in their places where they Jhould be found ; and they
fliould not be able to depart : neither fliould they repent b . Unto whomfoever we
grant a long life, him do we caufe to bow down his body through age , Will
they not therefore underftand ? We have not taught Mohammed the art of
poetry * *, nor is it expedient fot him to be a poet. This book is no other
than an admonition from God, and a perfpicuous Koran ; that he may warn
him who is living d : and the fentence of condemnation will be juftly executed
on the unbelievers. Do they not confider that we have created for them,
among the things which our hands have wrought, cattle of feveral kinds, of
which they are pofleffors ; and that we have put the fame in fubjeftion under
them ? Some of them are for their riding j and on fome of them do they feed :
and they receive other advantages therefrom ; and of their milk do they drink.
Will they not, therefore, be thankful ? They have taken other gods, befides
God, in hopes that they may be aflifted by them ; but they are not able to
give them any afli fiance : yet are they a party of troops ready to defend them.
Let not their fpeech, therefore, grieve thee : we know that which they pri-
vately conceal, and that which they publickly difeover. Doth not man know
that we have created him of feed ? yet behold, he is an open difputer againjt
the refurreftion ; and he propounded unto us a companion, and forgetteth
his creation. He faith, Who fhall reftore bones to life, when they are rot-
ten * ? Anfwer, He fhall reftore them to life, who produced them the firft
time : for he is fkilled in every kind of creation : who giveth you fire out of
the green tree f , and behold, ye kindle your fewel from thence. Is not he who
hath created the heavens and the earth, able to create new creatures like unto
ihem ? Yea certainly : for he is the wife Creator. His command, when he
willeth a thing, is only that he faith unto it. Be \ and it is. Wherefore
praife be unto him, in whofe hand is the kingdom of all things, and unto
whom ye fhall return at the lajl day.

CHAP.

* See the Prelim. Difc. §. IV. p. 88.

b If tee pleafed we could put out their eyes, &c.‘]
That is, They delerve to be thus treated for
their infidelity and difobedience } but we bear
with' them out of mercy, and grant them
lefyit.

c We have not t Might Mohammed the art of
poetry,'] This is in anfwer to the infidels, who
pretended the Koran was only a poetical compofi-
tion.

* Him who u living ;] i. e. Indued with un-

1 Al Beidaw i* * V. Hyde,

demanding ; the ftupid and carelefi being like
dead perfons 1 .

* See chap. 16. p. 2IJ. not. a.

f Who givetb you fin out of the green tree . J
The ufual way of ftriking fire in the eall, is by
rubbing together two pieces of wood, one of
which is commonly of the tree called Markh,
and the other of that called Af&r : and it will
fucceed even though the wood be green and
wet *,

it Bel Vet. Per/, c. a 5. f. 333, (ft.

366

Al KORAN.

Chap. 37.

CHAP, xxxvir.

Inti tied) Thofe who rank themfelves in order ; revealed

at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the angels who rank themfelves in order*; and by thofe who drive
forward and dilpel the clouds b ; and by thofr who read the Koran for an
tonition ; verily your God is one : the Lon d of heaven and earth, and
of whatever is between them, and the Lord of the tail r . Wc have adorned
the lower heaven with the ornament of the ftars : and kw have placed therein a
guard, againft every rebellious devil ; that they may not liken ro the difeeurfe
of the exalted princes, (for they are dartvtl at from every fide, to repel them,
and a lafting torment is prepared for them except him who catcheth a word
by Health, and is pUrfued by a fh:ning flame 4 . Aik (be MeccA.vs, therefore,
whether they be ftwmger by nature, or (be angels whom we have created? "We
have furely created them of ftiff clay. Thou wondreft at God's power and (heir
objlinacy ; but they mock at the arguments urged to convince them : when they are
warned, they do not take warning ; and when they fee any fign, they feoff
thereat, and fay. This is no other th in manifeft forccry : after we fliail be
dead, and become duft and bones, /hall we itally be Vaifed to life, and our
fore-fathers alfo ? Anfwer, Yea : and ye fbcdl then be defpicable. There
lhall be but one blaft of tbe trumpet , and they fhall fee tbemfehfes raifed: and
they lhall fay, Alas for us » this is the day of judgment ; this is the day of
diftinftion between tbe righteous and tbe wicked, which ye rejected as a fallhood.
Gather together thofe who have afted unjuftly, and their comerades, and the
idols which they worlhipped befides God, and direft them in the way to hell :
and fet them before God's tribunal ; for they fhall be called to account. What

aileth

* By tbe angels who rank tbemJitbtJ i a enter, nation* ; at, who drive away the devils from
tic ] Some uiiderfbmd bjr thefe words the fruit them. Off. *.

of nets who range tbtmfilots in obedience to c tie eajfi] Tbe original word, being in-tfae
Goo’s la '.vi, and fut oteay from them all iniidc- plural number, is fuppofed to fignify the different
lity and corrupt doings; or the Jim/i of those points of the h onion, from whence the fun rifea
who rank tbnvfehts in battle array, to fight for in the conrfc of die year, which are in namber
the true religion, and pnjb on ihcir horfes to jfio (equal to the number of days in the old ci-
choigcthc infiiels, tAe *. vil year) and have as many correfpon&ng points

b If bo drive forward tbe et<mdfi] Or, who where it fqpcefitvdy fets, during that fpaee } .
put in motion all bodies, in the upper and lower Morneti groundlefly imagines this interpretation
world, according to the divine command ; or, to be bark on the error of the plurality of
who keep if men from di (obedience to Qoo, worlds + .
by infpiring them with good thoughts and inch- * See diap. i j. p. 21 1.

Idem, Yahta.

♦ Mata acc. in Alt. f . ;89.

1 Al Bbidawi

* fdm.

Chap. 37. Al KORAN \ 367

aileth you that ye defend not one another ? But on this day they fhall fubmit
themfelves to the judgment of God : and they (hall draw nigh unto one another,
and fhall difpute among themfelves. And the f educed fhall fay unto tbofe who
feduced them , Verily ye came unto us with prefages of profperity * ; and the fedu-
cers fhall anfwer, Nay, rather ye were not true believers : for we had no
power over you to compel you ; but ye were people who voluntarily tranf-
grefled : wherefore the fentence of our Lord hath been juftjy pronounced
againft us, and we fhall furely tafte bis vengeance. We feduced you ; but
we alfo erred ourfelves. They fhall both therefore be made partakers of the
fame punifliment on that day. Thus will we deal with the wicked : becaufe,
when it is faid unto them, There is no god befides the true God, they
fwell with arrogance, and fay. Shall we abandon our gods for a diftratted
poet ? Nay ; he cometh with the truth, and beareth witnefs to the former
apoftles. Ye fhall furely tall: the painful torment of bell ; and ye fhall not
be rewarded, but according to your works. But as for the fincere fervants
of God, they fhall have a certain provifion in paradife, namely, delicious
fruits : and they Jball be honoured : they fhall be placed in gardens of plea-
fure, leaning on couches, oppofite to one another b : a cup fhall be carried
round unto them, filled from a limpid fountain, for the delight of thofe who
drink : it fhall not opprefs the underloading, neither fhall they be inebri-
ated therewith. And near them fhall lie the virgins of paradife, refraining
their looks from beholding any beftdes~ their fpoufes, having large black yes, and
refembling the eggs of an ofiricb covered with feathers from the duft And they
fhall turn the one unto the other, and fhall afk one another queftions. And
one of them fhall fay. Verily I had an intimate friend while 1 lived in the
vperld, who faid unto me. Art thou one of thofe who afferteft the truth of the
fejurreblion ? After we fhall be dead, and reduced to duft and bones, fhall
we furely be judged ? ‘Then he fhall fay to his companions. Will ye look down?
And he lhall look- down, and fhall fee him in the midft of hell : and he
flaall fay unto him. By God, it wanted little but thou hadft drawn me into
ruin i and had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I had furely been
one of thofe who have been delivered up to eternal torment. Shall we die
any other than our firft death •, or do we fuffer any punifhment ? Verily
this is great felicity : for the obtaining a felicity like this let the labourers la
bour. Is this a better entertainment, or the tree of At Zakkum 4 ? Verily
we have defigned the fame for an occafion of difpute unto the unjuft *. It
is a tree which iffueth from the bottom of hell : the fruit thereof refembletli

the

» Wtb prtfages f pnfperity }] laterally,/*** oftriqh’s egg when kept perfeftly clean.
tie right-bond. The words may alfo fee ren- d Al Zakkurx.] There is a thorny tree fo call-
dr ed, with force, to compel us s or, vtitb On mb, ed» which grows in Tehama, and bears fruit like
ftvearing that ye were in the right. an almond, but extremely bitter ; and therefore

b See c hap. i 5. p. 212. not. e. the fame name is given to this infernal tree.

c RefnMing the eggs of an oflrieb, &c.J This ' An occafm »f dijpatr, ] The infidel* not
may feem an odd comparifon to an European 1 Conceiving how a tree could grow in hell,
but the orientals think nothing comes fo near where the ftones themfelves ferve for fewel
the colour of a fine woman’s skin, as that of an

368 Al KORAN. Chap. 3

the heads of devils • ; and the damned (hall eat of the famr, and (hall fill
their bellies therewith ; and there Jball be given them thereon a mixture of
filihy and boiling water to drink: afterwards (hall they return into hell b .
They found their fathers going affray, and rhey trod haftily in their foot-
fteps : tor the greater part of the ancients erred be: ore them. And we fent
warners unto them heretofore : and fee how mifirable was the end of thofe
who were warned ; except the fincere fervants of God. Noah called on
us in former days, and we heard him gracioufly : and we delivered him and
his family out of the great diftrefs *, and we caufed his off-lpring <0 be thofe
who furvived to people the earth : and we left she following Jalatation to be
beftowed on him by the lateft pofterity, namely, Peace be on Noah among
all creatures ! Thus do we reward the righteous ; for he was one of our
fervants the true believers. Afterwards we drowned the others. Abra-
ham alfo was of his religion': when he came unto his Lord with a per-
fect heart. When he faid unto his father and his people. What do ye wor-
fhip? Do ye choofe falfe gods preferably to 'he true God ? What therefore is
your opinion of the Lord of all creatures? And he looked and obferved
the ftars, and faid. Verily I fkall be lick ■*, and pall not afftfi at jour fa -
orifices : and they turned their badcs and departed from him e . Anti Abra-
ham went privately to their gods, and faid fioffingly unto them. Do ye not
eat of the meat which is fit before you f What ailech you that ye fpeak net ?
And he turned upon diem, and (truck them with his right hand, and de-
■miifird them. And the people came haftily unto him : and he faid, Do
ye worihip the mates which ye carve? whereas Gon hath created you,
and alio that whieti ye mate. They faid. Build a pile for him, and caft
him into the glowing fire. And they devifed a plot againft him ; but we
made them the inferior, and delivered him f . And Abraham faid. Verily I
am going unto my Lord*, who will dired me. O Lord, grant me a
righteous iffue. Wherefore we acquainted him that he Jkoitld have a fin,
who fhould be a meek youth. And when he had attained to years of dif-
cretion *, and could join in afis of religion with him; Abraham Lid unto
him, O my fon, verily I faw in a dream that I (hould offer thee in facri-

fice;

• Of ;] Or of ferpenta ogly to behold:
the original woid Ggnifies both.

b Afietionris full they re tar a inti fir//.] Some
fuppofe that the' entertainment above mentioned
will be the welcome given the damned before
they enter that place ; and others, that they will
be fufiered to come out of hell from time to
time, to drink their feeding liquor.

c Abraham alb was if bis rtligitw ;] For Naab
and he agreed in the fundamental pointc both
of faith and practice ; tho* the (pace between
them was no lefs than 3640 ye rs 1 ■

* And be Aftrved tbs ftars, and faid, 1 ftxdt

fa ftti jj He made as if he gathered fo much
from the aipeft o! ihe heavens (the people be-
ing grear'y adiitVed to the fa perditions of illro-
log) : and made it his eicu e for being abfent
from their feitival, to which they had invited
him.

* And they turned tbtit hacks, &c ] Fearing

he had some conugioiL* diitemper *.

( See chap. 21 p. 266, {Ac.

* Vats icy Load i] i. e. Whither he hath
commanded me.

b Tt years cf difiretiens] He was then thir-
teen yean old

1 Al Beidawi.

* Idem,

3 Hits.

<

Chap. 37 * Al KORAN. 369

fice* : confider therefore what thou art of Opinion I Jhould do. He answer-
ed, O my father, do what thou art commanded: thou lhalt find me, if
God pleafe, a patient perfon. And when they had fubmitted themfelves to the
divine will , and Abraham had laid his fon proftrate on his face b , we cried
unto him, O Abraham, now haft thou verified the vifion. Thus do we
reward the righteous. Verily this was a manifeft trial. And we ranfom-
ed him with a noble viftim e . And we left the following fdutalion to he be
flowed pn him by the lateft pofterity, namely. Peace be on Abraham !
Thus do we reward the righteous : for he was one of our faithful fernnts.
And we rejoiced him with the promife of Isaac, a righteous prophet ; and
we blefifed him and Isaac : and of their off-fpririg were fome righteous doers,
and others who manifeftly injured their own fouls. We were alfo gracious
unto Moses and Aaron, heretofore: and we delivered them and their peo-
ple from a great diftrefs. And we affifted them again fi the Egyptians-,
and they became the conquerors. And we gave them the perfpicuous book
of the law, and we directed them into the right way : and we left the folr
lowing falutation to be beflowed on them by the lateft pofterity, namely.
Peace be on Moses and Aaron ! Thus do we reward the righteous j for
they were two of our faithful fervants. And EuAs d was alfo one of thofe

B b b who

1 I dreamed that IJbwld fatrifite tbee, &c.]
The commentators (ay, that Abraham was or*
dered in a vifion, which he faw on the eighth
night of the month Dbu'/bajja , to {acrifice his
fon ; and to affure him that this was not from
the devil, as he was inclined to fufpefl, the
fame vilion was repeated a fecond time the next
taight, when he knew it to be from Gop, and
alfo a third time the night following, when he
refolved to obey it, and to facrijice his fon : and
hence fome think the 8 th , 9 h , and 10 th days of
Dbu'Ibajja are called Tawm altarwiya,yawm arafat ,
and yawm alnebr , that is, the day of the vifion , the
day of knowledge^ and the day of the fatrifite.

It is the moft received opinion among the Mo-
hammedans that the fon whom Abraham offered,
was IfinaeU and not Ifaat; Ifmael being his
only fon at that time : for the promife efilfaad s
birth is mentioned lower, as fubfequent in time
to this tranfa&ion They alfo alledge the tefti-
mony of their prophet, who is reported to have
faid I am the Jon of the two who were offered in
fatrifite ; meaning his great anceftor, Ifvtaal,
and his own father Abdallah : for AbtT almotalleb
had made a vow, that if God would permit
him to find out and open the well Zemzem , and
fhould give him ten fons, he would {acrifice
one of them ; accordingly, when he had obtained
his dclire In both refpe&s, he caft lots on his

* Idem y Jallaj-o’ddin, al Zamakh. 2 Io
Bibl. Orient . Art. Ifmail.

fons, and the lot falling on Abd'allab, he re-
deemed him by offering an hundred camels,
which was therefore ordered to be the price of
a man’s blood in the Sonna

b And had laid him proflrate on bis fate.} The
commentators add, that Abraham went fo far
as to draw the knife with ail hi* ftrength acrofc
the lad’s throat; but'wasmiraauloufly hindred
from hurting him 1 .

c A noble vi£Um ;] The epithet of great or
noble is here added, either becaufe it was large
and fat, or becaufe it was accepted as the ranfom
of a prophet. Some fuppofe this vitfim was a
ram, and, if we may believe a common tradi-
tion, the very fame which ^r/facrificed; hav-
ing been brought to Abraham out of paradife :
others fancy it was a wild-goat, which came
down from mount Tbabsr , near Mecta ; for the
Mohammedans lay the feene of this tranfaflion
in the valley of Mina ; as a proof of which
they tell us that the horns of the victim were
hung up on the fpout of the Caaba , where
they remained till they were burnt, together
with that building, in the days of Abda'llab Ebn
Zobeir 3 ; tho’ others affure u$ that they had
been before taken down by Mohammed hira-
felf, to remove all occafion of Idtafatry

6 Elias ;] This prophet the Mohammedans
generally fuppofe to be the fame with alKbtdf,

and

my Jallalo’ddin. 3 lidem . 4 ^.D’Herb.

g 70 Al KORAN. Chap. 37 ,.

who were fent by us. When he faid unto his people, Do ye not fear God?
Do ye invoke Baal, and forfake the mod excellent Creator? Gon is
your Lord, and the Lord of your fore-fathers. But they accufed him of
impoflure : wherefore they ftiall be delivered up to Hemal pumjhment \ ex-
cept the fincere fervants of God. And we left the following faMatkn to be
bejlowed on him by the lateft pofterity, namely* Peace be on Ii.yasin**
Thus do we reward the righteous: for he was one of our faithful fervants.
And Lot was aljb one of ehofe who were fent by us. When we delivered
him and his whole family, except an old woman, bis wife y who perijhed a-
mong thofe that remained behind : afterwards we deftroyed the others \
And ye, O people of Mecca , pals by the places where they once dwelt % as ye
journey in the morning, and by night : will ye not therefore underftand ?
Jonas was alfo one of thofe who were fent by ns . When he fled * into the
loaded (hip ; and thofe who were on board caft lots among themfdves', and
he was condemned 1 : and the fifh fwallowed him * ; for he was worthy of
reprehenfion. And if he had not been one of thofe who praifcd God \ veri-
ly he had remained in the belly thereof until the day of refurreftion. And
we Caft him on the naked Jbvre , and he was fick 1 : and we caufed a plant of
a gourd k to grow up over him ; and we fent him to an hundred thou-

fand

and confound him with Pbizn r , , and route
times with Earis, or Ettzd', Some lay he was
the Ton of Tafiti, and nejrl relited t ■ Axnsn ;
and others foppofe him to have been a different
perfon. He was fent to the inhabitants of
Baattee hi Syria, the Hflitp&tis of the Greeks*
to redaim them from the worfhip of their idol
Baal , or the frin, whofe name makes part of
that of the dty 9 which was anciently called
Beet *.

B ItyAfini] Tlie commentators do not well
know what to make of this worcL Some think
it is the plural of Etbs* or, as the Arabs ^ me
it r 11 yds, and that both that prophet and his
followers, or thofe who refembled him, are
meant thereby: others divide tbe word, and
read dl Tafia, i. e. the family of Tfi#* who
was the father of Elio aerardmg to an opi-
nion mentioned above: and others imagine it
fignifies Mth-irntssid, or die Kt rSa, or fome other
book of feriptnre. But the moft probable con-
jefttire is, that Ily.b and VySfia are the fime
name, or defign one and the fame perfon,
as Sirtai and £.-> m denote one and die fame
mountain ; the bit tylbhk being added here,
to keep up the rhime, or cadefcce, at the clofe
r f the verfe.

L See chap. 7. p. 125, {57. and chap. 1 1. p.
i83.tfr.

* Seeekep. ifi ; 245. not. a. * Jallal,

/■ 272 1 A Beuiawi. 6 Idiot,

c See chap, 10. p. 174,

A 5« chap. si. p. zjt*
c Trn tafi feti ;] A/ BtU* bps the iTiip
flood (lock ftilh wherefore they cottcfoded ibn
they hid a Fugitive fervant on board, and caft
lots to find him out

He was cvtidmktit r] i. e. He was taken by
the lot.

The fifi> fmaBa&M bin ;] When the lot fell

on Jvnaj, he cried out, / .art the firgittw ;
and immediately threw hirnfcir into the ica : .

-■ Ow &/ tb:fi srfrff prmfrd God ;] The words
feem to relate ptrticuLirPy to Jwjj's application
while in the whale's belly ♦.

He ;] By reafon of wfaic he hid

fuffered; his hotly becoming like that of : new-
born child f . It is faid chat the frh, aster it
had 1 wallowed J fwam after the fhip with

its head above water, th:t the prophet might
breathe; who continued to pratfe God till the
fifh came to fan d. md vomited him out.

The opinions of the Mtbammfiim writer ,
as to the time continued in the fidL’i

bclry, differ very much: fome fuppofe it wan
a part nf a day 5 others three days, others feveit,
others twenty, and others forty 6 .

1 Agtftdi} The original word properly fig
nifies a phnt which t'prcdn it faff upon th
ground, haring no creel fhlk or ftem to Lap-

port

Al B£H»Awti 1 l-Juz. 4 $, :d m 4 iy. 2i +

Chap. 37. Al KORAN. 371

fand perfons , or they were a greater number, and they believed : where-
fore we granted them to enjoy this life , for a feafon. Inquire of the
Meccans whether thy Lord hath daughters* and they fons 1 ? Have we
created the angels of the female fex ? and were they witnefies thereof? Do
they not fay of their own falfe invention, God haftpr begotten iffue? and are
they not really liars? ? Hath he chofen daughters preferably to fons? Ye
have no reafon to judge thus. Will ye not therefore be admonilhed ? Or have
ye a manifeft proof of what ye fay? Produce now your book of revelations ,
if ye fpeak truth. And they make him to be of kin unto the genii b ->
whereas the genii know that they who affirm fuch things , lhall be delivered
up to eternal punijhment ; (far be that from God, which they affirm of him!)
except the fincere fervants of God. Moreover ye and that which ye wor/hip
(hall not feduce any concerning Gob, except him whoij define^ to be burned
in hell. There is none of us, but hath an appointed place: we range
ourfelves in order, attending the commands cf Gop\ and we celebrate the di-
vine praife c . The infidels faid. If we had been favoured with a book of
divine revelations, of thofe which were delivered to the ancients, we had
furely been fincere fervants of God : yet now the Koran is revealed , they
believe not therein; but hereafter lhall they know the conference of their
unbelief Our word hath formerly been given unto our fervants the apoftles;
that they Ihould certainly be affifted againft the infidels , and that our ar-
mies fhould furely be the conquerors. Turn afide therefore from them,
for a feafon : and fee the calamities which Jhatt afflitt them ; for they lhall
fee tby future fuccefs and profperity . Do they therefore feek to haften our
vengeance ? Verily when it lhall defcend into their courts, an evil morn
ing fhall it be unto thofe who were warned in vain. Turn afide from them
therefore for a feafon ; and fee : hereafter lhall they fee tby fuccefs and their
punijhment. Praife be unto thy Lord, the Lord who is Jar exalted above

B b b 2 what

port it ; and particularly a gourd : tho’ fome ima-
gine Jonas ' s plant to have been a fig ; and others
the {mall tree or fhrub called Mauz l , which
bears very large leaves, and excellent fruit 2 .
The commentators add, that this plant withered
the next morning, and that Jonas being much
concerned at it, God made a reraonflrance to
him in behalf of the Ninivites , agreeable to what
is recorded in feripture.
a See chap. 16. p. 218.
b The Genii ;] That is, the angels, who are
alfo comprehended under the name of genii ,
being a fpccies of them. Some fay that the
infidels went fo far as to afiert that God and
the devil were brothers 3 , which blafphemov^
exprelEon may have been occafioned by the
tnagian notions.

c There is none of us, hut hath an appointed
place , &c] Thefe words are fuppofed to be
fpoken by the angels, declaiming the worfhip
paid to them by the idolaters, and declaring
that they have each their ftation and office ap-
pointed them by God, whofc commands they
are at all times ready to execute, and whole
praifes they continually ling. There are fome
expofitors, however, who think they are the
words of Mohammed and his followers; the
meaning being, that each of them has a place def-
tined for him in paradife, and that they are the
men who range themfclves in order before
God, to worfhip and pray to him, and who
celebrate his praife, by rejeding every falfe no-
tion derogatory to the divine wii'dom and
power.

1 Idem. 2 V : J. Leon. Defer . Afric. lib . 9* Gab. Sionit .deUrb. Orient, ad eakmGiogr*

Nub. p. 55. £3* Hottinger. Hijl . Orient, p . 78, 3 Al Beidawi.

37 1 2 -dl KORAN, Chap. 38 .

what they affirm of him ! And peace be on bis apoftles ! And praife be
unto God, the Lord of all creatures!

CHAP, xxxvra.

Inti tied S; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

S *. By the Koran full of admonition b . Verily the unbelievers are addic-
ted to pride and contention. How many generations have we deftroy-
ed before them ; and they cried for mercy , but it was not a time to efcape.
They wonder that a wamer from among themfelves hath come unto them.
And the unbelievers faid, This man is a forcerer, and a liar : doth he
affirm the gods to be but one God ? Surely this is a wonderful thing.
And the chief men among them departed % faying to one another , Go, and
perfevere in the worjhip of your gods : verily this is the thing which is de-
figned 41 * We have not heard any thing like this in the laft religiou e : this
is no other than a falfe contrivance. Hath an admonition been fent unto
him preferably to any other among us ? Verily they, are in a doubt con-
cerning my admonition : but they have not yet tailed my vengeance. Are
the treafuriesof the mercy of thy Lord, the mighty, the munificent God, in
their hands ? Is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and of what-
ever is between them, in their poffeffion ? If if be fo y let them afcend by
fteps unto heaven. But any army of the confederates ffial 1 even here be put
to flight. The people of Noah, and the tribe of Ad, and Pharaoh the
contriver of theftakes', and the tribe of Thamvd, and the people of Lot,

and

a The meaning of this letter is unknown T :
fome guefs it Hands for Sidk, i. e. Truth ; or
for Sadaka, i. e. he (via. Mohammed) fpsaketh the
truth : and others propofe different conjectures,
all equally uncertain.

b By the Koran, Something mull be
understood to anfwer this oath, which the
commentators varioufly fupply.

c The chief men among them departed, &c.]
On the converiion of Omar, the Ksreijb being
greatly irritated, the moft confidetable of them
went in a body to Abu Taleb, to complain
to him of his nephew Mohammed^ proceed-
ings ; but being confounded and put to filence
by the prophet’s arguments, they left the af-
femMy, and encouraged one another in their
obftinacy * .

1 See the Brel Difi. $. III. f. 59, £sfr. 2

* ftl Beidawi,

d This is the thing which is defignedi] Namely,
To draw us from their worlhip.

c In the laft religion ;] i. e. In the religion
which we received from our fathers ; or, in the
religion of Jesus, which was the laft before the
million of Mohammed 3 .

f The contriver of the flakes 5] For they fay
Pharaoh ufed to tie thofe he had a mind to punilh,
by the hands and feet to four flakes fixed in the
ground, and fo tormented them ♦. Some in-
terpret the words, which may alfo be tranflated
the lord or mafter of the flakes, figuratively, of
the firm eftablifhment or Pharaob'n kingdom ;
becaufe the Arabs fix their tents with ftakes < :
but they may poflibly intend that prince’s obftinth
cy , and hardnefs of heart .

^/Beidawi. 3 Idem, * Jallalo’dbim.

Chap. 38.

Al KORAN.

373

and the inhabitants of the wood near Madian *, accufed the prophets of im-
pofture before them: thefe were the confederates againjl the mejfengers of God.
All of them did no other than accule their apoftles of falfhood : wherefore
my vengeance hath been juftly executed upon. them. And thefe wait only for
one founding of the trumpet ; which there fhall be no deferring. And they
fcoffingly fay, O Lord, haften our fentence unto us, before the day of account.
Do thou patiently bear that which they utter : and remind them of our
fervant David, indued with ftrengch b > for he was one who lerioully turned
himfelf unto God. We compelled the mountains to celebrate our praife
with him, in the evening and at fun-rife, and alfo the birds, which gatnered
themfelves together unto him c : all of them returned frequently unto him
for this purpofe. And we eftablilhed his kingdom, and gave him wifdom
and eloquence of fpeech. Hath the ftory of the two adverfaries d come to
thy knowledge ; when they afcended over the wall into the upper apartment ,
when they went in unto David, and he was afraid of them'? They faid.
Fear not : we are two adverfaries who have a controverjy to be decided.
The one of us hath wronged the other : wherefore judge between us with
truth, and be not unjuft j and diredl us into the even way. This my bro-
ther had ninety and nine fheep j and I had only one ewe : and he faid,
Give her me to keep ; and he prevailed againft me in the difcourfe which
we bad together. Datid anfwered. Verily he hath wronged thee, in de-
manding thine ewe as an addition to his own fheep: and many of them
who are concerned together in bufinefs , wrong one another, except thofe
who believe and do that which is right j but how few are they ! And David
perceived that we had tried him by this parable , and he afked pardon of
his Lord : and he fell down and bowed himfelf, and repented'. Where-
fore we forgave him this fault ; and he Jhall be admitted to approach near un-
to us, and Jhall have an excellent place of abode in paradlfe . O David,

Verily we have appointed thee a fovereign prince in the earth : judge there-
fore between men with truth *, and follow not thy own luff, left it caufe thee
to err from the way of God : for thofe who err fforti the way of God, fhall
fuffer a fevere punifliment, becaufe they have forgotten the day of account.

» See chap. 15. p. zij.
b Indued with ftrength ;] The commentators
fuppofe that ability to undergo the frequent
practice of religious exercifes isheremeant. They
lay David ufed to fall every other day, and to
fpend one half of the night in prayer '.
c See chap. zi. p. Z70.

<* The two adverfaries ;] Thefe were two an-
gels, who came unto David in the fhape of men,
to demand judgment in the feigned controverfy
ifieiritentioned. It is no other than Naibatss
parable to David *, a little difguiled.

e He was afraid of them ;] Becaufe they came
fuddenly upon him, on a day of privacy ; when

the doors were guarded, and no perfon admitted
to dilhirb his devotions. For David, they lay,
divided his time regularly, fetting apart one day
for the fervice of God, another day for rendring
juftice to his people, another day for pre ching
to them, and another day for his own affairs 1 .

f And David perceived that we had tried him,
&c.] The crime of which David had bren guil-
ty, was the taking the wife of XJriab, and or-
dering her husband to be fet in the front of the
battle to be flain 4 .

Some fuppofe this ftory was told to ferve as
an admonition to Mohammed, who, it feenv.
was apt to covet what was another’s.

lidrn Interp.

* 2 Sam. xii.

J Al Beidawi, Jailai.o’ddik.

Hit":.

37+ Al KORAN. Chap. 38.

We have not created the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between
them, in vain \ 1 his is the opinion of the unbelievers : but woe unto thofe

who believe not, becaufe of the fire of bell. Shall we deal with thofe who
believe and do good works, as with thofe who aft corruptly in the earth ?
Shall we deal with the pious as with the wicked ? A blefled book have we
fent down unto thee, O Mohammed 9 that they may attentively meditate on
the figns thereof, and that men of underftanding may be warned. And we
gave unto David Solomok ; how excellent a fervant ! for he frequently
turned himfelf unto God , When the borfes ftanding on three feet, and
touching the ground with the edge of the fourth fodt, andfwih in the courfe,
were fet in parade before him in the evening b , he faid, Verily I have loved the
love of earthly good above the remembrance of my Lord \ and have fpehi
the time in viewing theft borfes , until the fun is hidden by the vail of night :
bring the borfes back uncp me. And when they were brought back , he began
to cut off their legs and their necks. We alfo tried Solomon, and placed
on his throne a counterfeit body c : afterwards he turned unto God 9 and faid.

a We have not created the heavens and the earth
in vain ;] So as to permit injuftice to go un-
puuiihed, and righteoufnefa unrewarded.

b When the borfes there fet in parade before
him, &c.] Some fay that Solomon brought thefe
horfes, being a thoufand Jn number, from Da-
tnafeus and Nifsbis, which dries he had taken ;
others fay that they were left him by his father,
who took them from the Amalekites ; while
others* who prefer the marvellous, pretend that
they came up Out of the fea, and had wings.
However, Sokmon, having one day a mind to
view thefe horfes, ordered them to be brought
before him, and was fo taken up with them
that he fpent the remainder of the day, till after
fun- fet, in looking on them ; by which means
he negle&ed the prayer* which ought to have
been faid at that time, till it was too late : but
when he perceived his omiffion, he was fo great-
ly concerned at it, that ordering the horfes to be
brought badk, he killed them all as an offering to
God, except only a hundred of the beft of
them. But God made him atnple amend* for
the lofs of thefe horfes, by giving him dominion
over the winds x .

c We ptaced on his throne a counterfeit body ,
&c.] The moft received expofirion of this paf-
fage is taken from the following Talmudic
fable

Solomon , having taken Sidon, and flain the
king of that city, brought away his daughter
Jerada , who became his favourite ; and becaufe

fhe ceafed not to lament her father’s lofs, he or-
dered the devils to make an image of him for
her confolation : which being done, and placed
in her chamber, fhe and her maids worfhipped
It mbrhing and evening, according to their
cuftom. At length Solomon being informed of
this idolatry, which was pra£tifed under his
roof, by his vizir Afdf he broke the image, and
having chaflifed the woman, went out into the
defart, where he wept and made ^applications to
God ; who did not think fit, however, to
let his negligence pais without fome correftion.
It was Solomons cuflom, while he eafed, or
wafhed himfelf, to intruft his fignet, on which
his kingdom depended, with a concubine of his
named Amina : one day, therefore, when fhe
had the ring in her cuftody, a devil, named
Sakhar, came to her in the fhape of Solomon ,
and received the ring from her; by vertue of
which he became poflefled of the kingdom, and
fat on the throne in the fhape which he had
borrowfed, making what alterations in the law
he pica fed. Solomon , in the mean rime, being
changed in his outward appearance, and known
to none of his fubje&s, was obliged to wander
about, and beg alms for his fubiiflence ; till at
length, after the fpace of forty days, which
was the time the image had been worfhipped
in his houfe, the devil flew away, and threw
the 4 fignet into the fea : the fignet was imme-
diately fwallowed by a fifh, which being taken
and given to Solomon , he found the ring in its

1 Al Beidawi, AITj amakh. Yahya. 2 V. Talm. En Jacob , part . 2. 1$ Yalkut in lib .

Jteg.p. 182.

Chap. 38

Al KORAN.

375

O Lord* forgive me, and give me a kingdom winch may not be obtained
by any after me * i for thou art the giver of kingdoms. And we made
the -wind fubjeft to him ; it ran gently at his command, whicherib ver he
directed. And we alfo put the devils in fubjettion under him •, and among
them fuch as were every way {killed in building, and in diving for pearls b :
and others we delivered to him bound in chains ; faying. This is our gift : there-
fore be bounteous, or be fparing unto whom thou Jhalt think ft % without ren-
dring an account. And he fhall approach near unto us, and lhall have an excellent
abode in paradife. And remember our fervant Job * ; when he cried unto
his Lord, faying, Verily Satan hath afflidted me with calamity and pain.
And it was faid unto him. Strike the earth with thy foot *, which when be had
done, a fountain * fprang up, and it was faid to him. This is for thee to walh
in, to refrefh thee, and to drink. And we reftored unto him his family, and
as many more with them, through our mercy ; and for an admonition unto
thofe who are indued with underftanding. And we faid unto him. Take a
handful of rods f in thy hand, and ftrike thy wife therewith s *, and break
not thine oath h . Verily we found him a patient perfon : how excellent a
fervant was be ! for he was one who frequently turned himfelf unto us. Re-
member alfo our fervants Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, who were
men ftrenuous and prudent. Verily we purified them with a perfect purifica-
tion, through the remembrance of the life to come 1 •, and they were, in
our fight, eledf and good men. And remember Ismael, and Elisha “, and
Dhu’lkefl 1 : for ail thefe were good men. This is an admonition. Ve-

telly, and laving by this means recovered the committed, to deferve thischaftifement : we have
kingdom, took Sakbar, and tying a great (tone mentioned one opinion already 4 ; fome think
to his neck, threw him into the lake of TV- it was only becaufe ftie {laid too long on an er-

* A kingdom which may not be Stained by any h Break not thine oath y ] For he had fworn
ter me ;] i. e. That I may furpafs all future to give her a hundred ftriRCMf he recovered,
princes in magnificence and power. 1 We purified them through the remembrance

* b See chap. zi. p. 271, chap. 27. p. 310, of the life Jo come Or, as the words may be
ftfe. interpreted, according to al 'Zamakbjbari, We

c Be bounteous or be faring, .&c.] Some fup- have purified them, or peculiarly defined and
pofe thefe words relate to the genik *nd that fitted them for pa%ad\Je*

Solomon is thereby im powered to rekafe or to k Elifba ;] See chap. 6. p. 107.

* A fountain ;] Some fay there were two this prophet ; vi%. that he entertained and t
/prings, one of hot water, wherein he bathed; care of a hundred Ifaelitex , who fled to him
and the other of cojd, of which he drank from a certain {laughter ; from which a&ion he

f A handful <f rods ;] The original not ex- probably had the iurname of Dbu'lkefi given
preffing what this handful was to confift of, one him ; the primary fignirfic^tion of the verb ta~
fuppofes it was to be Only a handful of dry gtafs, fala being to maintain or take care of another,
or of ruflies ; and another that it was a branch If a conjecture might be founded on this tradi-
of a palm tree 3 . tion, I mould fancy the perfon intended was

e Strike thy wife therewith ;] The com men- Obadiah , the govemour of Abab's houfc h
tators are not agreed what fault fob's wife had

1 Al Beid. Jallal. Abu’lfeda.

rily

\berias l .

rand.

keep in chains fuch of them as he pleafcd.
d See chap. 21. p. 271.

1 Dhu'lkefl ;] See chap. 2 1 . p. 27 2. Al Beidatoi
here takes notice of another tradition concern*

4 Sec ibid . 5 See 1 Kings xviii. 4.

2 Al Beidawi. 3 See the notes to chap . 21. p* 271,

37 & Al KORAN. Chap. 38.

rily the pious (hall have an excellent place to return unto, namely, gardens
of perpetual abode, the gates whereof JhaU fund open unto them. As they
lie down therein, they lhall there aflc for many forts of fruits, and for
drink ; and near them /hall fit the virgins of paradife , refraining their
looks from beholding any befides their fpou/es , and of equal age with
them a . This is what ye are promifed, at the day of account. This is
our provifion ; which lhall not fail. This /hall be the reward of the right-
eous. But for the tranfgreflors is prepared an evil receptacle, namely , hell :
they lhall be caft into the fame to be burned, and a wretched couch JhaU
it be. This let them tafte, to wit, fcalding water, and corruption flowing
from the bodies of the damned , and divers other things of the fame kind.
And it y hall be faid to the feducers. This troop which was guided by you,
lhall be thrown, together with you, headlong into hell: they lhall not be
bidden welcome •, for they lhall enter the fire to be burned. And the fe-
duced lhall fay to their feducers , Verily ye lhall not be bidden welcome : ye
have brought it upon us i and a wretched abode is hell. They lhall fay, O
Lord, doubly increafe the torment of him who hath brought this puni/hment
upon us, in the fire?/ bell. And the infidels lhall lay. Why do we not fee the
men whom we numbred among the wicked, and whom we received with
fcorn ? Or do our eyes mifs them ? Verily this is a truth ; to wit, the de-
puting of the inhabitants of bell fire. Say, O Mohammed, unto the idolaters.
Verily I am no other than a wamer : and there is no god, except the one
only God, the Almighty, the Lord of heaven and earth, and of whatfoever
is between them *, the mighty, the forgiver of Jins. Say, It is a weighty
meffage, from which ye turn afide. I had no knowledge of the exalted
princes b , when they difputed concerning the creation of man : (it hath been
revealed unto me only as a proof that I am a public preacher :) when thy Lord
faid unto the angels, Verily I am about to create man of clay : when I
fhall have formed him, therefore, and lhall have breathed my fpirit into him,
do ye fall down and worlhip him c . And all the angels worlhipped him,
in general ; except Eblis, who was puffed up with pride, and became an
unbeliever. God faid unto him, O Eblis, what hindreth thee from worihip-
pingthat which I have created with my hands? Art thou elated with vain
pride ? Or art thou redly one of exalted merit ? He anfwered, I am
more excellent than he : thou haft created me of fire, and haft created him
of day. God faid unto him. Get thee hence therefore, for thou lhalt be
driven away from mercy : and my curie Jhall be upon thee, until the day of
judgment. He replied, O Lord, Refpite me, therefore, until the day of
refurredion. God faid. Verily thou (halt be one of thofe who are relpited un-
til the day of the determined time. Eblis faid. By thy might do I /wear,
1 will furely feduce them all, except thy fervants who /hall be peculiarly

chofcu

* Of equal age with them ;] i. e. About thirty b 7 "be exalted princes ;] Hut is, The angels,

or thirty three e See chap. 2. p. 5.

1 'See the Prelim. Di/c. §. IV. f. 99.

Chap. 39.

Al KORAN.

377

chofen from among them. Gop laid. It is a juft fentence ; and I fpeak the
truth : I will furely fill hell with thee, and with fuch of them as lhall follow
thee, altogether \ Say unto the Meccans, I alk not of you any reward for
this my preaching : neither am I one of thofe who affume a part which belongs
not to them. The Koran is no other than an admonition unto all creatures :
and ye lhall furely know what is delivered therein to be true , after a
feafon.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

T H E revelation of this book is from the mighty, the wife God. Ve-
rily we have revealed this book unto thee with truth : wherefore ferve
God, exhibiting the pure religion unto him. Ought not the pure religion to
be exhibited unto God ? But as to thofe who take other patrons befides him,
faying. We worlhip them only that they may bring us nearer unto God ; verily
God will judge between them concerning that wherein they dilagree. Surely
God will not direft him who is a liar, or ungrateful. If God had been
minded to have had a fon, he had furely chofen what he plcafed out of that
which he hath created '. But far be fucb a thing from him ! He is the foie,
the almighty God. He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth :
he caufeth the night to fucceed the day, and he cauleth the day to fucceed the
night, and he obligeth the fun and the moon to perform their fervices j each of
them hafteneth to an appointed period. Is not he the mighty, the forgiver of
fins ? He created you of one man, and afterwards out of him formed his
wife : and he hath bellowed * on you four pair of cattle *. He formeth you
in the wombs of your mothers, by feveral gradual formations f , within three
vails of darknefs *. This is God, your Lord : his is the kingdom : there

C c c is

* This title is taken from the latter end of furdity of the imagination here condemned, be-
the chapter, where it is faid the wicked lhall be caufe no creature can refemble the Creator, or
fent to hell, and the righteous admitted into be worthy to bear the relation of a Ion to hint,
paradife by troops. * He bath bellowed sj Literally, He hath fat

b Except the v erfe beginning. Say, O ay fervants, down s from which expreffion fome have imagin-
tobo have tranjgrejftd againjl your own fouls. Sec 1 . ed that thefe four kinds of beafts were created in
c If be bad been minded to have a fon, be bed paradife, and thence fent down to earth *.
chofen tobat be pleafed out of that which be both * See chap. 6. p. 1 14.
treated .] Becaufe, fays AlBtidawi, there is no f See chap. 22. p. 274.
being befides himfcll, but what hath been ere- s Within three vails of darksefs s] L e. The
ated by him 5 fince there cannot be two necefla- belly, the womb, and the membranes which
rily-exiftent beings : and hence appears the ab- indofe the embryo.

* See chap. 7. p. 117, and chap. 15. p. 211, (jTr.

CHAP.

Infilled, The Troops*; revealed at Mecca* 1 .

1 Jallai-o’ddin, .^/Bsidawi, 2 Al Zamakh.

378 At KORAN. Chap. 39,

is no God but he. Why therefore are ye turned a fide /row the worfhip of him to
idolatry ? If ye be ungrateful, verily God hath no need of you j yet he liketh
not ingratitude in his fervants : but if ye be thankful, he will be well pleafed with
you. A burthened foUl fhall not bear the burthen of another: hereafter
fhall ye return unto your Lord, and he fhall declare unto you that which
ye have wrought, and -will reward you accordingly •, for he knoweth the inner-
moft parts of your breafts. When harm befalletn a man, he calleth upon his
Lord, and turneth unto him : yet afterwards, when God hath beftowed on
him favour from himfelf, he forgetteth that Being which he invoked before *,
and fetteth up equals unto 600; that he may feauce men from his way. Say
unto fucb a man , Enjoy this life in thy infidelity for a little while : but hereafter
fhalt thou furely be one of the inhabitants of hell fire. Shall he who giveth
himfelf up to prayer in the hoars of the night, proftrate, and fUnding, and
who taketh heed as to the life to come, and hopeth for the mercy of his Lord,
be dealt with as the wicked unbeliever ? Say, Shall they who know their duty,
and they who know it not, be held equal? Verily the men of underftanding
only will be warned. Say, O my fervants who believe, fear your Lord.
They who do good in this world, fhall obtain good in the next b ; and God's
earth is fpacious c : Verily thofe who perfevere with patience fhall receive their
recompenfe without meafure. Say, I am commanded to Worfhip God, and
to exhibit the pure religion unto him : and I am commanded to be the firft
Modem 4 . Say, Verily 1 fear, if I be difobedient untb my Lord, the punifh.
ment of the great day. Say, I worfhip God, exhibiting my religion pure unto
him : but do ye worfhip that which ye will, befides him. Say, Venly they will be
the lofers, who fhall lofe their own fouls, and their families, on the day of re-
furreftion : is not this manifeft lofs ? Over them fhall be roofs of fire, and
under them fhall be floors of fire. With this doth God terrify his fervants:
wherefore, O my fervants, fear me. But thofe who efchew the worfhip of
idols, and are turned unto God, fhall receive good tidings. Bear good ridings
therefore unto my fervants, who hearken unto my word, and follow that which
is moil excellent therein : thefe are they whom God dire&eth, and thefe are
men of underftanding. Him therefore on whom the fehtence of eternal pu-
nifhment fhall be juftly pronounced, cahft thou, O MdnAMSmb, deliver him
who it defined to dwell in the fir ttf bell? But for thofe who fear their Lord
will be prepared high apartments in paradife , over which fhall be other apart-
ments built ; and rivers fhall run beneath them : this is the promife of God *
and God will not be contrary to the promife. Doft thou not fee that God fendeth
down water from heaven, and caufeth the fame to enter and form fources in the
. earth ;

* He firgettttb that Being which he invoked he- who cannot fafely exerdfe his religion where he
fore i] Or, He firgettetb the evil which be befit* was born or refides, fly to a place of liberty and
frayed againjl. feenrity *.

D They who do good in this world, Jhall obtain 4 The frft Moflem ;] i. e. The firil of the
good in the nexti] -Or, They who do good, fall Koreifi who profeffeth the true relrgionj or the
■obtain good even in this world. leader in chief of the Mofletos.

1 God's eorfb is ffacim ;] Wherefore let him

1 Al Beidawi.

Chap. 39. Al KORAN. 379

earth ; and produceth thereby corn of various forts ? Afterwards he caufeth
the fame to wither ; and thoufeeft it become yellow : afterwards he maketh it
crumble into duft. Verily herein is an inftrudtion to men of underftanding.
Shall he, therefore, whofe bread: God hath enlarged to receive tbe religion vf
Islam, and who followeth the light from his Lord, be as be whofe. heart is
hardened ? But woe unto thofe whofe hearts are hardened againll: the rem-m
brance of God ! they are in a manifeft error. God hath revealed a moft ex-
cellent difcourfe ; a book conformable to itfelf, and containing repeated admo-
nitions. The fkins of thofe who fear their Lord fhrink for rear thereat :
afterwards their fkins grow foft, and their hearts alfo, at the remembrance of
their Lord. This is the direction of God : he will direft thereby whom he
pleafeth ; and whomfoever God fhall caufe to err, he fhall have no di-
re<5tor. Shall he therefore who fhall be obliged to fcreen himfelf with his
face * from the feverity of the punifliment on the day of refur region,
be as be who is fecure therefrom ? And it fhall be laid unto the un-
godly, Tafte that which ye have deferved, Thofe who were before them,
accufed their apojlles of impofture ; wherefore a punifhment came upon
them from whence they expetted it not : and God caufed them to

tafte fhame in this prefent life ; but the punifliment of the life to come
will certainly be greater. If they were men of underftanding, they would
know this. Now have we propofed unto mankind, in this Koran, every
kind of parable; that they may be warned: an Arabic Koran, wherein there
is no crookednefs b ; that they may fear God. God propoundeth as a parable
a man who hath feveral companions which are at mutual variance, and a man
who committeth himfelf wholly to one perfon * : fhall thefe be held in equal
comparifon ? God forbid ! But the greater part of them do not underftand.
Verily thou, O Mohammed, lhalt die, and they alfo fhall die : and ye fhall
debate the matter d with one another before your Lord, at the day of refur-
rettion. * Who is more unjuft than he who uttereth a lie concerning God,
and denieth the truth, when it cometh unto him ? Is there not a dwelling pro-
vided in hell for the unbelievers ? But he who bringeth the truth, and giveth
credit thereto*, thefe are they who fear God ; they fhall obtain whatever they
fhall defire, in the fight of their Lord : this fhall be the recompenfe of the
'righteous : that God may expiate from them the very worft of that which they

C c c 2 have

* Who Jball fcretn himfelf with bis fete, &c ] d Ye {ball debate tbe. matter, &c.] For the
For his hands Ihall be chained to his neck, and proplirt will reprefent his endeavours to reclaim
he Ihall not be able to oppofe any thing but his them from idolatry, and their obftinacy : and
face to the fire 1 . they will make frivolous excufes ; as that they

k Wherein there is no erooisdne/s s] i. e. No obeyed their chiefs, and kept to the religion of
contradiftion, defeft, or doubt. their fathers, &c 1 ■

« God propoundeth at a parable, &c.] This e He who bringeth the truth, and giveth credit
paffage reprefents the uncertainty of the idoh- thereto ;] i. e. Mohammed and his followers .
ter, who is dill rafted in the fervice of different fo*e fuppofe that by the latter words Abu Beer
mailers ; and the fatisfaftion of mind which at- is particularly intended, becaufe he afferted the
tends the worlhipper of the only true God *. prophet’s veracity in refpeft to his journey to

heaven.

XXIV.

* Idem.

* Idem .

» Idem.

386 Al KORAN. Chap. 39.

have wrought, and may render them their reward according to the utmoft
merit of the good which they have wrought. Is not God a fufficient protcEior
of his fervant ? yet they will attempt to make thee afraid of the falfe dei-
ties which they worjhip befides God \ But he whom God fhall caufe to err,
fhall have none to direft him: and he whom God lhall direct, (hall have none
to miflead him. Is not God moft mighty, able to avenge ? If thou a(k
them who hath created the heavens and the earth, they will furely anfwer,
God. Say, Do ye think therefore chat the deities which ye invoke befides
God, if God be pleafed to afflift me, are able to relieve me from his affliftion ?
or if he be pleafed to lliew mercy unto me, that they are able to with-hold his
mercy ? Say, God is my fufficient fupport : in him let thofe put their truft,
who feek in whom to confide. Say, O my people, do ye aft according to your
ftate ; verily I will aft according to mine : hereafter fhall ye know on which of
us will be inflifted a punifhment that fhall cover him with fhame, and on whom
a lading punifhment fhall fall. Verily we have revealed unto thee the book
of tbe Koran, for the inJlruEHon of mankind, with truth. Whofo fhall be
direfted thereby., fhall be directed to tbe advantage of his own foul *, and whofo
fhall err, fhall only err againft the fame : and thou art not a guardian over
them. God taketh unto himfelf the fouls of men at the time of their death ;
and thofe which die not be cdfo taketh in their fleep b : and he with-holdeth thofe
on which he hath palled the decree of death*, but fendeth back the others till
a determined period Verily herein are figns unto people who confider.
Have the Kqreish taken idols for their interceflors with Gov ? Say, What,
although they have not dominion over any thing, neither do they underftand ?
Say, Intcrceffion is altogether in the difpofal of God * : his is the kingdom
of heaven and earth ; and hereafter fhall ye return unto him. When the one
foie God is mentioned, the hearts of thofe who believe not in the life to come,
fhrink with horror : but when the falfe gods , which are worjbipped befides him,
are mentioned, behold, they are filled with joy. Say, O God, the creator
of heaven and earth, who knoweft that which is fecret, and that which is ma-
nifeft; thou fhalc judge between thy fervants concerning that wherein they dif-

agree.

a They will attempt to make thee afraid of their
falfe deities ;] The Koreijb ufed to tell Mohammed
that they feared their gods would do him fome
mifehief, and deprive him of the ufe of his
limbs, or of his reafon, becaufe he fpoke dif-
gTaeefall/frof them. It is thought by fome that
this pa Gage was verified in Kbaled Ebn alfPalid ;
who being fent by Mohammed to demolilh the
idol alUzza , was advifed by the keeper of her
temple to take heed what he did, becaufe the
goddefs was able to avenge herfelf feverely : but
he was fo little moved at the man’s warning,
that he immediately ftept up to the idol, and
^roke her nofe. To fupport the latter explica-
tion, they fay, that what happened to Kbaled is

attributed to Mohammed , becaufe the former was
then executing the prophet’s orders A cir-
cumftancc not much different from the above-
mentioned, is told of the demolition of Allat 3 .

And tbe fouls which die not, be taketh in
their Jleep\\ That is, feemingly, and to out-
ward appearance ; lleep being the image of death.

c He with-holdeth tbofe on which he hath pajfed
the decree of death;] Not permitting them to
return again into their bodies.

d But fendeth back tbe others ;] viz. Into their
bodies, when they awake 3 .

e Intercejpon is altogether in tbe difpofal of
God :] For none can or dare prefume to inter-
cede with him, unlefs by his permiGion.

* idem .

% V, Gacnixr. Not. in Abulf Fit , Mob. p. 127.

3 AlBll DAWK

Chap. 39.

Al KORAN,

381

agree. If thofe who aft unjuftly were matters of whatever is in the earth, and
as much more therewith, verily they would give it to ranfom themfelves from
the evil of the punifhment, on the day of refurreftion : and there lhall appear
unto them, from God, terrors which they never imagined i and there lhall
appear unto them the evils of that which they lhall have gained ; and that
which they mocked at lhall encompafs them. When harm befalleth man,
he calleth upon us •, yet afterwards, when we have bellowed on him favour
from us, he faith, I have received it merely becaufe of God’s knowledge
of my deferts \ On the contrary, it is a trial ; but the greater part of
them know it not. Thofe who were before them, faid the fame b : but that
which they had gained, profited them not ; and the evils which they had de-
(erved, fell upon them. And whoever of thefe Mbccans lhall have afted
unjuftly, on them likewife lhall fall the evils which they lhall have deferved f ;
neither lhall they fruftrate the divine vengeance. Do they not know that God
beftoweth provifion abundantly on whom he pleafeth, and is Iparing unto whom
bepleafetb ? Verily herein are figns unto people who believe. Say, O my fer-
vants who have tranfgrefied againft your own fouls, defpair not of the mercy
of God : feeing that God forgiveth all fins' 1 } for hfe is gracious and merciful.
And be turned unto your Lord, and refign yourlelves unto him, before the
threatened punilhment overtake you \ for then ye lhall not be helped. And
follow the mod excellent inftruftions which have been lent down unto you from
your Lord, before the punilhment come fuddenly upon you, and ye perceive
not the approach thereof ; and a foul fay, Alas ! for that I have been negligent
in tny duty to God ; verily I have been one of the fcorners : or fay, If Goo
had directed me, verily I had been one of the pious : or fay, when it feeth
the prepared punilhment. If I could return once more into the world , l would
become one of the righteous. But God Jhall anfwer , My figns came unto
thee heretofore, and thou didft charge them with failhood, and wall puffed
up with pride ; and thou becamell one of the unbelievers. On the day of
refurredtion thou lhalt fee the faces of thofe who have uttered lies concern-
ing God, become black : is there not an abode prepared in hell for the arro-
gant ? But God lhall deliver thofe who lhall fear him, and Jhall fel them in their
place of fafety : evil lhall not touch them, neither lhall they be grieved.
God is the creator of all things, and he is the governour of all things. His are
the keys of heaven and earth : and they who believe not in the figns of God,
they lhall perilh. Say, Do ye therefore bid me ro worlhip other than God,
O ye foOls ? fince it hath been fpoken by revelation unto thee, and alfo unto
the prophets who have been before thee, faying. Verily if thou join any part-
ners with God, thy work will be altogether unprofitable, and thou lhalt cer-

» Becaufe if Goo's knowledge of my defects ;] were punilhed with a fore famine for fcven

Or by means of my own wifdom. years, and had the braveft of their warriors cut

b ‘thofe who were before them, faid the fame »] oft at the battle of Bedr *.

As did Karun in particular *. d Gov forgivetb all fins i] To thofe whofm-

c On them pall fall the evils they have dt- cerely repent, and profefs hu Unity : for the fin*

Jlrvedt] As it happened accordingly 1 for they of idolaters will not be forgiven 3 .

tainly

1 See chap. 28. p. 323.

3 See p. 1 1 . not. c.

» Al Beidawi.

3 8

Al KORAN.

Chap. 39.

tainly be one of thofe who perilh : wherefore rather fear God, and be one
of thofe who give thanks. But they make not a due eftimation of God*:
fince the whole earth Jhall be but his handful, on the day of refurre&ion ; and
the heavens Jball be rolled together in his right hand. Praife be unto him ! and
far be he exalted above the idols which they afiociate with him! The trumpet
lhall be founded b , and whoever are in heaven, and whoever are on earth lhall
expire ; except thofe whom God lhall pleafe to exempt from the common fate*.
Afterwards it lhall be founded again ; and behold, they lhall arife and look
tip. And the earth lhall Ihine by the light of its Lord : and the book
lhall be laid open d , and the prophets and the martyrs lhall be brought as wit-
nejfes ; and judgment lhall be given between them with truth, and they lhall
not be treated unjuftly. And every foul lhall be fully rewarded, according
to that which it lhall have wrought ; for he perfectly knoweth whatever they
do. And the unbelievers lhall be driven unto hell by troops, until, when
t-hey lhall arrive at the fame, the gates thereof lhall lie opened: and the
keepers thereof* lhall lay unto them. Did not apoftles from among you come
unto you, who rehearfed unto you the figns of your Lord, and warned you
of the meeting of this your day ? They lhall anfwer. Yea : but the fentence
of eternal punilhment hath been juftly pronounced on the unbelievers f . It lhall
be faid unto them , Enter ye the gates of hell, to dwell therein forever ;
and miferable Jhall be the abode of the proud ! But thofe who lhall have
feared their Lord, lhall be concluded by troops towards paradife, until
they lhall arrive at the fame : and the gates thereof lball be ready fet open ;
and the guards thereof lhall fay unto them, Peace be on you ! ye have been
good : wherefore enter ye into paradife , to remain therein forever. And they
lhall anfwer, Praife be unto God, who hath performed his promife unto us,
and hath made us to inherit the earth *, that we may dwell in paradife where--
ever we pleafe ! How excellent is the reward of thofe who work rigbteoufnefs !
And thou lhalt fee the angels going in proceflion round the throne, cele-
brating

* See chap. 6- p. 108. not b. the black-eyed damfelj, and other inhabitant* of

k The trumpet Jball be funded}] The firft paradife 1 .

time, fays Al Beidawi : who confequently fup- The fpaee between thefe two blafts of the
pofes there will be no more than two blafts, trumpet will be forty days, according to

(and two only are diilindly mentioned in the Tabja and other* ; there are fome, however,

Koran,) tho’ others fnppofe there will be three ' . who fuppofe it will be as many years 6 .

c Except theft whom God Jball pleafe to ex- d See the Prelim. Difc. j. IV. p. 8y.
em ft, &c.] Thefe, fome fay, will be the angels e See c. 74, and the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. 9a.
Gabriel, Michael, and Ifrafil, and the angel of f The Sentence of eternal punijbmeut bath been
death, who yet will afterwards all die, at the juftlj frmeuncei on unbelievers >] See ehap. 7. p.
command of God *; it being the conftant opi- 118, chap. ti. p. 187, &c. It Teems as if the
nion of the Mohammedan dodors, that every damned, by thefe words, attributed their ruin to
foul, both of men, .and of animals, which live Goo’s decree of predefli nation,
either on land, or in the fea, and of the angels * And bath made as to inherit the earth ;] This
alio, muft neceffarily tafte of death 5 : others is a metaphorical expreffion, reprefeating the
fuppofe thofe who will be exempted are the perfeft fecurity, and abundance, which the
angels who bear the throne of God * ; or bleffed will enjoy in paradife.

1 See thePrel Difc. $. IV. p % gj. 2 Al Beidawi, Yahya. 3 V \ Pocock. not. in Porto
Mtfih f. 266. 41 Beidawi. 1 Jallalo'ppin. * See the Prel Difc . ubi /up*

Chap. 40. Al KORAN. 383

brating the praifes of their Lord : and judgment (hall be given between
them with truth; and they fhall fay, Praife be unto God, the Lord of
all creatures !

CHAP. XL.

Intitled \ The true Believer * ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

H . M The revelation of this book is from the mighty, the wife God ;

the forgiver of fin, and the accepter of repentance ; fevfcre in punifliing ;
long fuffering. There is no God but he : before him Jhall be the general aflem-
bly at the laft day. None difputeth againft the figns of God, except the un-
believers : but let not their profperous dealing in the land c deceive thee with
vatu allurement. The people of Noah, and the confederated infidels which
were after them, accufed their refpe&ive prophets of impofture before thefe ;
and each nation hatched ill defigns againft their apoftle, that they might get
him into their power ; and they difputed .with vain reafoning, that they might
thereby invalidate the truth : wherefore I chaftifed them ; and how fevere
was my punilhment ! Thus hath the fentence of thy Lord juftly palled on
the unbelievers ; that they Jhall be the inhabitants of hell fire. The angels
who bear the throne of God , and thofe who ft and about it 4 , celebrate the
praife of their Lord, and believe in him ; and they ask pardon for the true
. believers, faying , O Lord, thou encompafleft all things by thy mercy and
knowledge ; wherefore forgive thofe who repent, and follow thy path, and
deliver them from the pains of hell : O Lord, lead them alfo into gardens of
eternal abode, which thou haft promifed unto diem, and unto every one who
fhall do right, of their fathers, and their wives, and their children ; for
thou art me mighty, the wife God. And deliver them from evil; for
whomfoever thou fhalt deliver from evil on that day, on him wilt thou ftiew
mercy ; and this will be great falvation. But the infidels, at the day of
judgment , fhall hear a voice crying unto them, Verily the hatred of God /o-
wards you is more grievous than your hatred towards yourfelves: fince ye
were called unto the faith, and would not believe. They fhall fay, O

Lord,

» This fide is taken from the paffage wherein 59. not. b.
mention is made of one of P bar nob's family, d The angels who bear the throne, and Jlani
who believed in Mofes. about it ;} Thefe are the Cherubim, the higheft

b Sec the Prel. Dife. J. III. p. S9» &c - tader 0 f angels, who approach neaieft to Goo’s
1 Tbeir profperous dealing in the land ;] By prefence *.
trading into Syria and Taman. See chap. 3. p.

1 Al Beidawi.

384 Al KORAN. Chap. 40.

Lord, thou haft given us death twice, and thou haft twice given us life * ;
and we confels our fins : is there therefore no way to get forth from this fire?
And it fhall be anfwered them , This hath befallen you , for that when one Goo
was preached unto you, ye believed not ; but if a plurality of gods had been
afiociated with him, ye had believed: and judgment belongeth unto the
high, the great God. It is he who fheweth you his figns, and fendeth
down food unto you from heaven: but none will be admonilhed, ex-
cept he who turneth himfelf unto God. Call therefore upon God, exhibit-
ing your religion pure unto him, although the infidels be averfe thereto.

He is the Being of exalted degree, the pofleffor of the throne ; who fendeth
down the fpirit, at his command, on fuch of his fervants as he pleafeth ;
that he may warn mankind of the day of meeting 1 *, the day whereon they
fhall come forth out of their graves, and nothing of what concerneth them
fhall be hidden from God. Unto whom will the kingdom belong , on that
day ? Unto the only, the almighty God. On that day fhall every foul be
rewarded according to its merits : there fhall be no injuftice done on that day.
Verily God will be fwift in taking an account. Wherefore warn them, O
prophet, of the day which fhall fuddenly approach ; when mens hearts fhall
come up to their throats, and ftrangle them. The ungodly fhall have no
friend or interceffor who fhall be heard. God will know the deceitful eye,
and that which their breafts conceal ; and God will judge with truth : but
the fadfe gods which they invoke, befides him, fhall not judge at alii for
God is he who heareth and feeth. Have they not gone through the earth,
and Teen what hath been the end of thofe who were before them ? They were
more mighty than thefe in ftrength, and left more confiderable footfteps of
their power in the earth : yet God chaftifed them for their fins, and there was
none to protect them from God. This they fujfered , becaufe their apoftles
had come unto them with evident figns, and they disbelieved : wherefore God
chaftifed. them i for he is ftrong, and Severe in punifhing. We heretofore -
fent Mosbs with our figns and manifeft power, unto Pharaoh, and
Ha man, and Karun *, and they faid. He is a forcerer, and a liar. And
when be came unto them with the truth from us, they faid. Slay the fons of
thofe who have believed with him, and fave their daughters alive e : but the
ftratagem of the infidels was no other than vain. And Pharaoh faid, Let

me

* Tbou baft given us death twite* and baft twite revivals to be thofe of the fcpulchre and the
given us life Having firfl created us in a ftate refurre&ion J -

pf death, or void of life and fenfation, and then b Tbe day of meeting ;] When the Creator and
given life to the inanimate body 1 ; and after- his creatures 4 , the inhabitants of heaven and of
.wards caufed us to die a natural death, and raifed earth, the falfe deities and their worfhippers,
us again at the refurre&ion. Some underftand the opprefTor and the oppreflfed, the labourer
the firft death to be a natural death, and the fc- and his works, £hall meet each other 1 .
eppd that in the feptiichre, after the body fhall c Slay their fens, and fave tbeir daughters
have been there raifed to. life in order to be ex- alive ;] /. e. Purfue the resolution which has
a mined 1 ; and confe^uently fuppofe the two been formerly taken, and execute it more ftri&ly

for the future. See chap. 7. p. 130. not b.

1 See chap. 2. p. 4* 2 See PreU Di/e . $. IV. p. 76, {jfo 3 Al Beid, Jallal,

See chap. 6. p. 101. * Al Beid* Jallal.

Chap. 40. Al KORAN, 385

irte alone, that I may kill Moses * ; and let him call upon his Lord : verily
I fear left he change your religion, or caufe violence to appear in the earth b .
And Moses faid unto bis people. Verily I haverecourfe unto my Lord, and
your Lord, to defend me againft every proud perfon, who believeth not in
the day of account. And a man who was a true believer, of the family of
Pharaoh*, and concealed Kis faith, faid. Will ye put a man to death, be-
caufe he faith, God is my Lord ; feeing he is come unto you with evident
figns from your Lord? If he be a liar, on him will the punifhment of his falfbood
light ; but if he fpeaketh the truth, fome of tbofe judgments with which he
threatened! you, will fall upon you : verily God direfteth not him who is a tranf-
grelfor, or a liar. O my peopkj the kingdom is yours this day ; and ye are con-
{picuous in the earth : but who lhall defend us from the fcourge of God, if it
come unto us 4 ? Pharaoh faid, I only propofe to you what I think to be moji
expedient : and I guide you only into the right path. And he who had be-
lieved, faid, O my people, verily I fear for you a day like fhat of the con-
federates againft the prophets in former times \ a condition like that of the
people of Noah, and the tribes of Ad, and Thamud, and of thofe who have
lived after them : for God willeth not that any injuftice be done unto bis fer-
vants. O my people, verily I fear for you the day whereon men lhall call
unto one another * i the day whereon ye fhall be turned back from the tribunal ,
and driven to bell : then lhall ye have none to proteft you againft God. And
he whom God lhall caufe to err, lhall have no director. Joseph came
unto you, before Moses, with evident figns •, but ye ceafed not to doubt of
the religion which he preached unto you, until, when he died, ye faid, God
will by no means fend another apoftle, after him. Thus doth God caufe
him to err, who is a tranfgreffor, and a fceptic. They who difpute againft
the figns of God, without any authority which hath come unto them, are in
great abomination with God, and with thofe who believe. Thus doth God
feal up every proud and ftubborn heart. And Pharaoh faid, O Hamah,
build me a tower, that I may reach the t rafts, the trafts of heaven, and
may view the God of Moses f j for I verily think him to be a liar. And thus
the evil of his work was prepared for Pharaoh, and he turned afide from the
right path: and the ftratagems of Pharaoh ended only in lofs. And he
who had believed, faid, O my people, follow me : I will guide you into the
right way. O my people, verily this prefent life is but a temporary enjoy-

D d d ment }

* Let me alone, that J may kill Mofes ;] For 4 See the fpeech of Gamaliel to the Jetoifb
they advifed him not to put Mofes to death, left Sanhedrim, when the apoftles were brought bc-
it fhould be thought he was not able to oppofe fore them *.

him by dint of argument '. * The day nberetn men fhall call unto one ano-

b Or caufe violence to affear in the earth.] then ] i. e. The day of judgments when the
By railing of commotions and feditions, in order inhabitants of paradife, and of hell, lhall enter
to introduce his new religion. into mutual difcourfe : when the latter lhall call

c A true believer of the family of Pharaoh, for help; and the feducers, and thefeduced, lhall
£57;] This feems to be the fame perfon who is caft the blame upon each other 3 .
mentioned, chap. 28. p- 318. f See chap. 28. p. 320.

1 ^/Bsidawi. * Ads v. 38, 39. 3 Al Beid. Jaiiallo’ddib.

386 Al KORAN* Chap. 40.

ment ; but the life tocome is the manfion of firm continuance. Whoever work-
eth evil, lhall only be rewarded in equal proportion to the fame : but whoever
worketh good, whether male or female, and is a true believer, they lhall
enter paradife ; they lhall be provided for therein fuperabundantly. And, O
my people, as for me, I invite you to falvatiqn ; but ye invite me to bell
fire : ye invite me to deny God, and to affociate with mm that whereof I
have no knowledge •, but I invite you to the mod mighty, the forgiver of
Jins. There is no doubt but that the falfe gods to which ye invite me, de-
ferve not to be invoked, either in this world or in the next ; and that we mult
return unto God ; and that the tranfgreffors lhall be the inhabitants of bell
fire : and ye lhall then remember what 1 now fay unto you. And l commit my
affair unto God : for God regardeth his fervants. Wherefore God delivered
him from the evils which they had devifed ; and a grievous punilhment en-
compaffed the people of Pharaoh*. They lhall be expofed to the fire of
bell morning afld evening* 1 : and the day whereon the hour of judgment lhall
come, it Jball be faid unto tbem t Enter, O people of Pharaoh, into a moll
fevere torment. And think on the time when the infidels lhall difpute together
in hell fire ; and the weak lhall fay unto thofe who behaved with arrogance c .
Verily we were your followers : will ye, therefore, relieve us from any part
of this fire ? Thole who behaved with arrogance lhall anfwer. Verily we are *
all doomed to fuffer therein : for God hath now judged between his fervants.
And they who Jball be in the fire, lhall fay unto the keepers of hell 4 , Call ye
on your Lord, that he would eafe us, for one day, from this punilhment.
They lhall anfwer. Did not your apoftles come unto you with evident proofs t
They lhall fay. Yea. The keepers lhall reply. Do ye therefore call on God :
but the calling of the unbelievers on him lhall be only in vain. We will furely
affift our apoftles, and thofe who believe, in this prelent life, and on the day
whereon the witnefles lhall Hand forth : a day, whereon the excufe of the un-
believers lhall not avail them ; but a curie Jball attend them, and a wretched
abode. We heretofore gave unto Moses a direction : and we left as an inhe-
ritance unto the children of Israel the book of the law ; a diredHon, and
an admonition to men of underftanding. Wherefore do thou, O prophet ,
bear the infults of the infidels with patience ; for the promife of God is true :
and ask pardon for thy fault * i and celebrate the praife of thy Lord, in

* A grieveus pumjbment encompajfti the people of
Pharaoh ;} Some arc of opinion that thofe who
were fent by Pharaoh to feize the true believer,
his kinfman, are the perfons more particularly
meant in this place : for they tell us, that the
faid believer fled to a mountain, where they
found him at prayers, guarded by the wild beafb,
which ranged themfelves in order about him i
and that his purfuers thereupon returned in a
great fright to their mafter, who put theift to
death for not performing his command *.

k They J hall he expofed to bell fire morning and

evening Some expound thefe words of the pre-
vious punilhment they are doomed to fuffer, ac-
cording to a tradition of Ebn Mafudi which in-
forms us, that their fouls are in the crops of
black birds, which are expofed to hell fire every
morning and evening until the day of judg-
ment a .

c See chap. 14. p. 207. not. a.

d See chap. 74.

* Ask tardon fir thy fault \ 1 Fn being too back-
ward and negligent in advancing the true religi-
on, for fear of the infidels 3 .

1 Al Be id aw 1.

» Idem*

3 Idem .

Chap. 40. Al KORAN \ 387

the evening and in the morning. As to thofe wha impugn the figns of God,
without any convincing proof which hath been revealed unto them, there is
nothing but pride in their breads*; but they fhall not attain their defer e:
wherefore fly for refuge unto God ; for it is he who heareth and feeth. Verily
the creation of heaven and earth is more confiderable than the creation of man :
but the greater part of men do not underftand. The blind and the feeing fhall
not be held equal ; nor they who believe and work righteoufnefs, and the evil-
doer : how few revolve tbeje things in their mind 1 The lajt hour will furely
come ; there is no doubt thereof: but the greater part of men believe it not.
Your Lord faith. Call upon me ; and l will hear you*: but they who proudly
difdain my fervice, fhall enter with ignominy into hell. It is God who hath
appointed the night for you to take your reft therein, and the day to give
you light : verily God is endued with beneficence towards mankind ; but the
greater part of men do not give thanks. This is God, your Lord ; the
Creator of all things : there is no God befides him : how therefore are ye
turned afide from bis worjhip ? Thus are they turned afide, who oppole
the figns of God. It is God who hath given you the earth for a ftable
floor, and the heaven for a cieling : and who hath formed you, and made
your forms beautiful $ and feedeth you with good things. This is God,
your Lord. Wherefore bleffed be God, the Lord of all creatures ! He is
the living God : there is no God but he. Wherefore call upon him, ex-
hibiting unto him the pure religion. Praife be unto God, the Lord of all
creatures ! Say, Verily I am forbidden to worfhip the deities which ye in-
voke, befides God, after that evident proofs have come unto me from my
Lord ; and I am commanded to refign myfelf unto the Lord of all creatures.
It is he who firft created you of duft, and afterwards of feed, and afterwards
of coagulated blood ; and afterwards brought you forth infants out of your
mothers wombs : then he permittetb you to attain your age of full ftrength,
and afterwards to grow old men, (but fome of you die before that age,) and
to arrive at the determined period of your life b ; that peradventure fe may
underftand. It is he who giveth life, and caufeth to die : and when he de-
creeth a thing, he only faith unto it. Be, and it is. Doft thou not obferve
thofe who difpute againft the figns of God, how they are turned afide from
the true faith ? They who charge with falfhood the book of the Koran, and
the other fecriptures and revealed doElrines which we fent our former apoftles to
preach, fhall hereafter know their folly ; when the collars fhall be on their
necks, and the chains by which they fhall be dragged into hell : then fhall they
be burned in the fire. And it fhall be faid unto them. Where are the gods
which ye afibciated, befides God ? They fhall anfwer, They have with-

D d d 2 drawn

a As to tbofi tebo impugn the figns of Govs, &c.] This man is not our lord , but the Meflias the fin
This fentence may be underftood generally ; tho* of David, ivbofi kingdom will be extended over
it was revealed on account of the idolatrous fia and land 1 .

Meccans , or of the Jews, who faid of Mohammed, b See chap, 22. p. 274.

1 Item .

3S8 Al KORAN. Chap. 40.

drawn themfelves from us : yea, we called on nothing * heretofore. Thus doth
God lead the unbelievers into error. This bath befallen you , for that ye rejoiced
infolently on earth, in that which was falfe i ana for that ye were elated with
immoderate joy. Enter ye the gates of hell, to remain therein for ever: and
wretched Jhall be the abode of the haughty ! Wherefore perfevere with pa-
tience, O Mohammed ; for the promife of God is true. Whether we caufe
thee to fee any part of the punifhment with which we have threatened them,
or whether we caufe thee to die before thou fee it ; before us fhall they be
affembled at the lajl day. We have fent a great number of apoftles before
thee b ; the bijlories of fome of whom we have related unto thee, and the
hijlories of others of them we have not related unto thee : but no apoftle
had the power to produce a fign, unlefi by the permiflion of God. When
the command of God, therefore, fhall come, judgment fhall be given with
truth ; and then fhall they perifh who endeavour to render the Jigns of God
of no effeft. It is God who hath given you the cattle, that ye may ride
on fame of them, and may eat of others- of them ; (ye alfo receive other
advantages therefrom 1 j) and that on them ye may arrive at the bufinefs
propofed in your mind : and on them are ye carried by land , and on fhips by
fea. And he fheweth you his figns ; which, therefore, of the figns of God,
will ye deny ? Do they not pafs through the earth, and fee what hath been
the end of thofe who were before them ? They were more numerous than
thefe, and more mighty in ftrength, and left more conftderable monuments of
their power in the earth : yet that which they had acquired, profited them not.
And when their apoftles came unto them with evident proofs of their miffion ,
they rejoiced in the knowledge which was with them 4 : but that which they
mocked at, encompaffed them. And when they beheld our vengeance, they
faid. We believe in God alone, and we renounce the idols which we affociated
with him : but their faith availed them not, after they had beholden our ven-
geance. ‘this was the ordinance of God, which was formerly obferved in
refpeft to his fervants : and then did the unbelievers perifh.

CHAP.

* We called on nothing ;] Seeing an idol is no- d Tbey rejoiced in the knowledge which was with
thing in the world l . them ;] Being prejudiced in favour of their own

b See the Prelim. Difc. IV. p. 75. erroneous do&rines, and defpifing the inftr unions

« Sec chap. 16. p. 215. of the prophets.

1 Idem .

Chap. 41.

Al KORAN.

3 8 9

CHAP. XLI.

Intitled \ Are diftin&ly explained * ; - revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the molt merciful God.

H . M b . This is a revelation from the mod Merciful : a book the verles
whereof are diftinftly explained®, an Arabic Koran, for the instruc-
tion of people who understand ; bearing good tidings, and denouncing
threats : but the greater part of them turn afide, and hearken not thereto .
And they fay. Our hearts are veiled from the doftrine to which thou inviteft
us *, and there is a deafiiefs in our ears, and a curtain between us and thee :
wherefore a ft thou, as thou Jhalt think fit ; for we Ihall aft according to our
own fenliments. Say, Verily I am only a man like you. It is revealed unto
me tliat your God is one God : wherefore direft your way ftrait unto him j
and alk pardon of him for what is pafi. And woe be to the idolaters •, who
give not the appointed alms, and believe not in the life to come ! But as to
thofe who believe, and work righteoufnefs ; they /hall receive an everlafting
reward. Say, Do ye indeed difbelieve in him who created the earth in two
days*; and do ye let up equals unto him? He is the Lord of all creatures.
And he placed in the earth mountains firmly rooted®, rifing above the fame : and
he bleffed it ; and provided therein the food of the creatures defigned to
be the inhabitants thereof, in four days equally, for thofe who alk 8 . Then
he fet his mind to the creation of heaven ; and it was fmoke k : and he faid
unto it, and to the earth. Come, either obediently, or againfl your will.
They anfwered. We come, obedient to thy command . And he formed them

* ^ into

* Some intitle this chapter Worjbip , or Adora-
tion* becaufe the infidels are herein commanded
to forfake the worlhip of idols, and to worfhip
Go d : but the 3 zd chapter bearing the fame
title, that which we have here prefixed is, for
diftinftion, generally ufed.
b See the Prelim. Difc. f III p. 59, &c.
c See ohap. 11. p. 175. not. d.

4 In mo ddys ;] viz* The two firft days of
the week r .

e See chap. 16. p. 21 J.
f In four days j] That is, including the two
former days wherein the earth was created.

® Equally, for tbofi zobo ask 5] 1. /. For all,
in proportion to the necellity of each, and as

their feveral appetites require. Some refer the
word frnaan , here transited equally , and which
alfo fignifies comp lea fly, to the four days; and
fuppofe the meaning to be, that God created
thefe things in juft fo many entire and complm
days *.

v It was fmoke ;] Or darknefs. Al Zamakbjbori
fays this fmoke proceeded from the waters
under the throne of God, (which throne was
one of the things created before the heavens
and the earth,) and rofe above the water ; that
the water being dried up, the earth was formed
out of it, and the heavens out of the fmoko
which had mounted aloft.

1 Jallalo’ddin.

* Idem, ^/Bexdawi.

39^ Al KORAN, Chap. 41.

into feven heavens, in two days*-, and revealed unto every heaven its office.
And we adorned the lower heaven with lights, ' and placed therein a guard of
angels b . This is the difpofition of the mighty, the wife God. If the
Meccans withdraw from tbefe injlruffions, fay, I denounce unto you a fudden
deft ruft ion, like the deftruftion of Ad and Thamdd. When the apoftles
came unto them before them and behind them e , faying, Worfhip God alone ;
they anfwered, If our Lord had been pleafed to fend meffengers , he had
furely fent angels : and we believe not the meffage with which ye are fent.
As to the tribe of Ad, they behaved infolently in the earth, without reafon, and
faid, Who is more mighty than we in ftrength ? Did they not fee that God,
who had created them, was more mighty than they in ftrength ? And they
knowingly rejedted our figns. Wherefore we fent againft them a piercing
wind, on days of ill luck i , that we might make them tafte the punilhment
of ftiame in this world : but the punilhment of the life to come will be more
ftiameful ; and they (hall not be protected therefrom. And as to T hamud,
we directed them j but they loVfed blindnels better than the true direction :
wherefore the terrible noife of an ignominious puriiftiment affailed them, for that
which they had deferved ; but we delivered thofe who believed, and feared God\
And warn them of the day, on which the enemies of God ftiall be gathered to-
gether unto hell fire, and ffiall march In diftindt bands •, until, when they (hall
arrive thereat, their ears, and their eyes, and their (kins ftiall bear witnefs againft
them of that which they lhall have wrought. And they ftiall fay unto their
fkins. Wherefore do ye bear witnefs againft us ? They ftiall anfwer, God
hath caufed us to fpeak, who giveth fpeech unto all things : he created you
the firft time ; and unto him are ye returned. Ye did not hide your felves,
while ye finned, fo that your ears, and your eyes, and your fkins could not
bear witnefs againft you f : but ye thought that God was ignorant of many
things which ye did. This was your opinion, which ye imagined of your
Lord : it hath ruined you ; and ye are become loft people- Whether they
bear their torment , hell fire Jhall he their abode j or whether they beg for
favour, they ftiall not obtain favour. Arid we will give them the devils to be
their companions ; for they drefled up for them thefalfo notions which they enter-
tained of this prefent world, and of that which is to come ; and the fentence

juftly

* In two days ;] viz- On the fifth and iixth
days of the week. It is faid the heavens were
created on Tburfday, and the fan, moon, and
Hars on Friday ; in the evening of which laft
day Adam was made 1 .

» See chap. 15. p. 211.

e Before them and behind them ;] That is, on
■every fide ; perfuading and urging them conti-
nually, and by arguments drawn from pail ex-
amples, and the expe£tation of future rewards
or punilhments.

d On days of ill luck ", ] It is faid that this
wind continued from IVtdne/day to tFednefday

indufive, being the Utter end of the month
Sbawal ; and that a Wedntfiay is the day where-
on God fends down, his judgments on a wicked
people*.

* See chap. 7. p. 124, &c.

{ Te did not bide your ftlvt* fo that your tars,
and yostr eyes, and your skins could not bear wit-
nefs againft you ;] i. e. Ye hid your crimes from
men, little thinking that your very members,
from which ye could not hide them, would rife
up as witnefles againft you.

* Idem.

* Al Bbidavu.

Chap. 4 1, Al KORAN* 391

juftly fitteth them, which was formerly pronounced on the nations of genii and
men who were before them > for they perilhed. The unbelievers fay, Hearken
not unto this Koran : but ufe vain difcourfe * during tbe reading thereof i that
ye may overcome tbe voice of the reader by your feoffs and laughter. Wherefore
we will furely caufe the unbelievers to tafte a grievous punilhment, and we
will certainly reward them for the evils which they (hall have wrought. This
jball he the reward of the enemies of God, namely , bell fire ; therein is pre-
fared for them an everlafting abode, as a reward for that they have wittingly
rejected our figns. And the infidels ihall fay in bell , O LoRD, *lhew us the two
who fedaced us, of the genii and men b , and we will caft them under our feet,
that they may become moft hafe and defpieable. As for thofe who fay, Our
Lord is God, and who behave uprightly ; the angels Ihall defeend unto them %
and Jball fay , Fear not, neither be ye grieved ; but rejoice in the hopes of
paradife, which ye have been promifed. We are your friends in this life, and
in that which is to come : therein Ihall ye have that which your fouls lhall
defire, and therein Ihall ye obtain whatever ye ihall aik for *, as a gift from a
gracious, and merciful God. Who fpeaketh better than he who inviteth un-
to God, and worketh righteoufnefs, and faith, I am a Modem ? Good and
evil ihall not be held equal. Turn away evil with that which is better } and
behold, the man between whom and thyfelf there was enmity, j ball become ,
as it were, tby warmeft friend : but none ihall attain to this perfefUon, except
they who are patient ; nor ihall any attain thereto, except lie who is indued
with a great happinefs of temper. And if a malicious fuggeftion be offered
unto thee from Satan, have recourfe unto God ; for it is he who heareth
and knoweth. Among the figns of his power are the night, and the day, and
the fun, and the moon. Worihip not the fun, neither the moon : but wor-
ihipGoD, who hath created them ; if yefervehim. But if they proudly dif-
dain bis fervice ; verily the angels , who are with thy Lord, praife him night
and day, and are not wearied. And among his figns another is, that thou
feeft the land wafte : but when we fend down rain thereon, it is ftirred and
fermenteth. And he who quickeneth the eetrtb, will furely quicken the dead ;
for he is almighty. Verily thofe who impiouily wrong our figns, are not con-
cealed from us. Is he, therefore, better, who ihall be caft into bell fire, or
he who ihall appear fecure on the day of refurredtion ? Work that which ye
will : he certainly beholdeth whatever ye do. Verily they who believe not in the
admonition of tbe Koran, after it hath come unto th cm, Jball one day be difeover-
ed. It is certainly a book of infinite value : vanity ihall not approach it, ei-
ther from before it, or from behind it d : it is a revelation from a wife Goo,

whofe

1 V/e vain difcourfe ;] Or, Talk aloud. minds to good, to preferve them from temp-

h Tbe two who /educed us, of tbe geHii and tationfc and to comfort them } or at the hour
men ;] i. e. Thofe of either fpecies, who drew of death, to fupport them in their laft agony ;
us into fin and ruin. Some fuppefe that the or at their coming forth from their graves, at
two mote particularly intended here, tteEb/u therefurreflion*.

and Cain; the two authors of infidelity and mur- * Vanity Jball not approach it, either from before

der *. it, or from behind it i] That is. It ihall not be

c Tbe angels Jball defend unto them ;] Either prevailed againft, or fruftrated by any means, or
while they are living en earth, to difpofe their m any refpeft whatever.

* Idem, Jalla^o’ubin. * Idem.

39 2 Al KORAN Chap. 41.

whofe pratfe is juftly to be celebrated. No other is faid unto thee by the
infidels of Mecca, than what hath been formerly faid unto the apoftles be-
fore thee : verily thy L6 rd is inclined to forgivenefs, and is aljb able to chaftife
feverely. If we had revealed the Koran in a foreign language 1 , they had
furely faid, Unlefs the figns thereof be diftinftly explained, we will not receive
the fame : is the book written in a foreign tongue, and the perfon unto whom it
is directed, an Arabian ? Anfwer, It is, unto thofe who believe, a fure guide,’ 1
and a remedy for doubt and uncertainly : but unto thofe who believe not, it i]
a thicknefs of hearing in their ears, and it is a darknefs which covereth them j
thefe are as they who are called unto from a diftant place h . We heretofore
gave the book of the law unto Moses •, and a difpute arofe concerning the
• fame : and if a previous decree had not proceeded from thy Lord, to ref
pite the oppofers of that revelation , verily the matter had been decided between
them, by the definition of the infidels ; for they were in a very great doubt as
to the fame. He who doth right, doth it to the advantage of his own foul ;
and he who doth evil, doth it againft the fame : for thy Lord is not unjuft
XXV. towards his fervants. * Unto him is referved the knowledge of the hour of
judgment : and no fruit cometh forth from the knops which involve it ; nei-
ther doth any female conceive in her womb , nor is fhe delivered of her bur-
then, but with his knowledge. On the day whereon he fhall call them to him
faying. Where are my companions which ye aferibed unto me ? they fhall an-
fwer, Weaffure thee there is no witnefs of this matter among us c : and the
idols which they called on before, fhall withdraw themfelves from them ; and
they fhall perceive that there will be no way to efcape. Man is not wearied
with afking good ; but if evil befal him, he defpondeth, and defpaireth.
And if we caufe him to tafte mercy from us, after affliction hath touched him,
he furely faith. This is due to me on account of my defirts : I do not think
the hour of judgment will ever come ; and if I be brought before my Lord,
I fhall furely attain, with him, the moft excellent condition. But we will
then declare unto thofe who fhall not have believed, tliat which they have
wrought; and we will furely caufe them to tafte a moft fevere punifhment 'When
we confer favours on man, he turneth afide, and departeth without returning
thanks : but when evil toucheth him, he is frequent at prayer. Say, What
think ye? if the Koran' be from Goo, and ye believe not therein ; who will
lie under a greater error, than he who diffenteth widely therefrom ? Hereafter
we will fhew them our figns in the regions of the earth , aivd in themfelves 4 ;
until jt become manifeft unto them that /Aw book is the truth. Is it not fuf-
ficient/w thee that thy Lord is witnefs of all things ? Are they not in a doubt
as to the meeting of their Lord at the refurreftion ? Doth not he encompafs
ail things ?

CHAP.

* See chap. 16. p. 223 , ice. matter among us i] For they fhall difdaira their

b Theft are as they mho are called unto from a idols at the refurreftion.
diftant place ;] Being fo for off that they hear 4 tVe mill fhew them our figns in the regions of
-not, or underfiand not the voice of him who the earth , and in themfelves ;] By the furprizing
stalls to them. viftories and conquells of Mohammed, and his

t They Jball anfwer. Here is no witnefs of this fuc c e ffo n *.

1 Al Bejdawj.

Chap. 42.

Al KORAN,

3 93

CHAP. XLII.

Intitled , Confultation * ; revealed at Mecca 15 ,

In the name of the mofl merciful God.

H . M. A. S. K*. Thus doth the mighty, the wife God reveal bis will
unto thee ; and in like manner did be reveal it unto the prophets who were
before thee. Unto him belongetb whatever is in heaven, and in earth ; and he
is the high, the great God, Ic.wanteth little but that the heavens be rent
in funder from above, at the awfitltsefs of bis majejly : the angels celebrate the
praife of their Lord, and a£k pardon for thofe who dwell in the earth. Is not
God the forgiver of Jins , die merciful ? But as to thofe who take other gods for
their patrons, beDdes him,. .' God obferveth their aHiotrs: for thou art nor a
fteward over them. Thus, have we revealed unto thee an Arabic Koran, that
thou mayeft warn the metropolis of Mecca, and the Arabs who dwell round
about it *, and mayeft threaten them with the day of the general affembly, of
which there is no doubt : one part Jball then be placed in paradife, and another
part in hell If God had pleafed, he had made them all of one religion : but
he leadeth whom he pleafeth into his mercy ; and the unjuft fhall have no pa-
tron or helper. Do they take other patrons, befides him? whereas God is the
only true patron : he quickeneth the dead and he is almighty. Whatever
matter ye difagree about, the decifion thereof appertained unto God. This
is God, my Lord : in him do I trait, and unto him do I turn me ; the
Creator of heaven and earth ; he hath given you wives of your own fpecies,
and cattle both male and female •, by Which means he multiplied! you : there
is nodiing like him *, and it is . he who heareth and feeth. His are the keys of
heaven and .earth : he beftoweth provifion abundantly on whom he pleafeth,
and he is fparing unto whom be pleafeth ij for he knoweth all things. He hath
ordained you the religion which he commanded Noah, and which we have
revealed unto thee, O Mohammed, and which we commanded Abraham,
and Moses, and Jesus d : faying , Obkrveibis religion, and be not divided therein.
The worfbip of one God, to which thou inviceft them, is grievous unto the un-
believers : God will elefr thereto whom he pleafeth, and will dired unto the
fame him who fhall repent. Thofe who lived in times pajl were not divided
among themfelves, until after that the knowledge of God's unity had come unto

• E e e them ;

* The title is taken from the verfe wherein b Jallalo'dJin except* three veiTes beginning

the believers are commended, among other with thefe words, Say, I ask not of you, fir this
things, for ufing deliberation in their affairs, and my preaching, any reward. See.

Confuting together in or At to aft for the bfeft. c See the Prel. Difc. §. HI, p. 59, £sV.

Some, inftead of this word, prefix the five fifigftt * See ibid. $ IV. p. 70, fed. jr.j,

letters with which the chapter begins.

39+ KORAN. Chap. 42.

them ; through their own perverfenefs : and unlefs a previous decree had
pa (Ted from thy Lord, to bear with them till a determined time, verily the
matter had been decided between them, by the dcfirullion of the gain-fayers.
They who have inherited the fcriptures after them *, are certainly in a perplex-
ing doubt concerning the fame b . Wherefore invite them to receive the fure faith ,
and be urgent with them , as thou haft been commanded ; and follow not their
vain deflres : and fay, I believe in. all the fcriptures which God hath fent down ;
and I am commanded to eftablilh juftice among you : God is our Lord, and
your„LoRD : unto us will our works be imputed, and unto you will your works
be imputed: let there be no wrangling between us and you ; for God will
affemble mall at the loft day , and unto him lhall we return. As to thofe who
difpute concerning God, after obedience hath been paid him by receiving bis
religion, their difputing fhall he vain in the fight of their Lord ; and wrath
/hall fall on them, and they fhall fuffer a grievous punifhment. It is God
who hath fent down the fcripture with truth •, and the balance of true judg-
ment: and what fhall inform thee whether the hour be nigh at hand? They
who believe not therein, wifh it to be haftened by way of mockery : but they
who believe dread the fame, and know it to be the truth. Are not thofe
who difpute concerning the la/t hour in a wide error? God is bounteous unto
his fervants : he provideth for whom he pleafeth ; and he is the ftrong, the
mighty. Whofo chufeth the tillage of the life to come*, unto him will we
give increafe in his tillage : and whofo chufeth the tillage of this world, we will
give him the fruit thereof; but he fhall have no part in the life to come.
Have the idolaters deities which ordain them a religion which God hath not
allowed ? But had it not been for the decree of refpiting their punifhment to the
day of feparating the infidels from the true believers , judgment had been already
given between them : for the unjuft fhall furcly fuffer a painful torment. On
that day thou fhalt fee the unjuft in great terror, becaule of their demerits ;
and the penalty thereof fhall fall upon them : but they who believe and do
good works, fhall dwell in the delightful meadows of paradife ; they fhall ob-
tain whatever they fhalt deiire, with their Lord. This is the greateft acqui-
firion. This is what God promifeth unto his fervants who believe and do
gopd works. Say, I afk not of you, for this my preaching, any reward, ex-
cept the love of my relations : and whoever fhall have deferved well by one
good action, unto him will we add the merit of another adion thereto ; for
God is inclined to forgive, and ready to reward. Do they fay, Mohammed
hath bkfphemoufly forged a lye concerning God ? If God pleafeth, he will
feal up thy, heart ^ : and God will abfolutely abolifh vanity, and will eftablilh

the

* %bey who have inherited the fcriptures after A If God pieafeth , he will fed up thy heart i]
them ;] viz. The modem yews and Cbriftians. The meaning of thefe words is fomewhat ob-
b Are in a doubt cgpcerning tfp fma 1 Not fcure. Same imagine they cxprefe a drteffa-
underftsftldirt^ fbe tnlc meaning, nor t^fieving tion of the forgery charged on the prophet
the reaf db&rihes thereof. by the infidels ; becaufe none could be capable

c Whyfiebujetb^ the, tillage of the Ijft to erne j] 01 fo wicked an but one wbofe heart was

Labouring here, to obtain a reward Weafter : clofe fbut, and knew not his Lorp : as if h^

for what is fown in this world, will be reaped had laid, God forbid that thou Jhouldfi.be fo void
in the next. of

Chap. 42.

Al KORAN.

395

the truth in his words * ! for he knoweth the innermoft parts of men 1 ! breafts.
It is he who acoepteth repentance from his fcrvants, and forgiveth fins, and
knoweth that which ye do. He will incline his ear unto thofe who believe
and work righteoufhefs, and will add unto them above what they /hall ask or
defense, of his bounty : but the unbelievers fball fuffer a fevere punifhment.
If God Ihould beftow abundance upon his fcrvants, they would certainly be-
have infolently in the earth : but he fendeth down by meafure unto every one
that which he pleafeth ; for he well knoweth and feeth the condition if his fer-
vants. It is he who fendeth down the raid, after men have defpaired thereof,
and fpreajkth abroad his mercy ; and he is the patron, juftly to be pra&fed.
Among his figns is the creation of heaven and earth, artd of the living crea-
tures with which he hath rcplenilhed them both ; and he is able to gather them
together before bis tribunal, whenever he pleafeth. Whatever misfortune be-
falleth you is fent you by God , for that which your hands have deferved •, and
yet he forgiveth many things : ye fhatl not fruftme the divine vengeance in
the earth ; neither fhall ye have any proteffor or helper, agamft God.
Among his figns alfo are the Jhi/ss running in the fea, like high mountains : if
he pleafeth, he caufeth the wind to ceafe, and they lie ftill on the back of the
water ; (verily herein are figns, unto every patient and grateful pferfon:) or he
deftroyeth them by fhiptvrack , becaufc of that which their crews have merited ;
though he pardoneth many things. And they who difpute againff our figns,
lhall know that there will be no way for them to efcape our vengeance.
Whatever things are given you, they are the provifion of this prefent life : but
the reward which is with God is better, and more durable, for thofe who be-
lieve, and put their truft in their Lord *, and who avoid hainous and filthy
crimes, and when they are angry, forgive j and who hearken unto their
Lord, and are conftant at prayer, and whofe affairs are direRed by confisca-
tion among themfelvcs, and who give aim j out of what we have bellowed on
them •, and who, when an injury is done them, avenge themfelves b { (and the
retaliation of evil ought to be an evil proportionate thereto :) but he who for-
giveth, and is reconciled unto bis enemy, lhall receive his reward from
God c for he loveth not the unjuft doers. And whofo lhall avenge himfelf,
after he hath been injured ; as to thefe, it is not lawful to punifh them for it :
but it is only lawful to punifh thofe who wrong men, and aft infolently in the
earth, againft juftice ; thefe lhall fuffer a grievous punifhment. And whofo
beareth injuries patiently, and forgiveth ; verily this is a neceffary work.

E e e 2 Whom

tf grate, or have Jo little fenfe of thy duty !
Others think the Jignifkadan to be, that God
might ftrike all the revelarions Which had been
vouchfafed to Mohammed, oat of his heart at
once ; and others, that God would ftrengthen.
his heart with patience againft. the infults of the
unbelievers 1 ■

* God will abolijb vanity, and eftablijb the
truth >} Wherefore if the doarine taught w this
book be of man, it will certainly fail and come

1 At BstD AWI.

to nothing; but if it be of God, it can never
be overthrown *.

b And who, when an injury it done them,
avenge tbemfehet ;] tiling the means which God
has put into their hands for their own defence;
This is added to compleat the character hers
given ; for valour and courage are not iocoa-
filtent with clemency 3 s the rule being,

Parcert fubjedis, debellart fuferbts,
e See chap. 5 . p. 83, ( 3 V.

a Idem. 3 Idem.

39^ Al KORAN. Chap. 43 .

Whom God fhall caufe to err, lie fhall afterwards havfe no' protd&Of. And
thou fhaltfee the ungodly, who fhall fay, when they behold the puftifhmenc
prepared for them , Is there no way to return back into the world ?• And thou
fhalt fee them expofed unto hell fire ; dejected, becaufe of the ignominy
fhall undergo: they fhall look at the fire Tideways, and by ftealth ; and the
true believers fhall fay. Verily the lofers are they who have loft their own
fouls, and their families, on the day of refurreftion : fhall not the ungodly
continue in eternal torment ? They fhall have no protestors to defend them
againft God : and whom God fhall caufe to err, he fhall find no way to the
truth. Hearken unto your Lord, before the day come, which God will not
keep back : ye fhall have no place of refuge on that day neither fhall ye
be able to deny your Jins. But if tbofe to whom thou predchefl turn afide from
thy admonitions , verily we have not fent thee to he a guardian over them : thy
duty is preaching only. When we caufe man to taftc mercy from us, he
rejoiceth thereat : but if evil befal them, for that which their hands have for-
merly committed, verily man becometb ungrateful. Unto God appertainelb
the kingdom of heaven and earth : he createth that which he pleafeth ; lie
giveth females unto whom he pleafeth, and he giveth males unto whom he
pleafeth v or he giveth them males and females jointly : and he maketh whom
ne pleafeth to be childlefs > for he is wife, and powerful. It is not fit for man,
that God fhould fpeak unto him otherwife than by private revelation, or from
behind a vail, or by his fending of a meflenger to reveal, by his per million,
that which he pleafeth * for he is high and wife. Thus have we revealed unto
thee a revelation*, by our command. Thou didft not underftand, before
this, what the book of the Koran was, nor what the faith was : but we have
ordained the fame for a light ; we will thereby direct fuch of our fer-
vants as we pleafe : and thou fhalt furely direft them into the righc way, the
Way of Gqd» unto whom belongetb whatever is heaven and in earth. Shall not
all things return unto God ?

* Thus boot toe revealed unto thee a revelation ;] have toe fent tbtjpirh Gabriel unto tbte, with a
Or, as the words may be alfo trinflatcd. Thus revelation.

CHAP. XLIH.

Intitkd y The Ornaments of Gold*; revealed at Mecca 6 .

In the name of the ntoft merciful God.

H '. M e . By the perfpicudus book •, verily we have ordained the fame an
Arabic Koran, ’ that ye may underftand : arid it is certainly written in

the

* The word chofen for the tide of this chap- words, And ah wr apojfiet tobom we have fent
ter, occurs p.398. before tbee , See.

? Some except the verfe begiiming with thefe l See the PreL Difc. IIL p, 59, £sV.

Chap. 43 * ^ KORAN. 397

the original book *, kepi with us, being fublime and full of wifdort. Shall we
therefore turn away from you the admonition, and deprive you thereof 'be-
caufe ye are a people who tranfgrefs? And how many prophets have we fenta-
mong thofe of old ? and no prophet came unto them, but they laughed him to
loom : wherefore we deftroyed nations who were more mighty than thefe in
ftrength ; and the example of thofe who were of old, hath been already fit before
them. If thou alk them who created the heavens and the earth, they will cer-
tainly anfwer, The mighty, the wife God created them : who hath fpread
the earth as a bed for you, and hath made you paths therein, that ye may
be diredted : and who fejideth down rain from heaven by meafure, whereby
we quicken a dead* country *, (fo lhall ye be brought forth from your graves :)
and who hath created all the various fpecies of things , and hath given you
fhips and Cattle, whereon ye are carried ■, that ye may fit firmly on the
backs thereof, and may remember the favour of your Lord, when ye fit
thereon, and may fay, Praife be unto himj who hath fubjedfced thefe unto our
fervice ! for we could not have mattered them by our own power : and unto
our Lord fhall we furely return. Yet have they attributed unto him fome of
his fervants as bis offspring : verily man is openly ungrateful. Hath God
taken daughters out of thofe beings which he hath created ; and hath he chofen
fons for you ? But when one of them hath the news brought of the birth of a
child that fix which they attribute unto the Merciful, as bis fimilitude, his
face becometh black, and he is oppreffed with forrow b . Do they therefore
attribute unto God female ijfm y which are brought up among ornaments, and
are contentious without caufe ? And do they make the angels, who are the
fervants of the Merciful, females? Were they prefent at their creation?
Their- teftimony fhall be written down, and they fhall be examined concerning
the fame t on the day of judgment. And they fay. If die Merciful had pleafed,
we had not worfhipped them. They have no knowledge herein : they only
utter a vain lye. Have we given them a book s/” revelations before this ; and
do £h e y keep the fame in their cuttbdy? Buc they fay. Verily we found our
fathers pradtiiing a religion*, and we are guided in fcneir footfteps. Thus we
fent no preacher, before thee, unto any city, but the inhabitants thereof who
lived in affluence, faid. Verily we found our fathers pradtifing a religion:
and we tread in their fdotfteps. And the preacher anfwered. What, although
I bring you a more right religion than that which ye founds -your fathers to
pradlife? And they replied. Verily we believe not that which ye are fent to
preach. Wherefore we took vengeance on them : and behold what hath been
the end of thofe who accufed our apoftles of impofture. Remember when
Abraham faid unto his father, and bis people. Verily I am clear of the gods
which ye worlhip, except him who hath created me •, for he will diredt me
aright. And he ordained this to be a conftant dodtrine among his pofterity v
that they fhould be turned from idolatry to the worfhip of the only true God.
Verily I have permitted thefe Meccans and their fathers to live in profperity,
until the truth fhould come unto them, and a manifeft apoftle ; but now the

truth

* In tbt original book s] '■ e. The preferve4 Table } which is the prig iul of all the fcrip-
tures in general. J Sec chap. io. p. it 9, &c.

398 Al KORAN \ Chap. 43.

truth k come unto them, they fay. This is a piece of forcery; and we
believe not therein. And they fay. Had this Koraw been fent down -unto
fome great man of either of the two cities*, we would have received it. Do
they diftribute the mercy of thy Lord b ? We diftribute their necefiary pro-
vifion among them, in this prefent life, and we raife fome of them feveral de-
grees above the others, that the one of them may take the other to lerve him :
and the mercy of thy Lord is more valuable than the riches which they
gather together. If it were not that mankind would have become one feft of
infidels , verily we had given unto thofe who believe not in the Merciful,
roofs of filver to their houfes, and ftairs of ft her, by which they might
afcend thereto , and doors of filver to their houfes^ and couches of f iver , for
them to lean on j and ornaments of gold : for all this is the provifion of the
prefent life *, but the next lift with thy Lord Jhall he for thofe who fear him.
Whoever fhall withdraw from the admonition of the Merciful, we will chain a
•devil unto him j and he fhall be his infeparable companion : (and the devils
fhall turn them afide from the way of truth ; yet they fhall imagine them-
felves to he rightly directed :) until, when he fhall appear before us at the laji
day , he fhall fay unto the devil *, Would to God that between me and thee
there was the diftance of the eaft from the weft ! Oh how wretched a compa-
nion art thou ! But wijbes fhall not avail you on this day, fince ye have been
unjuft 5 for ye fhall be partakers of the fane punifhment. Canft thou, O
prophet, make the! deaf to hear, or canft thou direft the blind, and him who
is in a manifeft error ? Whether we take thee away, we will iurely take ven-
geance on them ; or whether we caufe tbee to fee the punijhment with which
we have threatened them, executed, we will certainly prevail over them.
Wherefore hold faft the doSlrine which hath been revealed unto thee ; for thou
art in a right way : and it is a memorial unto thee and thy people, and
hereafter fhall ye be examined concerning your ohfervance thereof. And afk our
apoftles whom we have fent before thee *, whether we have appointed gods for
them, to worfhip, befides the Merciful. We formerly font Moses with our
figns unto Pharaoh and his princes, and he faid. Verily I am the apoftle of
the Lord of all creatures. And when he came unto them with our figns,
behold, they laughed him to fcom ; although we fhewed them no fign, but
it was greater than the other* : and we infli&ed a punifhment f on them, that
peradventure they might be converted. And they faid unto Moses, O magi-
cian,

» Had the Korn bun fast imn ante fmt great ons which they taught, and their learned men *.
.man of either of the two cities ;] i. e. To one of e But it was greater than the other:] Literally,
the principal inhabitants of Mecca, or of Tajtf ; Than its fijter. The meaning is, that the mira-
foch as al iValii Ebn al Might ira, or OrwaEbn cles were all very great and confiderabh, or, as
Jtdfud the <1 hakifite 1 • the French may exprefs it, by a phrafe nearly the

*• The mercy of thy Lord ;] By this expreffion Cane, lee an) plus grands put tes antres.
the prophetic office it here particularly intended, { A pnseijbmenti] viz. The fucceffive plagues
c See chap,: 19. p. 254. which they fullered, previous to their final dc-

4 Alb our apoftles whom we have fent before ftruftion in the red fea.
thus] That is, A sk thofe who profels the rdigi-

1 ^Beidavvi.

* Idem. Jall all, £jV.

Chap. 43 * Al KORAN 399

cian, pray unto thy Lord for us, according to the covenant which he hath
made with thee •, for we will certainly be directed. But when we took the
plague from off them, behold, they brake their promife. And Pharaoh
made proclamation among his people, laying, O my people, is not the king-
dom of Egypt mine, and thefe rivers * which flow beneath me ? Do ye not
fee? Am not I better than this Moses ; who is a contemptible perfon, and
can fcarce exprefs himfelf intelligibly b ? Have bracelets of gold, therefore,
been put upon him* j or do the angels attend him in orderly proceflion ?
And Pharaoh perfuaded his people to light behaviour j and they obeyed
him : for they were a wicked people. And when they had provoked us to
wrath, we took vengeance on them, and we drowned them all: and we
made them a precedent, and an example unto others. And when the fon of
Mary was propofed for an example j behold, thy people cried out through
excefs of joy thereat d ; and they faia. Are our gods better, or he ? They have
propofed this injlance unto thee no otherwife man for an occafion of difpute .
yea, they are contentious men. Jesus is no other than a fervant, whom
we favoured with the gift of prophecy ; and we appointed him for an ex-
ample ' unto the children of Israel : (if we pleafed, verily we could
from your felves produce angels, to fucceed you in the earth f :) and he Jhall
he a fign of the approach of the lafi hour 8 ; wherefore doubt not thereof.
And follow me : this is the right way. And let not Satan caufe you to
turn afide : for he is your open enemy. And when Jesus came with evident
miracles , he faid. Now am I come unto you with wifdom h j and to explain

unto

a Thefe rivers \\ To wit , The Nile and its
branches l * .

b See chap. 20. p. 257. not. e.
c Have bracelets of gold been put upon him
Such bracelets were lome of the injtgnia o?
Royalty : for when the Egyptians raifed a perfon
to the dignity of a prince, they pnt a collar or
chain of gold about hb neck a , and bracelets of
gold on his wrifts 3 .

d When the fon of Mary was propofed for an
example , &c.] This padage is generally fup-
pofed to have been revealed on occafio© of an
objection made by one Ebn al Zabdri to thofe
words in the 21ft. chapter 4 , by which all in
general, who were worlhipped as deities, be-
fides God, are doomed to hell : whereupon the
infidels cried out, We are contented that our gods
jbould be with Jeftis ; for be alfo is worjbipped as
God 5 . Some, however, are of opinion it
might have been revealed in anfwer to certain
idolaters, who faid that the Cbrifiians , who re-
ceived the feriptures, worfhipped Jefus, fuppofing
him to be the fon of God ; whereas the angels
were more worthy of that honour than he 6 .

c An example ;] Or an infiance of our power,
by his miraculous birth.

f We could from yottrfebes produce qngels, &c.)
As eafily as w« produced Jefus without a fother 7 .
The intent of the words is to fhew how juft
and reafonable it is to think*, that the angels
fliould bear the relation of cliiidren to men, ra-
ther than to God ; they being his creatures, as
well as men, and equally m his power.

g He (ball be a fifpt of the approach of the lafi
bouri ] For fame time before the renirre&iofl
Jefus is to defeend on earth, according to the
Mohammedans, near Dataafcus 8 , or, as lame fay,
near a rock in the holy land named A fib, with
a lance in his hand, wherewith he is to kill
Antichrift, whom he will encounter at Ludd, or
hydda , a fmall town not far from Joppa 9 *
They add, that he will arrive at Jerufalem at the
time of morning prayer, that he lhall perform
his devotions after the Mohammedan infiituuon.
and officiate infiead of the Imam , who dull
give place to him ; that he will break down the
croft, and defiroy the churches of the Cbrifiians »
of whom he will alio make a general daughter,
excepting only fuchaalHall profeft^w. See 10 .

b Now am I cme unto you with wi[domi\ That
is, with a book of revelations, ana an excellent
fyftcm of religion.

1 Idem. * See Genef. xli. 42. 3 ^/Bbidawi, Jalialo’dihn. * See p. 273.

1 Jallalo’ddin, ^/BeidaWi. 6 Idem . 7 Idem , 8 See the Prcl. Difc. §. IV- p. 8k.

9 See ib. p. 80. 10 Al Be id awl

400 Al KORAN. Chap. 43.

unto yoij pa# of theft, things concerning which ye difagree : wherefore fear
God, and obey me. Verily God is my Lord, and your Lord ; wherefore
worfhip him : this is the right way. And the confederated fe&s among them
fell to variance*: but woe unto thofe who have a£ted unjuftly, becaufe of the
punilhmenf of a grievous day. Do the unbelievers wait for any other than
the hour of judgment j that ‘it may come upon them fuddenly, while they
forefee it. not? The intimate frieryJs, on that day, Jhali. he enemies unto one
another ; except the pious, O my ihryanri, there Jhali no fear come on you
this day, neither fliaTl ye be grieved ; who have Believed in our figns, and
have been Moflems: enter ye into paradife, ye and your wives, with great
joy. Difhes of gold lhall be carried round unto them, and cups without
handled : and therein Jbpll ihey enjoy whatever their fouls IhalJ delire, and
•whatever their eyes fhafl delight ini and ye lhall remain therein for ever,
This'is paradife, which, ye have inherited as a reward for that which ye have
Wrought. Therein lhall ye have fruits in abundance, of which ye lhall eat.
But the wicked lhall remain for ever in the torment of hell : it lhall not be
made lighter unto them i and they Jhali defpair therein. We deal not unjuftly
with them, but they deal unjuftly with their own fouls. And they lhall call
£loud, frying* O Malec”, intercede for us that thy Lord would end us by
annihilation. He lhall anfwer *, Verify ye lhall remain here forever. We
brought you the truth heretofore, but the greater part of you abhorred the
truth. Have the' infidels fixed on a method to circumvent our apojlle ? Verily

we will fix on a method to circumvent them. Do they imagine that we hear not
their feeffcts, and their private difeourfe ? Yeas and our meflengers who attend
them 4 write down the fame. Say, If the Merciful had a Ion, verily I would
be the firft of thofe who fliould worlhip him. Far be the Lord of heaven and
earth, the Lord of the throne, from that which they affirm of bimi
Wherefore let them wade in their vanity , and divert themfelves, until they
arrive at their day with which they have been threatened. He who is God
in heaven, is God on earth alfo : and he is the wife, the knowing. And
bleffed be he unto whom appaftedneth the kingdom of heaven and earth,
and of whatever is between then! •, with whom is the knowledge of the laji
hoar ; and before whom ye lhall be affembled. They whom they invoke befides
him, have not the privilege to intercede for others ; except thofe who bear
witnefc to the truth, and know the fame If thou alk them who hath created

them,

1 The confederated feffs fe/2 to variance This c He Jhali anfwer i] Some fay that this anfwer
may be underltood either of the Jem in the will not be given jtill a ihoufand years after,
time of Jefm; who oppofed his do&rine, or of d Our mejfengers tobo attend them ;] 1 . e. The
the Cbriftiani fince, who have fallen into various guardian angels.

opinions conceriiing'him ; fome making hint to c Except thofe who bear xnitnefs to the truths
Be God, others the Son of God, and Others* Arc } That is, to the do&rine of God’s unity,
one of the perfons of the Triqjty, fsfr The exception comprehends Jejus* Ezra , and

b O Malec ;] This the Mohammedans fappofe the angels ; who will be admitted as in terc effort
to be the name of the principal anget who has tho* they have been worfliipped as gods *
the charge of hell.

1 Hem, Jallal. 2 /idem.

, - .. - „ %

j .-+JTJ .V *ut '

Chap. 44 * Al KORAN. 401

them, they will furely anfwer, God. How therefore are they turned away to
the •worjhip of others? God alfo beareth the faying of the prophet, O Lord,
verily thefe are people who believe not : and be anfwer eth. Therefore turn afidc
from them ; and fay. Peace 1 : hereafter fhall they know their folly.

a See chap, 25. p. 301. not. d.

CHAP. XLIV.

Intitled > Smoke a ; revealed at Mecca 11 ,

In the name of the moft merciful God.

H . M c . By the perfpicuous book of the Koran ; verily we have fent
down the fame on a bleffed night 4 , (for we had engaged fo to do,) on the
flight wherein is diftin&ly fent down the decree of every determined thing, as a
command from us *. Verily we have ever ufed to fend apojlks with revelations,
#1 proper intervals , as a mercy from thy Lord ; for it is he who heareth
find knoweth : the Lord of heaven and earth, and of whatever is between
them ; if ye are men of fure knowledge. There is no God but he : he giveth
life, and he caufeth to die; he is your Lord, and the Lord of your
fore-fathers. Yet do they amufe themfelves with doubt. But obferve them
on the day whereon the heaven fliall produce a vifible fmoke, which (hall
cover mankinds this wi// be a tormenting plague. They fhall fay , O Lord,
take this plague from off us : verily we will become true believers. How

F if Jhould

* This word occurs within a few lines from was fent down* : and according to this e.xpofirion
the beginning of the chapter. the paffage may be rendred. The night whereon

b Some except the verfe be ginning. We will every determined or adjudged matter was fent down,
take the plague off you a little , &c. f When the bedvens fhall produce a vifible fmoke,

c See the Prel/Difc. III. p. 59, &c. &c.] The commentators differ in their cxpoil-

d \A bleffed night ;] Generally fuppofed to be tions of this paffage. Some think it fpoken of
that between the 23 d . and 24 th . of Ramadan . a fmoke which feemed to fill the fur, during the
See ib. p. 64. and chap. 97. and the notes there, famine which was inflided on the Meccans in
e The night whereon is diftinftly fent down the Mohammed 's time and was fo thick, that tho’

decree of every determined thing , &c.] For an- they could hear, yet they could not fee one ano-
nually on this night, as the Mohammedans are ther 4 . But, according to a tradition of Ali, the
taught, all the events of the enfuing year, with fmoke here meant is that which is to be one of
jefpeft to life, and death, and the other affairs the previous figns of the day of judgment \
of this world, are difpofed and fettled x . Some, and will fill the whole fpace from eaft to weft,
however, fuppofe that thefe words refer only to and laft for forty days. This fmoke, they fay t
t hit particular night on which the Koran , will intoxicate the infideli, and iffue at their noie,
wherein are compleatly contained the divine de- ears, and poftcriors ; but will very little incom~
terminations in refpc# to religion and morality, mode the true believers 6 .

1 Jallalo’odin, ^/Beidawi. 3 Idem, 3 See chap. 23. p. 284. «ot. c. 4 41

Zamakh. ^/Beidawi, Yahya, Jall al, 1 See the Prel.Difc. $ IV. p. St. 6 Al

Zamaxh. ^/Beidawj,

4-02 Al KORAN. Chap. 44,

fhould an admonition be of avail to them in this condition j when a manifeft
apoftle came unto them, but they retired from him, faying. This man is ui'-
ftrufted by others *, or is a diftradted perfon ? We will take the plague from
off you, a little : hut ye will certainly return to your infidelity b . On the day
whereon we Ihall fiercely afiault them with great power*, verily we will take
vengeance on them. We made trial of the people of Pharaoh before them,
and an honourable mefienger came unto them, faying , Send unto me the fer-
vants of God * ; verily I am a. faithful mefienger unto you : and lift not your-
felves up againft God : for I come unto you with manifeft power. And I
fly for protection unto my Lord, and your Lord, that ye (tone me not e .
If ye do not believe me, at leaf depart from me f . And when they accufed
him of impofture , he called upon his Lord, faying, Thefe are a wicked people.
And God faid unto him, March forth with my fervants by night ; for ye
will be putfued : and leave the lea divided, that the Egyptians may enter

the fame , for they are a hoft doomed to be drowned. How many gardens,
and fountains, and fields of corn, and fair dwellings, and advantages which
they enjoyed, did they leave behind them ? Thus we difpoffejfed them thereof-,
and we gave the fame for an inheritance unto another people «. Neither heaven
nor earth wept for them h j neither were they refpiced any longer. And we de-
livered the children of Israel from a fhameful afflidion ; from Pharaoh ;
for he was haughty, and a tranlgrefibr : and we chofe them, knowingly *,
above all people ; and we Ihewed them fevered figns k , wherein was an evident
trial. Verily thefe Meccans fay, Afiuredly our final end will be no other
than our firft natural death •, neither fhall we be railed again : bring now
our forefathers hack to life , if ye fpeak truth. Are they better, or the peo-
ple of Tobba *, and thofe who were before them ? we deftroyed them, be-
caufe they wrought wickednefe. We have not created the heavens and the

earth,

* See chap. 1 6. p- 223. * Send unto me the fervants of God;] i. e. Let

We will take the plague from off them, a lit- the Ifraelites go with me to worihip their God.
tle% yet will ye certainly return to your infidelity.’] * That ye fione me not;] Or that ye injure me
If we follow the former expofition, the words not, either by word or deed. 1
are to be underftood of the ceafing of the fa- f Depart from me ;] Without oppofing me, or
mine, upon the interceffion of Mohammed, at offering me any injury, which I have not de-
the defire of the Kortijb, and on their promife ferved from you.
of believing on him ; notwithllandiog which e See chap. 26. p. 204.

they fell back to their old incredulity : but if we fc Neither heaven nor earth wept ftr them;]

follow the latter expofition, they are to be under- That is, Hone pitied their deltniAion.
flood of God’s taking away the plague of the ’ Knowingly ;J i: e. Knowing that they were
ffnoke, after the expiration of the forty days, at worthy of our choice; or notwithlhnding we
the prayer of the infidel), and on their promife knew they would, in time to come, fall into ido-
of receiving the true faith ; which bring done, latry, &c.

they will immediately return to their wonted ob- k Several figns i] As the dividing of the red
tlinacy. fea ; die cloud which fhaded them ; the raining

c On the day whereon we Jball fiercely effaa/t on them manna and quails, {* fc. *
them with great power ;J Some expound cilia of 1 The people of T obba jJ viz. The Ham-

jbe daughter at Bcdn and others of the day of yarites, whole kings had the title of Tobba*.

judgment- The commentators tell us that the Tobba here

meant

1 Al Bbisawi.

* Idea.

3 See the Prelim. Difc. §. I. p. 9,

Cm'ap. 45. Al KORAN. 403

earth, and whatevei* is between them, by way of fport : we have created
them no otherwife than in truth ' ; but the greater part of them do not un-
derftand. Verily the day of reparation b /ball be the appointed term of them
all i a day, whereon the matter and the fervant lhall be of no advantage to
one another, neither lhall they be helped; excepting thofe on whom God
fhall have mercy : for he is the mighty, the merciful. Verily the fruit of
the tree of al Zakkum fhall he the food of the impious* : as the dregs of oil
lhall it boil in the bellies of the damned , like the boiling of the hotteft water.
And it fhall he faid to the tormentors. Take him, and drag him into the
midft of hell: and pour on his head the torture of boiling water, faying ,
Tafte this ; for thou art that mighty and honourable perfon. Verily this
is the punifhment of which ye doubted. But the pious fhall he lodged in a
place of fecurity ; among gardens and fountains : they fhall be cloathed in
fine filk, and in fattin ; and they fhall Jit facing one another. Thus fhall it he:
and we will efpoufe them to lair damfels, having large black eyes. In that
place lhall they call for all kinds of fruits, in foil fecurity: they fhall not tafte
death therein, after the firft death; and God lhall deliver from the pains of
hell : through the gracious bounty of thy Lord. This will be great felicity.
Moreover we have rendred the Kounfs eafy for thee , by revealing it in thine
own tongue: to the end that they may be admonilhed: wlierefore do thou
wait the event ; for they wait to fie fine misfortune befall thee.

meant was very potent, and built Samarcand, or,
as others fay, demolilhed it; and that he was a
true believer, but his fubje&s were infidels. 1

This .prince feems to have been Abu Carl
Afaad , who flourilhed about feven hundred years
before Mohammed* and^m braced Judaifm , which
religion he firft introduced into Taman * (being
the true religion at that timejnafmuch as Cbrif-
Sanity was not then promulgated,) and was, for

1 Al Bbidawi, Jallalq’ddin.

that caufc probably, flain by his own people *.

* See chap. 21 p. 266. and chap. 4$. p. 374,
b The day of fipar at ion ;] i. e. The day of
judgment ; when the wicked (hall be feparatedl
from the righteous, £Ac,

c The impious ;] falluldddin Cup poles (his paf-
(age to have been particularly levelled againfl
Abu JahL

• Al Jansabi. V. Pec. Spec. p. 6d.

CHAP. XLV.

Inti tied* The Kneeling*; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T T. M*. The revelation of this book is from the mighty, the wife Gob,
XT Verily both in heaven and earth are figns of the divine power unto the
true believers: and in the creation of yourfelves, and of the beads which are

F f f 1 fcattered

* The word from which this chapter is denominated, occurs pag. 405. b See the Prel. Difc.
5 - III. p. 59, £ 3 V.

404 Al KORAN- Chap. 45.

i'cattered over the face of the eaplh, are figns unto people of found judg-
ment t, and alfa in the viciflkude of night and day, and the rain which
God fendeth down from heaven, whereby he quickeneth the earth after it hath
been dead : in the change of the winds alfo are figns, unto people of under-
ftanding. Thefe are the figns of God ; we rehearfe them unto thee with
truth. In what revelation therefore will they Relieve, after they have rejected
God and his figns? Woe unto every lying, and impious perlon ; who heareth
the figns of God, which are read unto him, and afterwards proudly perfifteth
in infidelity , as though he heard them not : (denounce unto him a painful puniih-
ment:) and who, when he cometh to the knowledge of any of our figns,
fecerveth the fame with fcorn. For thefe is prepared a fhameful punilh,-
ment: before them lietb hell; and whatever they fliall have gained ihall not
avail them at all, neither flail the idols which they, have taken for their pa-
trons, befides God : and they ihall fuffer a grievous puniihinent. This is
a true direction : and for thofe who difbelieve the figns of their I^ord, is
prepared the puniihment of a painful torment. It is God who hath fub-
jefted the fea unto you, that the (hips may fail therein, at his command ;
and that ye may feek advantage unto yourfelves by commerce, of his bouofy •, and
that ye may give thanks : and he obligeth whatever is in heaven and on
earth to ferve ypu *, the whole being from him. Verily herein are figns, unto
people who confider. Speak unto the true believers, that they forgive thofe
who hope not for the days of God *, that he may reward people according to
what they ihall have wrought. Whofo doth that which is right, doth it to the
advantage of his own foul ; and whofo doth evil, doth it againfl: the fame :
hereafter ihall ye return unto your Lord. We gave unto the children of Is-
rael the book of the law-, andwifdom, and prophecy ; and we fed them
with good things, and preferred them above all nations : and we gave them
plain ordinances concerning the bufinefs of religion ; neither did they fall to
variance, except after that knowledge had come unto them, through envy
amongft themfelves : but thy Lord will decide the controverfy between them,
on the day of refurre&ion, concerning that wherein they difagree. After-
wards we appointed thee, O Mohammed, to promulgate a law concerning the
bufinefs of religion : wherefore follow the fame, and follow not the defires of
thofe who are ignorant b . Verily they Hull not avail thee againfl- God at all :
the uniuft are the patrons of one another s but God is the patron of the pious.
This Koran delivereth evident precepts unto mankind •, and is a direction, and
a mercy, unto people who judge aright. Do the workers of iniquity imagine
that we will deal with them as with thofe who believe and do good works ;

fi

a Speal unto tie true believers , that they forgive thinking to revenge himfelf by force- Some are
thofe who hope not for the days of God, % of opinion that this verfe is abrogated 1 that of
the days God, in this place, are" meant the toar % .

profpeteus focceiTes of his people in battle a- b Follow not the dejtres of the ignorant i\ That
gainft theSahdeb *. The paflage is faid to have is. Of the principal Koreijh, who were urgent
been revealed on account of Omar , who being with Mohammed to return to the religion of his
ireviled by one of the tribe of Ghifar, ‘was forefathers 5 .

* See p . 205, not. <L

* Al Be id aw 1 .

3 Idem.

Chap. 45. Al K 0 R A N. 405

fo that their life and their death Jhall he equal ? An ill judgment do they make.
God hath created the heavens and the earth in truth •, that he may recom-
penfe every foul according to that which it fhall have wrought : and they (hall
not be treated unjuftly.* What thinkeft thou? He who taketh his own lull for his
God, and whom God caufeth knowingly to err, and whofe ears, and whofe
heart he hath fealed up, and over whofe eyes he hath call a vail j who (hall dirett
him, after God Jhall have forfaken him ? Will ye not therefore be admonilhed ?
They, fay, There is no other life , accept our prefent life : we die, and we live ;
and nothing but time deftroyeth us. But they have no knowledge in this
matter ; they only follow a vain opinion. And when our evident figns are
rehearfed unto them, their argument which they offer againjl the fame , is no other
than that tjiey fay, Bring to life our fathers who have been dead \ if ye (peak
truth- Say, God giveth you Ufa; and afterwards caufeth you to die: hereafter
will he afibmble you together on the day of refurreftioo i there is no dqubt
thereof ; but the greater part of men do not underftand. Unto God apper-
tainetb the kingdom of heaven and earth } and the day whereon the hour
fhall be fixed, on that day fhall thofe who charge the Kqvan with vanity
perilh. And thou fhalt fee every nation 1 kneeling : every nation fhall be
called unto its book of account *, and it fk<& he fai 4 unto them. This day (hall
ye be rewarded according to that which ye have wrought. This our book
will fpeak concerning you with truth : therein have we written down whatever
ye have done b . As to thofe who fhall have believed and done good works,
«their Lord fhall lead them into his mercy : this fhall be manifell felicity.
But as to the infidels, it Jhall be faid unto thepii Were not - my figns rehearfed
unto you ? hut, ye prqudly rejected them, and became a wicked people ? And
when it was faid unto you. Verily the prqmjf® °f God if true -, and as to the
hour of judgment, there is no doubt thereof: ye anfwered. We know noc
what the hour of judgment is : we hold an uncertain opinion only v and we
are not well a (lured of this matter. But on that day the evils, of that which
they have wrought, fhall appear unto them •, and that which they mocked at,
fhall encompafs them : and it fhall be faid unto them. This day will we forget
you, as ve, did fprget the meeting of this your day: and your abode Jhalj
he hell fire ; and ye (hall have none to deliver you. This Jhall ye fuff er, be-
caufe ye turned the figns of God to ridicule •, and the life of the world de-
ceived you. On this day, therefore, 'they (hall not be taken forth from thence,
neither fhall they be alked any more to render themfelves well-pleafing unto
G&d. Wherefore praife be unto God, the Lord of the heavens, and the
Lord of the earth the Lord of all creatures: and unto him be glory m
heaven and earth ; for he is the mighty, the wife God!

* Even nation ;] The original worf Ownat the fame law or religion,
properly ugnifies a people who profeS one and 5 See the Prelim, Diic, y IV. p. 89.

CHAP.

40 6

Al KORAN , :

Chap. 46.

CHAP. XLVI.

Intitled , A l A h k a f * ; revealed at Mec ca.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

XXVI. *T T.M h . The revelation of this book is from the mighty, the wife Goa.

1 1 We have not created the heavens, and the earth, and whatever is
between them, otherwife than in truth*, and for a determined period d : but
the unbelievers turn away from the warning which is given them. Say,
What think ye ? Shew me what part of the earth the idols which ye in-
voke, befides God, have created? Or had they any lhare in the creation of
the heavens ? Bring me a book of fcfipture revettkd before this, or fomC
footftep of ancient knowledge, to countenance jour idolatrous praffiees ; if ye are
men of veracity. Who . is in a wider error than he who invoketh, befides
God, that which cannot return him an anfwer, to the day of refurredtion ;
and idols which regard not their calling on them : and which, when men
fhall be gathered together to judgment , will become their enemies, and
will ungratefully deny their worlbip? When our evident figns are rehearfed
unto them, the unbelievers fay of the truth *, when it cometh unto them.
This is a manifeft piece of forcery. Will they fey, Mohammed hath forg-
ed it ? Anfwer, If 1 have forged it, verily ye fhall not obtain for me any
favour from God: he well knoweth the injurious language which ye utter
concerning it: he is a fufficient witnefs between me and you; and he is
gracious and merciful. Say, I am not fingular among the apoftles'-, neither
do I know what will be done with me or with you hereafter : I follow
no other than what is revealed unto me * neither am I any more than a
public warner. Say, What is your opinion ? If this hook be from God,
and ye believe not therein ; and a witnefs of die children of Israel bear
witnefs to its confonancy with the law*, and believeth therein } and ye

proudly

* Al Abkaf is the plural of Hetf, and fignifies
fands which lie in a crooked or winding man-
ner ; whence it became the name of a territory
in the province of Badramauty where the Adites
dwelt. It is mentioned about-the middle of the
chapter,

*Sce~thePrtlia. Rf<r. $. III. p. ;9,fcc.

* See chap. 2r. p. 266. and ch. 38. p. 374, Ac.

4 For m determined period {] Being, to iaft but

a certain fpace of time, and not for ever.

e The truth $] i. c. Any part of the revelations
of the Koran .

[ I am not fingular among the apoftles ;] That

1 jtlltL IDAWIu *

is, I do not teach a do&rine different from what
the former apoftlet and prophets have taught;
nor am I able to do what they could not i par-
ticularly to fhew the ffgns which every one fhall
think fit to demand 1 .

t fT a witnefs of the children of Ifrael bear
tpitdejs of Us ccnjori/mc'y to the lawy. Ac.] This
witnefi is generally fuppofed to have been the
Jew Abu til] ah Ebn Ga/dm, who declared that
Mohammed was the prophet foretold by Mofes*
Some, however, fuppofe the witnefs here meant
to have been Mofes hitafelf

Ideeni Jallalo'ddix.

Chap. 46.

Al KORAN.

407

proudly reject the fame : are ye not unjuft doers ? Verily God direfteth not
uivjuft people. But thofe who believe not, fay of the true believers. If the
dotlrine bf the Koran had been good, they had not em braced the fame before us*.
Andwhen they are not guided thereby, they fay, This is an antiquated lye.
Whereas the book of Moses was revealed before the Koran , to be a guide
and a mercy : and this is a book confirming the fame , delivered in the
Arabic tongue j to denounce threats unto thofe who aft unjuftly, and to bear
good tidings unto the righteous doers. As to thofe who fay. Our Lord is
God ; and who behave uprightly : on them Jball no fear come, neither fhall
they be grieved. Thefe Jball be the inhabitants of paradife, they fhall remain
therein for ever : in recompenfe for that which they have wrought. We
have commanded man to fhew kindnefs to his parents : his mother beareth
him in her womb with pain, and bringeth him forthwith pain: and the [pace
of his being carried in her womb , and his weaning, is thirty months b j un-
til, when he attaineth his age of ftrength, and attaineth the age of forty years,
he faith % O Lord, excite me, by thy infpiration, that I may be grateful
for thy favours, wherewith thou halt favoured me and my parents •, and
that I may work righteoufnels, which may pleafe thee : and be gracious unto
me in my ifiue ; for lam turned unto thee, and am a Modem. Thefe are
they from whom we accept the good work which they have wrought, and
whole evil works we pals by ; and they Jhall be among the inhabitants of
psradife : this is a true promife, which they are promifed in this world. He
who faith unto his parents. Fie on you ! Do ye promife me chat I fhall
be taken forth from the grave , and reftored to life’, when many generations
have pafled away before roe, and none of them have returned back * ? And bis

f lorents implore God’s affiftance, and fay to their fon, Alas for thee ! Be-
ieve : for the promife of God is true. But he anfwereth, This is no other
than filly fables of the ancients. Thefe are they whom the fentence faffed
on the nations which have been before them, of genii and of men, paltly
fitteth : they fhall furely perilh e . For every one is prepared a certain de-
gree of bappinefs or mifery , according to that which they fhall have wrought}

. that

» If the doHrint of the Koran bad been good,
they had not embraced the fame before #>.] Thefe
words were fpoken, as fome think, by the Jews,
when Abdallah profeffed IJlam ; or, according
to others, by the Koreijb, becaufe the firll fol-
lowers of Mohammed were for the moft part
poor and mean people ; or elfe by the tribes
of Amer, Ghat] n and Afad, on the converlion
of thofe of Jobeinab, Mozeinab, Aft am and
Gbifar «.

b Thirty months ;] At the leaft. Fqt if the
full time of fuckling an infant be two years *,
or twenty four months, there remain but fie
months for the fpace of his being carried in the
womb; which is the leaft that can be allowed*.
c He faith, &c.] Thefe words, it is faid, were

revealed on account of Abu Seer, who profe fled
IJlam in the fortieth year of his age, two year*
after Mohammed's million ; and was the only
perfon, either of the Mobajerin or the Att/art ,
whofe father and mother were alfo converted :
his fon Abdalrabman, and his grandfoit Abu
Alii, likewife embracing the fame faith 4 .

d He who faith to bis parents. Fit on you, &c.]
The words feem to be general : but it is faid
they were revealed particularly on occalion of
Abd ahabmdn, the fon of Abu Beer ; who ufed
thefe exprellions to his father and mother, before
he profefled IJlam ’.

* They jball furtly ptrijb 0 Unlefs they redeem
their fault by repentance, and embracing the
true faith ; as did Abd'alrabmdn.

1 Iidem.

1 See chap. 2. p. 27. 3 Al Bejdawi. 4 Idem, Jahai. {jfo. 1 ^/Bjidawi.

40$ Al KORAN. Chap. 46-

that God may reconiptfnfe them for their works : and they (hall not be
treated unjuftly. On a certain day, the unbelievers fhall be expofed before
the fire of bell ; aud it Jball be f aid unto them , Ye received your good things
4 n your life-time, nubile ye were in the world *, and ye enjoyed yourfelves
■therein : wherefore this day ye lhall be rewarded with the punllhtnent of
ignominy •, for that ye behaved infolently in the earth, without juftice, and
for -that ye tranfgrefled. Remember the brother of An*, when he preached
onto his people in al Ahkaf, ('and there were preachers before him, and
after him,) faying, Worfhip none but God : verily I fear for you the punifh-
ment of a great day. They anfwered. Art thou come unto us that thou
mayeft turn us afide from the worfhip of our gods ? Bring on us now the
fftnijbment with which thou threatened us, if thou art a man of veracity. He
Taid, Verily the knowledge of the time when your punijhifient will' be tn-
-jltfled, is with God *, and T only declare unto you that which I am fent to
preach ; but I fee ye are an ignorant people. And when they faw the pre-
paration made for their punijhmeM , namely , a cloud traverfing the sky , and
tending -towards their valleys, they faid. This is a traverfing cloud, which
bringeth us rain. Hud anfwered , Nay ; it is what ye demanded to be
hadened: a wind, wherein is A fevere vengeance : it will dedroy every thing b ,
at the command of its Lord. And in the morning nothing was to be feen,
befides their empty dwellings. Thus do we reward wicked people. We
had edablifhed them in the like fiaurifbing condition wherein we have edablilh-
ed you, O men of Mecca , and we had given them ears, and eyes, and
hearts : yet neither their ears, nor their eyes, nor their hearts profited them
at all, when they rejected the figns of God ; but the vengeance which they
mocked at, fell upon them. We heretofore deftroyed the cities which were
round about you' 5 and we varioufly propofed our figns unto them, that
they might repent. Did thole protetd them, whom they took for gods, be-
fides God, and imagined to be honoured with his familiarity ? Nay 1 they with-
drew from them : yet this was their falfe opinion which feduced them, and
the blafpbemy which they had devifed. Remember when we caufed certain of
the genii' 1 to turn aGde unto thee, that they might hear the Koran : and
when they were prefent at the reading of the fame, they faid to one another ,
Give ear : and when it was ended, they returned back unto their people,
preaching wbat they had heard. They faid. Our people, verily we have heard
a

* The brother of Ad i. e. The prophet Hud. the (ettlcments of the Ybamudites, Midianitei,

* It will deflroj every thing, Arc.] Which came and the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, &c.

to pals accordingly; for this peftilential and vio- Certain tf the genii ;) Thefe genii, accord-
lent wind killed all who believed not in the ing to different opinions, were of Nijtbin, or of
do&rine of llud, without diftinftion of fex, age, Taman, or of Ninive ; and in nomber dine, or
or degree ; and intirely deftroyed their poffef- feven. They heard Mthsmoud reading the Koran
lions. See the Prelim. Difc. $ 1 . p. 6, and the by ntgbt, or after the morning prayer, in the
notes to ch. 7. p. 124. valley ol at Nakblab, during the lime of his «-

c The cities wbicb were round about youS] As treat to al Tayef, and believed on him r .

1 Idem, Jallalo’ddik.

Chap. 47 * Al KORAN. 409

a book read unto us, which hath been revealed fince Moses „ confirming the
ftripture which was delivered before it *, and dire&ing unto the truth, and the
right way. Our peqple, obey God’s preacher : and believe in him ; that he
may forgive you your fins, and may deliver you from a painful punifh-
ment. And whoever obeyeth not God’s preacher, fhall by no means
fruftrate God's vengeance on earth : neither fhall he have any protedors be-
fides him. Thefe will be in a manifeft error. Do they not know that
God, who hath created the heavens and the earth, and was not fatigued
with the creation thereof, is able to raife the dead to life ? Yea verily : for
he is ftknightv. On a certain day the unbelievers fhall be expofed unto
bell Si re-; and it Jhall be j aid unto them. Is not this really come to pafs ?
They fhall anfwer. Yea, by our Lord. God fhall reply, Tafte, therefore,
the punifhment of bell, for that ye have been unbelievers. Do thou, O ro
pbet , bear the infults of thy people with patience, as our apoftles, who were
endued with conftancy, bar etbe injuries of tbeir people: and require not their
punifhment to be haftened unto them. On the day whereon they fhall fee
fine. punifhment wherewith they have been threatened, it fhall feem as though
they had tarried in the world but an hour of a day. This is a fair warning.
Shall any perifh except the people who tranfgrefs?

* A book which bath been rtveakJ fact Mofes;] before their eonverfion to Mobmmedifm, to hare
Hence the commentators fuppofe thofe genii, been of the Jiwijh religion.

CHAP. XLV1L

Inti tied, Mohammed*; revealed ^/Medina 1 *.

In the name of the molt merciful God.

G OD will render of none effeft the works of thofe who believe not, and
who turn away men from the way of God : but as to thofe who believe*,
and work righteoufnefs, and believe in the revelation which hath been fent
down unto Mohammed, (for it is the truth from their Lord,) he will expiate
their evil deeds from them, and will difpofe their heart aright. This will
be do, becaufe thofe who believe not follow vanity, and becaufe thofe who.
believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus God propoundeth unto
men their examples. When ye encounter the unbelievers, ftrike off tbeir
heads, until ye have made a great flaughter among them ; and bind them
in bonds : and either give them a free difmiffion afterwards, or exalt a ran-

Ggg fom*

‘Some intitle this chapt txWars which is there- k Some fuppofe the whole to here been ret-

in commanded to be vigoroufly earned on againft vealed at Mscia.
the enemies of the Mohammedan faith.

4'ior Al KORAN. Chap. 47;

fom ; until the war (hall have laid down its arms \ This (ball ye do: Ve-
rily if God pleafed, he could take vengeance on them, without your affiji-
ance ; but he commandetb you to jigbt bis battles , that he may prove the one
of you by the other. And as to thofe who fight k in defence of. God’s true
religion, God will not fuffer their works to pcrifh : he will guide them,
and will difpofe their heart aright ; and he will lead them- into paradife, of
which he harh told them. O true believers, if ye affift God, by fighting for
bis religion, he will aflift you ag&infi your enemies and wilt fet your feet
faft : but as for the infidels, let them perilh ; and their works (hall God ren-
der vain. This Jball befaltbemj becaufe they have rejected with abhor rence-
that which God hath revealed : wherefore their works fhall become of no
avail. Do they not travel through the earth, and fee what hath been the
end of thofe who were before them ? God utterly deftroyed them : and the
like cataftropbe awaiteth the unbelievers. This Jball come to pafs , for that
God is the patron of' the true believers, and for that the infidels have no
protect or. Verily God will introduce thofe who believe, and do good works,
into gardens beneath which rivers flow : but the unbelievers indulge
themfelves in pleafures, and eat as beafts eat j and their abode Jball be hell
fire. How many cities were more mighty in ftrength than thy city which hath
expelled thee ■» yet have we deftroyed them, and there was none to help them?
Shall he, therefore, who followeth the plain declaration of his Lord, be as he
whofe evil works have been drafted up for him by the devil j and who fol-
low their own lufts? The defeription of paradife, which is promifed unto
the pious : therein are rivers of incorruptible water y and rivers of milk, the
tafte whereof changeth not *, and rivers of wine, pleafant unto thofe who
drink ; and rivers of clarified honey : and therein fhall they have plenty of
all kinds of fruits •, and pardon from their Lord. Shalt the man for whom-
tbefe things are prepared, be as he who mult dwell for ever in bell fire •, and
will have the boiling water given diem to drink, which fhall burft their
bowels ? Of the Unbelievers there are fame who give ear unto thee, until,
when they go out from thee, they fay, by way of derifion, unto thofe to
whom knowledge hath been given*, What hath he faid now ? Thefe are
they whofe hearts God hath fealed up, and who follow their own lufts : but
as

* When Jt encounter tie unitlicvers, Ji/ike tjf but nuy either be fet *t liberty gratis, or on
their beds, &c.] This I w the Hanifites judge payment of a certain ranfom, or may be ex-
to be abrogated, or to relate particularly to the changed for Mohammedan prifoners, or condemn-
war of B&f i far the feverirv here commanded* ed to flamy, .at the pleafureof the Imtkn or
which was ncetfl&y in the beginning of Mo^ prince a .

b^mmedijm 1 * , theyjthink too rigorous tobepmt b Who fight , &c.] Some copies, jjnflead of
ia pia&icein its flourifhlrg flare. But the Per- kaiilu, read kutilu ; according to which latter
fin jit, and fome others, hold the command to reading it itionld be rendred, who tire fix: s, or
be Ml in full force : for, according to them, all JuJfer martyrdom. Sec .

the men of full age, who are taken in battle, are c Tbofi to whom knowledge bath been given ;]
to be {lain, onkfs they embrace the Mobammt- i. e. The more learned of Mebammed's compani-
dan faith ; and thofe who fall into the hands of ons ; fuch as Elm Mafud , and Ebn Abbas 3 .
the Mojlems after the battle, are not to be {lain,

1 Seeebap. 8 • p. 1 ± 1, and 147. 2 Al Beidawi. V. Rilanel Dijfert. de Jure militart Mob am «

medanor. /. 3,2. * Jallal.

Chap. 4-7’ K0Rj{T7. 41 1

as to thofe who are dire&ed, God will grant them a more ample diredion,
and he will inftrud them what to avoid*. Do the infidels wait for any other
than the loft hoar, that it may come upon them fuddenly ? Some figns there-
of are already come b : and when it fhall adually overtake therrt. how can
they then receive admonition ? Know, therefore, that there is no god but
God : and afk pardon for thy fin % and for the true believers both men and
women. God knoweth your bufy employment in the world, and the place of
your abode hereafter. The true believers fay. Hath not a Sura been re-
vealed commanding war againft the infidels? But when a Sura without any
ambiguity is revealed, and war is mentioned therein, thou mayeft fee thofe
in whofe hearts is an infirmity *, look towards thee with the look of one
whom death overlhadoweth. But obedience would be more eligible for them,
and to f|>eak that which is convenient. And when the command is firmly
eftablifhed, if they give credit unto God, it will he better for them. Were
ye ready therefore, if ye had been put in authority «, to commit outrages in
the earth, and to violate your ties of blood ? Thdfe are they whom God
hath eurfed, and bath rendred deaf, and whofe eyes he hath blinded. Do
they not therefore attentively meditate on the Koran ? Are there locks
upon their hearts ? Verily they who turn their backs, after the true direc-
tion is made manifeft unto them j Satan fhall prepare their wichedneft for
them, and God fhall bear with them for a time. This fhall befal them, be-
caufe they fay privately unto thofe who deteft what God hath revealed. We
will obey you in part of the matter *. But God knoweth their fecrets. How
therefore will it be with them, when the angels fhall caufe them to die,

1 and fhall ftrike their faces, and their backs* ? This fhall they fuffer, be-
caufe they follow that which provoketh God to wrath, and are avene to
what is well pleating unto him : and he will render their works vain. Do
they in whole hearts is an infirmity, imagine that God will not bring
their malice to light ? If we pleafed, we could furely fhew them unto thee,
and thou fhouldeft know them oy their marks j but thou fhalt certainly know
them by their perverfe pronunciation of their words. God knowedi your ad ions :
and we will try you, until we know thofe among you who light valiant-

Ggg* ly,

a And he trill tnftruEl ibem tribat to avoid i] Or, far ion of Go d a hundred rims a day*.
as the words may alfo be tranflated, and be will . 6 An infirmity^ A a hypocri fy, cowardice, or
reward them for their piety. inft ability in their religion.

b Some figns thereof are already come ;J As the e If ye had been put in authority ;] Or, as the
million of Mohammed , the fplitting of the moon, words may alfo be tranflated, If ye bad turned
and the fmoke 1 mentioned in the 44th chapter, bark, and apoflatized from your faith.

c Ask pardon for thy fin Q Tho’ Mohammed { We will obey you in fart of {be matter ;) i. e.
here and cite where 1 acknowledges himfelf to In part of what ye denre or us 1 by flaying at
be a finner, yet feveral Mohammedan dodlors home and not going forth with Mohammed to
pretend he was wholly free from fin, and fup- war, and by private combination againft him 4 .
pofe he is here commanded to ask forgivenefs, « When the angels Jballtaufe them to die , &c.J
not that he wanted it, but that he might fet an Thefe words are fuppofed to allude to the exa-
cxample to his followers : wherefore he ufed to mination of the fepulehre*
fay of himfelf, if the tradition be true, I ask

1 Idem, ^/Beidawi. * See chap. 4%. in tie beginning. 3 Jallalg’ddin, + AIBzidawi*

4'i2 Ad KORAN. Chap. 48.

]y, and who pcrftvere with cortftancy ; and we will try the reports of your
behaviour. Verily thofe who believe not, and turn away men from the way
of God, and makeoppofition againft the apoftle*, after the divine direction hath
been manifefted unto them, fhall not hurt God at all ; but he fhall make their
works to perifh. O true believers, obey God ; and obey the apoftle : and
render not your works of no effedt. Verily thofe who believe not, and who
turn away men from the way of God, and then die, being unbelievers, God
will by no means forgive. Faint not therefore, neither invite your enemief
to peace, while ye are the fuperior : for God is with you, and will not defraud
you of the merit of your wonts. Verily this prefent life is only a play and a
vain amufement : but if ye believe, and fear Cop t he will give you your
rewards. He doth not require of you your whole fubftance : if he fhould
require the whole of you, and eameftly prefs you, ye would become niggardly*
and it would raife your hatred againft his apoftle. Behold, ye are thofe who
are invited to expend part of your fubftance for the fupport of God’s true
religion ; and there are fome of you who are niggardly. But whoever fhall
be niggardly, fhall be niggardly towards his own foul : for God wanteth
nothing, but ye are needy : and if ye turn back, he will fubftitute another
people in your ftead, who fhall not be like unto you u .

* Wbo make tppyfitiin againft the apoftle i] Thefts the place of theft: lukewarm Modems, are gene-
were the tribes oi Ktreidba and at Nadir ; or rally fuppofed to be the Per/tans s there being a
thofe who diftributed provifion to the army of tradition that Mohammed, being asked what peo-
the Koreijh at Bedr *. pie they were, at a time when Salman was

b He will fubftitute another people in jour float, fitting by him, clapped his hand on his tbigb,
who J. ball not be like unto you ;] L e. In back- and find, This man and bit nation. Others,
waraneft and averfion to the propagation of the however, are of opinion the Aufart, or the an-
tiith. The people here defigned to be put in gels are intended in this place *.

1 Jl Beidawi. See chap. 8. p. 143. not. h. * Idem.

CHAP. XL VIII.

ratified) The Victory ; revealed at Me d in Ai

In the name of the moft merciful God.

we have granted thee a manifeft vi&ory? : tha\ God may forgive

thee

* We have granted thee a numiftft viBory. ] This There are forme, notwith fh ndjng, who fuppofe

vi&ory, from which the chapter fakes its title, the advantage here intended was the pacification
according to the moft received interpretation, was of al Hadeibtya , which is here called a viBory y
the taking of the city of Mecca. The pafTage is becaufe the Meccans . aed for peace, and made a
faid to have been revealed on Mohammed's return truce there with Mohammed, their breaking of
from the expedition of al Hodeibtya, and contains which occaiioned the taking of Mecca . Others
a promife or prediction of this %naf foccefs, think the conqueft of Kbatbar , or the vi&oiy o-
which happened not till two years after; the ver the Greeks at MAta* dec. to be meant in this
preterit tenfe being therein ufed, .according to place,
the prophetic ftyle, for the future *.

1 Al Zamakk. ^//Beidawi, £#.

Chap. 4 ^* ^ KORsfl V* 4*3

thee* thy preceding and thy fubfequent fm b , and may complcat his favour
on thee, and dirett thee in the right way ; and that God may aflift thee
with a glorious afliftance. It k he who fendeth down fecure tranquillity
into the hearts of the true believers, that they may encreafe in faith, beyond
their farmer faith : (the hofts of heaven and earth are God’s ; and God is
kftqWing and wife :) that he may lead the true believers of both fexes in-
to gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for ever *, and may
expiate their evil deeds from them : (this will be great felicity with God r)
and that he may punifh the hypocritical men, and the hypocritical women*
and the idolaters, and the idolatreffes, who conceive an ill opinion of God. They
lhall experience a turn of evil fortune ; and God fhall be angry with them,
and fhall curfe them, and hath prepared hell for them * an ill journey fhall
it be thither! Unto God belong the hofts of heaven and earth; ana God
is mighty and wife. Verily we have fent thee to be a witnefs, and a bearer
of good tidings, and a denouncer of threats ; that ye may believe in God,
and his apoftle ; and may aflift him, and revere him*, and praife him morn-
ing and evening. Verily they who fwear fealty e unto thee, fwear fealty un-
to God: the hand of God is over their hands d . Whoever fhall violate his
oath , will violate the fame to the hurt only of his own foul : but whoever
fhall perform that which he hath covenanted with God, he will furely give
him a great reward. The Arabs of the defarc who were left behind * will
fay unto thee. Our fubftance and our families employed us, fo that we went
nat forth with thee to war ; wherefore ask pardon for us. They fpeak that
with their tongues, which is not in their hearts. Anfwer, Who fhall be able
to obtain for you any thing from God to the contrary if he is pleafed to af-
flift you, or is pleafed to be gracious unto you ?' Yea verily, God is well
acquainted with that which ye do. Truely ye imagined that the apoftle
and the true believers would never return to their families ; and this was
prepared in your hearts : but ye imagined an evil imagination ; and ye are

a

a That God may forgive thee ;] That is to fay.
That God may give thee an opportunity of de-
fending forgivenefs by eradicating of idolatry,
and exalting his true religion, and the deliver-
ing of the weak from the hands of the ungod*
ly, &c.

b Tby preceding and thy fubfequent fre*]X e.
Whatever thou haft done worthy reprehenJSon*
or, thy fins committed as well in the time of
ignorance, as fince. Some expound the words
more particularly, and fay the preceding or for-
mer fault, was his lying with his handmaid Mar
ry 1 , contrary to his oath ; and the l otter , his
marrying of Zeinab the wife of Zend his
adopted fon

c Swear fealty $] The original word fignifiea
publickly to acknowledge or inaugurate a prince,

1 See {pap. (?6 and the notes thereon . 2 Set

4 Jallal. « Idem , ^/Beidawi.

by fwearrng fidelity and obedience to him.

d The band of God /7 over their bands ;] That i
He bcholdeth from above, and is witfiei* to the
folemnity of your giving your faith to his apoftlej
and will reward you for it 4 . The expreflion
alludes to the manner of their plighting their
faith on thefe occafioiw,

e The Arabs of the defart tobo were left behind j]
Thefe were the tribes of AJlam t Jobtinab, Mo -
zeinab* and Gbifar % who being fummoned to
attend Mohammed in the expedition of al llodei-
biyai ftaid behind, and excufcd themfelvei by
faying their families muft fuifer in their abfencc,
and would be robbed of the little they had, (for
thefe tribes were of the poorer Arabs;) whereas
in reality they wanted firmnefs in the faith, and
courage to face the Koreijb 1 .

(bap. 33. and the notes thereon. 3 AIZ\m ak k.

4i+ A KORAN. C HAP. 48.

a corrupt people. Whofo believech not in God and his apoftle, verily we have
prepared burning fire for the unbelievers. Unto God belongetb the kingdom
of heaven and earth : he forgiveth whom he pleafeth , and he punifheth
whom he pleafeth *, and God is inclined to forgive, and merciful. Thole who
were lefc behind will fay, when ye go forth to take the fpoil *, Suffer us
to follow you. They feek to change the word of God b . Say, Ye fhall
by no means follow us : thus hath Goo faid heretofore. They will reply.
Nay; ye envy us a Jbare of the booty. But they are men of fmall underftand-
ing. Say unto the Arabs of the defart who were left behind. Ye fhall be
called forth againfl a mighty and a warlike nation' : ye fhall fight againft
them, or they fhall prorefs Islam. If ye obey, God will give you a glo-
rious reward: but if ye turn back, as ye turned back heretofore, he will
chaftife you with a grievous chaftifement. It fhall be no crime in the blind,
neither fhall it be a crime in the lame, neither fhall it be a crime in the
fick, if they go not forth to war: and whofo fhall obey God and his apoftle,
he fhall lead him into gardens beneath which rivets flow; but whofo f hal l
turn back, he will chaftife him with a grievous chaftifement. Now God was
well pleafed with the true believer?, when they fware fidelity unto thee un-
der the tree 4 ; and he knew that which was in their hearts : wherefore he
fent down on them tranquillity of mind % and rewarded them with a fpeedy
viftory f , and many fpoils which they took : for God is mighty and wife.
God promifed you many fpoils which ye fhould take ; buc he gave you

thefc

* When fe go forth to take the / boil ;) Viz. Ia
the expedition of Kbaibar . Tne prophet re-
turned from al Hctiribiya in f>bu'lbajja, in the
6th year of the Hefira, and (laid at Medina the
remainder of that month and the beginning of
Mob ar ram, and then fet forward againft the
yews of Kbaibar , with thofe only who had at-
tended him to al Hodeibiy : ; and having made
himfelf mailer of the place, and all the caftles
and ftrong holds in that territory 1 » took fpoils
to a great value, which he divided among
them who were prefen t at that expedition, and
none elfe*.

* The word of God ;] WhicTi was his promile

to thofe who attended thejprophet to al Hodribiyc ,
that he would make them amends for their mif-
fing of the plunder of Mecca at that time, by
giving them that of Kbaibar in lieu thereof!
Some think the word here intended to be that
pafiage in the 9th chapter Ye JbaU not go firth

with me fir the future, &c. which yet was plain-
ly revealed long after the taking of Kbaibar , on
occafiofci of the expedition of Tabuc 4 .

1 A mighty and warlike nation ;] Thefe were

2 V. Abulf. Fit. Moh.p . 87,

* Idem . 6 Jallalo'ddi N.

9 In not . ad top. 2. p. 29.

Sana Honeifa, who inhabited alTamdma , and
were the followers of Mofeilama, Mohammed ’a
competitor ; or any other of thofe tribes which
apoftatieed from Mobammedi/m * 5 or, as othen
rather fuppofe, the Perfians , or the Grub 6 •
d When they fware fidelity unto thee under the
tree.] Mohammed , when at al Hodeibiy a, fent
JawwAs Ebn Qmeyya the Kbozaite, to acquaint
the Meccans that he was come with a peaceable
inteation, to vifit the temple ; but they, on
fome jealoufy conceived, refufmg to admit him,
the prophet fent Otbman Ebn Affdn* whom they
imprilbned, and a report ran that he was flain:
whereupon Mohammed called his men about
him, and they took an oath to be faithful to him,
even to death ; during which ceremony he fat
under a tree, fuppofed by fome to have been an
Egyptian thorn, and by others a kind of Jotc-tree\
e Tranquillity of mind ;] The original word is
&aki not, of which notice has been taken elfe-
where 8 .

f A fpeedy victory j] Namely, the .foccefs at
Kbaibar ; or, as fome rather imagine, the tak-
ing of Mecca , See.

4 Al Bei DAW!,

V. Abulf. pit. Moh.p. 86.

* Al Beidawi. 3 Pag. 160.
7 Idem , Al Beidawi.

Chap. 4^ KORAH, 415

thefe by way of earned : and he reftrained the hands of men from you
that the fame may be a fign unto the true believers ; and that he may-
guide you into the right way. And be dfo promifeth you other fpoils , which
ye have not yet been able to take : but now hath God encompafled them
for you and God is almighty. If the unbelieving Meccans had fought
againft you, verily they had turned tbeit backs ; and they would nothavefound
a patron or prote&or : according to the ordinance of God, which hath been
put in execution heretofore againjt oppofers of the prophets j for thou (halt
not find any change in the ordinance of God. It was he who reftrained their
hands from you, and your hands from them, in the valley of Mecca ; af-
ter that he had given you the vidfory over them b ': and God faw that
which ye did. Thefe are they who believed not, and hindred you from
vijiting the holy temple, and tafo hindred the offering, being detained, that
it fhould not arrive at the place where it ought to be facrificcd e . Had it
not been that ye might have trampled on divers true believers, both men
and women, whom ye knew not, being promifcuoujl'y ajfembled with the in-
fidels, and that a crime might therefore have lighted on you on their ac-
count, without your knowledge, be bad not refrained your bands from'
them: but this was done , that God might lead whom he pleafeth into his
mercy. If they had been diftinguilheu from one another, we had fure-
ly chaftiled fuch of them as believed not, with a fevere chaftifement.
When the unbelievers had put in their hearts an affected precifenefs,
the precifenefs of ignorance, and God fent down his tranquillity on his
apoftle and on the true believers i ; and firmly fixed in them the word of

piety.

* Ami be reftrained the bands of men frm youi]
5: e. The hands of thofe of Khaibar , or of their
fucceffors of the tribes of Afad and Ghatfan ; or
of the inhabitam of Mecca, by the pacification
of al Hodeibiya *.

b He reftrained their hands frm you, and your
bunds from them. Sec.] J all aid dim lays, that foar-
fcoreofthe infidels came privately to Mohammed *s
camp Hodeibiya , with an intent to furprize

fome of his men, bat were taken and brought
before the prophet; who pardoned them and
ordered them to be fet at liberty r and this ge-
nerous adlion was the occalion of the truce ftruck
up by the Koreijb with Mohammed ; for thereupon
they fent Mail Ebn Amru and fome others, (and
not Ansa Ebn Mafud, as is fa id, by miltake, in
another place * ; for his errand was an a&ual
defiance,) to treat of peace.

Al Beidawi explains the paffage by another
ftory : telling us that Acrema Ebn Abi Jahl
marching from Mecca at the head of five hundred
men to al Hodeibiya, Mohammed fent againft him
Khdled Ebn etWalid , with a detachraent,who drove
the infidels back to the inner moff part of Mecca ,
(as the word here tranilated valley properly fig*

nifies,) and then left them, out of refpett to the
place.

c And hindred the offering, being detained,
that it jbould not arrbe at the place where it ought
to be facriftced.} Mohammed** intent, in the expe-
dition of al Hodeibiya, being only to vifit the
temple of Mecca in a peaceable manner, and to
offer a facrifice in the valley of Mina, accord-
ing to the eftabliflied rites, he carried beafb
with him for that purpofe^ but was not permit-
ted by the Jfomp Cither to enter the temple,
or to go to Mina.

d When the unbelievers had put in their hearts
an affefitd precifenefs , &e.] This paffage was
occafiooed by the iliffnefs of Mail and hb com-
panions, in wording the treaty concluded wixh
Mohammed: for when the prophet ordered All to
begin with the form, In the name of the mod merciful
God, they objected to it, and muffed that
he ffiould begin with this, In thy name , O God *
which Mohammed fubmitted to, and proceeded
to didate, Thefe are the conditions on which
Mohammed the apoftle of God has made peace
with tboje of Mecca : to this Sob ail again objected,
faying, If we bad acknowledged thee to be the

* Prelim. Difc . 5 2. p 5 j*-

* ^/Beidawi,

4*6 Al KORAN. CfcAp. 48 .

pjjfjf \ and they were the moft worthy of the fame, and the mod deferving there-
of:. for God knoweth all things. Now hath God in truth verified unto his apoftle
the vifion \ wherein be [aid ; Y. fliall fufely enter the holy temple of Mecca,
if God pleafe, in full fecurityj having your heads Ihavedj and "your hair
cut c : ye fliall not fear : for God knoweth that which ye know not ; and
he hath appointed you, befides this, a fpeedy vi£tory d . It is he who hath
fent his apoftle with the direction, and the religion of truth •, that he may
exalt the fame above every, religion: and God is a fufficient witnefs hereof.
Mohammed is the apoftle of Gop : and thofe who are with him are fierce
agaioft the unbelievers, hut compaffionate towards one another. Thou
mayeft fee them bowing down, proftrate, feeking a recompenfe from Gqd,
and his good will. Their figns are in their faces, being marks of frequent
proftrarion. This is their defcription in the pentateuch, and their defcription
in the gofpel : they are as feed which putteth forth its ftalk, and ftrengtheneth
it, and fwelleth in the ear, and rifeth upon its ftem ; giving delight unto the
fower. Such are the Modems defcribed to be : that the infidels may fwell with
indignation at them. God hath promifed untofuch of. them as believe, and do
good works, pardon and a great reward.

■m*

apoftle ofGoxs we bad not g iven thee any eppofiiiwti companions entTed Mecca in fecurity, with their
whereupon Mohammed ordered AH to as heads fhaven, and their hair cut This dream,

Sobail defired, Tbefe are the eendhhm wbrtb Mo- being imparted by the prophet to his followers,
hammed the fan of Abdallah, (Ac. But the Mo- occafioned a great deal of joy among them 5
JUmi were to difguffed thereat, that they ivere and they fuppofed it would be fulfilled that fame
on the point of breaking off the treaty, and had year.: but when they (aw the truce concluded,
Alien on the Meccans, had not God appeafed which fruftrated their expc&ation for that time,
and calmed their minds ; as it follows in the they were deeply concerned ; whereupon this
text l . paflage was revealed for their confolation, con-

The terms of this pacification were, that there firming jthe vifion, which was not to be ful-
(hould be a truce for ten years ; that any perfon filled till the year after, when Mohammed per*
might enter into league either with Mohammed , formed the vifitation diftinguifhed by the addi-
or with the Koreijb, as he fhould think fit ; and tion of al Kada, or completion, becaufe he then
that Mohammed (hould have the liberty to vifit compleated the vifitation of the former year, when
the tempt of Mecca the next year, for three the Koreijb not permitting him to enter Mecca,
days 2 . he was obliged to kill his vidims, and to fluve

• The word of piety L e. The Mohammedan himfelf at al Hodeibiya * .

profeffion of faith ; or the Bifmillab, and the c Having jour heads Jbaved \ and your hair
words Mohammed the .apoftle of God, which cut i. e. Some being (hayed, and others hav-
were rejeded by the infidels. ing only their hair cut.

b The vifion jj Or dream which Mohammed 6 A fpeedy vi&ony ;] Viz, . The taking of Kbai-

had at Medina* before he fet out for al Ho - bar.
deibiya ; wherein he dreamed that he and his

1 ^/Beidawi. V. Abulf. vit* Mob. p. 87, % Iidenu 3 *4/Bjidawi, Jallalo’jjdjk.

]V. ABui-r. vit* Mob . p. 84, .87.

CHAP.

Chap. 49,

Al KORAN.

4i,7

• CHAP. XLIX.

Tntitledy The inner Apartments ; revealed at Medina.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

O True believers, anticipate not am matter in the light of God and
his apoftle * : and fear God j for God both heareth and knoweth. O
true believers, raife not your voices above the voice of the prophet b ; neither
fpeak loud unto him in difcourfe, as ye fpeak loud unto one another, left
your works become vain, and ye perceive it not. Verily they who lower
their voices in the prefence of the apoftle of God, are thofe whofe hearts
God hath difpofed unto piety : they fhall obtain pardon, and a great re-
ward. As to thofe who call unto thee from without the inner apartments
the greater part of them do not underftand the refpeft due to thee . If they
wait with patience, until thou come forth unto them, it will certainly be
better for them : but God is inclined to forgive, and merciful. O true be-
lievers, if a wicked man come unto you with a tale, inquire ftri&ly into
the truth thereof \ left ye hurt people through ignorance, and afterwards re-
pent of what ye have done d : and know that the apoftle of God is among
you : if he fhould obey you in many things, ye would certainly be guilty
of a crime, in leading him into a mijlake . But God hath made the faith a-
miahle unto you, and hath prepared the fame in your hearts > and hath
rendred infidelity, and iniquity, and difobedience hateful unto you. Thefe
are they who walk in the right way through mercy from God, and grace:

H h h and

* Anticipate net any matter, &c.] That is, Do
not pr$fume to give your own decifion in any
cafe, before ye have received the judgment of
God and his apoftle.

b Raife not your voices above the voice of the
prophet ;] This verfe is faid to have been oc-
omoned by a djfpute between Abu Beer and
Omar, concerning the appointing of a governor
of a certain place ; in which they railed their
voices fo high, in the prefence of the apoftle,
that it was thought proper to forbid fudh in-
decencies for the'future l .

c Thofe who call unto thee from without the
inner apartments, &c.] Thefe, they fay, were
Oyeyna'Ebh Hofei n, and al Akra Ebn H&bes ; who
wanting* to fpfeak with Mohammed , when he was
fleeping at noon in his women’s apartment, had
the rudenefs to call out feveral times, Mohammed,

come forth to us*.

4 If a wicked man come unto you with a tale,
&c.] This pafiage was occafioned, it is faid, by
the following accident. Al IValid Ebn Qkbes
being fent b y Mohammed to collett the alms from
the tribe of al Moftalek, when he faw them
come out to meet him in grea( numbers, grew
apprehenlive they defignea him forae mifehief,
becaufe of part enmity between him and them
in the time of ignorance, and immediately turn-
ed back, and told the prophet they refufed t<J
p$y their alms, and attempted to kill him *
upon which Mohammed was thinking to reduce
them by force : but on fending Khaled Ebn at
Walid to them, he found his former meiTenger
had wronged them, and that they continued
in their obedience 3 .

1 Jallai,,

2 Al Beiuawi, } Idem, Jallal.

4i 8 Al KORAN. C h a p. 49.

and God is knowing, and wife. If two parties of the believers contend
with one another, do ye endeavour to compote the matter between them : and
if the one of them offer an infult unto the other, light againft that party
which offered the infult, until they return unto the judgment of God ; and
if they do return, make peace between them with equity : and a& with
juftice •, for God loveth thofo who aft juftly \ Verily the true believers are
brethren : wherefore reconcile your brethren ; and fear God, that ye may
obtain mercy- O trqe believers, let not men laugh other men to fcorn ;
who peradventure may be better than themfelves : neither let women
laugh other women to fcorn \ who may poflibly be better than themfelves.
Neither defame one another ; nor call one another by opprobrious appellations.
An ill name it is to be charged t vitb wickednefs, after having embraced rhe
faith : and whofo repenteth not, they will be the unjuft doers b . O true
believers, carefully avoid entertaining a fufpicion of another : for fome fuf-
picions are a crime. Inquire not too curidufly into other mens failings :
neither let the one of you (peak ill of another in his abfcence. Would
any of you defire to eat rhe ffefh of his dead brother? Surely ye would ab-
hor it. And fear God : for God is eafy to be reconciled* and merciful. O
men, verily we have created you of a male and a female •, and we have
diftributed you into nations, and tribes, that ye might know one another.
Verily the moft honourable of you, in the fight of God, is the moil pious
of you: and God is wife and knowing. The Arabs of the defart c fay, We
believe. Anfwer, Ye do by no means beli ve* but fay. We have embraced
Islam*: for the faith hath not yet entred into your hearts. If ye obey
God and his apoftle, he will not defraud you of any part of the merit of your
works : for God is inclined to forgive, and merciful. Verily the true be-
lievers are thofe only who believe ui God and his apoftle, and afterwards
doubt not ; and who employ their fubftance and their perlbiis in the de-
fence of God’s true religion : thefe are they who fpeak lincerely. Say, Will

ye

* If two parties of the believers contenI f
Tim venfe is fuppofed to have been occzfionod
by a fray, which happened between the tribes of
aljws and el Kbazraf Some relate, th t the
prophet one day riding on an afs, as he pafled
near Abdallah Ebn Ofba y the afs chanced to dale,
at which Ebn Ohba flopped his nofe ; and Ebn
Raw at a faid to him. By God, the Pifs of his
afs [mills /wetter than thy musk : wncreupon a
quarrel enfued Between^ their followers, and they
came to blows, tha* they (truck one another on-
ly with their hands and flippers, or with palm-
branches *.

1 Neither let women laugh other women to /corn,
&c.} It is flu d that this verfe was revealed on
account of SaJSya Bint Hoy as, one of the pro-
phet's wives; who came to her hnsband and
complained that the women faid to her, O thou

Jcwefe, the daughter tf a Jew and (f a Jewefs
to which he anfwcred, Canfi thou n tf*y., Aaron
is my fit her i and Mofes is my unde* and Mo-
hammed is my husband 2 ?

c The Arahs the dejart % flrc.J Tbefe were
certain of the tribe of jjaJ t who came to Me-
dina in a year of fearcity, and having profefled
Mtbammedifm, told the prophet that they had
brought all their goods and their families, and
would not oppofe him, as fome other tribes had
done : and tius they faid to obtain a part of the
alms, and to upbraid him with their having em-
braced his religion and party ? .

d Anfwer , Ye do by no means believe : but fay 9 We
have embraced Iflam] That is. Ye are not fin-
cere believers, hut outward profcflbrs only of the
Due religion.

* lidem*

a JJ Beidawi. See Prid. Life of Mabom . f. in, (sic.

3 Idem.

Chap. 50. KORA AT* 4*^9

ye inform God concerning your religion • ? But God knoweth whatever is
in heaven and in earth: for God is omnifcient. They upbraid thee that
they have embraced Islam. Anfwer, Upbraid me not with your
having embraced Islam : rather God upbraideth you , that he hath
directed you to the faith 1 * ; if ye Ipeak fincerelv. Verily God knoweth
the fecrets of heaven and earth : and God bcholdeth that which ye do.

* Will ye inform Gotj tvuerntngjmr religionf\ you to tbefaitb ;] The obligation being not on
i. e. Will ye pretend to deceive him, by laying God's fide, but on yours, for that he has fa*
ye are true believers 1 voured you fo far as to guide yeu into the true

b God upbraideth you, that be bath directed faith, it ye are iiacere believers;

CHAP. L.

Inti tied, K; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mod merciful God.

K *. By the glorious Koran : verily they wonder that a preacher from
among themfelves is come unto them ; and the unbelievers fay, This
is a wonderful thing : after we fhall be dead, and become duft, fhall we re-
turn to life ? This is a return remote from thought . Now we know what
the earth confumeth of them * and with us is a book which keepeth an
account thereof- But they charge falihood on the truth, after it hath come
unto them : wherefore they are plunged in a confufed bufinefs b . Do they
not look up to the heaven above them, and eonftder how we have raifed it
and adorned it ; and that there are no flaws therein ? We have alfo
fpread forth the earth, and thrown thereon mountains firmly rooted * : and
we caufe every beautiful kind of vegetables to fpring up therein j for a rub-
iest of meditation, and an admonition unto every man who turneth unto us.
And we fend down rain as a bleffing from heaven, whereby we caufe gardens
to fpring forth, and the grain of harveft, and tall palm-trees having branch-
es laden with dates hanging one above another, as a provifion for mankinds
and we thereby quicken a dead Gountry : fo fhall be the coming forth of the
dead from their graves. The people of Noah, and thofe who dwelt at Al
Rass* 1 , and Thamud, and Ad, and Pharaoh accufed the prophets of im-
pofture before the M^cans j and alfo the brethren of Lot, and the inha-

Hhh z bitants

1 Some imagine that this letter is defigned to knowing what certainly to affirm of the Koran t
exprefs the mountain Kdf, which feveval eaftern calling it fometimes a piece of poetry, at other
writers fancy encompaiTes the whole world 1 . times* piecevf forcery, and at other times apiece
Others Uy it Hands fo i Kada al amr, i. e. The of divination, lAc.

matter is decreed, viz. the chaftifement of the c See chap. 16. p. *15, and chap. 31. p. 335
infidels. See the Prelim. Difc. $. III. p. 59, dsV. 4 See chap. *5. p. 299.
b They are plunged in a confufed bufinefs \\ Not

1 V, D’Herbel. Bib l. Orient . Art . Caf.

* Al BEinAWi. Jallal.

420 Al KORAN. Chap. 50W

bkaiits of the tvood near Mibian^ and the people of Tobba* : all theft a c-
cufed the apoftka of impofture ; wherefore the judgments which I threatened
werejuftly infli&ed on them. Is our power exhaufted by the firft creation?
Yea ; they are in a perplexity, becaufe of a new creation which is foretold them,
frnieljy the rm/ingcf the dead We created man, andwc know what his foul
whifpereth within him and we are nearer unto him than bis jugular vein.
When the two angels deputed to take account of a man's behaviour , take an
account thereof* one fitting on the right hand* and the other on the left: he
uttereth not a word, but there is with him a watcher, ready to note it \ And
the agony of death lhall come in truth : this, 0 man* is what thou foughteft
to avoid. And the trumpet fhalF found : this will be the day which hath
been threatened. And every foul fhall come ; and therewith Jhall be a dri-
ver and a witnefs c . And the former fla^l fay unto the unbeliever , Thou waft
negligent heretofore of this day : but we have removed thy vail from off thee;
ana thy light is become piercing this day. And his companion lhall fay.
This is what is ready with me to be attejled. And God flail fay , Call into
hell every unbeliever, and perverfe perlon, and every one who forbad good*
and every tranfgreffor, and doubter of the faith , who fet up another god
with the true Goo ; and call him into a grievous torment. His compa-
nion 4 lhall fay, O Lord, I did not feduce him j but he was in a wide error e .
Gob lhall fay. Wrangle not in my prefence : fince I threatened you before
hand with the torments which ye now fee prepared for you . The fentence is not;
changed with me : neither do I treat my fervants unjuftly. On that day we
will fay unco hell, Art thou full ? and it lhall anfwer. Is there yet any ad-
dition f ? And pamdile lhall be brought near unto the pious ; and it flail
he j aid unto them , This is what ye have been promifed * unto every one

* See chip. 44. p. 40*.

b When the two angels deputed to take account
of a mads behaviour, &c.] The intent of the
paflage is to exalt the omnifcience of God ;
who wants not the information of the guardian
angels* tho v he has thoaght fit, in his wifdora,
to give them that employment : for if they are
fo exaft as to write down every word which
falls from a man's mouth, How can we hope to
cfcape the observation of him who fees our in-
moll thoughts ?

The Mohammedans have a tradition that the
angel who notes a man's good adUops, has the
command over him who notes his evilfcftions S
and that when a man does a good a&on, the
angel ©f the right hand writes it down ten times,
and when he commits an ill adlion, the fame
angel (ays to the angel of the left hand. Forbear
piling it down for /even hours ; per adventure he
may pray > or may ask pardon *.

• A driver and a wimfs ;] L e. Two angels,
one aftisg as a feijcant, to bring every perion

before the tribunal ; and the other prepared as a
witnefs, to teftify either for or againft him. Some
fay the former will be the guardian angel who
took down his evil afiions, and the other the
angel who took down HFs good a&ions V
4 His companion vrc. The devil which lhall
be chained to him.

e I did not /educe him , &c.] This will be the
anfwer of the devil, whom the wicked perfon
will accufe as his feducer : for the devil has no
power over a man, to caufe hhn to do evil ; any
otherwife than by fuggefting what is agreeable
to his corrupt inclinations 3 .

f Is there yet any addition?] 1. e. Are there yet
any mete condemned to this place ; or is my
fpace to be enlarged and rendred more capacious
to receive them?

The commentators fuppofe hell will be quite
filled at the day of judgment; according to that
repeated expreffion in the Koran* Peril} I. wiU *
fill boU with you * See.

1 Idem.

* Idea.

5 See (hop. 14. p, 207, &c.

Chap. 51, Ah KORAN* 421

who turned himfelf unto Cod, and kept bis commandments *, who feared the
Merciful in fecret, and came unto him with a converted heart: enter the
fame in peace : this is the day of eternity. Therein fhall they have what-
ever they fhall defire ; and there will be a fuperabundant addition ofblifs with
us *. How many generations have we deftroyed before the MeccaHs, which
were more mighty than they in ftrength ? Pafs, therefore, through the regions
of the earth, and fee whether there be any refuge from , our vengeance t Verily
herein is an admonition unto him who hath a heart to underfland, or grveth
ear, and is prefent with an attentive mind. We created the heavens and die
earth, and whatever is between them, in fix days j and no wearinefs affe&ed
us b . Wherefore patiently fuffer what they fay e ; and celebrate the praifeof
thy Lord before fun-rife, and before fun-fet, and praife hinl in fame part of
the night : and perform the additional parts of worlhip 4 . And hearken un-
to the day whereon the cryer fhall call men to judgment from a near place* :
the day whereon they fhall hear the voice of the trumpet in truth : this will
be the day of mens coming forth from their graves : we give fife, and we caufe
to die ; and unto us fhall be the return of all creatures : the day whereon the
earth fhall fuddenly cleave in funder over them. This will be an affembly
eafy for us to ajfemble. We well know what the unbelievers fay ; and thou
art not fent to compel them forcibly to the faith. Wherefore warn, by the
Koran, him who feareth my threatening.

* See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. ioo. voluntary, and of fupererogatfon ; and may

b And no weariittfs affected us ;] This was re- therefbre be added, or omitted, indifferently,
vealed in anfwer to the Jews, who faid that * When tbt cryer Jhall call men to Judgment from
God relied from his work of creation on the a near place i\ That is, from a place whence e-
feventh day, and repofed himfelf on his throne, very creature may equally hear the call. This
as one fatigued *. place.it is fuppofed, will be the mountain of the

c Wherefore patiently fuffer tobat they fay ;J temple of Jerufalem, which fome fancy to be
Viz. Either what the idolaters fty, in denying nigher heaven than any other part of the earth ;
the refurreftion ; or the Jews, in-fpeaking in- whence Ifrafil will found the trumpet, and Ga-
decentlyof God. briel will make the following proclamation, O

.* ‘The additional parts of toorjhip ;] Thefe are ye rotten bones , and torn flejb, and difberfed hairs,
the two inclinations ufedafter the evening pray- God commandetbyou to bt gathered together to
er, which are not neceJTary, or of precept, but judgment *.

1 Al Beidawj, Jam. A t. ** Him .

CHAP. LI.

Intitledy The Difperfing ; revealed at Mecca,

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the winds difperfing and featuring the duft * ; and by the clouds bear-
ing

» By tbt winds difperfing tbt duji ;] Or. By the women who bring forth orjea/ter children, &c.

422 >47 KORAN. Chap. 51.

ing a load of rain * *, by the Jhips running fwiftly in the tea k ; and by the
angels who diftribute things necejfary for the fupport of all creatures' : verily
that wherewith ye are threatened is certainly true ; and the laft judgment
will furely come. By the heaven furnilhed with paths 4 ; ye widely differ
in what ye fay *. He will be turned afide from the faith 1 who lhall be
turned ande by the divine decree. Curfed be the liars ; who wade in deep
waters of ignorance, neglefting their falvation . They ask, When will the
day of judgment come r On that day lhall they be burned in hell fire ; and
it Jball be faid unto them, Tafte your punilhment ; this is what ye demand-
ed to be haftened. But the pious Jhall dwell among gardens and fountains,
receiving that which their Lord lhall give them ; becaulethey were righteous
doers before this day. They flept but a (mail part of the night f } and early in the
morning they asked pardon of Gos>: and a due portion of their wealth was
given uhto him who asked, and unto him who was forbidden by Jhame to ask.

‘ There are figns of the divine power and tpodnefs in the earth, unto men of found
underfunding ; and alfo in your own lelves : will ye not therefore confider ?
Your fuftenance is in the heaven ; and alfo that which ye are promifed *.
Wherefore by the Lord of heaven and earth I fwear that this is certain-
ly the truth ; according to what yourfelves fpeak \ Hath not the ftory of
Abraham’s honoured guefts 1 come to thy knowledge? When they went
in unto him, and faid. Peace : he anfwered, Peace ; faying within himfelf,
< Tbefe are unknown people. And he went privately unto his family, and
brought a fatted calf. And he fet it before them, and when be fam they
touched it not, he faid. Do ye not eat ? And he began to entertain a fear of
them. They faid. Fear not k : and they declared unto him thepromifeof a
wife youth. And his wife drew near with exclamation, and fhe fmote her
face V and faid, lam an old woman, and barren. The angels anfwered,
XXVII. Thus faith thy Lord : verily he is the wife, the knowing. * And Abrauam

faid

* By the eland* Searing a had tf fa:n {] Or,
By the women hiring a burthen in their womb,
or the winds bearing the clouds, &c.

b By the Jhips running fwiftly in the- ihi ;] Or,
By the wind* puffing fwiftlj in the air, or the
liar* f Hinting Jtoiftly in their courfcs, (5 U.

*■ By the angels who di /tribute things, &c.] Qr,
By the winds which difiribute the rain,

A By the heavens furnijbed with paths ;] 1 . e.
The path* or orb* of the ftars ; or the ftreaJka
which appear in the a ky like path* being thin
and extended c loads.

e Ye widely differ tn wbat ye fay ;] Concerning
Mohammed, or the Karan, or. the refurre&ion
and day of judgmeht; fpeaking Yarioufly and
in confidently of them.

f They Jlept but a finail part of the . night i}
Spendmg the greater part in prayer, and reli-
gious meditation.

You r fkficnessie is in the heaven i and alfo that
which ne are promifed ;] he. Your food cometh
from above, whence proceedeth the change of
fcafons and rain : and your future reward is alfo
there, that is to fay, in paradife, which i* fitu-
ate above the feven heavens.

h According to what yourfelves fpeak ;] That is.
Without any doubt or referved meaning, as yc
affirm a truth unto one another.

1 See chap, u . p. 182, and chap. 1 5. p. 212.
^Hbey f*U, Fear not.'} Some add. That to
remove Abraham's fear, Gabriel, who was one
of thefe dr angers, touched the calf with his
wing, and it immediately rofe up and walked to
its (km i upon which Abrahm knew them to be
the meffengers of God 1 .

1 Avdjbt fmote her face ;] This, fome pretend,
fhe did for Qiame ; becaufe fhe felt her courfes
coming upon her

1 Al B e 1 d a w 1 .

Chap. 51. Al KORAN. 423

faid unto them , What is your errand, therefore, O meflengers of God ? They
anfwered, Verily we are fentunto a wicked people : that we may fend down
upon them ftones of baked clay, marked from thy Lord, for the definition
of tranfgreffors. And we brought forth the true believers who were in the
city : but we found not therein more than one family of Moflems. And
we overthrew the fame i and left a fign therein unto thofe who dread the
fcvere chaftifement of God. In Moses alfo was a fign\ when we fent him
unto Pharaoh with manifeft power. But he turhed back, with his princes,
faying. This man is a forcerer, or a madman. Wherefore we took him
and his forces, and call them into the fea : and he was one worthy of re-
prehenfion. And in the tribe of Ad alfo was a fign : when we fent again ft
them a deftroying wind*-, it touched not ought, whereon it came, but it
rendred the fame as a thing rotten and reduced to duft. In Thamud like-
wife was a figu : when it was faid unto them, Eiyov yourfelves for a time b .
But they infolently tranfgreflfed the command of their Lord: wherefore a
terrible noife from heaven aflailed them, while they looked on ° ; and they were
not able to ftand on their feet , neither did they fave themfelves from de-
ft ration. And the people of Noah did we defir oy before tbefe : for they
were a people who enormoufly tranfgrefled. We have built the heaven with
might ; and we have given it a large extent : and we have ftretched forth
the earth beneath ; and how evenly have we fpread the feme ! And of every
thing have we created two kinds 4 , that peradventure ye may confider.
Fly, therefore, unto God ; verily I am a public warner unto you, from
him. And fet not up another god with the true God : verily l am a pub-
lic warner unto you, from him. In like manner there came no apoftle unto
their predeceffors, but they faid, ‘This man is a magician, or a madman.
Have they bequeathed this behaviour fucceflively the one to the other ? Yea;
they are a people who enormoufly tranlgrefs. Wherefore withdraw from
them ; and thou /halt not be blameworthy in fo doing. Yet continue to
admonifh : for admonition profiteth the true believers. 1 nave not creared genii
and men for any other end than that they Ihould ferve me. I require not any
filftenance from them ; neither will I that they feed me. Verily God is he
who provideth for all creatures ; poffefled of mighty power. Unto thofe
who mall injure our apoftle Jhall be given a portion like unto the portion of
rhofe who behaved like them in times fafi ; and they Ihall not wifh the fame
to be haftened. Woe, therefore, to the unbelievers, becaufe of their day
with which they are threatened 1

* See chap, 7. p.. 123, fgc. 4 Two kinds i] As for example : male, and fe-

k For a time ;] 1. e. For three days. See chap, male; the heaven, and the cartn ; the fun, and the
11. p.182. moon; light, and darknefs ; plains, and moun-

c While they looked on ;] For this calamity tains 5 Winter, and fummer > fwect, and bitter,
happened in the day time. 6f<r 1 • *

J Jailalg'ddin.

\

CHAP.

CHAP. LIL

Inti tied. The Mountain; revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the moil merciful God.

B Y the mountain of Sinai ; and by the book written in an expanded
fcroU * i and by the vifited houfe b ; and by the elevated roof of hea-
ven ; and by the fweHing ocean : verily the punilhment of thy Lord will
iurely defcend ; there J hall he none to with-hold it. On that day the hea-
ven fhall be flvaken, and lhall reel; and the mountains fhall walk and
pals away. And on that day woe be unto thofe who accufed God’s apoftles
of impofture ; who amufed themfelves in wading in vain difputes ! On that
day lhall they be driven and thruft into the fire of hell ; and it fhall he fold
unto tbem> This is the fire which ye denied as a fidtion. Is this a magic
illufion ? Or do ye not fee ? Enter the fame to be fcorched : whether ye
bear your torments patiently, or impatiently, it will he equal unto you : ye
lhall furely receive the reward of that which ye have wrought. But the
pious fhall dwell amidft gardens and .pleafures ; delighting themfelves in what
their Lord lhall have given them : and their Lord lhall deliver them from the
pains of hell. And it fhall be faid unto them. Eat and drink with eafy di-
geftion ; becaufe of that which ye have wrought: leaning on couches dif-
pofed in order : and we will efpoufe them unto virgins having large black
eyes. And unto thofe who believe, and whofe off-fpring follow them in
the faith, we will join their off-fpring in paradife : ana we will not diminilh
unto them ought of the merit of their works. (Every man is given in pledge
for that which he lhall have wrought '.) And we will give them fruits in
abundance, and flefh of the kinds which they lhall defire. They lhall prefent
unto one another therein a cup of wine , wherein there lhall be no vain dif-
courfe, nor any incitement unto wickednels. And youths appointed to attend
them, lhall go round them : beautiful as pearls hidden in tbeir fbelL And
they lhall approach unto one another, and lhall ask mutual queltions. And they
lhall fay, Verily we were heretofore amidft our family, in great dread with re-
gard

» By the boil, Ac.] The book here intended,
according to different opinion!, is either the
book or regifter wherein every man’s actions are
recorded ; or the prejervtd tabk t containing
God’s decrees; or the book of the law, which
was written by God, Mojes hearing the creak*
ing of the pen » or elfe the Koran l .

• The vifited houfe i\ L e. The Caaba fo much
r^iUtcd by pilgrims; or, as fome rather think,

1 41 Zamajch. 41 Be id awl.

the original model of that houfe in heaven, cal-
led al Derab , which is vifited and compaiTed by
the angels, as the other is by men *.

c Every man is given in for t bat wbitb
be Jball have wrought ;] i. e Every man is pledg-
ed nnto God for his behaviour : and if he does
well, he redeems his pledge ; but if evil, he
forfeits it.

* See 4be Prelim . Difi, $ IV.

Chap. 52.

Al KORAN.

425

gard to our Jtate after death : but God hath been gracious unto us H and hath deli-
vered us from the pain of burning fire : for we called on him heretofore ; and he
is the beneficent, the merciful. Wherefore do thou, 0 prophet, admonifh
thy people. Thou art not, by the grace of thy Lord, a foothfayer, or a
madman. Do they fay. He is a poet : we wait, concerning him, fome ad*
verfe turn of fortune? Say, Wait ye my ruin: verily I wait, with you, the
time of your deJiruRion. Do their mature underftandings bid them fay this ;
or are they people who perverfely tranfgrefs ? Do they fay, He hath forged
the Koran •? Verily they believe not. Let them produce a difcourfe like
unto it, if they fpeak truth. Were they created by nothing ♦, or were
they the creators of themfelves ? Did they create the heavens and the earth ?
Verily they are not firmly perfuaded that God hath created them*. Are
the ftores of thy Lord in their hands ? Are they the fupreme difpenfers of
all things .? Have they a ladder, whereby they may afcend to heaven, and
hear the difcourfts of the angels ? Let one, therefore, who hath heard them,
produce an evident proof thereof. Hath God daughters, and have ye fons *> ?
Dofl thou ask them a reward for thy preaching ? but they are laden with
debts. Are the fecrets of futurity with them ; and do they tranfcribe the
fame from the table of God’s decrees ? Do they feek to lay a plot againjl
thee ? But the unbelievers are they who fBdl be circumvented c . Have they
any god, befides God? Far be: God exalted above the idols which they
affix iate with biml If they Ihould fee a fragment of the heaven falling
down upon them, they would fay. It is onh a thick cloud 4 . Wherefore
leave them, until they arrive at their day wherein they fhall fwoon for fear*:
a day, in which their fubtle contrivances fhall not avail them at all, nei-
ther fhall they be prote&ed. And thofe who a£t unjutUy fhall furely fuller
another punifhment befides this f : but the greater part or them do not un-
derftand. And wait thou patiently the judgment of thy Lord concerning
them *, for thou art in our eye : and celebrate the praife of thy Lord, when
thou rifeft up *, and praife him in the nighc-feafon, and when the ftars begin
to difappear.

* They are not fifmh perfuaded that God bath
treated them ;] ror too* they confefs this with
their tongues, yet thfey deny it by their averfe-
nefe to render him his doe worfhip.

b See chap. 16. p. zi8, Sec .

c See chap. 8. p. 142, 8 rc.

* If they fbould fee a fragment of the heaven
falling down on tbem> &c ] This was one of the
judgments which the idolatrous Meccans defied
Mohammed to bring down upon them? and yet;
fays the text, if they ihould fee a part of the

heaven falling on them, they would nof believe
it till they were crulhed to death by it x .

* The day wherein they fhall fwoon for fear jJ
i. e. At the firft found of the trumpet a .

f Another punifhment befides this j] That is,
Befides the punifhment to which they fhall bo
doomed at the day of judgment, they fhall be
previoufly chaflifed by calamities in this life, as
the fkughterat Bedr , and the feven years famine,
and a Ifo after their death, by the examination
of the fepulchre

1 Al Beidawi. 2 See the Preli?n. Dlfc . IV. p . 82. 3 Al Be id aw r.

Iii

CHAP,

426

At KORAN.

Chap. 53.

CHAP. LIII.

Iniitled , The Star j revealed at Mecca.

In the Name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the ftar S when it fetteth b v your companion Mohammed erreth not ,
nor is he led aftray : neither doth he fpeak of bis own will. It is no
other than a revelation, which hath been revealed unto him. One mighty
in power, indued with underftanding, Caught it him c : ahd he appeared 4 in
the higheft part of the horizon. Afterwards he approached the pro-
phet and drew near unto bim\ until he was at the diftance of two
bows length { from him, or yet nearer : and he revealed unto his fer-
vant that which he revealed. The heart of Mohammed did not falfly
reprefent that which he faw*. Will ye therefore difpute with him con-
cerning that which he faw ? He alfo faw him another time, by the lote-
tree beyond which there is no palling 11 : near it is die garden of eternal
abode. When the lotc-tree covered that which it covered/, bis eye-fight
turned not afide, neither did it wander: and he really beheld fame of the
greaceft fignsofhis Lord*. What think ye of Allat, and At Uzza, and
Man ah, that other third goddefs 1 ? Have ye male children, and God fe-
male ?

* Bytbejlari J Some ftppofe the ftars in ge- feventh heaven, on the right hand of the throne
acral, and others the Plcirda in particular, to of God > and ia the utmoft bounds beyond
be meant in this place. which the angels themfelves mult not pafs, or,

•> When it fettetb j] Or, according to a con- as fome rather imagine, beyond winch no crea-
trary lignification of the verb here ufed, when tore’* knowledge can extend.
it rifetb. 1 When the hti-trtc covered that which it ce-

c Owe ipigbtj i* power, &c.] Namely, the angd vend.} The words feem tofiguify, that what
Gabriel. was under this tree exceeded all defeription and.

6 He appeared ;] In his natural form, in which number. Some fuppofe the whole hofl of an-
God created him, and in the eaftem part of the gels worihipping beneath it 1 are intended; and
sky. It is faid that this angel appeared in his others, the birds which fit on its branches 2 .
proper fhape to none of the prophets, except k And be beheld fome of the great efi figns of bis
Mobammldi and to him only twice : once when Lords] Seeing the wonders both of the fenfi-
he received the firfi revelation of the Koran, and ble and the intellectual world 3 »
a fecond time when he took his night-journey 1 Wbat think ye tf Allat, and al Uxza, and
to heaven ; as it follows in the text. Manah ;] Thofe were three idols of the ancient

* Afterwards be approached ;JIn a human fhape. Arabs , of which we have fpoken in the Prelimi-
f Two bozos length ;] Or, as die word alfo fig- nary Difcourfe 4 .
nifies, two cubits length . As to the blafphemy which fome pretend Mo-

s ihe heart of Mohammed did not finely repre- hammed once uttered, thro* inadvertence, as he
fiat that which bifaw\\ But he faw it in reality, was reading this parage, fee chap. zz. p. 279.

h The lot entree beyond which there is no paffittgi] not. c.

This tree, fay the commentators, (lands in the

1 Idem . 2 Jallalo'ddih* 3 ^Bxidawi.. u P g K

Chap. 53. AL KORAN. 427

male*? This, therefore, is an unjuft partition. They are no other than
empty names, which ye and your fathers have named goddeffes. God hath not
revealed Concerning them any thing to authorize tbeir worfhxp. They follow
no other than a vain opinion, and what their fouls defire : yet hath the true
diredtion come unto them from their Lord. Shall man have whatever he
wifheth for b ? The life to come, and the prefent life are Gods: and how
many angels foe/er there he in the heavens, their interceflion fhall be of
no avail, until after God fhall have granted permilfion unto whom he fhall
pleafe and fhall accept. Verily they who believe not in the life to come
give unto the angels a female appellation. But they have no knowledge
herein : they follow no other than a bare opinion ; and a bare opinion at-
tained not any thing of truth. Wherefore withdraw from him who turn-
ed away from our admonition, and feeketh only the prefent life. This is
their higheft pitch of knowledge. Verily thy Lord well knoweth him who
erred from his way -, and he well knoweth him who is rightly diredted.
Unto God helongetb whatever is in heaven and eard: that he may reward
thofe who do evil, according to dat which they fhall have wrought ; and
may reward thofe who do well, with de moft excellent reward. As to
thofe who avoid great crimes, and hainous fins, and are guilty only of lighter
faults i verily thy Lord will he extenfive in mercy towards them. He well
knew you when he produced you out of the eard, and when ye were
embryo’s in your mothers wombs : wherefore juftify not your felves : he
Left knoweth the man who feared him. What th'mkeft thou of him who
turned afide from following the truths and gived little, and covetoufly flop-
ped his hand e ? Is the knowledge of futurity with him, fo that he feed
the fame 4 ? Had he not been informed of that which is contained in the
books of Moses, and of Abraham who faithfully performed bis engage-
ments ? 5 Vo wit: that a burdened foul fhall not bear the burthen of ano-

ther ; and that nothing fhall be imputed to a man for rigbteoufnefs , except
his own labour •, and that his labour fhall furefy be made manifeft hereafter,
a nd that he fhall be rewarded for the fame with a moft abundant reward*
and dat unto thy Lord will he the end of all things * and that he caufeth

1.1 i 2 to

* See ehap. 16. p. 21 8, tec.
t> Shall man have whatever be wijbetb fir f]
i. e. Shill he didlate to God, and name whom
he pleafes for his interceffors, or for his prophet;
or (hall he chufe a religion according to his own
fancy, and prefcribc the terms on which he may
/•laim the reward of this life and the next 1 f
« What tbinkffi thou ofbim, Sec.] This paflage,
it is (aid, was revealed on account of al W slid
Ebn al Mogbeira, who following the prophet one
■day, was reviled by an idolater for leaving the
religion of the Kersijb, and giving occafion of
Jcandal ; to which he anfwercd, that what he

did was out of appreheniion of the divine
vengeance : whereupon the man offered, for a
certain fum, to take the guilt of his apoftacy on
himfelf s and the bargain being made, al SValii
returned to his idolatry, and paid the man part
of what had been agreed on, but afterwards, on
farther conddcration, he thought it too much,
and kept back the remainder *.

* Is the knowledge tf futurity with him /] That
is, Is he allured that the perfon with whom he
made the abovementioned agreement, will be
allowed to fuller in his dead hereafter } ?

* .^/Beidawj, Jam-aio’ddih.

* Al Beidawi.

J Idem.

428 Al KORAN . Chap. 54,

to laugh, and caufeth to weep 5 and that he putteth to death, and givetb
life ; and that he createth the two fexes, the male and the ftmafe, of
feed when it is emitted ; and that unto him a$$ertainetb anotlfer production
namely, the raiftng of the dead again to life' hereafter ; and that he inricheth,*
and caufeth to acquire poffeflions } and that he is the Lord of the dog-ftar * •
and that he deftroyed the ancient tribe of Ad, and Thamud, and left not
any of them alive j and alfo the people of Noah, before them 1 for they
were moft unjuft and wicked : and he overthrew the cities which were turn-
ed upfide down h ; and that which covered them, covered them. Which
therefore, of thy Lord's benefits, O man, wilt thou call in queftion ? This
cur ajojile is a preacher like the preachers who preceded him. The ap-
proaching day of judgment draweth near : there is none who can reveal the ex
alt time of the fame, befides God, Do ye, therefore, wonder at this new
revelation 5 and do ye laugh, and not weep, {pending your time in idle
diverfions ? But rather worlhip God, and ferve him.

1 He is the Lord of the Jog-Jltr;] 5 if las, or k The cities toblcb were turned up ft, It down ;1

the greater dog-ftar, was woriMpped by fome of V:*. So, km, and the other cities involved in her
the old Arabs *. ruin. See chap. 11. p. 184.

* See ibefttU «. J>i/c. §. t.p. 17 . and Hyd. not. in Vlug Seig, Tab. Stell. fix. p. 53 .

CHAP. LIV.

Intithdy The Moon; revealed at Mecca,

#

In the name of the moft merciful God,

I HE hour tf judgment approacheth \ and the moon hath been fplitin
funder *: but if the unbelievers Tee a fig n, they turn afide, faying,
is a powerful charm w . And they accufe tbee y O Mohammed , of im*
pofture, and follow their own lulls: but every thing will be immutably

fixed.

1 The moon bath bun fpUt in funder \ This fage ihould be rendred. The moon J&a/l be fplit
fage is expounded two ai&rent ways. Some ima- in funder : for this* they fay, is to happen at the
gine the words refer to a famous miracle fup- refurre&km. The former opinion is fupport-
pofed to have been performed by Mohammed* ed by reading, according to fome copies,
for it is faid that, on the infidels demanding a wind infhahka Hkamoroi l e. fine* the moon batb
fign of him, the moon appeared cloven in two l , already beenjpi £ inftmkr ; the fplittirtg of the
one part vaftifhing, and the other remaining ; moon j>eing reckoned by fome to be one of the
and Ebn ttajud affirmed that he faw mount previous figns of the laftday *.

Hard inteipofc between the two feftions- O- b A powerful charm ij Or, as the participle

then think the pfreter tenfe is here ufed, in the here ufed may alfo figzufy, a continued feries of
prophetic ftile, for the future, and that the paf- magic, or, a tranfient magic illufion .

* See a long and fabulous account of this pretended miracle in GaGRIEa* Vie de Mah. ch. 19.
* Al Zamakh* Al Beidawi.

Chap. 54 . Al KORAN. 429

fixed *. And now hath a meflage b come unto them, wherein is a deter-
ment from obft'inate infidelity ; the fame being confummate wifdofti : but War-
ners profit them not ; wherefore do thou withdraw from them. The day
whereon the fummoner fhall fummon mankind to an ungrateful buiinefs*, they
Ihali come forth from their graves with down-caft looks : numerous as locufts
featured f ar abroad*, battening with terror unto the fummoner. The un-
believers fhall fay, Thfe is a clay of diftrefs. The people of Noah accufed
that prophet of impofture, before thy people rejected thee: they. accufed our
fervant of impofture, faying, He is a madman ; and he was rejected with
reproach. He called, therefore, upon his Lord, faying. Verily I am over-
powered j wherefore avenge me d . So we opened the gates of heaven, with
water pouring down, and we caufed the earth to break forth into fprings *,
fo that the wafer of heaven and earth met, according to the decree which
had been eftabl fhed. And we bare him on a veffel cpmpofed of planks
and nails 5 which moved forward under our eyes • : as a recompenfe unto
him who had been ungratefully rejected. And we left the faid veffel for a
fign : but is any one warned thereby ? And how fevere was my vengeance,
and my threatening .! Now have we made the Koran eafy for admonition:
but is any one admUnilhed thereby ? Ad charged their prophet with itn-
p'ofture : but how fevere was my vengeance, and my threatening ? Verily
we fent againft them a roaring * wind, on a day of continued ill-luck* :
it carried men away, as though they bad been roots of palm trees forcibly
torn up b . And how fevere was my vengeance, and my threatening! Now
have we made the Koran *afy for admonition : but is any one admo-

nifhed thereby ? Thamud charged the admonitions of their prophet with falfe-
hood, and faid, Shall we follow a fingle man among us ? verily we fhould
then be guilty of error, and prepofterous madnefs: is the office of admoni-
tion committed unto him preferably to the reft of us ? Nay ; he is a liar,
and an infolent fellow. But God faid to Saleh, To morrow fhall they
know who is the liar, and the infolent perfon : for we will furely fend

_ the

* Every thing will he immttitbly fixed j} Or
will reach a final period of ruin or i'uccefs in this
World, and of mifery or happineb in the next,
which will be conclufive and unchangeable
thenceforward for ever 1 .

b A meffage :] i e. The Karen, containing
dories of former nations which have been cha-
dded for their incredulity, and threats of a more
dreadful punifhment hereafter.

c The day wherein tbt fammoner Jball fitmmn
mankind Is anmgrateful hufinefi ;] That is, When
the angel Jjrafil dial] call men to judgment.

* lam tverpototredi wherefore avenge me.] This
petition was not preferred by Noah till after he
had fudered repeated violence from his people :

for it is related, that one of then having fallen up-
on him and almod drangled him, when he came
to himfelf he faid, O Lot a forgive them, for
they knotr not what they do *.

e Under out eyes ;] i. e. Under our fpecial re-
gard and (teeping.

1 A roaring,] Or, a told wind.

* On a day of continued ill luck \] Viz. On a
Wcdneiday. See chap. 41. p. 390. not. d.

h It carried men away, as they bad been roots
of falm-trees, &c.] It is related that they fonght
welter in the clefts of rocks, and in pits, hold-
ing fad by one another ; but that the wind im-
petuouily tore them away, and threw them
down dead 1 .

1 Al BllD AWI.

* Idem-

* Idem.

43° Al KORAN 1 Chap. 54.

the fhe-camel for a trial of them a ; and do thou obferve them, and bear
their infulis with patience : and prophefy unto them that the water /hall be
divided between them b , and each portion Jhall be fat down to alternately. And
they called their companion c : and he took a fword^^ and flew her. But
how fcverc was my vengeance, and my threatening ! For we feot againlt
them one cry of the angel Gabriel , and they became like the dry fticks
ufed by him who buildech a fold for cattle € . And now have we made the
Koran eafy for admonition: but is any one admoniflied thereby? The
people of Lot charged his preaching with falfhood : but we fent againft
them’ a wind driving a (bower of ft ones, which dqftroyed them aU except the
family of Lot *, whom we delivered early in the morning, through favour
from us. Thus do we reward thofe who are thankful. And Lor had warn-
ed them of our feverity in ebaftifing , but they doubted of that warning.
And they demanded his guefts of him, that they might abufe them: but we
put out their eyes', faying* Tafte my vengeance, and my threatening. And
early in the morning a lading punifhment * furprised them* Taftc, there-
fore, my vengeance, and my threatening. Now have we made the Koran
eafy for admonition : but if any one admonifhed thereby ? The warning of
Afos^alfo came unto the people of Pharaoh ; but they charged every one of
our figns with impofture : wherefore we chaftifed them with a mighty and irre-
fiftible chaftifement. Are your unbelievers, O Meccans^ better than thefe ? Is
immunity from punifhment promifed unto you in the feriptures ? Do they
fay, We are a body qf men able to prevail againft our enemies ? The mul-
titude (hall furely oe put to flight, and (hall turn their back K But the
hour of judgment is their threatened time of punifhment 1 ; and that hour
Jhdl be more grievous and more bitter than their afflictions in this life . Ve-
rily the wicked wander in error, and Jhall be tormented hereafter in burn-
ing

* See chap. 7, p. 1 24, St c.

b rbt water Jhall be divided between them ;]
That is, between the Tbamudites and the camel.
See chap. 26. p. 306. not. b.

c Their companion ;] Namely Kod&r Ebn Salef;
who was not an Arab, but a ftranger dwelling
among the Tbamudites . See chap. 7. p. 125.

not. a.

6 He took a float di\ Or, as the word alfo
imports. He became rejalute and daring .

* Like the dry flicks ufed by him who builitib
a fold far cattle ;] The words may figoify either
the dry boaghl with which, jn the eili, they
make folds or indofures, to fence their cattle
from wind and cold ; or the Rubble and other
fluff with which they litter them in thofe folds
during the winter feafon.

f We put out their eyes f) So that their fockets
became Riled up even with the other parts of

their facet. This, it is faid, was done by one
flroke of the wing of the angel GabrieL See
chap. 11. p. 183.

* A lafling pstnijbment ;] Under which they
fhall continue till they receive their full punilh-
znent in hell.

h The multitude flmll furely be put to flight j] This
prophecy was fulfilled by the overthrow of
the Kcreijb at Bedr* It is related, from a tra-
dition of Omar , that when this paflage was re-
vealed, Mohammed piofeflcd himfelf to be igno-
rant of its true meaning $ but on the day of the
battle of Bedr , he repeated thefe words as he
was putting on his coat of mail *.

1 The bmtr of judgment is their threatened time
of punsjbment ;] i. e. The time when they fhall
receive their full punifhment ; what they fuffer
in this world being only the fore-runner or ear-
ned of what they Hull fed in the next.

1 Al Biidawi.

Chap. 55. Al KORAN, 431

ing flames. On that day they fliall be dragged into the fire on their faces*
and it Jhall be faid unto them , Tafteye the touch of hell. All things have
we created bound by a fixed decree : and our command is no more than a
Angle word *, like the twinkling of an eye. We have formerly deftroyed
nations like unto you i but is any of you warned by their example ? Every
thing which they do is recorded in the books kept by the guardian angels :
and every allion, both fmall and great, is written down in the preferved table.
Moreover the pious Jhall dwell a»iong gardens and rivers, in the affembly
of truth, in the prefence of a moft potent king.

* Our command is no more than a Jingle word;} Jingle aft, exerted in a moment. Some fuppofe
Vie. Kan, i. e. Be. The paflage may alfo be it refers to the buiincfiof the day of judgment *,
rendered. The execution of our purpofe is but a

1 Idem .

CHAP. LV.

Intitled , The Merciful; revealed at Mecca*.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T HE Merciful hath taught his fervant the Koran. He created man:
he hath taught him diftindt fpeech. The fun and the moon run
their courfes according to a certain rule : and the vegetables which creep-
on the ground, and the trees fubmit to his dijpofition. He alfo raifed the
heaven ; and he appointed the balance k , that ye fliould not tranfgrefs in re-
fpett to the balance : wherefore obferve a juft weight ; and diminifh not
the balance. And the earth hath he prepared for living creatures : there-
in are various fruits, and palm-trees bearing fheaths of flowers j and grain
having chaff, and leaves. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will
ye ungratefully deny*? He created man of dried clay like an earthen veflel:
but he created the genii of fire clear from fmoke. Which, therefore, of
your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? He is the Lord of the
eaft, and the Lord of the weft 4 . Which, therefore, of your Lord’s be-
nefits

» Moll of the commentators doubt whether
this chapter was revealed at Mecca or at Medina,
or partly at the one place, and partly at the other.

» Jte balance s] Or juftice and equity in mu-
tual dealings.

* Which therefore of your Lord V benefits will
ye ungratefully deny ?] The words are direfted
to the two fpecies'of rational creatures, men and
genii ; the verb and the pronoun being in the

dual number. „ ,

1 See Pfalm. cxxlvi

This verfe is intercalated, or repeated by way
of burden, throughout the whole chapter no lefs
than thirty one times, which was done, as Mar -
racci guc/Tes, in imitation of David l ,

d The eaft and the weft The original words
are both in the dual number, and lignify the dif-
ferent points of the horizon at which the fun
rifes and fets at the fummer and winter folfticc.
See chap* 37. p. 366. not. c.

432 Al KORAN* Chap. 53

ncfics will ye ungratefully deny ? He hath let loofe the two feas*, that they
meet each another : between them is placed a bar which they cannot pals.
Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? From
them are taken forth unions and leffer pearls. Which, therefore, of your
Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny? His alfo are the fhips, carry-
ing their laris aloft in die fea, like mountains. Which, therefore, of your
Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny? Every creature which liveth
on tbe earth is fubjc<3: to decay : but the glorious and honourable countenance
of thy Lord fhall remain/or ever. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s bene-
fits will ye ungratefully deny? Unto him do all creatures which are in
heaven and earth make petition : every day is he employed in Jome new
work b . Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully
deny? We will furely attend to judge you, O men and genii, at the lajl
day. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny?
O ye coliedive body of genii and men, if ye be able to pafs out of the
confines of heaven and earth ^ pafs, forth : ye fhall not pais forth but by
abfolute power. Which, therefore, of your Lord^ benefits will ye un-
gratefully deny ? A flame of fire without fmoke, and a fmoke without
flame 11 fhall be fent down upon you ; and ye fhall not be able to defend your-
felves tbirefrom. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully
deny ? And when the heaven fhall be rent in funder, and fhall become
red as a rofe, and fhall melt like ointment* : Which, therefore, of your

Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ?) On that day neither man nor

f enius fhall be afked concerning his un f . Which, therefore, of your
„ord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? The wicked fhall be known
by their marks * •, and they fhall be taken by the forelocks, and the feet,
and Jhall he cafi into bell. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will
ye ungratefully deny ? This is hell, which the wicked deny as a falfhood:
they fhall pafs to and fro between the fame and hot boiling watei
Which, therefore, of your Lord's benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? But
for him who dreadeth the tribunal of his Lord, are prepared two gar-
dens:

* The two fiat ;] Of fak water and freih 1 ; f Neither man nor genius fhaJl be ailed con-
or the Prrfian and Mediterranean feas *. arising, bis fin ;] For their crimes will be known

* Every Jay is he employed in feme new worli] by their different marks; as it follows in the
In executing thole thing* which he hath decreed text. This, lays at Beldams, is to be under-
from eternity ; by giving life and death, railing flood of the time when they (bell be raifed to
one and abafing another, hearing prayer* and life, and (hall be led towards the tribunal : for
granting petitions, &c when they come to trial, they wil^ then under-

« If ye be able to pafs out of the confines of go an examination, as is declared in feveral
heaven and earth j ] To fly from the power, ana places of the Karan.
to avoid the decree of Goo. K See the Prelim. Difc. V- IV. p. 84, See.

<* A fvtoke wit bout fi.nnf i] Ol, as the word h They fhall pafs to and fro between the fame
alfo flgnifles, molten hr nf, hlch (hall be pour- and hot boiling- water For the only fefpite they
ed on the heads of the damned. fhall have from the flames of hell, will be when

e And fi all ir.Jt like ointment ;] Or, Jhall ap- they are fuffered to go to drink this fcalding
pear like ted leather ; according to a different liquor. See chap. 37. p. 368-
fignification of the Origin il word.

1 See chap. 25. p. 300.

* AJ BeID AW!.

* Idem, Jallar.

Chap. 55 . Al KORAN \ 433

dens * : (Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully de-
ny ?) Planted with toady trees. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits
will ye ungratefully deny? In each of them Jhall be two fountains flowing.
Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? In
each of them Jhall there be of every fruit two kinds b . Which, therefore, of
your Lord’s benefits will ye ungracefully deny ? They iha.ll repofe on
couches, the linings whereof Jhall be of thick filk interwoven with gold :
and the fruit of the two gardens Jhall be near at hand to gather*. Which,
therefore, of your' Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? Therein
Jhall receive them beauteous damjels, refraining their eyes from beholding any be*
ftdes their JpouJes : whom no man fhall have deflowered before them, neither
any genius : ( Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungrateful-
ly deny ? ) Having complexions like rubies and pearls. Which, therefore, of
your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? Shall the reward of good
works be any other than good ? Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits
will ye ungratefully deny ? And befides thefe there Jhall be two other gar-
dens' 1 : (Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ?)
Of a dark green*. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye un-
gratefully deny? In each of them Jhall be two fountains pouring forth
plenty of water. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungrate-
fully deny ? In each of them Jhall be fruits, and palm-trees, and pomegra-
nats. Which, therefore, of your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ?
Therein Jhall be agreeable and beauteous damfels : Which, therefore, of your
Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny? Having fine black eyes*, and
kept in pavilions from public view : Which, therefore, of your Lord’s be-
nefits will ye ungratefully deny? Whom no man fhall have deflowered,
before their dejlined fpoufes^ nor any genius. Which, therefore, of your
Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? Therein Jhall they delight them-
Jblves, lying on green culhions and beautiful carpets. Which, therefore, of
your Lord’s benefits will ye ungratefully deny ? Blefied be the name of
thy Lord, pofleffed of glory and honour !

* Two gardens ;] i. e. One diftinft paradife for
men, and another for genii: or, as fome ima-
gine, two gardens for each perfon ; one as a
reward due to his works, and the other as a
free and fnperabundant gift, &e.

b Two forts of fruits ;} Some being known,
and like the fruits of the earth ; and others
of new and unknown fpecies : or, fruits both
green and ripe.

1 Near at band to gather ;] So that a man may
reach them as he fits or lies down.

* Two other gardens ;] For the inferior claf-
fes of the inhabitants of paradife.

‘Of a dark green i] From hence, f»y» Al
Seidawi . it may be inferred, that thefe garden*
will chiefly produce herbs, or the inferior forts
of vegetables ; whereas the former will be plant-
ed chiefly with fruit-trees. The following part
of this defeription alfo falls ihort of that of
the other gardens, prepared for the fuperior
dalles.

Kkk

CHAP.

434

At KORAN.

Chap. 56.

CHAP. LVI.

Intitled , The Inevitable ; revealed ^ Mecca

£

In the name of the moft merciful God.

TTTHEN the inevitable * day of judgnent fhall fuddenly come, no feed
V V <HalI charge the prediction of its coming wrth falfliood: it willabafe
feme, and exalt others. When the earth /hall be lhaken wkh a violent
fhock \ and the mountains fhall be dafhed in pieces, and fhall become as
duft fcattered abroad v and ye fhall be feparated into three diftinCl clafles :
the companions of the right hand-, (how happy Jhail the companions of
the right hand be f) and the companions of the Jeft hand * ; . (how mi-
fcrable Jhail the companions of the left hand be!) and thofe who
have preceded others in the faith* fhall precede them to paradife c . Thefe
are they who fhall approach near unto God; they Jbeil dwell in gardens of
delight r ( Inhere Jhail be *many of the former religions \ and few of the lafr 1 .)
Repofing on couches adorned with gold and precious Hones ; fitting oppofite
to one another thereon \ Youths which mall continue in their bloom for
ever, fhall go round about to attend them, with goblets, and beakers, and
a cup of flowing wine : their heads fhall not acb by drinking the fame,
neither fhall their reafon be difturbed : and with fruits of the forts which
they fhall choofe, and the flefli of birds of the kind which they fhall de-
fire. And there Jhail accompany them fair damfels having large black eyes
refembling pearls hidden in their Jbells : as a reward for that which they
fhall have wrought* They fhall not hear therein any vain difeourfe,

or

* The Inevitable ;] The original word, the
force whereof cannot well be expreffed by a
fingle one in Englijb , figitifies a calamitous
accident which falls furely r and with fudden
violence ; and is therefore made ufe of here to
defign the day of judgment.

b The companion of the right band, and of the
left bandi\ That is, the blefled, and the damn-
ed ; who may be thus diilinguUhed here, bt-
caufe the bools Wherein their a&ions are rc-
giftred, will be delivered into the right hands
of the former, and into the left hands of the lat-
ter 1 : tho’ the words tranllated right band, and
left band , do alfo fignify bappixefs, ind miftry .

c And tbofe tobs have preceded others in the
faith* Jhail precede them to paradife ;] Either the

1 jO Beidawj, Javlalo’dwn.

firft converts to Mobamm -rr. or the prophets,
who were the refpc&ive leaders of their people,
or any perfons who have been eminent example*
of piety and vertue, may be here intended. The
original words literally rtndred are, The leaders,
the leaders: which repetition, as feme fuppofe r
was defigned to $xprcfs the dignity of thefe
perfons, and the certainty of their future glory
and happinefs *,

4 There fliall he Many ef the former ttKgfom,
ami few of the i. e. There ihali be more
leaders , who have preceded others in faith and
good works, among the followers of the feverai
prophets from Adam down to Mohammed , than,
of the followers of Mohammed himfclf 3 .

c See chap. 25. p. 212. not. e.

* Iidem* • 3 Man*

Chap. 56. Al KORAN 435

or any charge of fin; but only the falutation. Peace! Peace! And the
companions of the right hand ( how happy jhall the companions of the
right hand be 1 ) Jhall have their abode among lote trees free from thorns, and
trees of mauz , loaded regularly with their produce from top to bottom ;
under an extended ihade, near a flowing water 6 , and antidjl fruits in abun
dance, which lhall not fail, nor fhall be forbidden to be gathered : and they
Jhall rcpofe themf elves on lofty beds*. Verily we have created the damfea
of par adtfe by a peculiar creation 4 : and we have made them virgins*, be-
loved by their Jtulbands, of equal age with them ; for the delight of the
companions of the right hand. ’There Jhall be many of the former religions ,
and many of the latter 4 . And the companions of the left hand ( how
miferable Jhall the companions of the left hand be /) Jhall dwell amidft burn-
ing winds s , and Raiding water, under the fhade of a black fmokc, nei-
ther cool nor agreeable. For they enjoyed the pieafures of life before this,
while on earth ; and obftinately perfifted in a hainous wickednefs 2 and they
faid. After we fhall have died, and become dull: and bones, Jhall we furely
be raifed to life ? Shall our forefathers alfo be raifed with us ? Say, Veri-
ly both the firft and the laft fhall furely be gathered together to judg-
ment , at the prefixed time of a known day. Then ye, O mess, who have
erred, and denied the refur^effian as a falfhood, fhall furely eat of the fruit
of the tree of al Zakkum, and fhall fill your bellies therewith : and ye
mall drink thereon boiling water ; and ye fhall drink as a thirfty camel

K k k 2 drink-

* Trees of mauz ;] The original word Talk
is the name, not only of the mauz T , but alfo
of a very tall and thorny tree, which bears a-
bundance of flowers of an agreeable fmell f ,
and Teems to be the Acacia.

b Near a flowing water i] Which lhall be
conveyed in channels to fuch places, and ia
fach manner as every one lhall delire . 3 Al
Beidawt obferves that the condition of the few
who have preceded others in faith and good
Works, is reprefented by whatever may render
a city life agreeable ; and that the condition of
the companions of the right hand, or, the ge-
nerality of the blefled, is reprefented by thole
things which make the principal plea fare of a
country life 5 and that this is done to- Ihew
the difference of the two conditions.

c Lofty beds ;] The word tranliatcd beds 9 lig-
nilies alfo. by way of metaphor, wives or con-
cubines ; and if the latter fenfe be preferred,
the paflage may be rendred thus. And they Jhall
enjoy damfds raifed on lofty couches , whom we
have created , 8 c c.

d We have created the damftls of par adtfe by-*
peculiar creation j] Having created them pur-

pofely of finer materials than the females of this
world, and fubjeft to none of thofe inconve-
niences which are natural to the fex 4 . Some
underffand this paflage of the beatified women ;
who, tho’ they die old and ugly, lhall yet be
reftored to their youth and beauty in paradife*.

* Virgins ;] For how often foe ver their hus-
bands lhall go in unto them, they lhall always
find them virgins.

f There Jhall be many of the femtr religions*
and many of the latter ;j Father JMarracci thinks
this to he a manifclt con tradition to what is
faid above. There Jhall be many of the former and
few of the latter : but Al Beidawt obviates fuch
an obje&ion, by obferving that the preceding
paflage fpcaks of the letders only, and thole
who have preceded others in faith and good
works, and the paflage before os fpeaks of the
righteous of inferior merit and degree 5 fo that
tho 1 there be many of both forts, yet there may
be few of one fort, comparatively fpeaking, in
refpeft to the other-

£ Burning winds 5] Which lhall penetrate into
the pafTages of their bodies.

1 See p. 371. * V. J. Leon. Defcripu Africa t lik 9.

, Prelim « vife . j. IV./. 96, 1 See ib. /. 103.

* ^/Beidawi, ♦ See the

43^ Al KORAN. Chap. 56.

drinkcth. This - /ball be their entertainment on the day of judgmeht. We
have created you: will ye not therefore believe that we can raife you frbrii
tbe dead? What think ye? The feed which ye emit, do ye create the
fame, or are we the creators thereof? We have decreed death unto you
A ll: and we lhall not be prevented. IVe are able to fubftitute others like
unto you in your Jlead, and to produce you again in the condition or form
which ye know not. Ye know the original production by creation ; will ye
not therefore conftder that we are able to reproduce you by refufeitation?
What think ye ? The grain which ye fow, do ye caufe the fame to fpring
forth, or do we caufe it to fpring forth ? If we pleafed, verily we could
render the fame dry and fruhlels, Jo that ye would not ceafe to wonder*,
faying , Verily we have contracted debts '‘for feed and labour j but we are not
permitted 1 * to reap the fruit thereof What think ye ? The water which ye
drink, do ye fend down the fame from the clouds, or are we the fenders thereof?
If we pleafed, we could render the lame brackilh : Will ye not therefore
give thanks ? What think ye ? The fire which ye ftrike, do ye produce
the tree whence ye obtain the fame 4 , or are we the producers thereof?
We have ordained the fame for an admonition®, an d an advantage unto
thofe who travel through the defarts. Wherefore praife the name of thy
Lord, the great God. Moreover I fwear f bv the fetting of the ftarsy
(and it is furely a great oath, if ye knew it j) that this is the excellent Korak,
the original whereof is written in the preferved book : none lhall touch the
fame, except thofe who are clean *. It is a revelation from the Lord of all
creatures. Will ye, therefore, defpife this new revelation ? And do ye make
this return for your food which ye receive from God , that ye deny yourfelves.
to be obliged to him for tbe fame h P When the foul of a dying perfin cometh.
up to bis throat, ana ye at the fame time ace looking, on ; ( and we are nigher
unto him than ye, but ye fee not his true condition :) would ye not, if ye are

not

* To mender ;] Or to repent of your time and
labour bellowed to little purpoib, &e.

b We have contrasted debts, &c.] Or, We are
undone.

* We are net permitted, Ac.] Or, We arc un-
fortunate wretches, who are denied the necefla-
ries of life.

<* See chap. 36. p. 365. not. f.

« An admonition ;] To put men in mind of
the refurreflion 1 ; which the production of
fire in fome fort refembtes : or, of the fire of
hell *.

• 1 fwear % ] The particle la is generally fug-
pofed to be intehfive in this place ; bat' if it be
taken for a negative, the words mull be tran-
flated, I will net or do not fwear, becaofe what
is here aliened is too manifefi to need the con-
firmation of an oath 3 .

* None ft all touch the fame, except thofe who
are clean-, ]. Or, Let none touch the fame, Ac.
Purity both of body and mind being rajuifitc in
him who would ule this book with the relpeCt
he ought, and hopes to edify by it : for which
rcalbn thefe words are afually written on the
cover*.

“ ‘that jt deny jourfelves to be obliged to him-
for the fame By aferibing the rains, which fer-

tilize your lands , to the influence of the
liars *.

Some copub inftead of rizlaeom, i. e. jour
food, read Jbncr acorn, 1. e. jr our gratitude', and
then th'e pillage may be rendered thus. And do
jt malt this return of gratitude, for God’s re-
vealing the Koran, that je rejiff the fame as a
Jiff ion f

1 See chap: 36. p. 365. *' A1 Btitfxwt. * Idem. 4 See the Prelim

Difc. J. III. p. 69. 1 See ib. J. 1 31, jz.

Chap. 57. Al KORAN. 437

not to be rewarded for jour aRions hereafter , caufe the fame to return in-
to the body , if ye ipeak truth*? And whether he be of thofe who lhall
approach near unto God b , bis reward Jhall be reft, and mercy, and a gar-
den of delights : or whether he be of the companions of the right hand, he
Jhall be faluted with the falutation , Peace be unto thee ! by tfie companions
of the right hand bis brethren : or whether he be of thofe who have rejected
the true faith, and gone aftray, his entertainment (hall eonfsft of boiling water,
and the burning of hell fire. Verily this is a certain truth* Wherefore
praife the name of thy Loro, the great God.

* iVbtn the feat tf a dying perftn cometb up to
bis throat , &c. ] The meaning of this obfeure
paffage Is, If ye fhall not be obliged to give an
account of your a&ions at the laft day, as by your
denying the refurreftion ye feem to believe,
caufe the foul of the dying perfon to return in"

to his body; for ye may as eafdy do that, as
avoid the general judgment 2 .

b Of thofe tobo Jhall approach near unto God ;}
That is, of the leaders , or firft profefiors of the
faith.

1 Jallal. if Feidawi.

CHAP. LVII.

Intitled , Iron a \ revealed at M e c c a, or at Medina* 5 .
In the name of the moft merciful Goix

W Hatever is in heaven and earth fingeth praife unto God v arid he is
mighty and wife. His is the kingdom of heaven and earth j he giv-
eth life, and he putteth to death ; and he is almighty. He is the firft, and the
laft •, the manifeft, and the hidden : and he knoweth all things. It is he who cre-
ated the heavens and the earth in fix days and then afeended bis thFone. He
knoweth that which entreth into the earth, and that which ilfueth out of the
fame j and that which defeendeth from heaven, and that which afeendeth
thereto: and he ji'with you, wherefoever ye be: for God feeth that which ye
do. His is the kingdom of heaven and earth ; and unto God lhall all things
return. He caufeth the night to fucceed the day, and he caufeth the day cp
fucceed the night ; and he knoweth the innermoft pare of men's, breafts. Be-
lieve in God and his apoftle, and lay out in alms a part of the wealth where-
of God hath made you inheritors : for unto-fqch of you as believe, and beftow
alms, Jhall be given a gre^t reward. And what ailcth you, that ye believe
notin God, when the apoftle invitethyoq to believe in your Lord-, and he
hath received your covenant ‘ concerning this matter , if ye believe any propoft-

tionr'f

* The word occurs toward the end of the c He bath received ' your covenant j] That is.
chapter. Ye are obliged to believe in him by the ftrong

b It is uncertain which of the two places ell arguments and motives,
was the feene of revelationr of this chapter.

43 8 Al KORAN. Chap. 57.

t ion ? It is he who hath feot down unto hisfervant evident figns, that he may
lead you out of darknefs into light } for God is compafii onate and merciful unto
you. And whaoaileth you, that ye contribute not of your fab fiance for the de-
fence of God’s true religion ? Since unto God apfertainetb the inheritance of
heaven and earth. Thole among you who fhall have contribui d and fought in
defence of the faitb, before the caking of Mecca, fhall not b.: held equal Atb
thofe whs fhall contribute and fight for the fame afterwards J . T-hefe (hall be supe-
rior in degree unto thofe who fhall contribute and fight for the t rofigmisn of
the faitb after the abovementioned faccefs : but unto all hath God promited a molt
excellent rew rd *, and God well knoweth that which ye do. Who is he that
will lend unto God an acceptable loan i for he will double the J une unto him,
and he fhall receive moreover an honourable reward. On a certain day, thou
fhalt fee the true believers of both fexes: their light fhall run l >: fore them,
and on their right hands and it JhaU he feud unto tbsps, Good tidings unto
you this day : gardens through which rivers flow •, ye fhall remain therein for
ever. This will be great felicity. On that day the hypocritical men and the
hypocritical women fhall fay unto thofe who believe* Stay for us % that we
may borrow fame of your light. It fhall be anfwered. Return back into the
world , and feek light. Anti a high wall fhall be let bfltwixt them, wherein
fhall he a gate, within which fhall be mercy •» and without it, overagainft the
fame, the torment of bell. The by picnics (hall call out unto the true be-
lievers-, faying. Were we not with you ? They fhall anfwer, Yea ; but ye In-
duced your own fouls by yctir bypocrifa : and ye waited our ruin *, and ye
doubtea.«?»i ermng the faitb •, and your wifhes deceived you, until the decree
of God came, and ye died : and the deceiver deceived you concerning God.
This day, therefore, a ranfom fhall not be accepted of you, nor of thole who
have been unbelievers. Your abode JhaU be o ell fire : rhis is what ye have
deferved ; and an unhappy journey fhall it he thither! Is not the time yet come
unto thofe who believe, that, their hearts fhould humbly fubmit to the admoni-
tion of God, and to that truth which hath been revealed ; and that they be
not as thofe unto whom the feripture was given heretofore, and to whom the
time of forbearance was prolonged, but their hearts were hardened, and many
of them were wicked doers ? Know that God quickeneth the earth, after it
hath been dead. Now have we diftinftly declared our figns unto you, that
ye may underftand. Verily as to the almfgivers, both men and women, and
tbofit who lend unto God an acceptable loan, he will double the fame unto
them ■, and they lhall moreover receive an honourable reward. And they
who believe in God and his apoftks, thefe are the men of veracity, and the
witnefles in the prefence of their Lord : th v^Jbd^Jterve their reward, and
their light. But as to thofe who believe not, an J fccufe our figns of falfe-

hood

* Thofe tube JhaU have contributed w-i foagbt in tbeir right band j) One light leading them the
defence 6f the faitb before the taking afbAcUA, fhall right way to paradife, and the other proceeding
not be held equal with tbofe who fhall contribute from the book wherein their aftions are record-
afteri] Uecanfe afterwards there was not fo great ed, which they Will hold in their right hand,
nccellity for either, the Mohammedan religion be- c Stay for at ;] For the righteous will haften

ing firmly eftablilhed by that great fuccefr. to paradife iwift as lightning.

° Tbeir fight fhall run before them, and on

Chap. 57.

Al KORAN.

439

hood, they /ball be the companions of hell. Know that this prefent life is
only a toy and a vain amufement : and worldly pomp, and the affe&ation of
glory among you, and the multiplying of riches and children, are as the plants
nourifhed by the rain, the fpringing up whereof delighteth the husbandmen;
afterwards they wither, fothat thou feeft the fame turned yellow, and at length
they become dry ftubble. And in the life to come will be a fevere puni foment
for tbofe who covet worldly grandeur ; and pardon from Goo, and favour for
thofe who renounce it : for this prefent life is no other than a deceitful provi-
fion. Haften with emulation to obtain pardon from your Lord, and paradife,
the extent whereof equalleth the extent of heaven and earth, prepared for
thofe who believe in God and his apoftles. This is the bounty of God : he
will give the fame unto whom he pleafeth *, and God is endued with great
bounty. No accident happeneth in the earth, nor in your perfons, but the
fame was entred in the book of our decrees , before we created it : verily this
is eafy with God : and this is written left ye immoderately grieve for the good
which efcapeth you, or rejoice for that which happeneth unto you ; for God
I oveth no proud or vain-glorious perfon, or tbofe who are covetous, and
command men covetoufnefs. And whofo turneth a fide from giving alms’, ve-
rily God is felf-fufficient, worthy to be praifed. We formerly fentour a-
poftles with evident miracles and arguments ; and we fent down with them the
fcriptures, and the balance \ that men might obferve juftice : and we fenc
them down iron * , wherein is mighty ftrength for war ‘ , and various advan-
tages unto mankind : that God may know who aflifteth him and his apof-
tles in fecret i ; for God is ftrong and mighty. We formerly fent Noah
and Abraham, and we eftabliftied in their pofterity the gift of prophecy, and
the lcripture : and of them fame were dire£ted, but many of them were evil
doers. Afterwards we" caufed our apoftles to fucceed in their footfteps *, and
we caufed Jesus the fon of Mary to fucceed them, and we gave him the
gofpel : and we put in the hearts of thofe who followed him, compaction and
mercy : but as to the monaftic ftate, they inftituted the fame ( we did not pre-
fcribe it to them ) only out of a defire to pleafe God ; yet they obferved not
the fanieas it ought truly to have been obferved. And we gave unto fuch of
them as believed, their reward : but many of them were wicked cloers. O ye who
believe iuthe former prophets r , fear God, and believe in hisapoftle Mahommed
he will give you two portions of his mercy f ,and he will ordain you a light wherein

ye

• And the balance’,] i. e. A rule of juftice.
Some think that a balance was actually brought
down from heave a by the ahgel Gabritl to
M tab, the ufe of which he was ordered to in-
troduce among his people.

* And we Jent them down iron ij That is, We
taught them how to dig the fame from mines.
Al Zamakbjbari adds, that Adam is laid to have
brought down with him from paradife five
things made of iron, viz. an anvil, a pair of
tongs, two hammers, a greater and a leffer, and
a needle.

* Wherein is might) flmsgtb for war } ] Wat'
tike inflruments and weapons being generally
made of iron.

“* In fair it i ] That is, fincerely and hearti-
ly.

* O ye who believe , tcc . } Tbefe words are
duelled to the Jews and Cbrijiians, or rather
to the latter only.

1 Two portions of bis mercy ',] One as a re-
compence for their believing in Mohammed, nod
the other as a recompence for their believing

in

44° Al KORAN. Chap. 58.

ye may walk, and he will forgive you •, for God is ready to forgive and mer-
cjful : that thofe who have received the fcriptures may know tnat they have
not power over any of the favours of God *, and that good is in the hand
of God } he beftoweth the fame on whom he pleafech, for Gop is endued
with great beneficence.

in the prophets who preceded him ; for *hey oned, beeaufe they briieve not in his apoftle,
will not fofe the reward of their former reiigt- and thofe favours are annexed to faith in him 1
op, though it be now abrogated by the promul- or, That they have not power to difpofe of
gation of Ifam *. God’s favours, particularly of the greateft of

* That they bm not power over any rf the them, the gift of prophecy, fo as to appro-
favour* of God ; ] u e. That they cannot ex- priate the fame to Mom they pleafe *.
ped to receive any of the favours abovementi-

1 y//$EI£AW!r 1 Idem

CHAP. LVIII.

Intkled , She who difputed 5 revealed at Medina*.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

XXVIII, * \T O W hath God heard the fpcech of her who difputed with thee con-
X\| cerning her husband, and made her complaint unto God *5 and God
hath heard your mutual difeourfe : for God both heareth and fecth. As tb
thofe among you who divorce their wives, by declaring that they will there-
after regard them as their mothers ; let them know that they are not their mo-
thers. They only are their mothers who brought them forth * 5 and they cer-
tainly utter an unjuftifiable faying, and a falfhood : but God is gracious and rea-
jdy to forgive. Thofe who divorce their wives by declaring that they will for the

future

■ Some are of opinion that tbe firft ten verfes decjfion, adding, that fuch form of {peaking was
of this chipter, ending withthefe words, and fear by general content underftood to imply a per-
God* before tobom ye jh all be ajfemblti 9 were re- petual reparation. Upon this the woman be-
veled at Mecca* and the reft at Medina r . ing greatly concerned becaufe of the fmallnefs

c Her who difputed with tbee concerning her of her children, went home, and uttered her
husband* Ac ] This was Kbamla bint Tbdlaba, complaint to God in prayer : and thereup-
the wife of AmEbn al Sdmat, who being di- on this paflage was revealed J , allowing a
yorced by. her husband by a form in ufe among man to take his wife again, notwithftanding his
the Arabs in the time of ignorance, viz . by having pronounced the abovemen dotted form
faying to her. Thou art to me as tbe back cf my of divorce, on doing certain ads of cha-
rt* tber *, came to ask Mobammei'% opinion whe- rity, or mortification, by way of penance,
ther they were necefiaiily obliged to a feparati- c They only are tbeir mothers tobo brought them
on ; and he told her that it was not lawful for forth ; ] And therefore no woman ought to be
her to cohab t with her husband any more : to placed in the fame degree of prohibition, ex-
•which fhe replying, that her husband had not cept thofe whom Gon has joined with them, as
put her away, the prophet repeated his former nurfiog-mcthm,and the wives of the prophet 4

l Idem . * See chap- 33. p. 341. 3 Al Beidawi, Jallal. Ac.

4 Al SfiiDAWi. See chop. 4. p. 63. and cb. 33. /. 350.

Chap. 5^ ^ KORAN, 441

future regard them as their mothers, and afterwards would repair * what they
have faid, Jhall be obliged to free a captive S before they touch one another.
This is what ye are warned to perform: and God is well apprized of that which
ye do. And whofo findeth not a captive to redeem, Jhall obferve a faft of two
confecutive months, before they touch one another. And whofo (hall not be
able to faft that time , Jhall feed threefcore poor men. This is ordained
you , that ye may believe in God and his apoftle. . Thefe are theftatutes of
God : and for the unbelievers is prepared a grievous torment. Verily they
•who oppofe God and his apoftle, fhall be brought low, as the unbelievers
who preceded them were brought low. And now have we fent down mani-
feft figns : and an ignominious punifhment awaiteth the unbelievers. On a certain
day God fhall raife them all to life, and fhall declare unto them that which
they have wrought. God hath taken an exatt account thereof ; but they have
forgotten the fame : and God is witnefs over all things. Doll thou not perceive
that God knoweth whatever is in heaven and in earth ? There is no private
difcourfe among three perfons, but he is the fourth of them ; nor among five,
but he is the fixth of them ; neither among a fmaller number than this, nor a
larger, but he is with them, wherefoever they be : and he will declare unto them,
that which they have done, on the day of refurredtion ; for God knoweth all
things. Haft thou not obferved thofe who have been forbidden to ufe clandeftine
difcourfe, but afterwards return to what they have been forbidden, and dif-
courfe privily among themfelves of wickednefs, and enmity, and difobedi-
ence towards the apoftle e ? And when they come unto thee, they falute thee
with that form offaiutalion wherewith God doth not falute thee 4 : and they fay
among themfelves, by way of dertfton , Would not God punifh us for what
we fay, if this man were a prophet ? Hell Jhall be their fufficient punijh-
ment : they fhall go down into the fame to be burned *, and an unhappy jour-
ney Jhall it be! O true believers, when ye difcourfe privily together, dif-
courfe not of wickednefs, and enmity, and difobedience towards the apoftle ;
but difcourfe of juftice, and piety : and fear God, before whom ye fhall
be affembled. Verily the clandeftine difcourfe of the infidels proceedeth from
Satan, that he may grieve the true believers : but there fhall be none to
hurt them in the leaft, unlefs by the permiflion of God ; wherefore in
God let the faithful truft. O true believers* when it is faid unto you, Make

L 1 1 room

» Would repair, &c.] This feems to be here
the true meaning of the original word, which
properly fignifies to return, and is varioully ex-
pounded by the Mohammedan doctors.

k A captive ; ] Which captive, according to
the moll received dccifion, ought to be a true
believer ; as is ordered for the expiation of man-
flaughter 1 .

* ‘Tbtje who have been forbidden to ufe clandejhtte
iijeourfe, See. ] That is, The Jews and hypo-

1 See chap. 4- p- r«,

critical Mojlems, who caballed privately together
againil Mohammed, and made figns to one another
when they faw the true believers : and this they
centinoed to do, notwithiianding they were
forbidden.

* ’ They falute thee with that font of falstta -
tion wherewith God doth not falute thee .] It feems
they ufed, inllead of Al faldm aleica, i. e.
Peace be upon thee, to fay, Al Jam aleiea, i. e.
Mlfcbitf on thee. See *.

* Al Beidawi, Jallal.

442 Al KORAN* Chap. 58.

room in the afTembty \ make room * : Goo will grant you ample room in
paradife. And when it is faid unto yon, Rife up ; rife up.: God will raife
thofe of you who believe, and thofe to whom knowledge is given, to Ju~
perior degrees of honour : and Gon if fully apprized of that which ye do.
O true believers, when ye go to fpeak with the appftle, give alms previouf-
ly to your difcourfing with him k : this will be better for you, and more pure.
But it ye find not what to gjw, verily God will be gracious and merciful
unto youi Do ye fear to give alms previoufly to your difcourGng with the
pfopbet y left ye jbould impoverish yourfefoes ? Therefore if ye do it not, and
God is gracious unto you, by difpenfing with the faid precept for the future, be
conftant at prayer, and pay the legal alms ; and obey God and his apoftle
in all other matters : for God well knoweth that which ye do. Haft thou
not obferVed thole who have taken for their friends a people againft whom
God is incenfrd c ? They are neither of you, nor of them 4 : and they
fwear to a lye e knowingly. Gon hath prepared for them a grievous puhifli-
ment ; for it is evil whichthey do. They have taken their oaths for a cloak,
and they have turned men afide from the way of Goo : wherefore a fhamd'ul
punifhment awaiteth them ; neither their wealth nor their children lhall avail
them at all againft God. Thefe Jhati be the inhabitants of bell fire ; they
lhall abide therein for ever. On a certain day God lhall rail© them all : then
will they fwear unto him, as they fwear now unto you, imagining that it
will be of fervice to them. Are they not liars? Satan hath prevailed a-
gainft them, and hath cauled them to forget the remembrance of God.
Thefe are the party of the devil ; and jhalt not the paTty of the devil be
doomed to perdition ? Verily they who oppofe God and his apoftle, fhdl be
placed among the moft vile. God hath written ; Verily I will prevail, and my
apoftles : for God is fltrong and mighty. Thou (halt not find people who
believe in God and the laft dayy to love him who oppoleth God and his
apoftle ; although thdy be their fathers* or their fons, or their bre thren, or
their neareft relation*. In the hearts of thefe hath God written faith ; and
he hath ftrengthened them with his fpirit s and he will lead them into gardens,
beneath which rivers flow, to remain therein for ever. God is well pleafed in
them ; and they are well pleafed in him. Thefe are the party of God 1 and
lhall not the party of God profper ?

CHAP.

a When it ii fad vnfa Make rfcrt in tbi aued but a wy little while in force-, being a-
V si ait hm. ] In this paflage the MsJIemi grted on all hands to be abrogated by the fol-*
are coin nundeti to give p Lee, in the public aJ Lem- Jew ing p? fa ge. Do ye fear to give almi f &c. 1 .
l:-ic 5 3 to the prophet and the more honourable of 4 A people xgamf sulk# Gad u mtnfedi } i. e.

his compariioift; and not to prefs and croud upon. The 7 etus.

i m a as they ufed to do* out of a deftre of bo- * Tbey are anther f you, nor of ;] Be-
ing near hipi, and heating his difeourfe ing hypocrites, and wavering between the two

° tfbfp y.tpa to fpeak with the give parties.

See. ~ 4 Xo fhew your hncerity, and to ho- c They fatar to a iyt j ] L e. They have f6-
boot the apoftle. It is doubted whether this be lenndy prafefled Ifilm, which they believe not
a counfel or a precept ; but however it cent!- in their hearts.

1 Brftvu

Chap. 59

Al KORAN.

4+3

CHAP. LIX.

Jntitled \ The Emigration 3 ; revealed ^/Medina*

In the name of the moil merciful God.

W Hatever is in heaven and earth celebrateth tjie praife of God : and he
is the mighty, the *ife. It was he who caufed thofe who believed
not, of the people who receive the faiplwe, to depart from their habitaci
ons at the firfl: emigration b . Ye did nqt think that they would go forth
and they thought that their fortreffes would protect them God. But

the fbajlifement of God came upon them, from whence they did not expett v
and he call terror into their hearts. They pulled down their houfes with
cheir own hands % and the hands of the true believers. Wherefore take ex-

L 1 1 2 ample

a The original wor 4 flgnjfies the getting, or verai years after, in the reign of Omar, when
removing, from one's native Country, or fettle- that Kbalif banfthed thofe who had fettled at
merit, to dwell elfewhere, whether it be by KbuUrar, and obliged them fo depart out of
choice or companion. Arabia

b It was God who eaufeddbe unbelievers, of Dr. Prideattx , fpeaking of Mohammed**
thofe who receive the fcziptstrcj* to f depart from obliging thofe of al Nadir to guit their fettle-
their habitations at the firfi emigration, j The merits, fays that a party of hu men purfued
people here intended were the Jews of the thofe whd fled into* and having 1 * over-

tribe of al Nadir, who dwelt in Medika, and taken them, put them aff to the fword, fcxcfept-
when Mohammed fled thither from Mecca, pro- ing only one man that efcapcd. With fuch
mifed him to ftand neuter between him ana his cruelty , continues he, did thofe barbarians Jirft
opponents, and made a treaty with him to that fit up to fight for that impofturc' they had ban
purpofe. When he had gained the battle of deluded into But a learned gentleman hat
Bedr, they confeffed that he Was the prophet already obferved that this is all grounded on a
deferred in the law : but upon his receiving} miftake, which the doftor was led into by ait
that difgrace a tObdd* they changed their note i jmperfelion in the printed edition pf Efmaeh
and Caab Ebn al Afiraf with 40 horfe went nus ; where, after raebtipning the expulfion of
and made a league with Abu &ofi$n, which the Nadirites , are inferted feme incoherent
they confirmed by bath. Upon 1 this, Molam - words relating to another *£tfon, which hapy
med got Caab difpatched, and, in the 4th year pened the month before, and wherein 79
©f the Hejra , fet forward agahift al Nadir , and MpfietflU inftead of putting others to the fword*
befieged them in their fortrefs, which flood a- were furprized and put to the fword theim
bout 3 miles from Medina, for & days, at the felves, together with their leader al Moniat
end of which they capitulated, and 'were al- EbnQufar, Caab Kbit Zeid alone efeaping ♦.
lowed to depart* on condition tiftt they fljould c Kbey pulled down their houfes with fbeir
entirely guit that place : and accordingly foipe own bands s] Doing what dapifge they could,
of them Went into tyrid, ahd ofa&i tQ Kbaibat that the Mofiems might make the lets advao*
and Bit a *. tage of wiiat were obliged to leave

This was the fitft mfg/dttoril mentioned in hind them,
the paflage before us. The other happened fe**

1 ^Beidaw.i, jAnJfffc &c.V. Aahl*. pity Mob. cap* a ldmlntetpf't * Rtiifc

Lift af Mab. p. 82. * V. Gagnier. n$t> iff Abulfi vit. Mob . p. 72.

444 Al KORAN. Chap. 59.

ample from thorn , O ye who have eyes. And if God had not doomed them
to bani foment, he had furely punilhed them in this world * ; and in the world
to come they (hall fufier the torment of hell fire. This, becaufe they op-
pofed God and his apoftle : and whofo oppofeth God, verily God will be
feverc in pum&ing him. What palm-trees ye cut down, or left (landing on
their roots, were fo cut down or left by the will of God ; and that he might
difgrace the wicked doers. And as to the fpoils of thefe people which Goi>
hath granted wholly to hi& apoftle % ye did not pufo forward any horfes or
camels againft the Fame c s but God giveth unto his apoftles dominion over
whom he pleaftth : for God is almighty. The fpoils of the inhabitants of the
towns which God hath granted to his apoftle, are due unto God and to
the apoftle, and him who is of kin to the apoftle^ and the orphans, and the poor,
and the traveller ; that they may not be for ever divided in a circle among
fuch of you as are rich. What the apoftle (hall give you, that accept ; and
what he (hall forbid you, that abftain from : and fear God *, for God is
fevere in chaftifing. A part alfo behngetb to the poor Mohajerin «*, who
have been difpofiefled of their houfes and their fubftance, feeking favour from
God, and bis good will, and aflifting God and his apoftle. Theft are the
men of veracity. And they who quietly poffeffed the town of Medina , and
profeffed the faith without moleflation , before them \ love him who hath fled
onto them, and find in their breads no want of that which is given the
Mobajerin\ but prefer them before themfelvcs, although there be indi-
gence among them. And whofo is preferved from the covetoufnefs of his
own foul, thofe (hall furely profper. And they who have come after them s
fay, O Lo*d, forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in the
faith, and put not into our hearts ill-will againft thofe who have believed :
O Lord, verily thou art compafiionate and merciful. Haft thou not obferv-

ed

• He bad furely punijhed them in this world ;]
By delivering them up to daughter and captivi-
ty, as he did thofe of Koreidbq.

* At to the fpoils which Goo hath granted
wholly (0 his aptfik, &c.} It is remarkable that
ill this expedition the ipofls were not divided
according to the law given for that purpofe in
the Kerb 1 , but were granted to the apoftle,
and declared to be entirely in his difpofition :
And the reafon was, becaufe the place w*s
taken without the affittance of hotfe; which be-
came a rule for the future *.

c Te did not fu(t forward any h\fn or camels
againft thrfam ?]' F*hr die fettlemem of thofe
of Al Nadir being fb near Medina , the Mofiem
went all on foot thither, except only the pro-
phet himfelf 3 .

d To the poor Mohajerin Wherefore Mr*
hammed diftributed thofe fpoils among the Mo-

hajenttj or thofe who had fled from Mecca, on*
\yi and gave no part thereof to the Anfars, or
thofe of Medina, except only to three of theta*
who were in nccefhtous circumftancci 4 .

* They who quietly poffeffed Medina, and pro*
feffed the faith without moleflation , before them ;]
That is, the AnjSrsi who enjoyed their houfes*
and the free exercife of their religion before
the Hijra , while the converts of Mecca were
perfecuted and harrafled hy the idolaters.

* And find in their hr rafts no want of that which
is given the Mohajerin;], L e. And bear them na
grudge or envy on that account.

* They who have come after thm ; J The per-
sons here meant feem to be thofe who fled from.
Mecca after Mohammed began to gain ftrength*
and his religion had made a confidciablc pro-
grefs.

x Chap . & f. *44. 3 V i Afivtr. vits Mob . p. $U * e&BiiDAvru * Idem

f* Axvrr. ubi f*p- t» 7*.

Chap. 59. Al KORAN, 445

ed them who play thfe hypocrites ? They Iky unto their brethren Who be-
lieve not, of thole who have received the? {criptures *, Verily if ye be ex-
pelled your habitations , we will furely go forth with you ; and we will not
pay obedience, in your refpedt, unto any one for ever : and if ye be attack-
ed, we will certainly afiift you. But God is witnefs that they are liars. Ve-
rily if they be expelled, they will not go forth with them ; and if they
be attacked, they will not afiift them b ; and if they do aflift them,
they will furely turn their backs: and they fhall not be protect-
ed. Verily ye are ft ranger than they , by reafon of the terror cafi into their
breafts from God. This, becaufe they are not people of prudence.
They will not fight againft you in a body, except in fenced towns, or from
behind walls. Their ftrength in war among themfelves is great *: thou
thinkeft them to be united ; but their hearts are divided. This, becaufe
they are people who do not underftand. Like thofe who lately preceded
them d , they have tailed the evil confequence of their deed ; and a painful
torment is prepared for them hereafter. Thus have the hypocrites deceived the
Jews : like the devil, when he faith unto a man, Be thou an infidel ; and
when he is become an infidel, he faith, Verily I am clear of thee j for I
fear God, the Lord of all Creatures. Wherefore the end of them both fhall
be that they Jhall dwell in bell fire, abiding therein for ever : and this fhall
be the recompenfe of the unjuft. O true believers, fear God ; and let a
foul look what it fendeth before for the morrow* : and fear God, for God
is well acquainted with that which ye do. And be not as thofe who have for-
gotten God, and whom he hath caufed to forget their own fouls : thefe are
the wicked doers. The inhabitants of bell fire, and the inhabitants of para-
dife fhall not be held equal. The inhabitants of pafadile are they who fhall
enjoy felicity. If we haafent down this Koran on a mountain, thou would-
eft certainly .have feen the fame humble itfelf, and cleave in funder for fear
of God. Thefe fimilitudes do we propofe unto men, that they may con-
fider. He is God, befides whom there is no God j who knowetn that which
is future, and that which is prefent : he is the moft Merciful ; he is God, be-
fides whom there is no God : the King, the Holy, the Giver of peace,
the Faithful, the Guardian, the Powerful, the Strong, the moft High. Far
be God exalted above the idols which they affociate with him / He is God,

the

* Their brethren who believe not, of tbofe who
have received the feriptures \ ] That is, the
Jem of the tribe Of al Nadir.

b If they be expelled , they will not go forth
with them ; and if they be attacked t they will not
ajjijl them ;] And it happened accordingly : for
Ebn Qbba and his confederates wrote to the
Nadirites to this purpofe, but never performed
their promife 1 .

* Their Jlrength in war among tbemfehet is
great ; ] i. e. It is not their weaknefs or co-
wardice which makes them decline a field bat-

tle with you, fluce they /hew ftrength and va-
lour enough in their wars with one another a
brut both foil them when they enter iota the
lifts with God and his apoftfo.

d Like thofe who lately preceded thm\\ Fiz.
The idolaters who were /Iain 1 1 Bedn or the
Jews of Kalnoki* Who were plundered and
font into exile before thofe of 41 Nadir .

• For the morrow 5} That }s, For the next
life, which may be called the morrow > a* this
prefont life may be called to day.

44-6 Al KORAN. Chap. 60.

the Creator, the Maker, the Former. He hath moft excellent names >.
Whatever if in heaven and earth praifeth him : and he is the Mighty, the

Wife.

■ Sts ship. 7 . p* 136 . not. f.

CHAP. LX.

Intitkdy She who is tried a ; revealed at Medina.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

O Truje Relievers, take not my enemy and your enemy for your friends k ,
Ikewing kindnefa toward them ; fmce they believe not in the truth
which hath come unto you, having expelled the apoftle and yourfelves from
your native ciiy y becaufe ye believe in God, your Lord. If ye go forth
to fight in defence of my religion, and out of a defire to pleafe me, and
privately (hew unto them e *> verily I well know that which ye con-

ceal, and that which yq diilovcr : and whoever of you doth this, hath already
erred from the ftrait path. If they get the better of you, they will be ene-
mies unto you, iind they will ftretch forth their hands and their tongues
again!}: you with evil: and they earneflily defire that ye fhould become unbe-
lievers, Neither your kindred nor your children will avail you at all on the day
of refurseftion, Which will feparate you from one another: and God
feeth that which ye do% Ye have an excellent pattern in Abraham, and
thofe who were with hint, when they faid unto their people. Verily we are
dear of you, and of the idols which ye wor&ip, befides Goo : we have re-
nounced

* The chapter bean this title, beoaufe it dir
re£U the women who defert and come over from
the infidels to the Mojtertp, to be examined*,
end tried whether they bd fincere in their pro-
feffion of the faith.

b Take not myenemy and year enemy fa yettr
friesdi* Sec. J This paflage was revealed on ac-
ebunt of Hateb Ebn Abi who uuder-

ftandmg tfiit Mpbmmed had a ddign to fur-
prize Mead, wrote a letter 10 the Kaeijh? giv-
ing them notice of the intended expedition, and
acfvifcd them to be on their guard; which let-
ter he fent by Sarah. a makf fetYaut J^opging
to the family of Hd fhax. The meftenger had
not been cone lojig, before Gabriel difeover-
ed?hc affair 'to the proplic^ who immediately
text t aftet fief, and fusing Intercepted the letter.

asked Hsttk how he came to be guilty of fuch
an afrion r to which he replied, that it was not
out of Infidelity, or a defire to return to ideja-
try. but meetly to induce the fare*/* to treat
his family, which was ftill at Mecca, with fome
kindnefs ; adding, that he was ell allured his
intelligence would be of no fervice at all to
the Mecca vs , becaufe he was fatisfied God
would take vengeaWJP on them. Whereupon
received his excuJe* and pardoned
him: but it was fkiGUgbt proper to forbid any
fnch practices for the fmute I .

c And privately jh&u frUedJhip «*je Bern ; ]
The verb here uftd haa alfo a contrary fignifi-
cation, according to which the words may be
re mired, apj ye; cpmij jltw friendship 'ante
S&fZh " 11

1 Idem . V. Abw- fie. ifeb- p. 103 .

Chap. 6o. Al KORAN. 447

nounced you ; and entnlty and hatred is begun between ms and you for ever,
until ye believe rri Gbo alone: except Abraham’s faying unto his father.
Verily I wHl Beg parddh for thee * ; but I cannot obtain ought of God in
thy behalf. G Lord, in thee do we truft, and unto thee are we turned ;
and before thee lhall we be affembled hereafter. O Lord, fuffer us not to be
put to trial by the unbelievers * : and forgive us, O Lord j for thou art
mighty and wife. Verily ye have in them an excellent example, unto him
who Hopeth in God and the laft day ; and whofo turneth back ; verily God
is felf fufficient, and praife worthy. PeradilefitUre God* will eftablilh foiendfhip
between yourfelves and fuch of thertl as ye now hold for enemies c : for God is
powerful and GOd is inclined to fofgive, and merciful. As to thofe who have
not born arms again ft you on account of religion, nor turned you out of your
dwellings, God forbttfeth you not to deal kindly With them, and to behave juft-
ly towards them j ; for God IoVeth thofe who adt juftly. But as to thofe who
have born arms againft you on account of feligiop, a rid,, have difpoffefied you
of your habitations, and have aflifted in difpdile fling you, God Forbid-
eth you to enter into friendlhip with them: and whofoever of jqu enter-
eth into friendfliip with them, thofe are unjuft doers, O true believers,
when believing Women come unto you as refugees, try them : God well
knoweth their faith. And if ye know them to be true believers, fend them
not back to the infidels: they are not lawful for the unbelievers to have its
marriage •, neither are the unbelievers lawful for them. But give their mbe-
Ke$mg hujlands what they fhall have expended for their dowers’. Nor Jhdl it be

any

* Except Abraham ’ j faji ng unto bis father ,
Verily lypiH a sit par den for t]bee\) For fa thri
Abraham'* example w ^not to be followed. Sec
ch$p. 9 ^: 164.

* Suffer us Hot to be put to trial by tbb un-
believer s ; j i. c. Suffer them not to prevail a-
gainft us, left they thence conclude themfelves
to be fa the right, and endeavour to make us
deny our faith byjthe terror of perfoedrion *.

c fir Adventure Goo mil eftabtijb friendfbtf
between yar, Set. ] And this happened according-
ly on the taking of Mecca > when Abu Sdfian
and others of the Koreijbs who had till then
been inveterate enemies to the Moflems , em-
braced the fame faith, and became their friends
and brethren. Some fuppofe the marriage of
Mohammed with Omm Habtba > the daughter of
Abu Sofdn , which was celebrated the year be-
fore, to be here intended a .

d As to thofe tobo have not born arms againjt
you , &c ] This paffage, it is faid, was reveal-
ed on account of Koteila bint AbcTal Uzza,
who I|iy£hg, while fhe was an idolatrefs, brought
fame pfefents to her daughter, Afma bint Abi

Becr % the latter not only refufed to accept
them, but even denied her admittance

* But give their iitibeticvhig husbands what
thPj fball have expended for tv Hr dowers. ] For
according to the terms df the pac/fication of
al Haieiblya 4 , each fide Was to return what
ever came into their power belonging to the
other ; wherefore when the McJIem were, by
this paffage, forbidden to reftore the married
women who fhould come over to tHem f they
were at the fame time commanded to make
fome fort of fatisfadion, by returning their
dowry.

It is related, that after the afbreGid pacifica
Tton, while Mohammed was yet at al Hodeibha.
Sobeia bint al Hareth , of the tribe of A flam*
having embraced Mohammed ifm, her husband,
Mojafer the Makbzumits r came and demandt J
her back ; upon which this paffage was reveal-
ed . and Mobammedj^xxrbxzviX thereto, adminirtre !
to her the oath thereafter direfted, and returned
her husband her dower ; and then Omar nu:
ried her * *

1 ^/Beidawi. a V* Gacnier not. in Abulf viuMob* fa 91* 3 Al Bbidaw u

«■ See chap. 41 8. p. 45* &c. 1 JIB* h>awu

44-8 Al KORAN \ Chap. 6 o.

any crime in you if ye marry them, provided ye give them their dowries *.
And retain not the patronage ot the unbelieving women : but demand back that
which ye have expended for the dowry of fitcb of your wives as go over to the
unbelievers ; and let them demand baclc that which they have expended for the
dowry of thofe who come cver_ to you. This is the judgment of Goo, which
he eftablilheth among you : and Goo is knowing and wife. If any of your
wives b efcape from you to the unbelievers, ana ye have your turn by the
coming over of am of tbe unbelievers wives to you e ; give unto thofe believers
whofe wives fhall have gone away, out of tbe dowries of the latter, fo much
as they fhall have expended/or tbe dowers of tbe former : and fear God, in whom
ye believe. O prophet, when believing women come unto thee, and plight
their faith unto thee \ that they will not aflfociate any thing with God, nor
Ileal, nor commit fornication, nor kill their children % nor come with a ca-
lumny which they have forged between their hands and their feet f , nor be
difbbedient to thee in that which fhall be reafonable : then do thou plight
thy faith unto them, and afk pardon for them of God ; for God is inclined
to forgive, and merciful. O true believers, enter not into friendfhip with a
people againft whom God is incenfed * : they defpair of the life to come h ,
as the infidels defpair of tbe refurreblion of thofe wno dwell in the graves.

a Provided y give thtm their dmrm ;] For

what is returned to their former husbands is not
to be confidered as their dower.

b Any of jm wives ;] Literally, any thing ef
ymr wives ; which fome interpret, any }ert cf
their dowry.

* And ye have your turn , Or, as the Origi-

nal veA may alfo be tranflated, and yc take fails i
in which cafe the meaning will be, that thofe
Mejlms, whofe wives fhall have gone over to
the infidels, fhall have a fatisfa&ion for their
dower out of the neat booty. This law, they
fay, was given, becaufe the idolaters, after the
preceding verfe had been revealed, refufed to
comply therewith, or to make any return of the
dower of thofe women who went over to them
from the Mojicas 1 ; io (tat the latter were
obliged to indemnify thcmfelves as the)- could,
4 See die Prelim. Difc. 5 II. p. 47. Some

are of opinion that this pailage was not revealed
till the day of the taking of Meec j » when, after
having received the folemn fubmiffion of the
men, he proceeded to receive that of the wo-
men *.

e See dup. 81.

f Ni- come with a calumny , dec. ] J allaid ddin
underfiands thefe words of their laying their
fpurious children to their husbands.

8 A people againft whom God u incenfed ; ]
i. e. The infidels, in general ; or the Jews in
particular

, h ftvj? defair of the life to come ;] By reafon
of their infidelity ; or becaufe they well know
they cannot ex pea to be made partakers of the
happinefs of the next life, by reafon of their
rejects ng of the prophet foretold in the law,
and whofe million is confirmed by miracles *,

2 £dew w * Id*#. * See tbzp* 1 . 1 • 4 Al Beidawj.

CHAP.

Chap . 61 * Al ICO RA I\I. 449

CHAP. LXI.

Intitled \ Battle Array ; revealed at Mecca*.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

W Hatever is in heaven and in earth celebrateth the praifc of God ; for
he is mighty and wife, O true believers, why on ye fay that which
ye do not 6 ? It is moft odious in the fight of God, that ye fay that which ye do
not. Verily God loveth thole who fight for his religion in battle array,
as though they were a well compared building. Remember when Moses faid
unto his people, O my peqple, why do ye injure me c ; fince ye know chat I
am the apoftle of God (tut unto yoti ? And hen th|y had deviated from the
truth , God made their hearts 1 to deviate from the right way ; for God dire£t-
eth not wicked people. And when Jesus the $on of Mary faid, O chil-
dren of /Israel, verily I am theapoijle( of God ferit unto -you, confirming
the law which was delivered before me, and bringing good tidings of an apo-
ftle who lhall come after me, and whofe nam tjball be Ahmed *. And when
he produced unto thenfi evident mirades,* thfey faid, This is manifeft forcery.
But who is more unjuft than he who forgech a lye againft God, when he is
invited unto Islam ? And God diredfeth not the unjuft people. They feck
to eXUDguifh God*s light: with their mouths: but God will perfcdt his light,
though the infidels be averfe -thereto. Jt is he who hath fent his apoftle
with the. direction, and the rofigion of truth, that he may exalt the fame a-
bove every religion, although the idolaters be averfe thereto'. O true believers,
fhall I fhew you a merchandize which will deliver you from a. painful tor-
ment hereafter ? Believe in God and his apoftle ; and defend God’s true reli-
gion with your fbbftance, and in your own perfortl This will be better for you,

M m m if

a Or, "as fame *ath$r judge, at Medina ;
which opinion is confirmed by *he expljcatM
In the next note.

b Why do ye faj tbdt which ye do not 7*] The
commentators generally fupjpofe- thefe words to
be diretted to the Mvjlervs, twhfl£ noiwichftlnd,-
ing they had folemnly engaged *bffi4pd their
lives and fortunes in defence of .th?u* c fiitV jjp
turned theif back's kt the battel of
Ohod T . They may, however, be applied to
hypocrites of all forts, whofe a&ions contra-
dict the» words.

Wfy da ye fyoreme? ] m yt»r

1 See chap. p. $o. Sc c. 2

A See the Prelim. Difc. ± JVty; ; " '

obedience r or by fifelicitfitfly afpetfing me 9 1
4 Wfafe name Jba{l ft Ah|ned j ] For Mobam*
med alfo bore the name of dimed \ both name*
Being derived frefcn th6 fame foot, and nearly
of’ the fame fi^niffadSon, The Perfiwt para
phraft, to fcpport what i i hdxe allcdgod* quote*
therfo^owipg words <Jf Cm r i . r, 7 to »y fa-
ther* and the 'Panel t\t\Jballcme 3 ; the Me*
Vakihedah doftors uriajuniotlljy t ticking, fhat
by the Paraclete (or, a* they chufe to read it, the
Plrhlyte , or Illu firms t \ their prophet is intend
ed, and no other 4 .

r -uL'iiji ftdt >:n Ltiaftio I . t r '-I vwfi v j._ < i

jr fl'tfu 3 Sde JfoitH'Al 7, ftc

^dTCiPtii & mu ,t . • ’

4.5 o Al KORAN. Chap. 62.

if ye knew it. He will forgive you your fins, and will introduce you into
gardens through which rivers flow, and agre£<ft>le habitations in gardens of
perpetual abode. This -mill be g^eat felicity. And ye pall obtain other
things which ye defire, namely , alfiftance from God, and a fpecdy vi&ory.
And do thou bear gpod tickings to the true believers. O true believers, be ye
the a Gift ants of God ; a* Jesus the fob of Mary laid to the apoftfes, Wno
mill be my affiftants withrefpedt to God*? The apoftles anfwered. We will be the
affiftants of Gop. So a rart of the chilurcn of Israel helieved, and a part
believed not b : but we ffrengthened thofe who believed, above their enemy ;
wherefore t%y became viftonoqs over them.

a See chap. £* p. 4 2. t ing h|m, or by affirming him to be Goa» and

h And n : art Minted not Either by r^eft. the fon of God *„

1 JfkLL

CHAP. LXH.

Infilled, The Aflembly ; revealed at Medina.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

W Hhtfcver ts in heaven and earth praifeth God \ thfe King, the Holy,
the Mighty, the Wife. It is he who hath railed up amidft the illite-
rate Arabuks an apoftle from among themfelves % to rehearfe his figns un-
to them, and to purify them, and to teach them the feriptures and wifdom
whereas before they were certainly in a manifeft error: and others of them
have not yet attained unto them, by embracing tbs faith j though tb:y afopall be
converted in God's gr id time *, for he is mighty and wife. This is the free
grace of Go® : be fcdtoweth the feme on whom he pleafith : and God is indued
with great beneficence. The likeneis of thofe who were charged with the obfer-
vance of the law, and then obferved it not, is as the likenefs of an afs laden
with books b . How wretched is the likenefc of the people who charge the
figns of God with fellhood f and God direfteth not the urtjuft people. Say,
G ye who follow the Jewilh religion, if ye fey that ye are the friends of
Goo above other men, wifh for death % if ye fpeak truth. But they will
never wi£h for it, becaufe of that which their hands have font before them : and
God well knoweth the unjuft. Say, Verily death, from which ye fly, will
furely meet you : then fhall ye be brought before him who knoweth as well

what

1 Sec the Prelim. Di(c. f II. p, 42* c Wifi fir death ;} i. e. Make it yow reqndt

k As the likenefs rf an afs laden with booh ; J to Goo, that lie would traaflate you from this
Becaufe they underftand not the prophecies troubkfome world to a Hate of never-fading
contained in the few> which bear witnefs to blifr.

Mohammed , no more Uun the afs dots the * See chap. 2. p. iz.
books he carries.

Chap. 63. Al KORAN. 451

what is concealed as what is difcovered; and he will declare unto you that which
ye have done. O true believers, when ye are called to prayer on the day of
the affembly », haften to the commemoration of God, and leave merchandiz-
ing. This 'will be better for you, if ye knew it. And when prayer is end.
ed, then difperfe yourfelves through the land as ye lift , and feek gain of the
liberality of God b : and remember God frequently, that ye may profper.
But when they 1 fee any merchandizing, or fport, they flock thereto, and
leave thee Handing up in tby pulpit c . Say, The reward which is with
God is better than any fport or merchandize : and God is the belt pro-
vider.

» The day */ the aftemkiy i] That w Friday, pations, if y« think fit : for the Mebamitdaui do
which being more peculiarly fet apart by Mo- not hold themfeives obliged to obfetve the da/
bammed for the pubHc worflrip of God, is of their public aiTembly with the fame ftri&nefs
therefore called Yacom al joma , f. e. the day of as the Cbriflhtnt and Jews do their refpeflive
the ajfembly, or tongregatien ; whereas it was Sabbath j or particularly to abftainfrom work,
before called al Aruba, The firlt time this after they have performed their devotioni.
day was particularly obferved , as fame fay, £onre, however, from a tradition of their pro*
was on the prophet's arrival at Medina , into phet, are of opinion that works of clurity, and
which city he made his firft entry on a Triday: religious exerciies, which may draw down the
but others teH os that Caab Ebn Lma , one Of bleffing of God, axe recommended in this
Mohammed's ancefoors, gave the day itt prcfcnt paffege.

name, becaufe on that day the people ufed to be c When they fee any merchandizings or fiartf
aWembld before him 1 . Otvereafop given for the &c. J It is related that one Friday, while Mo-
obfervation of Friday , preferably to any other hammed was preaching, a caravan of merchants
day of the week, is becaufe on that day God happened to arrive with their drums beating,
£nifhed the creation *. according to cuftomi which the congregation

b Andfedt gain of the liberality of \ God;] By hearing, they all ran out of the Mofyug to fee
returning to your commerce ana worldly occu- them, except twelve only 3 .

1 Al Biidawi. * V. Goi. in Sfrag. p, 15* * j#/Beidawi, Jaelal.

CHAP. LXIII.

Iritifled y The Hypocrites ; revealed at Medina.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

W HEN the hypocrites come unto thee, they fay. We bear witnefs that
thou art indeed the apaftle of Gotm Afidi Goo krtowetb that thou
art indeed his apoftle : but God beareth witnefs that the hypocrites are cer-
tainly liars. They have taken their earths, for a.; protection, arid tMy turn others
afide from the way oF God : it is furefy evil which they do. This is teftified of
them, becaufe they believed, and afterwards became unbelievers : wherefore a
feal is (fet on their Hearts, and they ' (halt not underhand. When thoa be-

■M m m 2 holdeft

• ,< • .• 1 ! ' " • ' ' 1 ‘

if

452 Al K 0 R A Chap. 64.

hold, ft .them; their perFoas ph\ifc thee : and if they fpeak, thou hear eft'
their difcouric Wifb Might. They refemble pieces of timber (tit up a&aittjl a

mull b , They imagine every fhout to be againft them *. They are enemies - r
wherelbffc beware of them. Goo curie them: how are they turned afide
•f: the if nib I And when iris faid unto them, Come, that the apofbie of
(ifsS may Afk pardon for you; they turn away their heads, and thou.feeft
thetn .retire big .with difiajn. Itjhati be equal unto them, whether thou ask
pardon .tor them, or do not ask pudon for them ; God wiH by no means
ibi'gjh'e .them: ior God direderh not the prevaricating people. Thtfe are
the men who fay to the inhabitants of Medina, t)o not beftow any thing orr
the refugees who are with the apoftle of God, that they may be obliged to fe-
parate from him; Whereas unto God belong the ftores of heaved and earth :
but tfie hypocrites do not underftahd. The^ fay. Verily, if we return to
Medina, ihqiyrorthler fbaft expel thence the meaner a. Whereas fuperior
jiforth belmgeth unto Gqv» and his apoftle, and the true believers : but the hy-
pocrites? know it not. Q true believers, let not your riches or your children
divert you from the remembrance of God : for whofoever doth this, they
will freely bC lofers. And give alms out of that which we have beftowed on
you 1 before death -come unto one of you, and he fay, O Loan, wilt
thou not grant me refpite for a fhort term ; that I may give alms, and beedme
ppr of the righteous? Tor God will by no means grant further refpite to
a foul, when its determined time is come : and God is fully appr - .J of that
which ye do.

• irbe/s ibs»b*kflJ$ them, tbnr pnfm fltefe t They imtghu fvt*§ Jpnti t\ . a f

sk’t, let. ] The commentators tell us, that Ab- living under continual -rprthejifjons i became
s.'Meh Ebn Obba, a chief Hypbcfitd , 1 was a till they are coufcious of tlttlr hvpecirify towards
man of a very graceful prefence, and of a ready God, and their iuiineerity towards the Mt f
and eloquent tongue; and tifedtd frequent the has.

prophet’s affembly, attended by feveral like * They fay. Fir if , . if mv re tarn la Medina,
himfelf : and that thefe men were greatly ad- tb*-wtrtintr jbali exftl tbtmt ike r.vwr;] Thefc,
mired by Mtbammi , who was taken with as well as the preceding, were the uords of
their bandfome appearance, #ud Jiitened to their Ebn Obba to one c# Medina, who in a certam
difeourfe with pleafure «. ' expedition quarrelling with an Arab of the de-

• They ujarMt fitm ef lierter fit up a^eisft fart about water, received a blow on the head

a toaUf] Being tall and big, but void of know- with a hick, and made his complaint thereof
ledge and .-'aiifide ration *. to him J .

* Al Beidawi. * Urn. 3 Hint.

CHAP. LXIV.

In tit led, Mutual Deceit ; revealed at Mecca
In the name of the moft merciful God.

'y^’Hatever is in heaven and earth celebrated!

the praifes of God : his is

the

■ The commentators are not agreed whether
ffiis chapter wu revealed at Mata, or at Me-

dina ; or partly at the one place, and partly at
the other.

CflAP. 64* -dl K 0 R Pf. 453

the kingdom, and unto him is the praife dtte ; for he is afm jgh'ty. h is ht
who Hath created yoM; and one of you is predefined to be an unbeliever, and
another of you is predefined to be a believer : and God beholdeth that which ye
do. He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth 5 and he hath fafoi-
oned you, and given yop beautiful forms : and unto him tnuft ye all go. He
knoweth whatever is in heaven and ejirth : and he knoweth that which ye con-
ceal, and that which ye difcover ; for God knoweth the innermoft part of
mens breafts. Have ye not beeH acquainted with the ftory of rfiofe who dif-
believed heretofore, and tafted the evil confequencc df their behaviour ? And
for them is prepared , in the life to come , a tormenting punifhmenc. This
Jhall they fuffer, becaufe their a pottles came unto th.etn with evident proofs of
their miffon x and they faid. Shall men dirett us ? Wherefore they believed
not, and turned their backs. But God ftandeth in need of no pepfon : for
God is felf-fufficient, and worthy to be prated. The unbelievers Imiin*
that they foall not be raifed'again. Say, Yea, by my Load, ye foall lu Yc-
ly be raifed again : then Ihall ye be told that which ye have jy rough t j and
this is eafy with God. Wherefore believe in Qop and his dpottfe, aiud the
light which we have font down : for God is well acquainted With that which
ye do. On a certain day he Ihall afiembfe you, at.-.the day of the general afo
fettlbly : that -will be the day of rnutuil deceit \ , And wHofo foall believe in
Gop, and foall do that which is right,, from him will lie ptpiatft bis, evil deeds,
and he will Ie£d hifo into garderisfoenea'th which rivers flow, to remain there-
in for ever. This trill be great felicity. But they who jhall not believe,
and Ihall accufe our ttgns of folfoood, thdfe '$#{1 h. the inhabitants of hell
"fine, wherein theV (hall remain for tter' x a nd a fourn^y fsafl it be

thither i No rhistortune hfyppenefk but J by thej^rm}lttppx/.Goh ; and whole*
bdievhth in- Goo, He will direct his heart; ahd.Gon knoweth all th^tgs. Where-
fore Otfey C^on, and obey the apoftle : but if ye turn back, verify the difty in.-
cjertiben't on our. a pottle is only public preaching. Go d ! there is no God but he :
wherefore in God let the faithfol put theVtruft. O true heftevers* .verily ctf your
•wives and your Children ye have an enemy b : wherefore beware of them, But
W ye pafs over theif off $(es[ and parfloft, and forgive ‘t TJap is lifoewilie in
feed to forkive ; 1 cad nrtertM. Your stealth and your children are oply a
temptation'; but' ^hh God Is a great Reward! Wherefore feac'i^op^ as much
as ye are able ; 'and Hear, a’hd qb'fey r and give afmpi for the good of youj
fouls ; For whofq’is pfefe'rved from the tfovet'oufnefs of his own foul, they foall
profper. If ye lend, unto' 6od an ’acceptable loan, he will double the fame

unto

* Tht 'day of mutual deceit '-,] \tyheh the blef-
fed will deceive the damned, "by talifig rh’e
places which they would have had in paradife,
had; ‘ ' * - ’ ’

■wife ■

b Ofy our wives and jour children je b/we 40
enemy ; J for tbefe are apt to diibaft a man
from his duty, efpecially in, time rtf diftjeli 2 ; a

tjjey been true believers ; and contrary

married man car *? /-? th t Lh;r. that are of
IhiS ivohld, while the unmirikj careth for the
things that belong to the Lo? d 3 .

c If jo pap over their, yfenm, Ire-] Cdft*
Lidcrmg that the hindrance they may occafioa
yon jproceeda from their aflEiefUon, and their ill
belong your abfencc in time of war, (jfrj

1 Idem, Jallal. Yahya.

1 iidqn.

3 See 1 Corinth . yil 25, te

454 Al E RA N. Chap. 65.

unto you, and will forgive you : ior Goo is grateful and long-fu Bering,
knowing both what is hidden, and what is divulged* the Mighty, the
/Wife.

CHAP. LXV.

Intitledy Divorce ; revealed at Medina.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

S Prophet, when ye divorce women, put them away at their appointed
term * ; and compute the term exactly : and fear God, your LoaD.
ge them not to go out of their apartments, neither let them go out, until
the term he expired^ unlefs they be guilty of manifeft uncleannefs. Thefc
are the ftatutes of God : and whoever tranfgrefieth the ftatutes of Qoo, afliired-
ly injureth his own foul. Thou knoweft not whether God will bring fbme-
thing new to pals, which may reconcile them, after this. And when they
/hall have fulfilled their term, either retain them with kindnels, or part
from them honourably : and take witnelfcs from among you, men of in-
tegrity ; and give your teftimony as in the prefence of God. This admo-
nition is given unto him who belie Veth in God and the laft day : and
whofo feareth God, unto him will he grant a happy iflue out of all his af-
flictions* and he will bellow on him an ample provifioa from whence he ex-
pe£leth it not : and whofo trufteth in God, he will Ite his fufficient fupport *
for God will furely attain his pucpofe. Now hath God appointed unto eve-
ry thing a determined period. As to fuch of yonr wives as mall defpair hav-
ing their courfes, by reaflon oftbeir age ; if ye be in doubt thereof , let their term
be three months : and let the fame be the term of thofe who have not yet had
their eourfes. But as to thofe who are pregnant, their term Jball be , until
they be delivered of their burthen b . And whofo feareth God, unto him will
he make his command eafy. This is the command of God, which he hath
fent down unto you. 4 ft d whofo feareth God, he will expiate his evil deeds from
him, and will increafc his rewards Suffer the women whom ye divorce to dwell
inflame part of the houfles wherein ye dwell ; according to the room and con-
veniences Of the habitations which Ve poflefs : and make them not uneafy,
that ye may reduce them to ftrajrs. And. if they be with child, expend on them
wbat /halt be needful* until they be delivered of their burthen. And if they

Tackle

a At tbtir apfchwi That ii„ When vorce their wivee while they are dean: and fays

ih-y fhall feme had; their courfes thrice, after the that the pallage was revealed on account* of St*
time of their divorce* if they prove not tobe with Omar, who divorced his wife when Hie had
child; <r, if they prove with child,, when her courfes upon her, and was therefore oblige
they fhall have been delivered 1 . AlBttdami ed to take her again,
fuppgCci husbands are hereby commanded to di- b See chap. z. p. 26.

1 Su chap, 2. 26.

Chap. 66. Al KORAN". 455

fuclcle their children for yotf, give them their hire * ; and confuk among your-
feives, pdeording to what fhall be jdft and reafonable. And if ye be put to
a difficulty herein , and another woman (hall fuckle the child for him, let
him who hath plenty expend propdrtienably, in the maintenance of the mother
and the hurfe , out of hB plenty t and let him whole income is fcanty, ex-
pend in proportion out of that whieh Goo hath given him. God obligeth no
man to more than he hath given him ability to perform : God will caufe eafe
to fucceed hardffiip. How many cities have turned afide from the command
of their Lord and his apoftles? Wherefore we brought them to a live re ac-
count i and we ebaftifed them with a grievous chaftifetnent : and they tail-
ed the evil confequence of their bufinefs ; and the end of their bufineis was
perdition. God bath prepared for them a fevere punifhment: wherefore
fear God, O ye who are indued with undemanding. True believers, now
hath God fent down unto you an admonition, an apoftle who may rehearfe
unto you the perfpicuous figns of God that be may bring forth thofe who
believe and do good works, from darknels into light. And whofo believeth
in God, and doth that which is right, him will he lead into gardens beneath
which rivers flow, to remain therein for ever : now hath God made an ex-
cellent provifion for him. It is God who hath created feven heavens, and
as many different Jtories of the earth : the divine command defeendeth be-
tween them b i that ye may know that God is omnipotent, and that God
cocftprehendeth all things by his knowledge.

* fbeir him] Which ought at leaft to be b ‘Ibe divine commend defeendetb between them i'
Jlfficient to maintain and cloath them during the Penetrating aad pervading them all, with sb-
time of luckling. Sec chap, 2. p. 27. folute efficacy.

CHAP, lxvi;

Ihtitledy Prohibition; revealed at Medina;

In the name of the moft merciful God.

O Prophet, why holdeft thou that to be prohibited which God hath al-
lowed thee, feeking to pleafe thy wives * * fince God is inclined to for-
give

* Wbj loldeft that that to be prohibited whiik and Safi, all told him they fmelt he had been
God both allowed tbee, fcc.1 There are Tome eating of the juice which diftilb from certain
who fuppofe this paJTage to have been occafi- fhrubs in thofe ports, and refembles hbney in
oned hy Mohammed's protefting never to eat tafte and confluence, but is of a very ftrtmg fa-
honey any more, becaufe, having once eaten vour, and which the prophet had a great aver-
fome in the apartment of Hafia, or of Zeinab, fion to But the more received opinion is,
three other of his wives, namely, Ayejba, Sarnia, that the chapter was revealed on the following

occafioa.

1 Al. Al Bf IDAWt.

456 At KORAN* Chap. 6f>.

nth'; merciful ? Goo hath: allowed yoq the diffolution of your oaths *
and Gob is your matter ; and he is knowing and wife. When the prophet
intruded as a fecret unto one of his wives a certain accident ; and when fhe
difclofed the fame, and God made it known unto him ; he acquainted bit
with part pf wbat fie bad dotff , and forbore to upbraid bar with- the after
patt thereof. And when he had acquainted her therewith, flic faid, Who

hath

-GCttfoijn- with a Save

of ius named Man* of Coptic extract, (who
had been fent him as a prefent by cd Mokawkas ,
govemour of Egypt,' on the day which was due
to A ? ; to Hafsa* and, as fome fay, on

•’ own bod, while fhe was ablest ; and
tm cpmfog to Hafsa'x knowledge, ihe took it
extrearojy i II, and reproached her husband fo
lharplyy that, to p vHy her, he pondfed*, with
anoatfet never to touch the maid again l »: Red
to free him from the obligation of this pipatifo,
was the defign of the chapter.

I cannot here avoid qhftrmng, as a learned
writer 1 has done 1 ore me, that Dr Priitfivx
ius 11 1 ! ngi? 3 y m irepre fen ted I h .is^a fijge- Fofiuv-
ir.^r gtv&jfl the lipiy of W prophet's amour with
his maid Miry, a Hftle eiiVheliilhed, he .pro-
ceeds to tell us, thic in this chapter Mikm-
.r.i f* brings in God .allowing him, and ap hU
AJykfi u, to lie with their tmMf r.hen ritey
will, tiiiTwiihltaGuLuf, thrir drives: ( wher^i
the words rdste j the prophet t?nJy , who
wanted not any new permiffion for that par-
pofc, bezaufe it was a privilege already grant*
ed him 3 , though to none elfd arid then, to ihew
what ground he hie, for his .fiiettijn, adds, that
the firft words oi the chapter are, O/t p*.- /, tit by

A thm frhit nbar God Litb alimtd f£w,
fkut that ffost/f tb t i pftm? Goo hath
gra- ■ J jthfj y&t to Ik miti jwr mid /rvai nts 4 .
Which laft words re not to be found h*re, or
el few here in the KtrZn* and contain an allow -
ance of wh.it is expiejly forbidden therein 1 ;
though the doXor has thence taken occafion to
make Tome reflexions which might as wdl
have been {pared. I shill fsy nothing to ag-
gravate the matter; but leave the reader to
imagine whit thh reverend divine would have
faidof a Met'd nrxtian, if he had caught him
tripping in die like manner.

J-Javmg digrefled fo far, I will venture to a id
a yvqrd, or two, in order to account for one cir-
cumftance which pr. PridtauA relates concern-

1 lidtm, ]alx.al Yahya. 1 Gac’ Iir,
p. 348, 349. * Prid. Lift f Mat* p* 1 1 3.

24. p. 287, &c. * Pri t>. Lift of Mob* p* 11,

HtJJ. Dyn\fi p* 165- 9 Seetbap . $■ p+g 4*

ing Mdbammed's concubine Mary ; vtx. chat
after her mailer's death, no account was Harj
of her or the fon which fhe had born him, but
both were fent away into Egypt, and no mention
made of either ever aftfer among llhem ; and then
he fuppofe* . for he feldom is at a lofa for a fop-
pofnfon) Jlhax 4jtJba* out ofthe hatred which foe
bore her, procured of her F.irh?r, who fucceeded
the impoj! in the government, to have her thus
difpofed of« But it being certain, by the gene
ral confent of a I tIic eat ern Writers, that Mary
continued in JrabuL till her death* which hap-
pened at MeJA*. u about five years after that of
her huiler, and was bured tn the ufual bmying-
I'hce [litre, caSStd al and that her fon

died beiorehia iatheri k kis been asked, .v hence
fhc.doXor hid thrs " . I jwfwcr, I'hat I guefa
he had it parllv fiom Ahu'far^m j, according
to the primed edition pf whofe work, the
Mary we are f pealing of, is laid to hive been
fent With her filler Shirk [ not w ch her fon )
10 JttxMria by fr! MAtsrzhii - ; though fmakc
no doubt but we ought in that paflage to read
™;n 9 front, inflead of ila, r ; ( notwithflanding
fhe Iiiamifcripi rapiq. of this author ufed by
Dr. P&tm (t, the ediEtr, and alfo a very fair one
in my own pgffcIEL.:.n + agree in the latter reading;)
and that the ibntenct ought to run :huf t

rix. Mariam) zr'i nm —jfr Shirraa ei Alex-
andria. tptwrr.it al MoUwias.

- GtJ wttb nu'ttrisi aait fit Jfb&itkti f jo**
By having appointed an ttplmnn for
that purpofo y : or, as the words may be tranf-
lated. Gad bath aUtmtd yu {? &;} an txm$Lm
in y-w tittM, that b + to add the words, f
H ptijft G<u> ; in wh eh cafe a man is extufed
from guilt if he perform not his oath 1 , The
pafiage, though direXed to *1! the M firm in ge-
neral, foems to be prtietilarly defigned forqukt-
ing foe prophet^ confciencc in regard to the
oath ahoyrmeriifositiJ ; bur A! Ee.lmi ap
proves riot r his apsiifun, M«afe an v:.ih
was to b* fo ked upm as an fnc nfltferatft one;'
arid reg uired tit? expiitipn.

not. ad JbsK vitn Mik p.i$pS d-3\ aj,

5 Set tWtp: l?-p. 230. d*ip, 4. p*. 6 + . firJrhap.

(- 7 G a c « 1 e r , ^ j' Japra, " Abv'lfarac.

10 A! B£i da.. - 1 .

Chap. 66.

At KORAN.

457

hath di/qovsred this unto thee ? He anfwered, The knowing, the ftgacious Gob
hath dijftovered it unto me ® If ye both be turned unco God (for your hearts
have fwerved j it is weU : but if ye join againft him, verily God is his patron •,
and Gabriel, and the good man among the faithful, and the angels alfo are bis
affiftants b . If he divorce you, his Lord can efljily give him in exchange
other wives better than you, women rcfigned unto God , true believers, devout,
penitent, obediqnt* given to fading, both fetch as have been known by other
men, and virgins, O true believers, fave your fouls* and tbofiefyoux families*
from the fire whofe fewel is men and ftones, over which are fit angels fierce
and terrible c ; who difobey not God in what he hath commanded them,
but perform what they are commanded. O unbelievers, excufe not yourfelves
this d^y v ye (hall furely be rewarded for what ye have done d . O true be
lievers, turn unto God with a fincere repentance : peradventure your Lord
will do awa y from you your evil deeds, and Will admit you into gardens,
through which rivers flow ; on the day whereon God will not put to fhame
the ftfopTiet, or thole who believe with him: their light flrall run before
them, and on their right hands % and they ftialffay, Lord, make our light
perfeft, and forgive us ; for thou art almighty. O prophet, attack the infidels
with arms , and the hypocrites with arguments \ and treat them with feverity :
their abode fhall be hell, and an ill journey Jhallit be thither . God propounded
as a fimilitude unto the unbelievers, the tfife of Noah, and the wife of Lor :
they were under two of our righteous fervants 1 , and they deceived them both f ;

Nnn where-

* When the prophet intrilfled as a fecret unto one
of his wives a certain accident , &c v ] When Mo-
hammed found that Hafsa knew of his having
injured her, or Ayefia, by lying with his con-
cubine Mary on the day due to one of them, he
defired her to keep the affair fecret, proofing,
at the fame time, that he would not meddle with
Mary any more; and foretold her, as a piece
of news which might footh her vakfty, that
Abu Beer and Omar fhould fucceed him in the
government of his people. Hafsa, however,
could not conceal thisdrora Aytjba, with whom
{he lived in ftrifl friendfhip r out acquainted her
with the whole matter : whereupon the prophet,
perceiving, probably by Ayejha's behaviour,
that his iecret had been difeovered, upbraided
Hafsa with her betraying ^him, telling her that
God had revealed, it to him ; and not only di-
vorced her, but feparated him from all his other
Wives for a whole month, which rime he (pent
in the apartment df Maty. In a fhort time, not-
wkftfbiiding. he tool? Hdfia again, by thedire&l-
on, as he gave out, of the angel Gabriel who

commended her for her frequent falling and other
exefcife* of devotion, afftmng hkn likewise that
fhe fhould be one of his wives in paradife 1 .

b If ye both , &c.j This fentence is dire&ed
to Hafo zn&yffejha ; the pronouns and verbs of
the feebnd peyfoh being in the dual number.

c See chap. 74. and the Prelim. Difc. $. IV.
p. 92.

d O unbelievers, &c.] Thefe words will be
fpoken to the infidel at the laff day.
e See chap. 57. p. 438.
f The wife of Noah* and thy wife of Lot, &c ]
Who were both Unbelieving women, but de-
ceived their refpeftive husbands by their hypo*
crify. Noab'.s wife, named PPqita, endeavour-
ed to^p&'fuade the people her husband was d 1
tra&ed ; and Lot's ‘wife , whofe name wj..«
Wdbela ( though fome Writers give this name to
the other, and that of Wail a to the fatter^) tv
in confederacy Vvjth the men of . and ufed
to give them nofee when any fern cm came to
lodge: with him; by a fign of ftaote by dr, ¥
and of fire by night 2 .

1 Idem , AIZ amakh fee.

* J^llaLi Al Zah ak*.

458 At KORAN. Chap. 67 .

whmfore their husbmth were of no advantage unto them at afll, in the fight
of God * : and it fhall be faid unto them, at the laji Enter yeinto bell fire,
with thofe who enter therein. God alfo propounaeth as a fimflitude unto
thofe who believe, the wife of Pharaoh h ; when (he faid, Loittr, build roe
an houfe with thee inparadife-, aAd deliver me from Pharaoh and his doings,
and deliver me from the urquft people : and Mary the daughter of Imran* •
v \o preferved her chaftity, .itid into whole womb we breathed of our fpirit c ,
md who believed in the words of her Lord and his feriptures, and was a de-
vout Lind obedient perfon* 4 ,

1 tFbmfitfe fhiir htihands zzvre rf ns advan-
:t 8t* them* in the fight f God 1 } For they
h r rh i*et w itb a difaftroui end in thb world 1 J
md will be doomed to eternal mifery in the next.
In Is Ex manner, as would infmua^te,

the in l'tkT: 6f his time hsS no reafon to
any mil ig lion of their p uni ftmttnl, on account
of tlu^r reliiion to himfelf and the reft of the
true believers.

h Tie G' j: s/Pharaoh ; ] Vie. Jfia the daugh-
ter of I&ztrir-tf. The commentators roll Tc*

tbit became the believed in M =■ « her haf-

band erectly tormented her, Ll: civ ng her kinds
and ect to four fhkcs k and laying a large mi],
ftone on her breaft, her face, at the fame tim/,
being «*pofed to the fcorching beams of the
fun: thefe pain*, however, were alleviated by

1 See ebofr 11./. 179. 18$, 4

the angels fhading her with their wings, and
the view of the manfion prepared For her in pa-
radife which was exhibited to her on her^pro
iiJiitscLiiC the prayer in the text; at length God
received er io :E ; or, as fome fay, {he was taken,
up alise intd piradife, where fhe cats and
dri ®k* 2

* See dup. 19. p. 250,

On ->c^fion of th* honourable mention
here made of thefe two extraord nary women,
the commentators introduce a faying of their
prophet, Tr.tf tmewg men thrr many

ptrftfr* hi ps mrt than four if the sther fex'haJ
uttaintd {■irftflt&i; to wii 9 Aha the Wife f
Pharaoh, A hry th davgkfcr /Imran, Khidiuh
the daughter f Khowailed, ( the prophet's firft
wife,) and Fatcnu the daughter ^Mohammed.

td 1S4. 2 Jallal. Al Zamakb.

CHAP. LXVII.

Intitledy The Kingdom*; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mofl merciful God.

* TjLeffed be he in whofe hand is the kingdom ; for he is almighty ! Who
JQ hath created death and life, that he might prove you, which of you is
moft righteous in bis attions : and he is mighty, and ready to forgive. Who
hath created feven heavens, one above another : thou eanft not fee in a crea-
ture of the moft Merciful any unfitnefs or difproportion. Lift up thine eyes
again to heaven , and look whether thou fecit any flaw : then take two other
views ; and thy fight (hall return unto thee dull and fatigued. Moreover we

have

* It is alfo intitled by fome. The Saving, or him who reads it, from the torture of the lepul-
‘ibf Delivering, bccaufc, fay they, it "< ill lave chre.

Chap. 67. Al KORAN \ 459

have adorned the lowed heaven with lamps, and have appointed them to
be darted at the devils*, for whom we have prepared the torment of burn*
ing fire : and for thofe who believe not in their Loro, is ajfo prepared the
torment of hell ; an ill journey Jhall it he thither ! When they (halt be
thrown thereinto, they (hall hear it bray like an afs ” ; and it (hall boil, and al-
moft burft for fury. So Often as a company of them (hall be thrown therein,
the keepers thereof (hall ask them, faying, Dia not a warner come unto you ?
They (hall anfwer, Yea, a warner came unto us : but we accufed him of
impofture, and faid, God hath not revealed any thing ; ye are in no other
than a great error : and they (hall fay, If we had hearkened, or had right
ly confidered, we lhould not have been among the inhabitants of burning fire :
and, they (hall confefs their fins j but far be the inhabitants of burning fire
from obtaining mercy ! Verily they who fear their Lord in fecret, (hall receive
pardon and a great reward. Eitlter conceal your difcourfe, or make it
public ; he knoweth the innemioft parts of your breads : (hall not he know
dl things who hath created them ; fincehe is the fagaciops, the knowing ? It is
he who hath levelled the earth for you : therefore walk through the regions
thereof, and eat of his proviiion ; unto him Jhall he the refurre&ion. Are
ye fecure that he who dwelleth in heaven will not caufc the earth to fwallow
you up? and behold, it (hall (hake. Or are ye fecuce that he who dwelleth
in heaven will not fend againft you an impetuous whirlwind, driving the fands
to overwhelm you ? then ihall ye know how important my warning was. Thofe
alio who were before you disbelieved ; and how grievous was my drfplcafune !
Do they not behold the birds above them, extending and drawing back their
wings ? None fudaineth them, except the Merciful ; for he regarded! all
things. Or who is he that will be as an army unto you, to defend you a-
gainft the Merciful ? Verily the unbelievers are in no other than a miftake.
Or who is he that Will give you food, if he withholdeth his provtfion ? yet
they perfid in perverfenefe, and flying from the truth. Is lie, therefore, who go-
eth grovelling upon his face, better directed than he who walketh upright
in a drait way c ? Say, It is he who hath given you being, and endued you
with hearing, and fight, and underdanding •, yet how little gratitude have ye 1
Say, It is he who hath fown you in the earth, and unto him (hall ye be ga-
thered together. They (ay, When Jhall this menace be put in execution, if
ye fpeak truth ? Anfwer, The knowledge of this matter is with God alone :
for 1 am only a public warner. But when they (hall fee the feme nigh at
hand, the countenance of the infidels ihall grow fad : and it (hall be faid unto
them. This is what ye have been demanding. Say, What think ye? Whether
God dedroy me and thofe who are with me, or have mercy on us *, who will
protect the unbelievers from a painful punilhment ? Say, He is the Merci-
ful v in him do we believe, and in him do we put our trud. Ye Ihall here-

N n n 2 after

» See chap. 15. p. 211. &c.] Thia comparifon is applied by the erpoft

•> See chap. 31. p- 337* tors to the infidel and the true believer.

c Is be who goetb grovelling on bis fate,

460 Al KO RAN. Chap. 68.

after know who is in a manifeft error. S*y, What think ye? If your
water be in the morning fwallowed up by the earth, who will give you
clear and running water ?

CHAP. LXVIII.

Intitledy The Pen; revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the moll merciful God.

N ’ a By the pen, and what they write b , thou* O Mohammed , through
• thfe grace of thy Lord, Art not diftra&ed. Verily then is prepared
tor thee an everlafting reward : for thou art of a noble difpofition c . Thou
ihalt fee, and the infidels fha.ll fee, which of you are bereaved of your fenfes.
Verily thy Lord well knoweth him who wandereth from his path ; and ho
well knoweth thofc who are rightly dire&ed : wherefore obey not thofe who
charge thee with impofture. They defire that thou Ihouldeft be tafy with
them, qnd they will be eafy with thee 4 . But obey not any wh® is a com-
mon fwearer, a defpicable fellow* a defemer, gamp about with Hander, who
forbiddeth that which is good, who is dfo a tran greffor, a wicked pcrlon,
cruel, and befides this, of fpurious birth e : although he be poflfcfied of wealth
and md>iy children ; when our figns are rehearl'ed unto him, he faith, Tkn

are

* This letter is fometimes made the tide of the
chapter, but its meaning is confefTodly uncertain,
Thpy whofuppo e it Hands for the word Nw t are
not agreed as to its fignificatkm in thi pi ce ;
fof it is not only the name of the letter N in
Jbrtbu* but fignifies alfo ^ itibbafi, and a fife:
fdtoe are of opinion the former is

tjhe moft proper here, as confonmt to w hit is
immediately mentioned of tie fnv, and writ* Kg*
and, confidermg that the blixd of certain fife is
good ink. not in confident with the latter figni-
fication ; which is, however, preferred by others,
faying that either the whole lpedes of fifi in ge-
neral is thereby intended, or the filh which fwal-
lowed7<w<i/;(who is mentioned in this c Kapler,)
or el e that vaffc one called Bebtn fancied to
fupport the earth, in particular, Thofe who ac-
quiefee in none ot the foregoing explications, have
invehted others of their own, and imagine dlls
charader Hands for the table of God*/ detrees,
or one of the rivers in pat adife, &c. 1 .

h By tbtpnr* and tebai they tcriir ; ] Some un-
deribndthefe u tjrds generality- and other;- of the
pen ^ ith to hich God 1 decrees arewr- tiers on the

preferved table, and ot the jngdi who regifter
the fame.

c Of it JtaSk j] In that thou haft

born with fo much patience an. I rei^r .tijp- u K
wrongs and infu.. jf ihy p-opli, which, ii vc.
been gie: ter chan thsfe offered to an: apoftle
before thee V

• T&ty difir - tfaf tPfU tbvtUfi Af fJt fy Wltb l | Mb

li.id they ml* t/ f*Jy wttl .] 3 .' ■: If thou

wilt let them done in their idolatry msi ■ ther
wicked pra^kfF, they v*ill ce-ife to reviie *.id
perfecutft thee.

* Obey est jfVT fsema fieeerer, &c.] The per-
fon at whom this paflage was particularly level-
led, is gcnerall) I uppofed to lit 2 been A 7. r^med*%
inveterate enemy #/ If add Ebn al Aftghrtra,
wham, to compleat his charter, he calls
bfiiitd r becaufe al Afogbeira did not own him

for

1 Al Zama£H. Alh eidawi, Y hta.

a Al Beidaiv j;

3 Idem, Jallal*

Chap. 6$. Al KORAN. 461

are fables of the ancients. We will ftigmatize him on the nofe \ Verily we
have tried the Meccans \ as we formerly, tried the owners of the garden ' ;
when they fwore that they .would gather the fruit thereof “ in the morning,
and added not the exception, if ittpleafe God : wherefore a furrounding de-
ft ruction from thy .Lord encompaffed it, while they flept; and in the morn-
ing it became like a garden whole frtiits had been gathered *. And they
called the one to the Other as they rofe in the morning, faying. Go out early to
your plantation, if ye intend to gather the fruit thereof : fo they went on,
whifpering to one another. No poor man (hall enter the garden upon you,
this day. And they went forth early, with a determined purpofe. And when
they faw the garden blajled and dejlroyed, they faid. We have certainly mil-
taken our way : but when they found it to be their own garden, they tried. Ve-
rily we are not permitted { to reap the fruit thereof. The worthier of them
laid. Did I not fay unto you. Will ye not give praife unto God? They
anfwered, Praife be unto our Lord ! Verily we have been unjuft doers. And
they began to blame one another*, and they faid, Wo be unto us! veri
iy we have been tranfgreflors : peradventure our Lord will give us in ex-
change a better garden than this : and we earneftly befeech our J. ord to pardon
us. Thus is the chaftifement of this life : but the chaftifement of the next Jhall
be more grievous j if they had known it, tbeywouldhave taken heed. Verily for the
pious are prepared , with their Lord, gardens of delight. Shall we deal with the

Modems,

for his fon, till he was eighteen years of age r . fhould come to want if they followed their fa-
Sbme, however, think it was al Akhnas Ebn thcr’s example, agreed to gather the fruit e*rly in
Sforaik, who was really of the tribe of Tbakif \ the morning,^. hen the poor could hive no notice
thqjigh reputed to be of that of Zahra z . of thd matter ; but when they came t. * execute

* We toitt him oil the nofe ; ] Which their purpofe, they found, to their great grief
being the molt coirfpicuous part oF the face, a and fnrprixe/ that their plantation had been de-
mark fet thereon is attended with the utmofl ig- ii roved in the night .

pominy. It is faid that this prophetical menace That they tv mid rather tht fruit iher&f i 3

was a&ually made good, al lValid having his JLit^raHy, that th y tvmld cut it $ the manner of
nofe flit by a fword, at the battle of Bedr, the gathering dates teing to cut the duller* off with
mark of which wound he carried with him to a knife. NLirracd luppofe* tttv in rinded temr
his grave 3 ♦ * he trees * an ^ defir oy the plan ution j w hfcJi,

* We have tried the Meccans;] By afflicting as he obferves, renders the itory ridiculous and
them with a grievous famine* See chapw3- p* abfurd.

284, 285. q Lite a garden ttihofe fruits had btcb gather-

c The owners of the garden. See.] This garden edi] Or, a the original nuy aUb be rend red,
was a plantation of palm-trees, about two pa- like a dark night ; it Ijeing burnt up and
rafangs from Sanaa, belonging to a certain cha- black.

ritable man, who, when he gathered his dates, f The fame expreffion is ufed, chap. 56* p.
ufed to give public notice to the poor, and to 436.

leave them fuch of the fruit as the knife miffed, * They began to hhme one Another 5 } For one
or was blown down by the wind, or fell befide advifed this expedition, another approved of
the cloth fpread under the tree to receive it: it, a third gm- con lent by hi: filence, but the
after his death, his fons, who were then be- fourth was abfolutely agunft it \
come mailers of the garden, apprehending they

1 Idem* Jallal. 2 Idem .

3 Idem , Jallal.

4 Ldtm x i Al B&idawi,

462 A KORAN". C hap . 63 .

Modems, as with Ae wicked ? What ajleth you that ye judge thus ? Have ye
a book from heaven, wherein ye read that ye are therein promifed that which ye
fhall choofe? Orhavey ^received oaths which fhall be binding upon us to the day of
refurre&ion* that ye fhall enjoy what ye imagine ? Ask them,which of them wi U
be the voudber of this. Or have they companions b who will vouch for them ?
Let them produce their companions, therefore, if they ipeak troth. On a cer-
tain day the leg fhall be made bare*; and they fhall be called upon to worship,
but they fhall not be able*. Their looks Jbeil be caft down : ignominy fhall
attend diem : for that they were invited to the worfhip -of Goa, while they
were in fafety, but would not bear. Let me alone, therefore, with him who
accufetb this new revelation of impofture. We will lead them gradually to
deftruSion, by ways which they know not ' : and I will bear with them for a
long time ; for my ftratagem is effectual. Do ft thou ask them any reward
for tby preaching ? But they are laden with debts. Are the fecrets of futu-
rity with them ; and do they tranferibe the fame from the table of God's de-
crees f ? Wherefore patiently wait the judgment of thy Lord: and be not
like him who was fwallowed by the fifhe; when he cried unto God , being
inwardly vexed. Had not grace from his Lord reached him, he had fure-
ly been caft forth on the naked fhore, covered with fhame : but his Lord
chofe him, and made him one of the righteous. It wanteth little but that the
unbelievers ftrike thee down wilh their malicious looks, when they hear the
admonition of the Koran-, and they fay, Hew certainly diftrafted: but it
is no other than an admonition unto all creatures.

* Shall wr deal with the Mofleras as with tht A They pall be tolled npm tt> worjbip , hut they
wicked?] This paflage was revealed in anfwer to p&R mt hr ahh ;] Becaufe the time of acccpt-
the infidels, who (aid. If tee jball be raijed again, ance (hall be pad. Al Beidawt is uncertain whe-
as Mohammed and bis followers imagine , they will ther the words refpeft the day of judgment, or
not excel us ; but we pall certainly be in a better the article of death : but Jallalo'ddin fuppofes
condition than they in the next worlds as toe are them to relate to the former, and adds that the
in this *• * infidels fhall not be able to perform the aft of a-

b Have they companions Or, as fome inter- doradon, becaufe their backs fhall become ftiff
pret the word, idols 5 which can make their and inflexible.

condition, in the next life, equal to that of the • By wets which they know mti] i. e. By grant-
AUjltms ? sng them long life and profperity in this world ;

c The kg pell be made here; ] This expreffi- which will deceive them to their ruin,
on is ufed to fignify a grievous and terrible ca- f *e chap. .52. p. 415.
lamity x thus they fay. War has made bare the 5 Be tot like bint who was fioallomti by the
leg , when they would exprefs the fury and rage fip ;] That is, Be not impatient and pettilh, as
of batik Jonas was. See chap. 2i« p. 272.

1 J7Bkidawi, * Idem * Jallal.

CHAP.

Chap. 69.

Al KORAN.

4^3

CHAP. LXIX.

Inti tied. The Infallible; revealed at Mecca.

In die name of the moft merciful God.

T HE infallible 3 ! What is the infallible? And what fhall caufe thee
to underftand what the infallible is? ^he tribes of Thamud and Ad
denied as a felfhoodthe day which Jhall ftrike b mats hearts with terror . But
Thamud were deftroyed by a terrible noife : add Ad were deftroyfcd by a
roaring and furious wind ^ which God caufcd to affaii them for feven nights
and eight days fuccefiively : thou mighteft have feen people, dbring the fame,
lying proftrate, as though they bad been die roots of hollow palm-trees c ;
and couldeft thou have feen any of them remaining? Pharaoh alfb, and
thofe who were before him, and the cities which were overthrown , were guil-
ty of fin ; and they federally were difobedient to the apoftlc of their Lord ;
wherefore he doaftifed them with an abundant chaftifemenr. When the water
of the deluge arafe, we carried you in the ark which fwam thereon \ that we
might make the fame a memorial unto you* and the retaining ear might re-
tain it. And when one blaft fhall found the trumpet, and the earth {hall be
moved from its* place, and the mountains allb, arid (hall be dafhed in pieces at
one ftroke: on that day the inevitable tiour of judgment fhall fuddenly come ; and
the heavens fhall cleave in funder, and Jhall fall in pieces, on that day : and the
angels Jhall be on the fides thereof' ; and eight fhall bear the throne of thy
Lord above them, on that day f < On that day ye fhall be prefented before
the judgment feat of God ; and none of your Ibcret aSliond Jhall be hidden. And
he who (hall have his book delivered inro his right hand, fhall fay, Take ye,
read this my book i verily I thought that I fhotild be brought to this my ac-
count :

* The infallible i ] The origin*! word el
Hakkat is one of* the names or epithets of the
day of judgment. As the root from which it
is derived figoifies not only to be or come to pafs
of necejfity, hut aifo to verify, fome rather think
that day to he lb called becaufe it will verify, and
pew the truth of what men doubt of in this
life 5 viz. the refurre&ion of the dead, their
being brought to account, and die ca»fe<juent
rewards and punilhmenta 1 .

b The day which Jhall Jlrike ;] Arab, al Kan at,
or the Miking ; which is another name or epi-
thet of the tail day.
c See chap. 54. p. 429.

d The cities which were overthrown ; ] Viz
Sodom, and Gomorrah . See chap. 9. p. 158.
not. a.

e The angels Jhall be on the Jt*ks thereof \ ]
Thefe words feem to intimate the deith of the
angel®, at the demolition of their habitation >
befide the ruins whereof they fhall lie like
dead bodies.

f Eight angel) Jhall bear the throne of thy
Loan, on that day i} The auraber of thofe who
bear it at prefent being generally Arppc&d to
be but four ; to whom four more ■.'> ill be added
at the laft day, for the grandeur of the occ**
fion a .

1 / idem.

* liHem.

4 &+

At KORAN.

Chap. 70.

count: he fb&Y. had a pleating life, in a lofty garden, the fruits whereof fhall
be near to gather. Eat and drink with eafy digeftion ; becaufe of the gi ad
works which ye ftnt before you. in the days which arc paft. But he who
(hall have his book delivered into his left hand, fhall fay, O that I had not
received this my book ; and that I had not known what this my account
was 1 O that Jamb had made an end of me ! My riches have not profited
me ; and my power is paffed from me. Ar.l God jhail fay tv the keepers of
bail. Take him, and bind him, and caft him into hell to be burned ; then
put him into a chain of the length of feventy cubits ■ : becaufe he believed
not in the great God ; and was not follicitous to feed thepoor : wherefore this
day he fhall have no triend here ; nor any food, but the filthy corruption
flowing from the bodies of the damned, which none fhaJl eat but the finnecs.

1 fwear b by thaf which ye fee, and that which ye fee not, that this is the dif-
courfe of an honourable apoftle, and not the difeourfe pf a poet : how little
do ye believe ! Neither is it the difeourfe of a footh layer : how little are ye
admonifhed ! It is a revelation from the Lord of all creatures. If Moham-
med had forged any part of theft difeourfes concerning us, verily we had taken
him by the right hand, and had cut in funder the vein of his heart *, neither
would we have withheld <ny of you from cbaflijtng him. And verily this
book is an admonition unto the pious ; and we well know that there are fame of
you who charge the fame with impofture : but it fimll furely hi an eetnfion of
grievous fighing unto the infidels j for ito the truth of a certainty. Where*
foie praife the name of thy Lord, the great God .

* Put hint info a tbnin, See ] i. e. Wrap him b 1 fa far ; ] Or, / alUttat ftsear. Seeclup.
round with it, fo that he may not be able 56- p. 4)6. not. f.
to ffir.

O NE demanded and called for vengeance to fall on the unbelievers*:
there fhall be none to avert the fame from being hsfsSed by God, the

* One called far the pursijbnuni t* be tt tfiWfd on ut a fi steer ef fftnh, ; r find first dreadful judg-
tie unbelievers',] The pcrlon here meant is ge- tut nt to panijk us 1 ■ Others, floweret, think
nerally luppolcd to hare been al Nodar Ebn /t! it was Atm Jabl, who challenged bkh.smmid
Horetb, who laid, O Goo, if what Mohammed to caufe a fragment ot heaven to fall on them *.
preaches be the truth from thu, rain doom up:ts

CHAP.

Intitled, The Steps; revealed al Mecca.

*

In the name of the moft merciful God.

pofTcflor

1 Al Zamakh. ^/Bsidawi.

* Al Bbidawi.

Chap. 70. Al KORAN. 465

ppffeffor of the fl;eps*; by which the angels afcend unto him, and the
ipiric Gabriel • alfo , in a day whofe fpace is fifty thoufarid years b : where*
fore bear the infults of the Meccans with becoming patience ; for they fee
their pcnijhment afar off, but we fee it nigh at hand On a certain day the
heaven fhall become like molten brafs, and the mountains like wool of va-
rious colours, fcaUerM abroad by the wind : and a friend fhall not ask a
friend concerning bis condition, although they fee one another. The wicked
(hall wifh to redeem himfelf from the puniftiment of that day, by giving up
his children, and his wife, and his brother, and his kindred who fhewed kind-
nefs unto him, and all who are in the earth ; and that this might deliver him :
by no means : for hell fire* dragging them by their f<^lps, fhall call him who
Ihall have turned his back, and fled from the faith , and fhall have amaffed
riches* and covetoufly hoarded them- Verily man is created extreamly im-
patient c : when evil toUcheth him, he is full of complaint • but when good
befalleth him, he be'comelh niggardly : except thofe who are devoutly given,
and who perfevere in their prayers j and thofe of whofe fubftance a due and
certain portion is ready to be given unto him whoasketh, and him who is for-
bidden by Jhameto ask : and thofe who fincerely believe the day of judgment,
and who dread the puoifhmept of their Loup : ( for there is none fecure from
the punifliment of theiir Loan : ) and who ahftain from the carnal knowledge
of women other than their wives, or the Jlaves which their right hands poffcfs $ (for
as to them theyjhaij be blamelefs ; but whoever coveteth any woman befides thefe,
they are tranfgrefibrs : ) and thofe who faithfully keep what they are intrufted
with, and their covenant ; and who are upright in their teftimonies, and who care-
fully obferve the requijite rites in their prayers : thefe Jhall dwell amidft gard-
ens, highly honoured. What aileth the unbelievers, that they run before
thee in companies, on the right hand and on the left? Doth every man of

O o o them

■ The fiefi 0 By which prayers and righteous
a£Uons afcend to heaven ; err by which the an-
gels afcend to receive the divine commands* or
the believers wHl afcend to paradife. Some
linderlland thereby the different orders of an-
gels 5 or the heavens, which rife gradually one
above another.

* A day whofi Jbaa is fifty tboufand years \ }
This is fuppofed to be the fpace which
would be required for their afeent from the
loweft part of the creation to the throne of
God, if it were to be meafured; or the time
which it would take a map up to peribm* that
journey : and this is not contradiflory to what
is faid el few here (if it be to be Interpreted

-of the afeent of the angels,) that the length
of the day whereon thfey afcend is 1000 years ;
becaufe. that is meant only of their afeent from
earth to the lower heaven, including alfo the

1 Chop. 32. p . 338. * Prelim . Difc . $.

it- p- 86. 1 Al Zamajch.

time of their defeent*

But the commentators generally taking the
day fpoken of in both thefe paffages, to be the
day of judgment, have recourfe to feveral ex-
edients to reconcile them, fome of which we
dvd mentioned in another place 2 : and as both
paffages feem to cofttraditt What the 1 Moham-
medan do&ors teach, that God will judge all
creatures in the Tpace of half a day 3 , they fup-
poie thofe large numbers of years are defigned
to exprfifs the time of the previous attendance
of thofe Who are to be judged 4 ; or elfe to the
fpace wherein God will judge the unbelieving
nation^, of which* they fey, there will be fifty,
the trial of each nation taking up 1 000 years*
though that of the true believers will be over ia
the ftiort fpace abovemenrioned * .

4 See chap. 17. p. 228.

\ f . 84.

5 Set it. p, 88, %),

* Set

4-66 Al KORAN* Chap. 71.

them wifh to enter intd a garden of delight ? By no means : verily we have
created them of that which they know*. I fwear k by the Lord of the
eaft and of the weft*, that we are able to dsftroy them, and to fubftkute
better than them in Ibeir room ; neither ore we to be prevented, if we /ball
pkafe fo to do. Wherefore fuffer them to wade in vain difputes, and to
amufe themfelves with fport : until they meet their day with which they
hare been threatened ; the day whereon they Ihall come forth haftiiy from
their graves, as though they were troops haftetting to their ftandard : their looks
Jball be downcaft *, ignominy ihall attend them. This is the day with which
they have been threatened.

» Verity m boot created them of that which * / fatter ; ] Or, Itoi/T not fiatar, Sc c. See

they knew, } Vi*. Of filthy feed, which bears chap. 56. p. 456, not. f.
no relation or refemblance to hoty beings : « Of the eafi eutd of the weft s } The original

wherefore it is necefiary for him who would words are in the phusal number, and fignify the
hope to be an inhabitlnt of paradtfe, to perfect different points of the horizon at which the fun
kimfelf in faith abd fpiribwl vertues, to fit rifea and fets in the courfe of the year. See
limfelf for that place! 1 . chap. 37. p. 366. not. c.

* Al Bsipawi.

CHAP. LXXI.

Infilled, Noah; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

"T TErjly we fent Noah unto his people, faying. Warn thy people, before a
y grievous punifhmcnt overtake, them. Nqau faid, O my people, veri-
ly I am a public warner unto you; wherefore ferve God, and rear nim, and
obey me : he will forgive you part of your fins •, and wiH grant you refpite
until a determined time : for God’s determined time, when it cometh, ihall
sot be deferred ; if ye were men of underftartding, ye would know this. He
faid. Lord, verily t have called my people night and day ; but my callmg
only increafeth their averfion : and whenfoever I call them to the true faith,
that thou mayeft fotgive them, they put their fingers in their ears, and cover
themfelves with their garments, a ttd perfift in tbeir inf ditto y, and proudly
difdain my ctntnfel. Moreover I invited them openly, and I fpake to them a-
gam m public *, and I alfo fecretly admoniihed them in private : and I faid.
Beg pardon of your Lord v for he is inclined to forgave : and he will caufe
the heaven to pour down rain plentifully upon you, and will give you in-
create of wealth and of children * ; and he will provide you gardens, and

fumiih

* Part your fin »\ } L e. Yow piff fias ; wealth andef tb'Mrm ;J It » laid, that after
which are done away by the prefeffion of the Ntah had for a lotig time preached to them ir*
true faith. raito. Goo fhut op the heaven for fbrty years*

h And be will taufe the heaven n rain plentt- and rendied their women barren x .
folly upon yob ant will give you inenmfe ef

1 Idem

Chap. 72 . At KORAN. 467

fumilh you with rivers. What aileth you, that ye hope not For benevolence
in God t ; Dnce he hath created you varioufly b ? Do ye not fee how God
hath created the feven heavens, one above another ; and hath placed the
moon therein for a light, and hath appointed the fun for a taper?
God hath alfo produced and caufed you to fpring forth from the earth :
hereafter he will caufeyou to return into the fame; and he will again take
you tbmcc, by bringing y## forth from your graves . And God hath fpread the
earth as a caTpct for you, that ye may walk therein through fofcciaus paths,
Noah faid. Load, verily they are difobedient unto me ; and tWey follow
him whofe riches and children do no other than increafe his perdition. And
they devifed a dangerous plot againji Noah ; and the chief men faid to the
others^ Ye fhall by no means leave your gods; neither fhall ye forfake
Wadd, nor Sowa, nor Yaghdth, add YaUr, andNm e . And they re-
duced many ; (for thou (halt only mfcreafe error in the wicked r) becaufe of
their fins they were drowned, and caft into the fire of hell ; and they found
none to procedt them againfl: God. And Noah faid. Lord, leave not any
families of the unbelievers on the earth : for if thou leave them, they will fe-
duce thy fervants, and will beget none but a wicked and unbelieving off-
spring d . Lord, forgive me and my parents •, and every one who fliall enter
my houfe % being a true believer, and the true believers of both (exes ; and
add unto the unjuft doers nothing but deft ruction.

a What ailetb you, that ye hope not for bene-
volence in God?] i. e. That God will accept
and amply reward thofe who ferve him ? For
fome fuppofe Noah'* people made him this an-
fwer, If c^hat we now, follow be the truth , we
aught not to firfake it ; but if it be falfe, how
will God accept, or be favourable unto us, who
have rebelled againfl him 1 T

b Hath creatgdyoH varioufly,} That k, as the
commentators expound it, by various ftep 3 or
changes, from the original matter, till ye be-
came perfect men *.

e Thefe were five idols worlhipped by the
4 ntediluvians, and afterwards by the ancient /

rabs. See the Prelim. Difc. §. 1. p. 19.

d Lord, have not any families tie unbe~
lievers , &c. ] They fay Noah preferred aot thi*
prayer for the dcftru&ion of his people till after
he had tried them for nine hundred and fifty
years, and found them incorrigible reprobates*

« My parents ; ] His father Lantech, and hi»
mother, whofe name was Shamkba, the daugh-
ter of Enojh, being true believers.

f My houfe ; ] The commentators are uncer-
tain whether Noah's dwelling-houfe be here
meant, or the temple he had built for the Wor-
Ihip of God, or the ark

* Idem . * Set chap . 22. p. 274. and chap. 23. p. 281, &c.

CHAP. LXXIL

Intitled , The Genii; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mod merciful God.

S AY, Ic hath been revealed unto me that a company of genii attentively
heard me reading the Koran •, and laid. Verily we have heard an admira-

O o o 2 blc

* Set ebap. 46. p. 40?. net. d.

468 Ai KORAN. Chap. 72.

ble difcourfe ; which dire&eth unto the righc iaftitution : wherefore we believe
therein, and we will by no means afibciate any other with our Lord. He
(may the majefty of our Lord be exalted!) hath taken no wife, nor bath
he begotten any ifiue, Yet the foolifh among us » hath fpoken that which is
extreamly falfe of God : but we verily thought that neither man nor genius
would hy any means have uttered a lie concerning God. And there are cer-
tain men who fly for refuge unto certain of the genii k ; but they increafe
their folly and tranfgreffion : and they alfo thought, as ye thought®, that
God would not raife any one to life. And we formerly attempted to pry in-
to what was tr an facing in heaven *, but we found the fame filled with a ftrong
guard of angels, and with flaming darts : and we fat on fome of the feats thereof to
hear the difcourfe of its inhabitants ; but whoever lifteneth now, findeth a flame
laid in ambuih for him, to guard the celeftial confines *. And we know not whe-
ther evil be hereby intended againfi: thofewho are in the earth, or whether their
Lord intendeth to direct them aright. There are fome among us who are
upright ; and there are fome among us who* are otherwife : we are of diffe-
rent ways. And we verily thought that we could by no means fruftrate God
in the earth, neither could we efcape him by flight : wherefore, when we had
heard the direction contained in the Koran, we believed therein. And who-
ever believeth in his Lord, need not fear any diminution of bis reward, nor
any irijuftice. There are fome Modems among us ; and there are others of us
who fwerve from righteoufoefs e . And whofo embraceth Islam, they ear-
nefUy feek true direction : but thofe who fwerve from righteoufhds, fhall be
fewel for hell. If they tread in the way of truth , we will furely water them
with abundant rain f ; that we may prove them thereby: but whofo tumeth
afidefrom the admonition of his Lord, him will he fend into a fevere torment.
Verily the places of worfhip are Jet apart unto God : wherefore inyoke not
any other therein together with God. When the fervant of God * Hood up
to invoke him, it wanted little but that the genii had prefled on him in
crouds, to bear him rehearfe the Koran. Say, Verily I call upon my Lord
only, and I afibciate no other god with him. Say, Verily I 4m not able, of
myfelf, to procure you either hurt, or a right inftitution. Say, Verily none
can proteft me againfi: God \ neither lhall I find any refuge befides him. /
can

* The fbolijb among us-,'] Via. EkJti, or. the Cured to manly.;!, and which to the genii : fome
rebellious genii expofi W^s taking that of the third period to relate

b There art certain men thBiJtjfir refuge unit to the Jformer, and that of the fecond perLon, to the
eertain of the genii'. ] For the Arabs, when latter; and others being of the contrary opinion,
shey found themfelves i® a defart in the even.- See c^up. 1 5 p. 21 1
ing, ( the genlf being fuppofed to haunt fuch « See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. yi t (s',
places about that time ) ufed to fay, I f.) fir . { ti',- mil! mater tbm with a l arsine ■ is j j
refuge unto the Lari ofi'tSis osllcy, that ha i. e. We will grant them plenty of all good
maj defend me firm tie fldijh among bit things. Some think by there wtrds rain is pro-
ftofle '. mifed to the Meccans , after their feven yean

e Tbeget'f thought, as ja thought, &c. } It is drought, on their embracing Iflm*
uncertain which of thefe pronoun* is to be re- * The fir pant of Goo;] viz. Mebammed.

1 Jl Beidawi.

Chap. 73 * & KORAN, 469

can do no more than publifh wbat both been revealed unto me from God*
and his meflages. And whofoever fhall be difobedient unto God and his
apoftle, for him is the fire of hell prepared ; they fhall remain therein for
ever. Until they fee the vengeance with which they are threatened, they will
not ceafe tbeir oppofition : but then fhall they know who were the weaker in a
proteftor, and the fewer in number. Say, I know not whether the punijh-
ment with which ye are threatned he nigh, or whether my Lord will appoint
for it a diftant term. He knoweth the fecrets of futurity ; and he doth not
communicate his fecrets unto any, except an apoftle in whom he is well
pleafed : and he caufeth a guard of angels to march before him, and behind
him i that he may know that they have executed the commiflions of their
Lord a : he comprehendeth whatever is with them v and counteth all things
by number.

* That be may know that they have executed velatlon, have communicated it to him pure
the ctmmijfioni of tbeir Lord i ] That is to fay* and free from any diabolical fuggeftions; or that
Either that the prophet may know that Gabriel God may know that the prophet ha* publiihed
and the other angels, who bring down the re- the fame to mankind.

1 Idem

CHAP. LXXIII.

Inti tied) The Wrapped up; revealed at Mecca*.

In the name of the moft merciful God*

O Theu wrapped up fc , arife to prayer , and continue therein during the night,
except a fmall part* i that is to fay , during one half thereof: or do

thou

* Some will have the Iaft verfe, beginning ed men *, pretty plainly to intimate hi* Being
at thefe words, Ferity thy Lord knmttb. See. fubjeffc to the falling ikknefs; a malady gene-
to have been revealed at Midina. rally attributed to him by the Chriftians J ,

b O tbtu wrapped up i ] When this revelation but mentioned by no Mohammedan writer,
was brought to Mohammed, he was wrapped up Though fuch an inference may be made, yet I
in his garments, being affrighted at the appear- think it fcarce probable, much lefs necefiary *.
ance of Gabrieli or, as fome fay, he lay deep- * Except a fall parti J For a half is fttdr,
ing unconcernedly, or, according to other*, with refpeft to the whole. Grj as the fentence
praying, wrap ped up in one part of a large may be rendred, Pray bgff the night, within a
mantle, or rug, with the other part of which fall matter. See. Some expound thefe words
jjejba had covered herfelf to lleep 1 . as an exception to nights in generals ae-

This epithet of wrapped up, and another of cording to whom the fenfe will be. Spend one
the fame import given to Mohammed in the next half «f every night in prayer, except fimt fern
chapter, have been imagined, by feveral learn- nights in. the year. Sc c. t

1 Al Zam.wch. Al Beidawi. * Hotting. Hijl. Orient. 1 . i. e. t. Marracc. in Ale.

p, 76$. T. Gacnier. not. ad Abvlv. vit. Mob. p. 9. 1 * SwPrideavx, Lift of Mah.

p. 16. and the authors there cited. 4 Set Ock ley’s Miff. of. the Saracens, Vol. 1. p. joo, &o

! Al Beidawt.

47® ^ KO Rd 4 N. Chap,

thou leffen the fame a Ijr^lc, or add thereto 8 . Aud repeat; the Koran with a
diftintt and fonorOus voice t for we will lay on thee a weighty word b . Verily
the rifing by night c is more efficacious for ftedfoft continuance in devmion „ and
more conducive to decent pronunciation 4 : for in the day-time thou haft long
employment. And commemorate the name of thy Loan: and feparate thy
felf unto him, renouncing wqridly vanities. Be ts. the Loan of the caft t
and of the weft ; there is no Goo but he. Wherefore take him for thy
patron : and patiently fuffer the contumelies which the infidels utter again fi
thee ; and depart from them with a decent departure. And let me alone with
thofe who charge the Kurin with fal(hood t who enjoy the blelfings of this
life ; and bear with them for a while : verily with us are heavy fetters, and a
burning fire, and food ready to choak him who fivajlov&tk it % and painful
torment. On a certain day the earth (hall be ftiaken, and the mountains
and the mountains (hall become a heap of fand poured forth. Verily we
have fent unto you an apqi^f , to bear witneft againft you 5 as we fent an
apoftle unto Pharaoh: but Pharaoh was difobedient unto the apoftle ;
wherefore we chaftifed him with a heavy chaftifement. How, therefore, will
ye cfcape, if ye believe not, the day which (ball make children become grey-
headed through terror ? The heaven Jhall be rent in funder thereby : the pro-
mife thereof fliall furely be performed. Verily this is an admonition ; and
whoever is willing to be admmjhe^, will take the way unto his I^ord. Thy
Lord knoweth that thou qc^tiniicft in.ptaycr and meditation fometimes near
two third parts of the night, and fometimes one half thereof, and at other
times one third part thereof : and a part of tbp companions* who are with
thee, do the fame . But God meafureth the night and the day ; he knoweth that
ye cannot exaSlp compute the fame: wherefore he tumeth favourably unto you \

Read #

* Or to thou k]fen the fame* or add thereto]
i. e. Set apart either lefs than half the night, as
<me third, for example, or more, as two thirds.
Or the meaning may be. Either take a finall
matter from a lefler part of the night than one
half, e. g* iron one third, and fo reduce it to a
fourth ; or add to fnch lcflet part, and make it
a full half 4 .

b A weighty word ;] Via. The precept* con-
tained in the Koran ; which are heavy and diffi-
cult to thofe who are obliged to obferve them,
and efpecially to the prophet, wfcofe care it was
to fee that his people obferved them alfo \

« The rifing by night*] Or The perfin who
rifetb by night ; or the, hours* or particularly the
firfi <f the night , kc.

4 The rifing by night is more effuacimsfor fled*
faff continuance in devotion^ and more conducive to
decent pronunciation i\ For the nighttime is
snoft proper for medication and prayer, and alfo
for reading Goa's word diftin&Jy and with at-

tention ; by reafon of the abfeace of eveqr noife
and obje& which may diitraft the mind.

Marracci, having mentioned this natural ex-
plication of the Mohammedan commentators,
bccaufc he finds one word in the verfe which
may be taken in a fenfc tending that way, fays
the whole may with greater exa&nefs be ex-
pounded of the fitnefs of the night feafon for
amorous diverfions and difeourfe ; and he para-
phrases it in Latin thus : Certe in princifio no8is
majns robur hf vim habet homo , ad fetminas pre -
mendas & fnbagitandas, & ad clarioribus verbis
amores fines propalanios J . A moft effe&ual way
this, to tarn a book into ridicule !

« G hooking fiood ; ] As thorns and thill] es, the
fruit oJT^the infernal tree alZaklum* and the
corruption Bowing from the bodies of the
damned.

f Wherefore he tumeth favourably unto you ;]
By making the matter ea fy to you, and difpeuf
ing with your fcrapalout counting of the hours

of

8 Idem

* Idem, JallaLh

3 Mas.* acc. in JU.p. 759.

Chap. 74 * KORAN* 471

Read, thefefore, fo much of the Koran as may be eafy unto you.
He knoweth that there will be fome infirm among you •, and others travel
through the earth, that they may obtain a competency of the bounty of God ;
and others fight in the defence of God’s faith. Kead, therefore, fo much
of the fame as may be eafy. And obferve the ftated times of prayer, and
pay the legal alms ; and lend unto God an acceptable loan j for whatever
good ye fend before for your fouls, ye fhall find the fame with God. This
will be better, and will merit a greater reward •. And afk God forgivenefs $
for God is ready to forgive, and merciful.

of the night which ye are direfted to fpend in ted by the inftittrtion of the fire hoar* of
reading, and praying : for fome of the Mojlemsy prayer 1 .

not knowing hoW the time patted, ufed to witch 4 This will merit a greater reward ; } i. e. The

the whole night, Handing and walking about till good which ye lhall do in your life-time will be
their legs and feet fwelled m a fad manner. The much more meritorious in the fight of God*
commentators add, that this precept of dedica- than what ye fhall defer till death, and order by
ting a part of the night to devotion, is abroga- will a .

1 Al Bbidawi. * Idem.

CHAP. LXXIV.

Int tried) The Covered ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moll merciful God.

O Thou covered % arife and preach \ and magnify thy Lord. And
cteanfe thy garments: and fly eve ry abomination c : and be not liberal,
in hopes to receive more in return : and patiently wait for thy Lord. When
the trumpet lhall found, verily that day Jhdl be a day of diftrels and uneali-

nefo

* O thou tebtrt&i Ac. J It i* related; from
Mohammed's own mouth, that being on mount
Hard, and hearing himfelf called, he looked o ft
each hand, and faw no-bddy, btit looking up-
wards, he faw the angel Gabriel on a throiie,
between heaven and earth ; at Which fight be-
ing much terrified, he returned to his wife
Khadtja, and bid her cover him up; and that
theft the 8ngd defected, and addreffed him in
the word* of the text, from hence fome think
this chapter to have been the firft which was re-
vealed : but the more received Opinio®. it, that
it was the 96th. Others lay, that the prophet.

having betri reviled by Certain oF the Kertifa
was fitting in a melancholy and penfive potture^
wrapped up in hfe mantle. When Gabriel ac -
cofled Him : and fome fay, he was fleeping.
See the fecond note to the preceding chapter.

b Arifi and pretttb'*'] It is generally fuppofed
that Mohammed is here commanded more efpe-
dally to warn his dear relations, the Koreijb v
as he is exptefly ordered to do in a fubfequent
revelation *.

* Fly every abomination 1] By the word ab$»
mi nation the commentators generally agree ido*
latry to be principally intended.

1 See ebay. 26. /. 308. and the Prelim . Dife. §. II. p. 43:

47 2 rU KORAN Chap. 74 ,

nds unto the unbelievers. Let me alone with him whom I have created *,
■on w'hom I have beftowed abundant riches, and children dwelling m his
prefence b , and for whom I have difpofed affairs in a fmooth and eafy man-
ner*, and whoddireth that I will yet add other bleffngs unto him. By no
means : becaufe he is an adierfary to our figns d . I will afflift him with grie-
vous calamities*: for he hath devifed and prepared contumelious expreffmns to
ridicule the Koran. May he be curfed: how tnalicioufr. hath he prepared the-
fame ! And again, may nd be curfed : how /nahchify hath he prepared the
fame! Then he looked, and frowned, and pot on an auftere countenance:
then he turned back, and was elated with pride ; and he fnid, This is no other
than a piece of magic, borrowed from others : thefe are only the words of a
man. I will caff him to be burned in hell. And what fhall make thee to un-
derftand what hell is ? It leaveth not any thing tnwnfumed., neither doth it
fuflfer any thing to efcapte : it fcorcheth mens flefh : over the Lime are nineteen
angels appointed. We have appointed none but angels to prefide over hai:
fire f : and we have exprefled the number of them oply for an occafion of
difeord to the unbelievers * j that they to whom the feripeures have been given,
may be certain of the veracity of this book h , and the true believers may encreafe
in faith ; and that thofe to whom the fcriptures have been given, and the
true believers may not doubt hereafter ; and that thofe in whofe hearts there
is an infirmity, and the unbelievers may lay. What my fiery doth God in-
tend by this number ? Thus doth Goo ciufe to err whom he pleafeth ;
and he diredteth whom he pleafeth. None knoweth the armies of thy Lord 1 ,
befides him: and tliis k is no other than a memento unto mankind. Affured-

iy.

* Let me alow with Mm tshsm I J-j re rmtedt that al W.diA will be condemned to afeend this
Zee. ] The perfbn hero meant is geferatjy flip- Irtountain, and then to be cafft down from thence,
pofed to have been al Walid Ebn al Moghnra a , ahcraatcly Tor ever ; and that he will be feventy
a principal man among the Korc-jM vears ia dimbing up, and as many in falling

b And children Rifling its hit frifintc , ] down".

Being well provided for, and not obliged tog-i f We b,n-t appointed none hut angels to prtfidi
abroad to feck theii livings, as moft oihers ot c vtrhtUfin ;] The reafon of which is faid to
the Meccans were *. be, that they might be of a different nature and

c And f*r %'hm I hrt dyifid shlvgs its j* fpecies from thofe who are to be tormented,
eafy manners] By facilitating his advancement left they fhoold have a fellow feeling of, and
to power and dignity ; which were lo confider- comprifionate their fuffermgs ; or elfe, becanfe of
able that he was ftirnamed Ribdna Kerry* or their great ftrength, md feverity of temper 6 .
The fit' cct odour of the Koreifh, and a! Wahid* * For an occafion of it fiord to the unbelievers ;]
i. e. The only one, or The inrzmparai'Ic 5 . Or, For a trial of them: becaufe they might

d By no means , See. ] On the revelation of fay this was a particular borrowed by Mohammed
this pillage it is (aid that Walii "a prosperity be- of the Jews.

gan to decay, and continued daily fo to do to h They to whom the firsptures home been given i]
the time of his death 4 . And efpecially the Jews ; this being confbrma-

c I Si-iV qfith him t vjtbgrievm tnld/eiiifi ; ] ble to vx hat is contained in their books
Or, as the words may be ftri&ly rend red, / 1 The armies of thy Lord ;] i. e. All his crea-

te/# drive him up the crag f a mountain ; which tures ; or particularly the number and ftrength
fome underftand of a mountain of dre. agree- of the guards of hell,
ably to a tradition of their prophet, importing, * This ; ] The antecedent fcccns to be bell \

1 Al Zamakh. Al Beidawi, Jallal; * AJ Beidawl * Idem. 4 Idem , 1 Idem.

4 Idem . 7 Jallal,

Chap. 75 * Al KORAN 473

ly. By the moon, and the- night when it retreateth, and the morning when
it redden eth, I /wear that this is one of the moft terrible calamities , giving
warning unto men, as well unto him among you who defireth to go forward”
as unto him who choofeth to remain behind. Every foul is given in pledge for
that which it lhall have wrought * : except the companions of the right
hand b ; who Jhall dwell in gardens, and (hall a(k one another queftions con-
cerning the wicked, and Jhall alfo ajk the wicked tbemfilves, faying, What
hath brought you into hell ? They lhall anfwer, We were not of chofe who
were conftant at prayer, neither ’did we feed the poor } and we waded in vain
difputes, with the fallacious reafoners ; and we denied the day of judgment,
until death c overtook us : and the intercefiion of the intercedes lhall not
avail them. What aileth them, therefore, that they turn afide from the
admonition of the Koran , as though they were timorous affes flying from a
lion ? But every man among them defireth that he may have expanded fcrolls
delivered to him from God <*. By no means. They fear not the life to come.
By no means: verily this is a fufficient warning. Whofo is willing to be
warned , him lhall it warn : but they fhall not be warned, unlefs God lhall
pleafe. He is worthy to be feared j and he is inclined to forgivenefs.

* Sec chap. 52. p. 424. d That he may have expanded fir oils delivered

b Except the companions of the right band ; ] to him from’G od;] For the infidels told Mo-
L e. The biefTed 1 ; who (hall redeem them- bammed that they would never obey him as a
felves by their good works. Some fay thefe are prophet, till he brought each man a writing
the angels ; and others, fuch as die infants *. from heaven, to this efle&, viz* From God
« j Death ;] Literally, That which is certain . to fuch a one : Follow Mohammed 3 .

1 See chap. 56. f. 4*4. not . b. 2 Al Beidawi. 1 Idem.

CHAP. LX.XV.

Intitledy The Refurre&ion ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

V ERILY I fwear * by the day of refurredion ; and I fwear by the foul
which accufeth itfelf k : doth man think that we will not gather his
bones together ? Yea : we are able to put together the fmallejl bones of his

P p p fingers.

a / faear-A Or, I will not (wear. See chap, tiers, at the laft day, for having been remifs in
*6 p 416. not. f. their devotion*, faff. Some nnderfland the

5 '» The foul which accufeth itfelf A Being eon- words of thc foul of . Ad ** j“,PV tic l ular . ! " h °
fcious of having offended, and of failing of is continually blaming himfelf for having loft
perfection, notwithftanding its endeavours to do paradife by his difobcdicnce
its duty : of, the pious foul which Jbull blame o-

1 Idem.

474 At KORAN. Chap. 75.

fingers. But man choofeth to be wicked, for the time which is before him.
He afketh. When will the day of relbrfe&ion be ? But when the fight (hall
be dazzled, and the moon lhali be eclipfed, and the (un and the moon lhali
be in conjun&ion * j on that day man Bull fay. Where is a place of refuge ?
By no means : there fhall be no place to fly unto. With thy Lord JbaU be
the fure manfion of reft on that day : on that day fhall a man be told that which
he hath done firft and laft *>«- Yea ; a man Jhall be an evidence againft himfelf: and
though he offer his excufes, they Jhall not be received. Move not thy tongue,
O Mohammed , in repeating the revelations brought thee by Gabriel, before be-
Jhall have finijhed the fame, that thou may eft quickly committhem to memory : for
the collecting the Koran in thy mind, and the teaching ;hee the true reading there-
of are incumbent on us. But when we lhali have read the fame unto thee by the
tongue of the angel , do thou follow the reading thereof : and afterwards it
Jhall be our part to explain it unto tbee. By no means Jbalt thou be thus bqfty
for the future. But ye love that which hafteneth away % and negleft the life
to come. Some countenances, on that day, fhall be bright, looking towards
their Lord i and fame countenances, on that day, fhall be difmal : they lhali
think that a crulhtng calamity lhali be brought upon them. Afliiredly. When
4 marts foul lhali come up to bis throat, in bis lajl agony ; and tbejlanders-by lhali
fey. Who bring bth a charm to recover him? and lhali think it to be bis
departure out of ibis world j and one leg lhali be joined with the other leg 4 :
on that day unto thy Lord lhali he be driven. For he believed not % neither
did he pray i but he accufed Go its apoflie of impofture, and turned back from
obeying him: then he departed unto his family, walking with a haughty
mien. Wherefore, wo be unto thee ; wol And again. Wo be unco thee j. wo !
Doth man think that he lhali be left at full liberty, without controul ? Was
he not a drop of feed, which was emitted ? Afterwards he became a little
coagulated blood ; and God formed him, and falhioned him with juft pro-
portion : and made of him two fexes, the male and the female. Is not he
who bath done this able to quicken the dead ?

* And the fan and the mm fhall h* in tmjant-
fi m - ^ Rifiog both in the weft 1 : which con*
jonCUon is no contradi&ioa to what is mention-
ed juft before, of the moon's being eclipfed ;
becanle thofe words are not to be underftood of
a regular eelipfe, but metaphorically, of the
moon’s lofing her light, at the laft day, in a
preternatural manner. Some think the mean-
ing rather to be, that the fun and the moon Hull
be jtintd in the lofs of their light *.

0 That which hi bath imt firft and laft-, 3 Or
the good which he hath done, and that which
he hath left undone, (At.

« Tt live that which baftnttb awayi j i. e.
The fleeting pkafurea of this life. The woida

intimate the natural haftinefs and impatience of!
man J , who takes up with a prefent enjoy-
ment, though fhort, and bitter m its confe-
qnencea, rather than to wait for real happinefs in
futurity.

* And we leg Jbeil he joined with the r ther ;]

i. e. And when he flufl ilretch forth hi* legi to-
gether; as is uftul with dying perfons. The
words may alftfbc txanflated, And when one tf-
fiiBion Jhall be joined with another ajfi&hp.

e Hit believed not i } Or, He did not pvt aims ;
oi% He was not a man cf verantj* Somefnppofe
Abu Jahl f and others one Adi Ebm Ratia, to
bo particularly inveighed againft in this chapter.

2 Sea the Prelim* Di/e • 79 % 2 Al B&idawi. * fa jw. p.

CHAP.

Chap. 76

Al KORAN , :

475

CHAP. LXXVI.

Intitled \ Man; revealed at Mecca*.

In the name of the moft merciful God

D I D there not pals over man a long fpace of time } during which he wa
a thing not worthy of remembrance b ? Verily we have created man
of the mingled feed of both fexes, that we might prove him : and we have
niade him to hear and to fee «. We have foreiy directed him in the way ;
whether he be grateful, or ungrateful. Verily we have prepared for the un-
believers chains, and collars, and burning fire. But the juft lhall drink of a
cup of wine , mixed with the water of Cafur d , a fountain whereof the ler-
vants of God lhall drink ; they lhall convey the fame by channels wbither-
foever they pleafe. Tbefe fulfil their vow, and dread the day, the evil whereof
will difperfe itfelf far abroad ; and give food unto the poor, and the or-
phan, and the bondman, for his fake, faying , We feed you for God’s fake
only : we defire no recompenfe from you, nor any thanks : verily we dread,
from our Lord, a difmal and calamitous day e . Wherefore God lhall
deliver them from the evil of that day, and lhall caft on them brightnefs of
countenance, and joy ; and lhall reward them, for their patient perfevering,
with a garden, and filk garments : therein lhall they repofe themfelves on

P p p 2 couches i

m It is fomewhat doubtful, whether this
chapter was revealed at Mecca, or at Medina .

b Did there not pafs over man a long fpace of
time, &c. ] Some take thefe words to be fpoken
of Adam , whole body, according to the Mo -
bammedan tradition, was at firlfc a figure of day,
and was left forty years to dry, before God
breathed life into it 1 : Others underftand them
of man in general, and of the time he lies 14
Che womb.

c We have made him to hear and to fee ;] That
he might be capable of receiving the rules and
directions given by God for his guidance * ;
and of meriting reward or punilhmcnt for his
©bfervance or negleCt of them.

d Cafur ] Is the name of a fountain in pa-
radife, fo called from its refembling campbire
(which the wonjfignifies) inodour.and whitenefs.
Some take the word for an appellative, and think
che wine of paradife will be mixed with campbire*
becaufe of its agreeable coolnefs and fmell 3 .

* Tbefefktff their vow, fire.] It is related that
Hafan and Hofein, Mohammed f s grandchildren,
on a certain time being both fick, the prophet,
among others, vifitedthem; and they wifhed Aii
to make fome vow to God for the recovery of
his Tons: whereupon All, end Fdtana , and
Kidd a, their maidservant, vowed a fait of three
days in cafe they did well ; as it happened they
did. This vow was performed with fo great
ftri&nefs, that the firft day, having no proViH-
ons in the houfe, Alt was obliged to borrow
three meafures of barley of one Simeon, a Jem
of Khaibar ; one meafure of which Fatema
ground the fame day, and baked five cakes of
the meal; and they were fet before them, to
break their fait with, after fun fet ; but a poor
man coining to them, they gave all their bread
to him, and palled the night without tailing any
thing, except water. The next day, Fatema
made another meafure into bread, for the fame
purpofe; but an orphan begging fome food,

they

* See the notes to chap , 2 . p.

* ^/Beioawi,

3 Idem

476 Al KORAN. Chap. 76.

couches ; they (hall fee therein neither fun nor moon a ; and the (hades
thereof /ball It near fpreading above them, and the fruits thereof lhall hang
low, fo as to be eafily gathered. And tbeir attendants (hall go round about
unto them, with vefleis of filver, and goblets; the bottles mall be bottles
of filver Jhining like glafs j they lhall determine the meafure thereof by tbeir
wifi. And therein lhall they be given to drink of a cup of wine , mixed
with the water of Zenjebil b, a fountain in paradife named Salsa bil c ;
and youths, which lhall continue for ever in tbeir bloom, lhall go round to
attend them ; when thou feeft them, thou lhalt think them to be fcattered
pearls : and when thou looked:, there lhalt thou behold delights, and a great
kingdom. Upon them Jbatl be garments of fine green filk, and of brocades,
and they (hall be adorned with bracelets of filver ; and their Lord lhall
give them to drink of a moll pure liquor j and Jhall fay unto them. Verily
this is your reward : and your endeavour is gratefully accepted. Verily we
have fent down unto thee the Koran, by a gradual revelation. Wherefore
patiently wait the judgment of thy Lord *, and obey not any wicked per-
fon or unbeliever among them. And commemorate the name of thy Lord,
in the morning, and in the evening ; and during Jotne part of the night wor-
Ihip him, and praife him a long part of the night Verily thefe men love
the tranfitory life , and leave behind them the heavy day of judgment. We
have created them, and have ftrengthened their joints } and when we pleafe,
we will fubftltute others like unto them, in their Head. Verily this is an ad-
monition : andwhofo willeth, taketh the way unto his Lord : but ye lhall not
will, unlels God willeth i for God is knowing, and wife. He leadeth whom
he pleafeth into his mercy : but for the unjuft hath he prepared a grievous
punifhment

they chofe to let him have It, and palled that properly fignifiei extream aid: for which raa-
aight as the firft : and the third day they like- ion fome underftand the meaning of the paflage.
wife gave their whole proviGon to a fanjifhed to be, that in paradife there lhall be felt no ex-
captive. Upon this occafion Gabriel defeended cefs either of heat, or of cold.

■with the chapter before ut, and told Mohammed b Zenjebil ; ] The word GgniGea ginger, which,
that God congratnlated him on the virtues of the Jrabs delight to mix with the water they,
his family *, drink; and therefore the water of this fountain.

» They (ball fee therein neither fin ntr mon ; ] is fuppofed to have the tafte of that fjpice 1 .
Becanfe they lhall not need the light of either *. * Salfibil 2 Signifies water which flows gent?

The word Zambafir , here tranflated mm, ly and pleafandy down the throat.

* idea. * See Bevel, xx Li}. 3 ,4/Bhdawi»Jali.au

CHAP.

Chap. 77

Al KORAN.

477

CHAP. LXXVII.

Intitledi Thofe which are Tent; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the angels which are lent by Gor>, following one another in a conti-
nual feries ; and thofe which move fwiftly, with a rapid motion •, and by
thofe which difperfe bis commands, by divulging them through the earth ; and
by thofe which feparate truth from faljhood, by diftinguilhing the fame ; and
by thofe which communicate the divine admonitions, to excufe, or to threaten * :
verily that which ye are promifed b is inevitable. When the liars, therefore,
lhall be put out, and when the heaven fhall be cloven in funder, and when the
mountains (hall be winnowed, and when the apoftles (hall have a time af-
figned them to appear and bear Ujlitnony againjt their refpeftive people \ to
what a day lhall that appointment be deferred ! to the day ofleparation : and what
fhall caufe thee to underftand what the day of reparation is ? On that day,
wo be unto them who accufed the prophets of impofture ! Have we
not deftroyed the objlinate unbelievers of old ? .We will alfo- caufe thofe
of the latter times to follow them. Thus do we deal with the wicked. Wo be,
on that day, unto them who accufed the prophet y of impofture ! Have we
not created you of a contemptible drop of feed , which we placed in a fure re-
jiofitory, until the fixed term of delivery ? And we were able to do this :
for we are moft powerful. On that day, wo be unto thofe who accufed the
prophets of impofture ! Have we not made the earch to contain the living
and the dead, and placed therein liable and lofty mountains » and given you
frelh water to drink? Wo be, on that day, unto thofe who accufed
the prophets of impofture ! It JhaU be faid unto them. Go ye to the ptmfb-
tnent which ye denied as a fallhood : go ye into the lhadow of the fmoke of hell,
which fhall afcend in three columns, and lhall not lhade you from the heat , nei-
ther lhall it be of fervice'againll the flame ; but it lhall call forth fparksaj big
as towers, refembling yellow camels in colour ». Wo be, on that day, unto

thofe

* By the angels which are feat, &c. ] Some
nnderfland the whole pafTagc of the verfis of
the Koran ; which continued to be fent down,
parcel after parcel, during the fpace of feveral
years, and which refcini ( for fo the verb afafa
may alfo be tranllated ) and abolifh all former
difpenfations, divulging and making known the
way* of falvation , diftinguijbing truth from
fhllhood, and communicating admonition, &c.
Some interpret the firft three verfes of the winds,
fent in a continual JucceJJion, blowing with a vio-

lent gstft, and difperfeng rain over the earth' :
and others give different explications.

b That which ye are promifed |] Viz. The day
of judgment.

c Refembling yellow camels t ] Being of a fiery
colour. Others, however, fuppofe thefe fparka
will be of a dufty hue, like that of black camels,
which always inclines a little to the yellow ;
the word tranllated yellow, fignifying fometimes
black. Some, copies, by the variation of a
vowel, have cables, inHead of camels.

478 Al KORAN, Chap. 78.

thofe who accufed the prophets of impofture ! This Jbedl he a day whereon
they fhall not fpeak to any purpofe neither fhall they be permitted to excufe
themfelves. Wo be, on that day, unto thofe who accufed the prophets of
impofture ! This /ball be the day of reparation : we will afifemble both you
and your predeceffors. "Wherefore, if ye hive any cunning ftratagem,
employ ftratagems againft me. Wo be, on that day, unto thofe who ac-
cufed the prophets of impofture ! But the pious /ball dwell amldft (hades and
fountains, and fruits of the kinds which they fhall defire : and it Jhall be /aid
into them , Eat and drink with eafy digeftion, in recompenfe for that which ye
have wrought ; for thus do we reward the righteous doers. Wo be, on that
day, unto thofe who accufed the prophets of impofture ! Eat, O unbelievers ,
ana enjoy the pleafteres of this life , for a little while : verily ye are wicked
men. Wo be, on that day, unto thofe who accufed the prophets of impof-
ture! And when it is laid unto them. Bow down ; they do not bow down.
Wo be, on that day, unto thofe who accufed the prophets of impofture ! In
what new revelation will they believe, after this ?

CHAP. LXXVIII.

Intitkdy The News ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mofl merciful God.

£ * Onceming what do the unbelievers alk queftions of one another? Con-
y, t ccrning the great news of the refurrcSHon , about which they difagree;
Affuredly they fhall hereafter know the truth thereof. Again, AfTurediy they
. fhall hereafter know the truth thereof. Have we not made the earth for a
bed, and the mountains for ftakes to fix the fame * t And have we not created
you of two fexes s and appointed your fieep for reft ; and made the night
a garment fa cover you ; and deftined the day to the gaining your livelihood ;
and built over you (even folid heavens ; and placed therein a burning lamp?
And do we not fend down from the clouds preffing forth rain, water pouring
down in abundance, that we may thereby produce com, and herbs, and
gardens planted thick with trees ? Verily the day of reparation is a fixed
period: the day whereon the trumpet lhall found, and ye fhall come in
troops to judgment ; and the heaven mail be opened, and fhall be full of gates
for the angels to pafs through i and the mountains fhall pals away, and be-
come as a vapour ; verily hell fhall be a place of ambulh, a receptacle for
the tranfgreffors, who fhall remain therein for ages : they fhall not tafte any
refreftupent therein, or any drink, except boiling water, and filthy corrup-
tion : a fit recompenfe for their deeds! For they hoped that they fhould not

be

a fee chap, i(. p. 215: and chap. 31. p. 335.

Chap. 79. Al KORAN. 479

be brought to an account, and they disbelieved our figns, accufmg them of fal-
fhood. But every thing have we computed, and written down. Tafte, therefore :
we will not add unto you any other than torment a . But for the pious is
prepared a place of blifs : gardens planted with trees, and vineyards, ana damfels
with fwelling breafts, of equal age with tbemfelves , and a full cup. They
fhall hear no vain difcourfe there, nor any falJhood. This Jhall be their
recompenfe from thy Lord j a gift fully fufficient : fromthe Lord of heaven and
earth, and of whatever is between them •, the Merciful. The inhabitants of
heaven or of earth Jhall not dare to demand audience of him : the day
whereon the fpirit G^bsjel, and the other angels Jhall Hand in order,
they fhall not fpeak in behalf of tbemfelves or others , except he only to
whom the Merciful Jhall grant permiJSon, and who Jhall fay that which is right.
This is the infallible day. Whofo, therefore, willeth, let him return unto
bis Lord. Verily we threaten you with a punifhment nigh at hand : the day
whereon a man Jhall behold the good or evil deeds which his hands have fenc
before him ; and the unbeliever. Jhall fay. Would, to Goo I were duft !

* Wt toil I not ■ add unto you any other than hell ; they being hereby allured that every
ferment ; ] This, lay the commentators, is the change in their torments will b« for the
mod fevere and terrible fentence in the whole worfc.

Koran, pronounced againft the inhabitants of

CHAP. LXXIX.

JntitUdy Thofe who tear forth *, revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mod merciful God.

B Y the angels who tear forth the fouls of fpme with violence ; and by thole
who draw forth the fouls of others with gentlenefs » ; by thofe who glide
Swimmingly through the air with the commands of God y and thofe who pre-
cole and°uJher the righteous to paradife ; and thofe who fubordinately govern
Che affairs of this world: on a certain day, the difturbing blaft of the trumpet
Jhall difturb the univerfe i and the fubfequent blaft Jhall follow it. On that

day

* By the angels who tear forth the fouls of fomt 1 • .

with violence, See. ] Thefe are the angel of There are feveral other interpretations of this
death, and his affiftants; who will take the whole paffage ; fome expounding all the five-
fouls of the' wicked in a rough and cruel man- parts of the oath of the ftars, others of the foals
ner, from the inmoft part of their bodies, as a of men, others of the fouls of warriors in par*
man draggs up a thing from the bottom of the ticular, and others of toar-borfts: a detail of
fea; but will take the fouls of the good in a which, I apprehend, would rather tire than
gentle and eafy manner , from their lips, as pleaic,
when a man draws a bucket of water at one

* M KUDAWfc

4.8o AL KORAN. Chap. 79.

day men's hearts lhall tremble : their looks Jhdl he caft down. The infidels
fay. Shall we furely be made to return whence we came*? After we
lhall have become rotten bones, Jhdl we he again raifed to lift ? They fay. This
then will he a return to lofs. Verily it will be but one founding of the trumpet b ,
and behold, they Jhdl appear dive on the face of the earth c . Hath not the
ftory of Moses reached thee ? When his Lord called unto him in the holy
valley Towa *, faying* Go unto Pharaoh ; for he is infolently wicked :
and fay. Haft thou a defire to become juft and holy ? and I will direffc thee
unto tny Lord, that thou mayeft fear to franfgrefs. And he fhewed him the
very great fign of the rod turned into a ferpent : but he Charged Moses with
impofture, and rebelled agdnjl God. Then he turned back haftily ; and he
affembled the magicians., and cried aloud, faying, I am your fupreme Lord.
Wherefore God chaftifed him with the punilhment of the life to come, and
dfo of this prefent life. Verily herein is an example unto him who feareth to
rebel. Are ye more difficult to create, or the heaven which God hath built?
He hath raifed the height thereof, and hath perfe&ly formed the fame : and
he hath made the night thereof dark, and hath produced the light thereof
After this he ftretched out the earth *, whence he caufed to fpring forth the
water thereof, and the pafture thereof ; and he eftablilhed the mountains,
for the ufe of yourfelves, and of your cattle. When the prevailing, the
great day lhall come, on that day mail a man call to remembrance what he
hath purpofely done : and hell lhall be expofed to the view of die fce&ator.
And whofo lhall have rranfgrejQed* and mall have chofen this prefent life ;
verily hell lhall be his abode : but whofo lhall have dreaded the appearing
before his Lord, and lhall have refrained bis foul from luft *, verily paradile
lhall be bis abode. They will ask thee concerning the lafi hour, when will
be the fixed time thereof. By what means canft thou give any information of
the fame ? Unto thy Lord belongetb tbe knowledge of the period chereof:
and thou art only a warner, who feareft the fame. The day whereon they
lhall fee the fame, it Jhallfeem to them as though they had not carried in tbe
world longer than an evening, or a morning thereof!

* Shall we firth be made to return whence we earth ; ] Or, They JbaU appear at tbe place ef

came f ] i. e. Shall we be reftored to our former judgment . The original word al Sabira is alio
condition ? one of the names of hell.

* One founding <f the trumpet;] Viz. The * See chap. 20. p. 256.

fecond, or third buff, according to different * After this be fintebed out tbe earth, ] Which
opinions. had been created before the heavens, but with*

* fh*j Jhdl appear alive on the fact of the out expanfion

* J ALLAl.

CHAP.

Chap. 8e>.

Al KORAN , :

481

CHAP. LXXX.

Inti tied) He frowned; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God,

T HE prophet frowned, and turned a fide, becaufc the blind man came unto
him ' : and how doft thou know whether he (hall peradventure be cleanfed
from bis Jins ; or whether he lhaJI be admonifhed, and the admonition fhall profit
him ? Tbeman who is wealthy, thou received refpedtfulJy i whereas it is not to be
charged on thee, that he is not cleanfed : but him who ccJmeth unto theeearneftiy
feeking his falvation , and who feareth God, doft thou negledt. By no means
Jhouldefi thou aft thus. Verily the Koran is an admonition ; (and he who is wil-
ling retaineth the fame ;) written in volumes honourable, exalted, and pure ;
by the hands of feribes honoured, and juft b May man be curfed! What hath
leduced him to infidelity ? Of whit thing doth God create him? Of a drop of
feed doth he create him ; and he formeth him with proportion ; and then facili-
tated! bis paflage out of the womb : afterwards he caufethhim todie,and layeth him
in the grave ; hereafter, when it lhall pleafehim, he fhall raife him to life. AfTur-
«dly. He hath not hitherto fully performed what God hath commanded him. Let
man confider his food ; in what manner it is provided. We pour down water by
Ihowers ; afterwards we cleave the earth in clefts, and we caufe corn to
fpring forth therein, and grapes, and clover, and the olive, and the palm, and
gardens planted thick with trees, and fruits, and grids, for the ufe of your-
felvcs and of your cattle. When the ftunning found of the trumpet fhall be
heard •, on that day fhall a man fly from his brother, and his mother, and his
father, and his wife, and his children. Every tnan of them, on that day,
lhall have bufinefs of bis own fufficicnt to employ his thoughts. On that day the
feces of fome fhall be bright, laughing, and joyful : and upon the faces of others,

Q^q q on

* The prophet frowned, and turned ajide, beeaufe for which he is here reprehended. After this,
•the blind nan tame unto bin, &c.J This paflage whenever the prophet fa w Ebn OmmMaSum, he
was revealed on the following occafion. A cer- fliewed him great refpect, laying, ‘The man is
tain blind man, named Abdallah Ebn Omm Mae- %uektme,tn whoje aeeount my Loro bath reprimand-
tum, came and interrupted Mohammed while he ed mei and he made him twice governor of Me-
was engaged in earned difeourfe with fome of the dina 1 .

principal Koreijb, whofe converfion he had hopes b Written in volumes honourable , exalted, and
«f; bat the prophet taking no notice of him, pure, tec. ] Being tranferibed from the prt-
the blind man, not knowing he was otherwifebu- ftrved table , highly honoured in the fight of
fled, raifed his voice, and faid, O apoftle of God, kept pure and uncorrupted from the hands
God, teach me fome part of what God hath of evil fpirits, and touched only by the angels.
taught thee : but Mohammed, vexed at this inter- Some nnderftand hereby the books of the pro-
mpt ion, frowned, and turned away from him; phets,with which the Koran agrees ia fubdaocc*.

* liens, M BciDAWt. * MZ amajck.

482 Al KORAN. Chap. 81.

on that day, Jball there he duft j darknefc (hall cover them. Thefe are the un-
believers, the wicked.

CHAP. LXXXI.

Intitledy The Folding up; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

W HEN the fun fhall be folded up * ; and when the ftars (hall fall 5 and
when the mountains fhall be made to pa fs away ; and when the camels
ten months gone with young fhall be neglected h ; and when the wild beafts fhall be
gathered together c 5 and when the feas fhall boil d ; andjwhen the fouls fhall be
joined again to their bodies \ and when the girl who hatli been buried alive fhall
be afked for what crime fhe was put to death* ; and when the books fhall be laid
open ; and when the heaven (hall be removed f \ and when hell fhall burn fierce-
ly ; and when paradife fhall be brought near : every foul (hall know what k
hath wrought. Verily I fwear* by the ftars which are retrograde, which move
lwiftly, and which hide themfclves h ; and by the night, when it cometh on •, and
by the morning, when it appeared!-, that thefe are the words of an honourable
meffenger endued with ftrength, of eftablifhed dignity in the fight of the pof-
feffor of the throne, obeyed by the angels under bis authority* ana faithful: and
your companion Mohammed is not diftradbed He had already feen him in
the clear horizon k : and he fufpcdted not 1 the fecrets revealed unto him . Nei-
ther

* When tit fun boBbt folded ufi\h%i garment ftretthcd rut tbtbectvtn lilt u skin*

that is to be laid by, 5 I fwcar;] Or, I toill not ftoear, £$V. See

b See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. p. 82. chap. 56. p 436. not. f.

* See ibid. p. 83, and 86. h By the ft an mkub ore retrograde, Se c.J Some

d Seeibid. p. 82. troderftand hereby the ftars in general, bat the

* Tbe dsmftl who bath been buried alive ;] P or it more exad commentators, five of the planets, viz,

was cufiomary among the ancient Arabs to bury the two winch accompany the fun, and the
their daughters alive, as foon as they were born ; three fu peri or planets ; which have both a retro-
for fear they fhould be impovcrifiicd by providing grade and a direft motion, and hide themfclvai
for them, or (hould fuficr difgrace on their ac- in the rays of the fun, or when they fct.
count. See chap. 16. p. 218. 1 An honourable meffenger ;] L e. Gabriel.

f When tbe heaven pall be removed,'} Or pluck- k See chap. 53. p. 426.
ed away from its place, as tbe skin is plucked off 1 He fufpe&ed not Some copies, by a change
from a camel which is flaying ; for that is the of one letter only, inftead of dbantnin, read
proper fignification of the verb here ufed. Mar - damnin ; and then the words ihould be rendered
raeci fogies the paflage alludes to that in the He is not tenacious of, or grudges not to commu-
Pfalms 1 , where, according to the verfions of the nicate to you, the fetrtt revelations which he hat
Heptua&int and the Vulgate , Goo is faid to have received.

* Pfalm dv, 2.

Chap. 83. Al KORAN. 483

ther are thefe the words of an accurfed devil*. Whither, therefore, are ye
going ? This is no other than an admonition unto all creatures ; unto him a-
mong you who lhall be willing to walk uprightly : but ye lhall not will, un-
lefi God willeth, the Lord of all creatures.

* Neither are tbefo the words of an accurfed it- the Arabs fuppofe the foothfayer, or magician,
p//,] Who has overheard, by Health, the dif- receives his intelligence from thofe evil rpiriti,
courfe of the angels. The verfe is an anfwer who are continually Mening to learn what they-
to a calumny of the infidels, who faid the Koran can from the inhabitants of heaven,
was only a piece of divination, or magic : for

CHAP. LXXXIL

Intithdy The Cleaving in funder ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

W HEN the heaven lhall be cloven in funder ; and when the liars lhall bo
fcattered ; and when the feas lhall be fuffered to join their waters ; and
when the graves lhall be turned upfide down : every foul lhall know what ie
hath committed, and what it hath omitted. O man, what hath feduced thee
againft thy gracious Lord, who hath created thee, and put thee together, and
fighdy dilpofed thee ? In what form he pleafed hath he falhioned thee. Af-
furedly. But ye deny the laft judgment as a falfhood. Verily there are appoint-
ed over you guardian angels % honourable in the fight of God, writing down
your allions ; who know that which ye do. The juft Jhall Purely be in a place'
of delight : but the wicked Jhall Purely be in hell ; they lhall be call therein to
be burned, on the day of judgment, and they Jhall not be abfent therefrom
for ever. What lhall caufe thee to underftand what the day of judgment is?
Again, What lhall caule thee to underftand what the day of judgment is ?
It is a day whereon one foul lhall not be able to obtain any thing in behalf of
another foul: and the command, on that day, Jhall be God’s.

• See chap. 5a p. 420, and the Preliminary Difc. }. iv. p. 7*.

CHAP. LXXXIII.

Intitled , Thofe who give fhort meafure or weight; revealed

at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

W O be unto thofe who give Ihort meafure or weight j who, when they
receive by meafure from other men, take the full » but when they

Qjq q 2 meafure

r

484 Al KORAN. Chap. 8j,

meafurc unto them, or weigh unto diem, defraud ! Do not thefe think they
fhall be railed again, at the great day *, the day whereon mankind fhall ftand
before the Lord of all creatures ? By no mean9. Verily the regifter of the
afflom of the wicked is furely in Sbjjin\ And what fhall make thee to un-
derftand what Sejjin is 9 Ilis a book diftinttly written. Wo be, on that
day, unto thofe who accufed tbs prophets of impofture ; who denied the day
©f judgment as a falfhood ! And none denieth me fame as a falfhood, except
every unjuft and flagitious perfon : who, when our figns are rehearfed unto
him, faith, They are fables of the ancients. By no means : but rather their
hifts have caft a vail over their hearts. By no means. Verily they jball be
fhut out from their Lord on that day j and they fhall be fent into hell to be
burned : then fhall it be laid uni e thm, by the infernal guards. This is what ye
denied as a falfhood. Afluredly. But the regifter of the ahions of the righ-
teous -i in Iiaiy ycs : and what fhall caufe thee to underftand what Illiyyuh
is? It is a book dlfUn&ly written: thofe who approach near unto God, are
witnefles thereto . Verily die righteous fha’l dwell among delights: Jested
©n couches they fliall behold chjeBs of pleafute i thou fhalt fee in thdr faces the
brighmefs of joy. They fhall be given to drink of pure wine, fealed *, the
fed whereof fhslt be musk ,: : and to this let thofe afplre, who afpire to happi-
»efs: and the c . . r mixed therewith Jhdl be of T asmji % a fountain where-

of thofe ihall drink who approach near auto the divine prefence t They who act
wickedly laugh the true believers to fcom ; and when they pafs by them, they
wink at one inodkt : and when they turn a fide to their people, they turn afide
making fcurrilous lefts : and when they fee them, they fey, Verily thefe are mifta-
ken men. But they are not fent re be keepers over them ". Wherefore one day

* Srjj**} Is the mme of the general regSfle*;
wherein the allions of all the wicked* both men
and genii, are diftbftjy enued- Srjrr figEwfies a
prtjjBi and this boo.* n fr.rtic flunk T derives
Jr> name from Thence, tetanic is wiG occaiioti
thofe whole deeds aK thErs recorded* m be bs-
prifsttid in hell or S. i« llfo the mmt

qf the dungeon beneith the fevetitb earthy the reft*
dk* nee of Eblb snd hr? hull : w here it h fbppof-
cd, by bine* that this 'wok is kept, and where
the ! .mis or t e wjeted wMJ be detailed til] the
jiikrr&f t /in 1 . If the Liter zspli cation be -.dmit-
r?dL- the words* Ax* zth-if nrth tier it m-
4$rfhmi wktii Sgpn w 9 fhoujd be fndofe d wit h-
m z parenihciif,

J'Tw ■ i] The word h a pi ora!, and (igm-
nr- high places. Some Qv ft h the gerteti! rc-
gifter -vhrrdn the aiHons of theri^hieoHif, whe-
ther smg.de, men, or ^emi, are d&(imcily refold-
ed. O triers will have it a be j place in she
7 Lh heave fi p undo w-ftrone os' (Jodi where
this hook b and where the fturfj nf the
juft, as many mink, wifi retain til] the lift

1 Jallal, A* Bbid 1 vv 1 See th. ; f ,'a D'fd
ziejtip, -■ 4/BejdawlJ

day * . If w r prefer t he lit ie r op rn bn , t he word j,
4nd wfcrijflrrf/ nett: thfi tntm&rffa ^ktr Iliiy y on
<j 9 iliouTd Hfcewiie be iadofed in 1 parenthdin
f An frtixfJTtt fhr;st ,] Of, sti f rdf ft* stilt*,
and keep th Uafi.

4 ffSf fftfi TZfrerttf hi mri & :) i e. The
veGeb ojntainbg she Ume k 1 baled vviih
rouik, inftcid ot day. Some underfbnd by the
JfA of thU wine, its fitrcwel, or ihe ftavoor it
Will in the month after it is d ank.

e TrAmas 1 Ig the name uf a foonLLin in para-
dile, h taiied from m being conveyed to the
hi^heft apifcmenti.

f friunsf ihfe jhAJ drink mh? ,ippre.teh m4r
ih At'tm jrgjiMf ] For fpn /hail drink the
water of Taptim pure and unsniicd, htmg con-
tiiiqsGy . nA wbdly emploved in the couEempla-
liovi \t Goo ; bui-t ube other mhabiLLHis ot pa-
diLe Jl.jtfi d:fqk It mixed wkh ihdr wine*,

* fit* t fv M hr & h k*t peri *pfr thm ;] i e.
T‘ie if.hdds are not coEncniilioned by God to
Gill lie believers to or in ot thdr

iv . f. - * 2 JaLLal, See th Prr/ifs. D y

Chap. 84 . Al KORAN. 48$

the true believers, in their turn , fhall laugh the infidels tofcom*: hint on
couches they fhall look down upon them in bell. Shall not the infidels be re-
warded for that which they have done ?

* Tbe believers Jb all laugbtbt infidels to /torn i\ they fhall be bidden to go in; but when they
When they lhall fee them ignominioufly driven come near the door, it fhall be fuddenly fhut a

into hell. It is alfo faid, that a door fhall be and the believer* within fhall laugh at them 1 ,
fhewn the damned, opening into paradife, and 6

1 Idem.

CHAP. LXXXIV.

Inti tied j The Rending in funder ; revealed at M e c c a\
In the name of the moft merciful God.

W HEN the heaven fhall be rent in funder, and fhall obey its Lord,
and fhall be capable thereof-, and when the earth fhall be ftretched out b ,
and fhall call forth that which is therein c , and fhall remain empty, and fhall o-
bey its Lord, and fhall be capable thereof: O man, verily labouring thou la-
boureft to meet thy Lord, and thou fhalt meet him d . And he who mall have
his book given into his right hand, fhall be called to an eafy account, and fhall
turn unto his family ° with joy : but he who fhall have his book given him behind
his back f , fhall invoke deftru&ion to fall upon him » and he fhall be fent into
hell to be burned i becaufe he rejoiced infolently am'idft his family on earths
Verily he thought that he fhould never return unto Goi>: yea verily ; but his
Lord beheld him, Wherefore I fwear 8 by the rednefs of the sky after fun-fet,
and by the night, and the animals which it driveth together, and by the moon
when fhe is at the full ; ye fhall furely be transferred fucceffively from Hate to
ftate \ What aileth them, therefore, that they believe not the refurreSHon ;
and that, when the Koran is read unto them, they worfhip not 1 ? Yea : the
unbelievers accufe the fame of impofture: but God well knoweth the malice

which

a There are fomcwho tale this chapter to have
been revealed at Medina .

b When the earth Jball be ftretched out ,] Like a
Ain % every mountain and hill being levelled.

c Andjball caft forth that which is therein i] As
ihe treifures hidden in its bowels, and the dead
bodies which lie in their graves.

d And thou jbdlt meet him ;] Or, And thou Jh ah
meet thy lr un whether thy works be good, or
•whether iky bo evil.

e [Jfj/.naiJy ;] f. e. His relations or friends who
are true Ldki-prs ; or rather^ to his wives and

fervanti, of the damfels and youths of paradife,
who wait to receive him
f Behind bis back ;] That is, into his left hand ;
for the wicked will have that hand bound behind
their back, and their right hand Co their neck.

£ rfioear ;] Or, I will not ftaear. See chap.
56. p. 436. not. £

h Ye Jball furely be transferred from one ftate to
another ;} u e. From the flat* of the living, to
that of the dead ; and from the ftate of the dead,
to a new ftate of life in another world.

1 They mrjbip not,] Or, humble not tbmfthes*

'idem*

4-86 Al K 0 R A N, Chap,

which they keep hidden in their breafts. Wherefore denounce unto them a
grievous punifhment, except thofe who believe and do good works : for them
is prepared a never failing reward.

CHAP. LXXXV.

Intit led. The Celeftial Signs ; revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the mofl merciful God.

B Y the heaven adorned with figns * ; by the promifed day of judgment ; by
the witnefs, and the witnefled b ; curfed were the contrivers of the pit % of
fire fupplied with fewel ; when they fat round the fame, and were witneffes of
what they did againft: the true believers' 1 * * : and they affiidted them for no o-
ther reafon, but becaufe they believed in the mighty, the glorious God, unto
whom belongetb the kingdom of heaven and earth : and God is witnefs of all
things. Verily for thofe who perfecute the true believers of either fex, and af-
terwards repent not, is prepared the torment of hell j and they Jhall fuffer the
pain of burning*. But for thofe who believe, and do that which is right, are
deflined gardens beneath which rivers flow : this JbaiU be great felicity. Ve-
rily the vengeance of thy Lord is fevere. He createth, and he reftoreth to

life :

1 Signs ;] The original word properly fignifies
toners ; which (bmc interpret of real towers *,
wherein it is fuppofed the angels keep guard 4 ;
and others, of the ftars of the fiift magnitude : but
the generality of expofitors underftand thereby
the twelve figns or the zodiac, wherein the
planets make their feveral Nations * .

b By the witnefs , and the witnejftd .] The mean-
ing of thefe words is very uncertain, and the
explications of the commentators confeqaently
vary- One thinks the witnefs to be Mohammed,
and that which is born witnefs f, to be the re-
furreffiott, or the profeffors of the Mohammedan
faith ; or elfe that theie latter are the witnefs , and
the profeffors of every other religion, thofe who
will be witneffed againft by them. Another fup-
pofes the witnefs to be the guardian angel, and his
charge the perfon witneffed againft- Another ex-
pounds the words of the day of Arafat, the 9tk
of Dbvlbajja, and of the day of flaying the vic-
tims, which is the day following; or elm of Fri-
day, the day of the weekly affembliag of the
Mohammedans at their mofques, and of the pco-

1 Yahya. * See chap- i c.p. 24. * [1

* lidem . V. Poc. Spec, p. 62. Ecchelleks Hi

61. 6 V. D’Herb&l, Bibl. Orient, Art*

pie who are affembled on thofe days, £$V. 4

c The contrivers of the pit;] Literally, the lords
of the pit - Thefe were the mmifters of the
perfecuticn raifed by Dhu Nmds, king of Ya-
man, who was of the JewiJh religion, againft
the inhabitants of Najrdu : for they having em-
braced Cbriftianitj (at that time the true religi-
on, by the confemon of Mohammed himfelf) the
bigotted tyrant commanded all thofe, who would
not renounce their faith, to be caft into a pit, or
trench, filled with fire, and there burnt to allies f .
Others, however, tell the ftory with different
circumftances

d And were witneffes of what they did againft the
true believers 5] Or, as feme choofc to under fbnd
the words. And Jball be witneffes againft them-
fehtSy at the day of judgment, if their unjuft treat-
ment of the true believer s.

c They Jball fuffer the pain f burning ;] Which
pain, it is faid, the perfecutors of the Cbriftian
martyrs abovementioned felt in this life ; the fire
burning forth upon them from the pit, and con-
fuming them 7 .

llal. Al Beida wi, Yahya. 4 lidem .
< l. Arab, part 1. c. 10. and Prid. Life f Mab . p.
m Navas. 7 Al Beidawi, Yahya.

Chap. 86. Al KORAN. 487

life : he is inclined to forgive, and gracious : the poffeffor of the glorious
throne ; who effe&eth that which hepleafeth. Hath not the ftory of the holts,
of Pharaoh *, and of Thamud 6 , reached thee? Yet the unbelievers ceafe
not to accufe the divine revelations of fallhood : but God encompaffeth them
behind, that they cannot efcape. Verily that which they rejeft is a glorious
Koran ; the original whereof is written in a table kept in heaven e .

* Sec chap. 7. p. 128, £3 fc.

Sec ibid. p. 124, &iv.

c Kept in heaven', ] And prcferved from the

leaft change or corruption. See the Prelim.
Difc. §. III. p. 64, and j. IV. p. 75.

CHAP. LXXXVI.

Intitled \ The Star which appeareth by night ; revealed at

Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the heaven, and that which appeareth bv night : but what lhall caufe thee
to underfiand what that which appeareth by night is ? it is the liar of pier T
cing brightnefs* : every foul hath a guardian Jet over it. Let a man conhder,
therefore, of what he is created. He is created of feed poured forth, iffuing
from the loins, and the breaft-bones b . Verily God is able to reftore him to life ,
the day whereon all fecret thoughts and actions lhall be examined into •, and he
lhall have no power to defend himfetf, nor any protestor. By the heaven which
returneth the rain c ; and by the earth which openeth to let forth vegetables and
fprings: verily this is a difcourfe diftinguifhing good from evil ; and it is not com-
pofed with lightnefs. Verily the infidels are laying a plot to frufirate my deftgns :
but I will lay a plot for their ruin. Wherefore, 0 prophet , bear with the
unbelievers : let them alone a while.

* The fiar of piercing brigbtnefii] Some take the 4 From the loins, and tie breafl-btme; ;] {. e.

words to iigmfy any bright ftar, without reftrifti- From the loins of the man, and the breaft-Dones
on : but others think fome particular ftar or liars of the woman *.

to be thereby intended ; which one fuppofe* to c Which returneth the rain {] Or, as fome ex-

be the morning liar, (peculiarly called at Tirek , pound it. Which performetb its periodic notion,
or the appearing by night i) another, Saturn, (that returning to the point from whence it began the
planet being by the Arabs furnamed al Tbakeb, or fame. The words feem defigned to exprefs the
the piercing, as it was by the Greeks, Pbecnon, alternate returns of the dift'erent feafons of the
or the Shining ; ) and a third, the Pleiades. year.

1 41 Beidaw>» Yahya.

CHAP.

4 8 $ KO RAN. Chap# 88 #

CHAP. LXXXVII.

Int tiled) The moft High*; revealed at Mecca.*

In the name of the moft merciful God.

P RAISE the name of thy Lord, the moft high-, who hath created,
and compleatly formed his creatures: and who determined! them to
various ends b , and diredleth them to attain tbe fame * j and who produced!
the pafture for cattle, and afterwards rendreth the fame dry ftubble of a
dufky hue. We will enable thee to rehearfe our revelations * i and thou fhalc
not forget any part thereof , except what God fhall pleafe* ; for he knoweth
that which is manifeft, and that which is hidden. And we will facilitate
unto thee the mofteafy way f . Wherefore admonifh thy people , if thy admoni-
tion fhall be profitable unto them. Whofo feareth God, he will be admo-
nifhed : but the moft wretched unbeliever will turn away therefrom *, who
fhall be caft to be broiled in the greater fire of bell , wherein he fhall not
die, neither fhall he live. Now hath he attained felicity who is purified by
faith, and who remembreth the name of his Lord, and prayeth. But ye prefer
this prefent life : yet the life to come is better, and more durable, verily
this is written in the ancient books, the books of Abraham and Moses.

* Some take the firft word of this chapter, ' Except abet God Jbeil pltefe ;] i. t. Except
viz. Praift, for its tide. fuch revelations as God fhall think fit to abro-

b Wbe determined them to various ends ;] De- gate, and blot out of thy memory. See chap,
terminiag their various fpecies, properties, z. p. 14, and chap. 7;. p. 474.
ways of life, (ft. * f STe mitt facilitate unto tbet the vufi eefy

« And direBctb them, &c.J Guiding the ra- way ;] To retain the relations communicated
tional by their reafon and alfo by revelation, to thce by Gabriel : or, as feme underftand the
and the irrational by inftinft *, (ft. word!, We will difpofc tbet to tbe prtfejftm and

•* Sec chap. 75. p. 474. JtriB sbfcrvanct of the moft eajj religion, that is,

" of Iftam,

1 A 1 Be ida w t. * Idem.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.

Intitkd y The Overwhelming a ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

H ATH the news of the overwhelming day of judgment reached thee?
The countenances of fome, on that day, /hall be caft down ; labouring

and

* Tbe overwhelming ;] This is a name, or epi- overwhelm all creatures with fear and allonifli-
thet, of the laft day;, becaufc it will fuddenly meat. It is alfo a name, or epithet, of hell-fire.

Chap. 89. Al KORAN. 489

and toiling * : they (hall be caft into fcorching fire to be broiled : they (hall be
given to drink of a boiling fountain : they lhall have no food, but of dry-
thorns and thirties b ; which fhall not fatten, neither lhall they fatisfy hunger.
But the countenances of others , on that day, fhall ^ joyful •, well pleafed with
their paft endeavour : th ty fhall be placed in a lofty garden, wherein thou fhalt
hear no vain difcourfe : therein fhall be a running fountain : therein fhall be
railed. beds, and goblets placed before them , and cufhions laid in order, and
carpets ready fpread. Do they not confider the camels', how they are
created ; and the heaven, how it is raifed ; and the mountains, hotf they are
fixed ■, and the earth, how it is extended ? Wherefore warn thy people > for
thou art a warner only : thou art not impowered to aft with authority over
them. But whoever /hail turn back d , and disbelieve, God fhall punifh him
with the greater punifhment of the life to come. Verily unto us fhall they
return : then fhall ic be our part to bring them to account.

* Labouring and toiling i\ i. e. Dragging their proper inftance, to an Arabian, of the power
chains, and labouring through hell-fire, as ca« and wifdom of God.

mels labour thro 1 mud, l$c. Or, Employing Some, however, think the clouds (which the
and fatiguing tbemfelves in what lhall not avail original word ibl alfo fignifies,) are here in-
them 1 . tended ; the heaven being mentioned immediately

* Dry thorns and thifilesi\ Such as the camels after.

eat when green and tender. Some take the ori- d But whoever fhall turn back, &c.] Or, Ex-
ginal word al Dart for the name of a thorny tree, cept him who fhall turn back, and be an infidel :
c Do they not confider the camels, &c.] Tkefe and God Jhall alfo punijh him. See. By which
animals are of fuch ufe, or rather neceffity, in exception fomefuppofe that power is here given
the eaft, that the creation of a fpecies fo won- to Mohammed to chaftifc obftinate infidels and
der fully adapted to thofe countries, is a very apoftates.

1 Idem.

CHAP. LXXXIX.

Infilled, The Day-break; revealed at Mecca*.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the day -break, and ten nights”; by that which is double, and that
which is fingle * ; and by the night when it cometh on : is there not in

R r r this

* Some are of opinion this chapter was re- ftngli :] Thefe words are virioufly interpreted,
veaied at Medina. Some underftand thereby all things in general ;

b ( qi t ten n igbtt 5] That is. The ten nights of fome, all created beings, (which are faid to have
Dbu'/bajia, or the tenth of that month, (whence been created by pairs, or 'of two kinds 1 ,) and
fome underftand the day-break mentioned juft the Creator, who is fingle ; fome, of the frimum
before, of the morning of that day, or of the mobile, and the other orbs ; fome, of the conftel-
preceding;) or the nights o'f the' 16th of Mohar- latrons, and the planets; fome, of the night*
ram ; or, as others father think, the 10th, before mentioned, taken either together or
nth, and nth of Dbu'lbnjja. All which are fingly; and fome, of. the day of flaying the
days peculiarly facred among the Mohammedans. viSims, (the toth of Dbu'ibaija,) and or the
. c gj Jfaf w btib is double, and that which is day of Arafat, which is the day before, (Ac- ■

» Seecbap. 51. p. 423. » Al Zamaxh.

49° Al KORAN. Chap. 89.

this an oath formed withunderftanding? Haftthounot confideredhowthy Lord
dealt with Ad, the people of Irem \ adorned with lofty buildings the like
whereof hath not been erefted in the land c -, and with Thamud, who hewed
the rocks in the valley d into hottfes \ and with Pharaoh, the contriver of the
flakes e : who had behaved irtfolently in the earth, and multiplied corrupti-
on therein ? Wherefore thy Lord poured on them various kinds f of chaftife-
ment : for thy Lord is furely in a watch-tower, whence he obfervetb the acti-
ons of men . Moreover man, when his Lord trieth him by profperity y and
honoureth him, and is bounteous unto him, faith. My Lord honoureth me:
but when he proveth him by affli£lions y and withholdeth his provifions from
him, he faith. My Lord defpifeth me. By no means «: but ye honour not
the orphan, neither do ye excite one another to feed the poor i and ye devour

the

a Irem ] Whs the name of the territory or city
of the Adites, and of the garden mentioned in
the next note; which were fo called from Irem,
or Aram , the grandfather of Ad, their proge-
nitor. Some think Aram himfelf to be here
meant, and his name to be added to fignify the
ancient Adites , his immediate defcendants, and
to diftinguifh them from the latter tribe of that
name 1 : but the adje£Hve and relative joined to
the word are, in the original, of the feminine
gender, which feems to cotitradid this opi-
nion.

b Adorned toitb lofty buildings 1 ] Or pillars .
Some imagine thefe words are ufed to exprefs
the great fize and ftrength of the old Adites 2 ;
and then they (hould be tranflated, who were
of enormous future , But the more exa£l com-
mentators take the paflage to relate to the fumptu-
ous palace and delightful gardens built and made
by Sbedddd the Son of Ad. For they fay Ad
left two fons, Sbedddd and Shed did, who reign-
ed jointly after his deceafe, and extended their
power over the greater part of the world : but
Sbedddd dying, his brother became foie mo-
narch; who, having heard of the tflejlial pa -
radife, made a garden, in imitation thereof, in
the defarts of Aden , and called it Irem, after the
name of his great grandfather: when it was fi-
nilhcd, he fet out, with a great attendance, to
take a view of it ; but when they were come
within a day’s journey of the place^ they were
all deilroyed by a terrible noifb from heaven.
Al Beidawi adds that one Abdallah Ebn Keldbab
{ whom, after D" Her helot, I have elfewhere

turned Colabab 3 ) accidentally hit on this won-
derful place, as he was feeking a camel.

c The like whereof batb not been ereBed in tbe
land\ ] If we fuppofe the preceding words to
relate to the vaft Aature of the Adites , thefe
mull be tranflated, Tbe like cf whom have not
been created , See.

4 Who hewed tbe rocks in tbe valley ; ] The
learned Greaves , in his tranflation of Abu'lfeda's
defeription of Arabia 4 * , has falfly rendered thefe
words, which are there quoted, Quibus petrat
vallis nfponjum dederunt , i. e. To whom tbe
rocks of tbe valley returned anfmer: which flip
being made by lo great a man, I do not at all
wonder that U Roque, and Petis de la Croix ,
from whnfe Latin verfion, and with whofe af-
fiflance, la Roque made his French tranflation of the
aforefaid treatife, have been led into the dme
miflake, and rendered thofe words, A qui les
pierret de la valce rendirent reponfe *. The
valley here meant, fay the commentators 6 , Is
Wadi * Ikora , lying about one days journey 7 ,
(not five and upwards, as AbuTfeda will have it)
from al Hejr .

* See chap. 38. p. 37a.

( Various kinds;] The original word flgnifiei
a mixture, and alfo a fcourge of platted thongs :
whence fome fuppofe the tbajlijement of this life
is here reprefentea by a fcourge, and intimated
to be as much lighter than that of the next life,
as fcQurging is lighter than death 8 .

£ By no means ; ] For worldly proiperity or
a^vfrfity is not a certain mark either of the fit-
vour or disfavour of God.

1 Al Beidawi, Jallal. * lidept. Sec tbe Prelim. Difc. p. 7. 3 Prelim . I }tfc.p. 6.

4 Pag. 43. It was fublijbed by Dr. Hudson, in the third Vol . of tbe Geographic veterh Scripters

Gr. minor. * Defer. de\P Arabie, mift a la fuite> du Voyage de la Paleftine , par La Roque,

p . 35. 6 Iallal. ^/Beidawi. 7 Ebn Hawkal, apud Abulf. ubi fupr. Geogr,

Nub. p* uo* 8 ^/Beidawi.

#

Chap. 90. Al KORAN. 491

the itlheritanqe of the weak •, with undiftinguilhing greedinefi 5 and ye love
riches, with much affedtion. By no means Jhould ye do thus. When tne earth
{hall be minutely ground to duft ; and thy Lord lhall come, and the angels rank
by rank ; and hell, on that day, lhall be brought nigh b : on that day lhail man
call to remembrance bis evil deeds ; but how Jball remembrance avail him ?
He lhall fay. Would to God that I had heretofore done good works in my
life-time c ! On that day none lhall punifh with his punilhment ; nor lhall any
bind with his bonds d . O thou foul which art at reft *, return unto thy
Lord, well pleafed with thy rewhrd , and well pleafing unto God : enter a
mong my fervants *, and enter my paradife.

* Ye devour tbe inherit ante of the weak ; ] Not pound this of the foul which having, by purfu
fuffering women or young children to have any ing the concatenation of natural caufes, raifed it
fhare in the inheritance of their husbands or pa- felf to the knowledge of that Being which
rents. See chap. 4. p* 6 1 . . produced them, and exifts of neceffity, rtfs

b And bell Jball be brought nigh ; ] There is fully contented, or acquiefcss in the knowledge of
a tradition that at the laft day hell will be dragged him, and the contemplation of his perfections,
towards the tribunaiby 70,0x50 halters, each halter By this the reader will obferve that the Mo-
being bawled by 70,000 angels; and that it bammedanszrc no ftrangers to 2 >uietifm. Others,
will come with great roaiing and fury 1 . however, underftand the words of the foul

« In my life time* ] Or, For this my latter which having attained the knowledge of the

truth, re/Is fatisfied, and relies ftcureh thereon,
J * None Jball punijb with bis pUuiJh)nent\ &c. ] ufcdiftutbed by doubts ; or of the foul which is
i. e. None lhall be able to puniftt or to bind, as Jbckre of its lawation, and free from fear or
God lhall then punilh and bind the wicked a . forrow
e o thou foul which art at reft ; ] Some ex-

1 Idem , jAi/LALt * lidem * 3 Al Bxidawi.

CHAP. XC.

Jnt tiled , The Territory ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the raoft merciful God.

I Sw^ar a by this territory ( and thou, O prophet , refideft in this territo-
ry e 9 ) an d by the begetter, and that which he hath begotten <* ; verily we
have^ created man in mifery «. Doth he think that none lhall prevail

Rrr 2 over

• rjwear\) Or, I mill not /wear, &c. See

chap. 56. h- 436. not f. ,

* This territory i ) Viz. The facred territory

of Mecca . ,

c And thou reRdefi in this territory ; J Or,

Thou / bait 'be allowed to do what thou plcafejt in
ibis territory ; the words, in this fenfe, import-
ing a promife of that abfolute power which
Mohammed attained, on the taking of Mecca *»

1 Idem* * Idem.

d By the begetter , and that which be bath be-
gotten;) Some underhand thefe words generally,
others of Adam\ or Abrabam t and of their off-
ering, and of Mohammed in particular *.

• W& have created man in mifery ; ] Or, to
trouble . This paiTage was revealed to comfort
the prophet under the perfection? of the
Koreijb K

3 Idem;

49 2 Al KORAN. Chap. 91.

oy_i him* ? He faith, I have wafted plenty of riches K Doth he think that
none feeth him ? Have we not made him two eyes, and a tongue, and two
lips; and fhewri him the two highways of good and evil? Yet he attempt-
eth not the cliff. What Ihall make thee to underftand what the cliff is ? It
is to free the captive ; or to feed, in the day of famine, the orphan who is
of kin, or the poor man who lieth on the ground. fVbojb doth tbis y and is
one of thofe who believe, and recommend perfeverance unto each other, and
recommend mercv unto each other ; thefe /hall he the companions of the
rigfht-hand c . But they who lhall disbelieve our figns, (hall be the compani-
ons of the left-hand d : above them /ball be arched fire.

1 Doth be think that none /ball prevail over make him fall, though they tote the skin to
bin Some expofitors take a particular perfon pieces *.

to be here intended, who was one of Mob am- b I have wafted plenty of riebes ; ] In a vain

tried's tnoft inveterate adverfaries; as AlWalid and often taticms manner; or, in oppoftng of
Ebn at Mogbeira 1 ; others fuppofe Abu' l A/badd Mohammed J .

Ebn Calda to be the man ; who was fo very c See chap. 56. p. 434.
ftrong, that a large skin being Ipread under his 4 See ibid.
feet, and ten men pulling at it, they could not

1 A/Z\u.kkb. 3 affBeiDAWt 3 Idem.

CHAP. XCL

Intitledy The Sun ; reveahd at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the Sun, and its rifing brightnefs ; by the moon, when file followeth
him * ; by the day, 1 when it fheweth his fplendor ; by the night, when it
covereth him with darknefs ; by the heaven, and him who built it ; by the
earth,and him who fpread it forth; by the foul, and him who compleatly formed
it,and infpiredinto the fame its faculty ofdijiingui/hing^and -power of t hoofing, wick-
edneis and piety : now is he who hath purified the fame, happy ; but he
who hath corrupted the fame, is miserable. T&amud accufcd their prophet
Sales of impofture, through the excels of their torickednefs: when the
wretch b among them was fent to flay the camel ; and the apoftle of God faid
unto them. Let alone the camel of God ; and Binder not her drinking. But
they charged him with impofture ; and they flew her. Wherefore their
Lord deftroyed them, for flieir crime, and made their puni/hment equal unto
them all : and he feareth not the Hfue thereof.

a When P>e ft/lhmfilb him } i. e. When ihe happens when fhe is a little paft the full *.
lifer juftjafter him, a# ihe does at the beginning " 0 The wretch ; ] Viz. Kedar Ebn $alef. See
of the month; or when (he fets after him, as chap. 7, p. 125. and chap. 54. p. 430.

1 Idem,

CHAP.

Chap, 93.

Al KORAN.

493

CHAP. XCII.

Intitled, The Night; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the night, when it covereth all things with darknefs ; by the day,
when it fhineth forth ; by him who hath created the male, and the fe-
male : verily your endeavour is different. Now whofo is obedient, and fear-
eth God , and profefleth the truth of that faith which is mqft excellent-, unto
him will we facilitate the way to happinefs : but whofo fhall be covetous, and
fhall be wholly taken up with this world, and fhall deny the truth of that which
is moft excellent i unto him will we facilitate the way to mifery 5 and his riches
fhall not profit him, when he fhall fall headlong into hell. Verily unto us apper-
tained the diredion of mankind: and ours is the life to come; and the prefent life.
Wherefore I threaten you with fire which burneth fiercely, which none fhall
enter to be burned except the moft wretched v who fhall havedisbelieved, and
turned back. But he who ftrifily bewareth 1 idolatry and rebellion , fhall be
removed far from the fame -, who giveth his fubftance in alms, and by whom
no benefit is bejlowed on any,' that it may be recompenfed, but who b (flow-
ed the fame for the fake of his Lord, the moft High * : and hereafter he
fhall be well fatisfied with bis reward .

* By trim no benefit is teftovieS' on any, rbar dbia. or cryer to prayers) who had been pot to
it may be recompenfed, &c.} JalJalo'ddin thinks the rack on account of his faith, the infidels
this whole defcription belongs peculiarly to faid he did it only out of a view of intereft t
Abu Beer: for when he had purchafed Belal, upon which this paf&ge was revealed,
the Ethiopian ( afterwards the prophet’s Muedb -

CHAP. XCIII.

Int tiled. The Brightnefs; revealed at Mecca;

In the name of the moft merciful God.

, " ■*. ’

T) Y the brightnefs of the morning a > and by the night, when itgroweth dark :

thy

* The brightnefs of the morning ; J The ori- the d.,y, when the fun fliines full out, three or
gioal word ploperly fignifies the bright part of four ho^rs after it is rifen.

494 Al KORAN. Chap. g4.

thy Lord hath not forfaken thee, neither doth he hate thee ». Verily the
life to come Jhall he better for thee than this prefent life : and thy Lord lhall
give thee a reward wherewith thou ft alt be well pleafed. Did he not find
thee an orphan, and hath he not taken care of thee ? And did he not find
thee wandring in error, and hath he not guided thee into the truth ? And did
he not find tbee needy, and hath he not enriched tbeef Wherefore opprefs
not the orphan ; neither repulfe the beggar : but declare the goodnefs of thy
Lord.

* Thy Lord both not forfaken thee, See. ] It exception, if it pleafe God r , or becaufe he had
is related, that no revelation having been repjulfcd an importunate beggar, or elfe becaufe
vouchlafed to Mohammed for feveral days, in a dead puppy lay under hie feat, or for fome o-
anfwer to fome quellions put to him by the ther reafon; his enemies faid that God had
Koreifi , becaufe he had confidently promifed to left him : whereupon this chapter was {Sent
refolve them the next day, without adding the down for his confolatbn 2 .

* See chap - 18./. 2+1. 2 AI B eidawi, J AL lal.

CHAP. XCIV.

Intitled \ Have we not opened; revealed at Mecca.

In die name of the moft merciful God.

H A V E we not opened thy bread a ; and eafed thee of thy burthen b ,
which galled thy back ; and raifed thy reputation for thee ? Verily a
difficulty Jhall he attended with eafe. Verily a difficulty Jhall he Mended with
eafe. When thou fhalt have ended thy preachings labour to ferve God in re-
turn fir bis favours c > and make thy fupplicarion unto thy Lord.

* Have toe not opened thy breaft ; ] By difpo- think it relates to the occafion of the preceding
ling and enlarging it to receive the truth, and chapter a .

wiSom, and prophecy; or, by freeing thee b And eajfed thee of thy burthen ; ] i. e. Of thy
from uneafinefs, and ignorance i This paffage fins committed before thy million ; or of thy
is thought to intimate the opening of Mobam - ignorance, or trouble of mind.
meds heart, in his infancy, or when he took c When thou (bah have Bnijbed tby preachings
his journey to heaven, by the angel Gabriel \ labour to ferve God, Ufc. ] Or, When thou Jbalt
who having wrung out the black drop, or feed have finished thy prayer, labour in preaching the
of original fin, waflied and cleanfed the fame, faith
and filled it with wifdom and faith 1 : but fome

1 Al Beidawi* Yahya* V. Abvi.f .viU Mob. p . 9. fcf 33. Prid, LifeofMab.p . 1051 &c.
2 Al Beidawu 3 idem.

CHAP.

Chap. 95

Al KORAN.

495

CHAP. XCV.

Intitled , The Fig : where it was revealed is difputed.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the fig, and the olive*; and by mount Sinai, and this territory of
fecurity b : verily we created man of a moft excellent fabric ; afterwards
we rendred him the vileft of the vile c : except thofe who believe, and work
righteoufnefs ; for they fhall receive an endlels reward. What therefore fhall
caufe thee to deny the day of judgment after this 6 ? Is not God the moft wife
judge ?

* By tie Jig and the olive \ ] God, fay the
commentators,fwears by thefe two fruits,becaufe
of their great ufes and virtues : for the fig is
wholefome and of eafy digeftion, and phyfically
good to carry off phlegm, and gravel in the
kidneys or bladder, and to remove obftrudlions
of the liver and fpleen, and alfo cures the piles,
and the gout, &c. the olive produces oil, which
is not only excellent to eat, but othcrwife ufe-
ful for the compounding of ointments 1 % the
wood of the olive-tree moreover is good for
cleaning the teeth, preventbjg their growing
rotten, and giving a good odour to the mouth ;
for which reafon the prophetf and Mohammed
In particular, jnade ufe of no other for tooth*
pjcis

Some, however, fuppofe that thefe words do
not mean the fruits or trees above-mentioned,
but two mountains in the holy land, where they
grow in plenty ; or elfe the tempi* of Damjcru
and that at Jerufalen * 3 .

b This territory of feenrityi] Via. The terri-

tory of Mecca*. Thefe words feem to argue
the chapter to have been revealed there.

* We created man of a moft excellent fabric I
afterwards we rendred him tie vileft of the vile:]
i. e. as the commentators generally expound
this pailage. We created man of comely proportion
of body, and great perfect ion of mind ; and yet
we lave doomed him, in cafe of difobedience, to
be an inhabitant of hell. Some, however, under-
ftand the words of the vigorous con flit ution of
man in the prime and ftrength of his age, and
of his miferable decay when he becomes old
and decrepit : but they feem rather to intimate
the perfett ft ate of happinefs wherein man was
originally created, ana his tali from thence, in
conference of Adapt s difobedience, to a ftate
of mifery in this world, and becoming liable to
one infinitely more miferable in the next h
d What fhall cattfe thee to deny the day of
judgment after this ? } Some fuppoie thefe words
direfted to Mohammed, and others to man in ge*
aeral, by way of apoftraphe.

1 Hem , -^/Zamakh. a Al Zamak^ 3 Idem, Yahya, ^/Biidawi, Jallal.
♦ Set tie Prtlim. Di/t- J. IV. * V. Marracc. in lot. p. 809.

CHAP.

496

Al KORAN ;

Chap. 96.

CHAP. XCVL

Lit tiled, Congealed Blood; revealed at Mecca*.

In the name of the moil merciful God.

Ty EAD, in the name of thy Loris who hath created all things \ who
Jt\ hath created man of congealed blood K Read, by thy moft beneficent
Lord c ; who taught the ufe of the pen ; who teacheth man that which he
knowethnot. Affuredly. Verily man becometh fnfolent, becaufe he feeth him-
felf abound in richest Verily unto thy Lord pall he the return of alL
What thinkefl thou as to him who forbiddeth our fervant, when he prayeth c ?
What thinkefl: thou ; if he follow the right direftion ; or command piety ?
What thinkefl thou ; if he accufe the divine revelations of fajfhood, and turn his
back ? Doth he not know that God feeth ? Afiurtdl /. Verily, if he forbear
not, we will dragg him by the forelock the lying, finful forelock. And
Jet him call his council e to hit ajffiftance : we alfo will call the infernal guirds
to caft him into bell . AfTmtdly. Obey him not : but continue to adore God ;
and draw nigh unto him.

■ The firft five verfei of this chapter, ending
with the words. Who taught man that which be
knew not , are generally allowed to be the firft
paffage of the Koran which was revealed, tho’
fome give this honour to the 74th chapter, and
others to the firft, the next, they fay, being
the 68th.

b Of congealed bleed ;] All men being created
of thick or concreted blood 1 , except only A -
dam , Eve, and Jefus \

c Read, by thy moft beneficent Lord ;] Thefe
words, containing a repetition of the command,
are fuppofied to be a reply to Mohammed , who in
anfwer to the former words fpoken by the angel,
had declared that he could not read, being per-
fe&ly illiterate; and intimate a promife that
God, who had infpired man with the art of
writing, would gracioufly remedy this defeat in
him 3 .

x See chap. 22. p, 274, 2 Yahya.

d Ferity man beemeih tqjoknt, 8cc ] The com-
mentators agree the remaining part of the chap-
ter to have been revealed againft Abu Jab I,
Mohammed's great pdver&ryi

e He toko forbiddeth mtr fervant when he pray
eth ;] For Abu Jahl threatened that if he catch-
ed Mohammed in the a£l of adoration, he would
fet his foot on his neck : but when he came and
faw him in that pofture, he fuddenly turned
back as in a fright ; and being asked what was
the matter, laid, there was a ditch of fire be-
tween himfelf and Mohammed, and a terrible
appearance of troops, to defend him
f Sec chap. 1 1 ^.p. 181. not. h.
g Let him call bis council ; ] i. e. The coun-
cil or aflembly of the principal Meccans, the
far greater part of Whom adhered to Abu
Jahl.

3 Al Bxidawi. 4 Idem .

CHAP,

Chap. 98. Al KORAN. 497

CHAP. XCVII.

Int tried) al Kadr; where it was revealed is difputed.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

V Erily we fent down the Koran in the night of al Kadr And what
lhali make thee underftand bow excellent the night of al Kadr is? The
night of al Kadr is better than a thoufand months. Therein do the angels
defcend, and the fpirit Gabriel alfo, by the permiffion of their Lord, with
bis decrees concerning every matter b . It is peace, until the rifing of the
mom.

* The night of al Kadr.] The word alKadr fig- lame, to the lowed heaven, from whence G*-
nifies fewer, and honour or dignity, and alfo the di- brie! revealed it to Mohammed by parcels, as oc-
vine decree ; and the night is 10 named either from cafion required.

its excellence above all other nights in the year, The Mojlem doctors are not agreed where to
or becanfe, as the Mohammedans believe, the fix the night of al Kadr: the greater part are
divine decrees for the enfaing year are annually of opinion that it is one of the ten lad nights of
on this night fixed and fetded, or taken from Ramaddn, and, as is commonly believed, the
the freferved table by God’s throne, and given 7th of thofe nights, reckoning backwards; by
to the angels to be executed x . On this night which means it will fall between the 23d and
Mohammed received his fird revelations; when 24th days of that month 1 ,
th c Koran, fay the commentators, was fent down * See the preceding note, and chap. 44. p*

from the aforefaid table, entire and in one vo- 401.

1 See cheep, 44. 4QI- * Al Zamakh. Al Beidawi, Jalual.

chap, xcvin.

Int itled. The Evidence*; where it was revealed is difputed.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

T H E unbelievers among thofe to whom the fcriptures were given, and
among the idolaters, did not ftagpr b , until the clear evidence' had

» Some intitle this chapter, from the firft nimoufly believed and expefled the coming of
words. Did not. that prophet, until which time they declared

b Did not flatter ‘A i. e. Did not waver in they would perfevere in their reTpedlivs reiigi-
their religion, or in their promifes to follow the ons, and then would follow him but when <.t&
truth, when an apodle (hoiild come unto them, came, they rejeaed him through envy *.

For the commentators pretend that before the c The clear evidence ;] Viz. Mobammtd^ or tx
appearance of Mohammed, the Jews and C hr ift i- Koran •

*ns, as well as the worfhippers of idols, una-

1 Jidem ,

49 8

Al KORAN.

Chap. 99

come unto them : an apoftie from God, rehearfing unto them pure books of
revelations •, wherein are Contained ri^ht dflcourfiis. Neither were they un-
to whom the fcriptures were given divided among tKemfelves, until after the
clear evidence had come unto them *. And they were commanded no other
in the fcriptures than to worftiip God, exhibiting unto him the pure religion,
and being orthodox ; and to be conftant at prayer, and to give alms b : and
this is the .fight relfgion. Verily thofe Who believe not, among thofe who
have received the fcriptures, and among the idolaters, 'Jball be cqft into the
fire of hell, to remain therein for ever. Thefe are the worft of creatures.
Bilt they who believe, aftd do good works ; thefe are the beft of creatures :
their reward with their Lord fhdl be gardens of perpetual abode, through
which rivers flow ; they fliall remain therein for ever. God will be well
pleafed in them *, and they Ihall be well pleated in him. This is prepared for
him who fliall fear his LoRd.

* Were not divided among tbemfelvet, until af- knowledging Mohammed to be the prophet fore-
ter the clear evidence bed come unto ib/rti 1 But told in the fcriptures, and others denying it 1 .
when the promffed epolHe was fent, ana the b They were commanded no other than to war-
troth became manifeft to them, witliftocd Jhif God, &c. ] But thefe divine precepts in
the elesteil conviflion, differing from one ano- the law and the golpel have they cotrapted,
ther in their Opinions s fome believing and ac- changed, and violated *.

W HEN the earth fliall be fhaken by an earthquake * •, and the earth
ihall call forth her burthens b * and a man fliall fay. What aileth her ?
On that day the earth fliall declare her tidings, for that thy Lord will infpire
her c . On that day men fliall go forward in diftintt clafles, that they may be-
hold their works. And whoever Ihall have wrought good of the weight of an
ant 4 , Ihall behold the fame. And whoever fliall have wrought evil of the
weight of an ant, Ihall behold the fame.

* When the earth Jball be JbaJten, &c.] This trembling, and calling forth her treafures and
earthquake will happen at the firft, or, as others her-dead, by the circumftanecs which Ihall im-
fajr, at the fecond blaft of the trumpet ’. mediately attend them. Some fay the earth

“ Itt burthens ;] Viz. The treafures and dead Will, at the laft day, be miraculodfly enabled to
bodies witbin it *. fpeak, and will give evidence of the aflions of

c The earth Jball declarrber tiding 1, &c.J i. e. her inhabitants J .

Will inform all creatures of the occafiob of her d See chap. 4. p. 66. not. d.

1 Al Zamakk. Al Bbidawi. See the Prelim. Difc. $. IV. 82. * See (hap. 84. f. 46J.

3 Al Beidawi. See the Prelim. Dipt. 5 . IV. p. 8P.

1 lidem.

* lidem .

CHAP.

Chap. ioi.

At KORAfr.

CHAP. C.

Intitled \ The War-Horles which run fwiftiy j where it was

revealed is difputed.

In the name of the moil merciful God.

ru 2 ^ W1 ^y t0 the battle, with a panting noife ;
* n J. b £ dafhing their bpofs aglinft from ;

and By thofe Which make a fddden mcurfion on the enemy early In the morning,
and therein raife the dtift, and therein pafs through the midft of the adverfe
troops * : verily man is ungrateful unto his Lofto ; and he is witnefs thereof*
and he is immoderate m the love of worldly good. Doth he not know, therel
fore, when that which is in the graves fhall be token forth, and that which is
in men's breafts fhall be brought to light, that their Lord will ', on that
day, he fully informed concerning them l

* By tbt nar-btrfts tobicb run falfllj , Sec. ] the parte of the oath of the human foul * t
Some will have it that not berfes, but the ca- but their explications feem a litde forced, and
melt which went to the battle of Bedr, are therelore I choofe to omit them,
meant in this paflage l . Others interpret all

* Yahy a, ex trad, Ali Ebn Abi Taleb. a Al BeidaWj.

CHAP. CL

e

Intitled , The Striking; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the. Jnofl: merciful God.

t ■ ' *’ ’ r ' i ’ !_

T H E ftriking * 1 What is the ftriking ? And what fhall make thee to
underftand how terrible the if Fitting will be? On that day men fhall
be like moths fcattered abroad, and the mountains fhall become like carded
Wool of various Colours df^ven by' the wind. Moreover he whofe balance
fhall be heavy with good works, fhall lead a pleafing life : but as to him whofe
balance fhall be light* his dwelling fidl he the pit of bell b . What fhall

S f f 2 make

z Tbi ftriking ! ] This is one of the names b The pit of belli] The original w*ord
or epithets given to the laft day, bccaufe it will Bfaiyat is the name of the low eft dungedn of
fir ike tty hearts of all creatures with terror ** hell, and properly figaifics a deep pit or gaf,

1 Idem, Jallau

500 Al KORAN, Chap. 103.

make thee to underftand how frightful the pit of hell is t It is a burnin g
fire.

CHAP. CII.

Ini it led) The emulous Defire of multiplying; where it
was revealed is difputed.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

T H E emulous defire of multiplying riches and children employeth you,
until ye vifit the graves a . By no means fhould ye thus employ your times
hereafter (hall ye know your folly. Again, By no means : hereafter lhall ye
know your folly. By no means : if ye knew the conference hereof with, certainty
of knowledge, ye would not ait thus. Verily ye lhall fee hell : again, ye lhall
furely fee it with the eye of certainty. Then lhall ye be examined, on that day,
concerning the pleafures with which ye have amufed yourfelves in this life.

* The emulous iejtrt of multiplying riches and which of the two families were the more na-
children employeth you, until ye vifit the graves merout ; and it being found, on calculation,

i. e. Until ye die. According to the expofiti- that the children of Aid MenSf exceeded thofe
on of Tome commentators, the words fhould be of Sahm, the Sabmites (aid that their numbers
rend red thus ; The contending or vying he uua - had been much diminifhed by wars in the time
bers wholly employeth you, fo that ye vifit even of ignorance, and infilled that the dead, as well
the graves, to number the dead ; to ex- as the living, fhould be taken into the account ;
plain which, they relate that there was a great itad by this way of reckoning they were found
difpute and contention between the defendants to be more than the defeendanct of Aid
of Aid Menaf and the defeendants of Saba, Mndf *.

1 Al Zamakh. Al Beidawi, Jalial.

CHAP. an.

Intitled , The Afternoon; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

B Y the afternoon a ; verily man employeth htmfelf in that which will prove of
lofs : except thofe who believe, and do that which is right ; and who
mutually recommend the truth, and mutually recommend perfcverance unto
each other.

* By the afternoon ; ] Or the time from the ginal wotd alfo fignifies. The age, or time in
fun’s declination to his letting ; which is one of general,
the five appointed times of prayer. The oii-

CHAP.

Chap. 105.

Al KORAN.

501

CHAP. CIV.

Inti tied) The Slanderer; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mod merciful God.

W ‘ O unto every flanderer, and backbiter a : who heapeth up riches, and
prepareth the fa met for tbe time to come ! He thinketh that his riches
will render him immortal. By no means. He Ihallfurely be caft into al
Hotama h . And what fhall caufe thee to underftand what al Hotama is ?
It is the kindled fire of God c ; which fhall mount above the hearts of
tbofe who fhall he caft therein. Verily it fhall be as an arched vault above
them, on columns of vaft extent.

a Wo unto every fianderer and backbiter. See. ] b Al Hotama j ] Is one of the names of hell.
This paflage is faid to have been revealed againft or the name of one of its apartments 2 ; which

al Akbnas Ebn Sboreik , or al Walid Ebn al is fo called becaufe it will break in pieces what-

Mogbeira , or Omeyya Ebn Kbalf, who were ever fhall be thrown into it

all guilty of flandermg others* and efpecially the c It is tbe kindled fire of God j ] And there**
prophet z * fore fhall not be extinguifhed by any 3 .

1 Iidem . a See tie Prelim . 1)iJ i. f IV./. 92. 3 Al Beidawi.

CHAP. CV.

Intitled, The Elephant ; revealed at Mecca;.

In the name of the mod merciful G o d..

H AST thou not feen how thy Lord dealt with the matters of the ele-
phant » ? Did he not make their treacherous defign an occafion of
drawing them into error •, and fend againft them flocks of birds, which caft

down

* How tbj Load dealt with tbemafttrs of the religion, having built a magnificent church at
elephant ; ] Thi* chapter relates to the following Sanaa , with a defign to draw the Arabs to go
piece of hiftory, which is famous among the A- In pilgrimage thither, inftead of vifiting the
tabs. Abraha EbnaJSabdb, furnamed al AJbram, temple of Mecca, the Koreijb, obfervmg the de-
i. e. tbe Sfit-nofed , king or vicc-roy of Taman, votion and ccmcourfe of the pilgrims at the
who vvasift Ethiopian and of the Ckrifiian Caaba hegan confiderably to dhmmlb, lent

1 See tbe. Prelim, Wfc< /• 10*

$03 At KORAN. Chap. 105.

down upon them ftones of baked clay a \ and render them like the leaves of
corn eaten by cattle ?

CHAP.

one Nofail, as he is named by fome, of the tribe This remarkable defeat of Abraha happened
of Ktmmb, iv ho getting info the aforefaid the very year Mob a fumed was bore, and as this
church by nigh t* defflkd thk altar and wills chaptA* Was revealed before the Hejra, and
thereof with Ms excrements. At this profanft- within 54 years, atjeaft, after it came to pafs,
tion A hr, ib a being hig 1 ly incenfed, vowed the when feveral perfons who ceuld have dete&ed
deftruflion of the Cauh:, ar.d accordingly ftf tHe lye, had Mohammed forged this ftory out of
out againft Mecca at the head of a conlider- his own head, were alive, it feems as if there
able army, wherein were feveral elephant^, was really fomething extraordiiuiy in the mat-
which he had obtained of the king o t E(&fc ter, Which tnighf, by adding lome eftturnffin-
f their number being, as lbmd fay, thirteen, ces, have been worked op Into a miracle to his
though others mention bn* one. The Meccans, hands. Mirraici 2 * judges the whole to be 4 i-
at the approach of fo considerable a hoft, retir- ther a fable, or dfe a feat of fome evil foirits,
ed to the neighbouring m<5ufctains,being uflable of which he ^iyes a parallel mftance,as he thinks,
to defend their city or temple: but God himfelf in the ftrange defeat of Brennus , when ne Was
undertook the protefkitm of both. For when A- machine ti> attack the temple of Apolh at Del-
hfata drew near to Me rtf, and would have entred phi*. Dr. Pridemj <ijre6U y charges Mob am-
it, the elephant on which he rode, which was rwl with coining this miracle, notwiiMandmg
a very large one, and named MvhmuJ* refu- he might have been fo eafily difprcved f and fup-
fed to advance atsy Higher to the town, but knelt pdfes, without any foundation, that this chap,
down whenever die y endeavoured to force ter might not have been public ed till Olbmads
him that w.~v* though he would rife jnd march edition of the K'.rdt 4 , Which was many years
briskly enough if they turned him towards any pftcr, when if! nright be dead who could re-
uihtt quarter : Arid while fiia tiev were in this member any thing of the abovemehtidned war :
pofture, on a fud Jen a targe flack of birds, like But Jf ibammd had no occafion to coih fUch a
fwallows, came flying from die ie,i coaft, every miracle himfel r , to gain the temple of Mecca any
one of which carried three Clones, oneinexb greater veneration : the Meccans were but too
foot, and one in its bill; And thefc ftones they fuperftitioufty fond of it, and obliged him, a-
threw down upon the heads of Abrabd s men, gainft hi \ inclinations and original defign, to
certainly killing every one they (truck. Then make Ic the chief place of his new invented
God fent a flood, which fwept the dead bodid, worilup. 1 cannot, however, but obferve Dr.
and fome of thofe who had not beeft ftnick by Pridismtu partiality on this occafion, compared
the ftones, into the fea: the relt fled towards with the favourable reception he gives to the
Taman , but perilhed by the way 5 none of them ftory of the miraculous overthrow of Brennus
reaching Sanac, except only Abraha himfelf, and his army, which he concludes in the folio w-
who died foon after his arrival there, being ing words. u Thus was God pleafed in a very
ftruck with a fort of plague or putrefaction, fo “ extraordinary manner to execute his venge-
that his body opened, -nd his limbs rotted off “ an ct up6ft thofe facrilegious wretches for the
by piece-meal. It is faid that one of Abrabd* <f fake of religion in general, how falfe and ido-
m army, named Abu Tacjum , efcaped over the red “ latrous .oever that particular religion was, for
fea raus Etbkpij, aUd going directly to the “ which that temple at Delpbos was erefted 6
king, told him the tragical ftory ; and upon that If it be anfwered, that the Gauls believed the
prince’s asking him what fort of birds they were, religion, to the devotions of which that temple
that had occafioned fuch a deftroflion, the was confecrated, to be true, ( though that be not
man pointed to one of them, which had follow- certain,) and therefore it was an impiety in them
•ed him all the way, and was at that time horn- to offer violence to it , whereas Abrabu ac-
iflgpdirctily over h i heid,v. hen intin tdiatdy the knowledged not the holinefs of the Caaba, or
bird let Jail the ,ilonr t and ftruck him dead at the ^Cfrftrip there pradifed ; I reply, That the doc-
the feet l . tor,

1 ^/Zamakh. Ai Beidawi, ^allal. Abulf. Hijl. Gert. See. See Prid. Life sf Mab.p.

61. &c. a*d D’HtRBEt. Bibl. Orient. Art. Abrabab. 2 Eefut. in Alcon /. 823. 3 See

Prid. CoKtrt&m* part II. book I. p. z 5. and the authors there quoted. * See the Prelim. Difc .

§. III,/. 46. 11 Prid. Life of Mob. p. 6y* 64. $ Prid. Cdnnetfion, in the plate above sited*

Chap. 106. Al KO

tor, on occafion of Cambyfes being killed by a
wound he accidentally received in the fame
part of the body where he had before mortally
wounded the Apis , or bull Avorfbipped by the
Egyptians , whofe religion and worfhjp that
prince moft certainly believed to be falfe and fu-
perflitious, flake* the ftme reflexion ; •* The
“ Egyptian^ fays he,- reckoned 1 this as an efpc-
** ctal judgment from heaven upon him for that
4t h£i, and perchance they Were not much out
u in it : for if feldom happening in an affront
“ given to any mode of worfhip, how errone-
“ uus foe* ex i* may be, but that religion is in

1 Ibid, fartl . book III. p. i;

R A N, £ 0 ^

“ general wounded hereby, there are many
in fiances in biliary, wherein God hath very
“ fignaljypmnifhed the prophanations of religi-
" on in the waril of times, and under the
“ worft modes of heathen idolatry 1
a Stones of baked clap ; ] Thefe ftones were of
the fame kind with >Wc by which the Sodo-
mites were deftroyed a , and" were no bigger than
vetches, though they fell with fuch force as to
pierce the helmet and the man through, paf-
flrig out at his fundament. ft is faid alfo that
on each Hone was written the name of him who
was to be ilain by it.

3. 9 Seetbap , u.y. 184.

CHAP. CVI.

Inti tied) Koreish ; revealed at Mecca.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

F O R the uniting of the tribe of Koreish a ; their uniting in fending forth the
caravan of merchants and purveyors b in winter and fommer : let them
ferve the Lord of this houfe ; who fupplieth them with food againft hunger %
and hath rendred them fecure from fear a .

1 For the uniting of the Koretlh ,* ] Tfome con-
cert; thefe words with the following, and fup-
pofe the natural order to be. Let them firve the
Loud of this bo*fe> for the uniting , &c. Others
conned them with the laft words of the preced-
ing chapter, and take the meaning to be, that
God had fo deftroyed the army of Alraba, for
the uniting of the Koreifli, See. And the laft
opinion is confirmed by one copy, mentioned
by al Seidam , wherein this and the preceding
make but one chapter. It may not be amifs to
ebferve, that the tribe of Koreijhy the moft no-
ble among all the Arabians , and of which was
Mohammed iumfelf, were the pofterity of Rbr,
furnamed Koreijb , the (on of Malec, the foo of
4/ Nadr 9 who was defqended in a right line
from IfmaeL Some writers fay that al Nadr
bore the furname of &reijb> but the more re-
ceived opinion b* that it was his grandfem Rbr 9

1 V. Gacnier, Vie de Mob. /. Kjk 44* & 4 ^*
Zamakh. Jallal. Al Beidawi. 4 Iidem v

w£o was to called becaufe of his intrepid bold-
nefs, the word being a diminutive of Karjb,
which is the name of a fca-ippn/ier, very ftrong
and daring j though there be other reafons given
for its impofition 1 .

b Their uniting in fending forth the caravan ,
itc. } It was Hdjhem t the great grandfather of
Mohammed , who firft appointed the two yearly
caravans, here mentioned 2 ; one of which, fet
out in the winter for Taman , and the other in
fummer for Syria 3 .

c JVho fupplyetb them with food againft bungenj
By means of the aforefaid caravans pf purveyor* »
or, Who fupplted them with food in time of a fa-
mine , which tbofe of Mecca had fuffered

d And hath rendred them fetter* from fear ; ]
Ry delivering them from Abraha and his troops*
or, iby making the tetrkory ■{ Mecca a place of
feiurity.

2 See the Prelim- Dift. p. 4. ? Al

CHAP.

5°4

Al KORAN , ;

Chap. 108

chap. evil.

hit it led , Necefiaries ; where it was revealed is difputed.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

W HAT thinkeft thou of him who denieth the future judgment as a
falfhood? It is he who pufheth away the orphan a ; and ftirreth not up
others to feed the poor. Wo be unto thofe who pray, and who are negligent at
their prayer ; who play the hypocrites, and deny necefiaries b to the needy •

* Who pujbetb a to ay the orphan ; ] The perfon properly fignifies utenfib, or whatever is of ne-
here intended, according to fome, was Abu ceflary ufe, as a hatchet , a pot, a di(b, and a
Jabl, who turned away an orphan, to whom nee die y to which fome add a bucket, and a band -
he was guardian, and who came to him naked, mill ; or, according to a tradition of Ayejba ,
and asked for fome relief out of his own money, fire, water, and fait » and this fignificanon it
Some fay it was Abu Sofian , who having killed oore in the time of ignorance : but fince the
a camel, when an orphan begged a piece of eftabJifhment of the Mohammedan religion, the
the Helh, beat him away with his ftaff; and o- word has been ufed to denote alms , either legal,
thers think it was al Waltd Ebn al Mogbeira , or voluntary ; which feems to be the true
&c. meaning in this place.

b Nccejfaritn ] The original word al Maun

CHAP. CVIII.

Intit led, al Cawthar ; revealed at Mecca*.
In the name of the moft merciful God.

V E R I L Y we have given thee al Cawthar \ Wherefore pray unto

thy

• There are fome, however, who think it to
have been revealed at Medina .

*Al Cawthar .] This word fignifies abundance,
efpe dally of good, and thence the gif t of wifdom
and prophecy, $he Koran, the office of iuterceffor,
&c. Or it may imply abundance of children ,
followers , and the like. It is generally, how-
ever, expounded of a river in paradife of that

name, whence the water is derived into Mo-
hammed's pond, of which the bleJTed are to
drink before their admiffion into that place Y .
According to a tradition of the prophet’s, this
river, wherein his Lord promifed him abun-
dant good, is Tweeter than honey, whiter than
milk, cooler than fnow, and fmoother than
cream ; its banks are of chrysolites, and the vef-

fela

1 See the Prelim , Difc, $. IV. 9 j.

Al KORAN :

Chap. 109.

thy Lord ; and flay the viSiims *.
childlefs b .

fels to drink thereout, of filver j and thofe who
drink of it lhall never thirft x .

Zigabenus 2 , inftead of C author,
reading Cant bar, fappofes the word to have the
{kmt fignification in Arabic as in Greek, and
tranflates the two firfl verfes of the chapter thus ,*
r H|uBV AJbi&wjr <nt nip £ fi£*i

*£$* $ wleAf (m, ty i. e. We have

given thee the beetle i wherefore pray unto thy
Loan, and flayiti and then he cries out, O
tmd&fel and. magnificent facrifice , worthy of the
hgifiatw !

* pray unto thy Lor d, and flay the rifiims ;]
Which are to be fecrificed, at the pilgrimage,

1 Al Beidawi, Jallal. &c.

3 Jallal.

Verily he who hateth thee lhall be

in the valley of Mina. Al Beidawi explain® the
words thus: Pray with fervency and intenfe de-
votion, not out of hypocri fy ; and flay tho fat
ted camels and oxen, and diftribute the flefli a-
mong the poor ; for he fays this chapter is the
counterpart of the preceding, exhorting to
thofe vertues which srp ^ppofite to the vice*
there condemned.

b He who hateth thee , flail be childlefs .] Thefe
words were revealed againft al As Ebn Waytl \
who, on the death of al K&fem , Mohammed's
fon, called that prophet Abtar , which figniiiei
one who has no children, or pofterity 3 .

a In Panoplia dogmat . inter $*lburcii Saracenic . p* 29.

CHAP. CIX.

Intitled , The Unbelievers ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moft merciful God.

S AY: O unbelievers % I will not worfhip that which ye worfhip nor
will ye worfhip that which I worfhip: Neither do l worfhip that

which ye worfhip ; neither do ye worfhfp that which I worfhip, Ye have
your religion, and I my religion.

» O Unbelievers, &c.] It is faid that certain of they would worfhip hi* God for the fame
the Kurtijb once propofed to Mohammed, that fpace of time! upon which this chapter was
if he would worfhip their gods for a year, revealed *.

1 Idem, Al Beidawi.

T t t

CHAP.

5°6

Al KORAN.

Chap, i i r

CHAP. CX.

Intitled , Afliftance ; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the mofl merciful God.

W HEN the afliftance of God fhall come, and the vi&ory a ; and thou
lhalt fee the people enter into the religion of God by troops b : celebrate
the praife of thy Lord* and ask pardon of him c ; for he is inclined to for-
give.

m When the ajfiffance of God fhall come, and been revealed before the taking of Mtcca, and
the vi fiery ; ] i. e. When God fhall caufe thee fnppofe it gave Mohammed warning of his death :
to prevail over thy enemies, and thou lhalt take for they fay that when he read it al Abbas
the city of Mecca. wept, and being asked by the prophet, what

b And thou JbaJt fee the people enter into the was the reafon of his weeping, anfwered, Bt-
religion of 'GodJj troops;] Which happened in caufe it biddetk thee to trepare for death; to
the ninth year of the Hejra, when, Mohammed which Mohammed replied. It is as thou fay eft V
having made himfelf mailer of Mecca, and obliged And hence, adds Jallalo'ddin , after the revelation
the Koreifb to fubmit to him, the reit of the of this chapter, the prophet was more frequent
Arabs came in to him in great numbers, and in praifing and asking pardon of God ; becaufe
profefTcd IJlam f . he thereby knew that his end approached : for

c Celebrate the praije of thy Loud, See. } Mod Mecca was taken in the 8th year of the Hejra>
of the commentators agree tills chapter to have and he died in the beginning of the loth.

1 See the Prelim . Difc. $. II. /. rc. % Al Bbidaavi.

CHAP. CXI.

Intitled, Abu Laheb; revealed at Mecca.

In the name of the moil merciful God.

rjlHE hands of Abu Laheb fhall perifh % and he fhall perifh b * His

riches

• The hands of Abu Laheb fhall perifh ; ] mand he had received to admnifh bis near re-
Abu Laheb was the furname of AbTal Uzza , lotions f , had called them all together, and told
one of the fons of Abd* almvtalleb , and uncle to them that he was a zoamer feat unto them be -
Mohammed . He was a moft bitter enemy to fore a grievous ebaflifement, Abu Laheb cried out,
his nephew, and oppofed the eflabliChment of Moyeft thou perifh f baft thou called us together
bis new religion to the utmoft of his power, for this f and took up a ftone to caft at hjyn-
When that prophet, in obedience to the com- Whereupon this paifage was revealed *•

By

1 See the Prelim, Difc. $.11./. 43 , * Al Bkidawi, Jamal. See.

Chap. ii$. Al KORAN. 507

riches (hall not profit him, neither that which he hath gained *. He fhall

f o down to be burned into flaming fire b ; and his wife alfo c , bearing wood 4 ,
truing on her neck a cord of twilled fibres of a palm-tree.

By the bands of Abu Labeb fome commen
tetors, by a /yjjecdoche, nnderftand his perfon 5
othqrs, by a metonymy, his affairs in general,
they being tranfafted with thofe members; or
his hopes in this world, and the next.

b And be Jball perijb ;] He died of grief and
vexation at the defeat his friends had received at
Bedr, furviring that misfortune bat 7 days x .
They add, that his corpfe was left aboveground
three days, till it (tank, and then fome negro's
were hired to bury him a .

a Hit riches Jball not profit bim y &c.] And ac-
cordingly fcis great po/feftioris, and the rank and
efteera in which he lived at Macca, were of no
fervice to him, nor could prote& him againft the
vengeance of God. Al Beidawi mentions alfo
1 Abulf. pit. Mob. ^.57. 2 -

the lofs of his fon Otba 9 who was torn to pieces
by a lion, in the way to Syria* though furround-
ed by the whole caravan.

b Flaming fire ;] Arab, ndr dbit labeb 1 al-
luding to the furname of Abu Labeb , which
fignifies the father of flames.

c His wife*] Her name was Omm JemU:
fhe was the daughter of Harb $ and lifter of
Abu Sofidn .

d Bearing mood ; ] For fewel in hell ; becaufe
fhe fomented the hatred which her huf-
band bore to Mohammed ; or, bearing a bundle
tf thorns and brambles , becaufe Ihe carried fuch,
and ft re wed them by night in the prophet's
way 3 .

I Beidawi. 3 Idem, Jallal,

CHAR CXII.

Intitledy The Declaration of God’s Unity a ; where it was

revealed is dijputed.

In the name of the mod merciful God.

S AY, God is one Goo *, the eternal God : he begetteth not, neither is he
begotten : and there Is not any one like unto him.

» This chapter is held in particular venersti- to have been revealed in anfw 5 ? to the Kortijb,
nn bv the JW bbrnmedsm. and declared, by a whoasked MW^concermng thediftingui/h-
nLlUion of their prophet, to be equal in value mg attributes of the God he invited them to
to a third part of the whole Kvan- It »» worihip *.

1 liiem.

CHAP. CXIII.

Intitled , The Day-break; where it was revealed is difputed \

In the name of the mod merciful God.

^ AY, I fly for refuge unto the Lord of the day-break®, that he ma^de^

aes ssfttfK tc

508 Al KORAN. Chap. 1,14.

liver n ;e from the tnifehief of tbofe things which he hath created * ; and from
the mifehief of the night, when it cometh on b ; and from the mifehief of
women blowing on knots'; and from the mifehief of the envious, when he
envieth.

ofexiftence, andefpeciallyof thofc things which to work on, or debilitate the perfon they had a
proceed from others, as fprings, rain, plants, mind to injure. This was a common pra&ice
children, and hence it is ufed more parti- in former days * ; what they call in Trance
nilarly to frgnify the breaking forth of the light Noue'r PtguiUcttt, and the knots which the wi-
from darknefs, which is a moft wonderfal in- sards in the northern parts tie, when they fell
fiance of the divine power. mariner* a wind, ( if the (lories told of them be

* From the mifehief of tbofe things which be true,) are alfo relics of the fame fupcrftition.
hath created',] i. e. From the mifehiefs proceed- The commentators relate, that Lobe id, a
ing either from the perverfenefs and evil choice Jew, with the afliftance of his daughters, be-
of thofe beings which have a power to choofe, witched Mohammed , by tying eleven knots on
or the natural effe&s of neceflary agents, as a cord, which they hid in a well; whereupon
fire, poifon, l$c. the world being good in the Mohammed falling ill, God revealed this chapter
whole, though evils may follow from thofe two and the following, and Gabriel acquainted him
caufes *. with the ufe he was to make of them, and of the

1 From the mifehief af the night , when it cometh place where the cord was hidden : according
d?; ; ] Or, as the words may be rendred, Frm to v, hofe dire# ions the prophet fent Alt to fetch
the mifehief cf the moon , when fhe is eeUpfcd- the cord, and the fame being brought, he re-
c From the mifehief 'cf women blowing on peated the two chapters over it, and at every

That is, of witches, who ufed to tie knots in a verfe ( for they confift of eleven ) a knot was
cold, and to blow on them, uttering at the fame loofed, till on finifliing the laft words, he was
time certain magical Words over them, in order entirely freed from the charm 3 .

1 Al Beidawi. * V- Virgil, in Pharma :mtria, 3 ^/Beidawi, Jallal.

CHAP. CXIV.

Int tiled, Men; where it was revealed is dijputed a .

In the name of the moft merciful God.

S AY, I fly for refuge unto the Lord of men, the king of men, the God
of men, that he may deliver me from the mifehief of the whifperer who
flily withdraweth, who whifpercth evil fuggeftions into the breafts of men ;
from genii and men.

• This chapter was revealed on the fame oc- The devil ; who withdraweth when a man
cafion, and at the fame time with the former.' mentioneth God, or hath recourfe to his pro-
b The whijpercr who Jlily withdraweth » ] i. e. tedlion.

FINIS