The Samkhya Karika
==================
The Samkhya Karika, translated by H. T. Colebrooke (Oxford, 1837), public domain. Colebrooke's landmark English rendering of Ishvara Krishna's memorial verses, the root text of classical Samkhya philosophy. Scan via Internet Archive.

Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



o



THE

SANKHYA KARIKA,

OR

MEMORIAL VERSES ON THE SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY,
--' ' \^Vfh.^K KRISHNA;

TRANSLATED FROM THE SANSCRIT

BY

HENRY THOMAS COLEBROOKE, ESQ.

s

ALSO

THE BHASHYA OR COMMENTARY OF



i-'o-^.c/^A.-l^.-x i GAURAPADA;


TRANSLATED, AND ILLUSTRATED BY AN ORIGINAL COMMENT,

BY

HORACE HAYMAN WILSON, MA. F.R.S.

MKMBKK OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY, AND OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETIES OF PARIS

AND CALCUTTA, &C. &C. ;
AND BODEN PROFESSOR OF SANSCRIT IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.


^ OXFORD,

PRINTED FOK THE ORIENTAL TRANSLATION FUND OF GREAT BRITAIN

AND IRELAND,

BY S. COLLINGWOOD, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY.

PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY A. J. VALPY, A. M., LONDON.

1837.



4 ^ ' ^ /



h



lt]o



/ 4


I ^


TO



SIR GRAVES CHAMNEY HAUGHTON, MA. F.R.S.



AS TO ONE



WHO WAS THE FRIEND AND ADMIRER



OF THE LATE



HENRY THOMAS COLEBROOKE ;



WHO IS QUALIFIED,



BY HIS CONVERSANCY WITH THE SANSCRIT LANGUAGE



AND METAPHYSICAL INQUIRIES,



TO APPRECIATE THE CORRECTNESS WITH WHICH



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS

IS REPRESENTED IN THE FOLLOWING PAGES;

AND
WHO HAS FOR MANY YEARS BEEN UNITED WITH THEIR AUTHOR



IN STUDIES, SENTIMENTS, AND FRIENDSHIP;



THE PRESENT WORK IS INSCRIBED,



AS A PUBLIC TESTIMONY OF ESTEEM AND REGARD,



BY



HORACE HAYMAN WILSON.



PREFACE.



One of the works earliest announced for publication by the Oriental
Translation Fund Committee was the Sdnkhya Kdrikd, a text book
of that system of Hindu philosophy to which the term Sdiikhya is
applied, and which had been translated from Sanscrit into English
by that eminent Sanscrit scholar the late Henry Thomas Colebrooke.
The accession of the lingering illness which finally terminated in his
decease prevented Mr. Colebrooke from conducting his work through
the press, and from adding to the translation those explanations and
illustrations which the text required, and which he was most compe-
tent to supply. Upon my return to England from India, therefore,
in the beginning of 1833, I found that no progress had been made
in the publication, and that the Translation of the text alone was in
the possession of the Committee.

Being desirous of redeeming the pledge which they had publicly
given, and of accomplishing the purpose which they had announced,
the Committee thought it desirable that the Translation, in its then
existing form, should be printed ; and conceived that, as its extent was
insufficient to constitute a separate work, it would be advisable to print
it in the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society. With this view
the manuscript was placed in my hands, that I should render such
assistance as I might be able to afford in the correction of the press.

Conceiving that the appearance of the Translation in the pages
of the Transactions would be equally incompatible with the views of
the Translator and the original intention of the Committee, I ven-
tured to recommend that their purpose should be adhered to, and

b



vi PREFACE.

that the Translation should be printed, as at first designed, as a
se|)arate work ; offering at the same time to supply such annotations
as the text might seem to rei|uire, to tx; rendered sufficiently intelli-
gible and explicit. The C^ommittee approved of the suggestion, and
Mr. rolebr(K)ke*s concurrence was readily obtained.

In the meantime, in the interval that had ela|)sed sincc^ the work
was announced, other translations of the Sankhya Karikn had a{>-
|)eared. The San.scrit text, and a version of it in Latin by Professor
Lassen, had Imxmi printed at Bonn*; and the text in Iloman cha-
racters, with a French translation, had l>een published at Paris by
Mons. Pauthierf . Many of the verses of the translation had l^een
also emlxxlied in Mr. (!olebrooke's general view of the Sankhya phi-
losophy : and it ap|K'arcHl to me exinnlient, therefore, to make some
such addition to the work as should give it at least more novelty
than it was otherwise likely to |K>s.sess. It seemed also to l)e a
favourable occasion for offering to Sanscrit .students an exemplific*a-
tion of the nuHle in which phiIo.sophical works are illu.strated by
native commentators: and I accordingly ])rocured the consent of the
Translation Connnittee to print, not only the text and translation of
the Sankhya Karikd, but the text and a translation of the oldest,
and |)erhaps the Ik'st, coumientary u]K>n the KarlhU the lihthhya of
Cf ArRAPAUA. In order likewise to fulfil the object of attempting to
render the diK*trines of both text and comment as clear and explicit
as it was in my |M)wer to re))resent them, I further added to the
translation of the lihaithya a conmient of my own, deriving my elu-
cidations however, to a very great extent, from the works i)f native
s(*holiast.s and giving the original {Ntssages at the foot of the |)age.

The scholia which have Ikhmi usi^ for this pur|X)He are the

* (ffvn)iMM»phi!iU: .Mvi- Inclica* IMiiloMiphiii* ilocunicnta. Vol. I. Iswara I'riftlinA* San-
khva-Caricani tonviii. KiNina* acl Kheniiiii, IKfJlS.

t Kamuii »ur la rhilu«o|>hic lii^ Ilinilous traduits de I' Anglais, ct augmenun tie tc\u*«
San^LritN &CC. ; |iar G. Pauthier. Paris 183d.



PREFACE. vii

Sdnkhya Tatwa Kaumudi of Vachespati M isra, and the Sdnkhya
Chandriku of Narayana Tirtha. The Sdnkhya Kaumudi of Rama
Krishna has been also consulted, but it is almost word for word the
same as the S. Chandrikdy and is therefore in most instances super-
fluous. I have occasionally referred to the Sdnkhya Sdra^ a separate
tract on the doctrines of this school by Vijnana Bhikshu ; but an-
other work by the same scholiast, the Sdnkhya Pravachana Bhdshya^
a commentary on the Sutras or aphorisms of Kapila, the first teacher
of the Sankhya, according to tradition, has been of particular service,
and will be found often cited. Copies of these different commenta-
ries, as well as of the text, exist in the library of the East India
Company, and the Sdnkhya Pravachana Bhdshya was printed at
Serampore in 1821. I have, however, followed a manuscript copy,
as I did not obtain a copy of the printed work until my translation
was finished.

There was little need of the labour of collation, after the very
accurate text of Professor Lassen. I have not failed, however, to
compare the reading of the different copies, and have noticed a few
of the variations : none of them are of any great importance. Where
collation was most wanted, it was unfortunately not practicable,
there being but a single copy of the Bhdshya of Gaurapada in my
possession. The manuscript was luckily tolerably correct, but it
was doubtful in some places, and clearly faulty in others ; and I may
not have always succeeded in rightly correcting, or in accurately
interpreting it. With regard to typographical errors in the present
edition of text and comment, I trust they will not be found very
inexcusable, especially when it is known that the work was for the
greater part necessarily carried on at a distance from me, during my
absence in London, and that it is the first publication in Sanscrit
printed at the Press of the University of Oxford.

Not having made the Sankhya philosophy a subject of study in
India, I have executed my task without the advantage of previous



viii PREFACE.

preparation. The subject indeed is but little cultivated by the Pan-
dits and during the whole of my intercourse with learned natives
I met with but one Brahman who professed to be acc|uainted with
the writings of this school. ()p|M)rtunity was wanting to l)enefit by
his instructions, and I cannot therefore venture to claim exemption
from those liabilities to error to which the unassisted study of San-
scrit literature in Kuroi)e is exiK)sc^, esjx^cially when directed to
topii*s sufficiently obsc*ure and difficult in themselves, and rendered
still more so by the sententious and elli[)tical style in which they
are treatt^l. It is the fashion with some of the most distinguished
SiUiscTit scholars on the continent to s|K'ak slightingly of native
sc*holiasts and Pandits, but this is the cimsecjuence of measuring
their merits by a wrong sc^ale, and censuring them for venial inac-
curacies which often ])r<Keed from tiK> entire a familiarity with their
subject. In all studies which native scholars professedly pursue, they
have the advantage of traditional tuition, of a course of instruction,
coming down, through successive generations, from the founder of a
system, or the author of a lK)ok, to the individual who explains the
one or illustrates the other, and from whose interpretation we may
therefore reasonably ex|)ect to learn what it was originally meant to
teacli. There are also in all philoso])liical works, es|)ecially» brief
hints and conventional allusions which without such aid it is not
|M)ssil)le to deci])her, and for the proiKT understanding of which a
native explanation is indispensable. Without therefore in the least
degree undervahiing Kuro|H^an industry and ability* I cannot a)nsent
to hold in less esteem the attainments of mv former masters and
friends the Siuiscrit learning of learned Brahmans.

The translations to which I have alxive referred are highly credit-
able to the translatiirs. That of IVofessor Lassen in {^articular is of
great merit and accuracy, and is illustratiHl by annotations in which
he has sucxr.ssfully cleared up many of the obscurities of the original
text. I have taken the plan of his notes as in some degree the



PREFACE. ix

model of my comment ; and although I do not always concur in his
interpretations or explanations, I have found them always entitled
to attention and respect. In one or two instances, and especially in
regard to the first stanza, where I have most widely differed from
him, I have sought rather to vindicate the accuracy of Mr. Cole-
brooke, than to impugn that of Professor Lassen. Variety of inter-
pretation in such a case as that of a difficult work, on an abstruse
subject, is no more than may be expected from different interpreters ;
and occasional misapprehension implies no want of either compe-
' tency or care.

In the course of my attempts to elucidate the text, I have in a
few instances pointed out what seemed to me to offer remarkable
coincidences with the doctrines of classical philosophers. That an
intimate connection exists between the metaphysical systems of the
Hindus and those of the Greeks is generally admitted, although its
extent has not yet been fully made out. We are scarcely yet indeed in
possession of the means of instituting an accurate comparison, as the
text books of the Hindus have not been printed or translated, and
general dissertations, however comprehensive or profound, are insuf-
ficient for the purpose. The present publication will go sqme way,
perhaps, towards supplying the deficiency, and may afford, as far as
it extends, authentic materials for the use of those better qualified
classical scholars who may be curious to ascertain in what degree the
speculations of Plato and Aristotle correspond with those of Kapila
and Gautama, or how far the teachers of one school may have been
indebted to those of another. That the Hindus derived any of their
philosophical ideas from the Greeks seems very improbable ; and if
there is any borrowing in the case, the latter were most probably
indebted to the former. It has been objected to this conjecture,
that the total want of chronology in Hindu writings renders it im-
possible to pronounce upon their date, and that it is probable that
many works regarded as ancient are really very modern, as they may


X PREFACR

have tx^n composed long after the acra of Christianity ; the notions
which they inculcate l)eing in fact aa}uired from the Greeks of
Alexandria, through the intercourse Ix^Cween India and Kgypt. That
this intercourse may have exercised a mutual influence upon some
|)arts of the philosophy of lM)th countries in the first ages of Chris-
tianity — that rcsemblantvs, res|)ec-tively interchanged, may he de-
tected in the notions of the new Platonists or Platonic Christians
and of the more modern Viklantis, or in the eclectic {lantheism of
the Pauraniks — is not im|K)ssible; hut the Grc^k philosophy of that
j)eri(xl can scarcely have suggested the severer abstractions of the
Sankhya, and we must go back to a remoter age for the origin of the
dogmas of K aim la. In truth, the more remote the |K'riod, the closer
the affinity that seems to prevail ; and as far as we are aa}uainted
with the tenets of the Ionic and Italic sc*hools, it is with them that
Hindu philoso])hy, uucilloyed with {umtheism, seems to claim kin-
dred, rather than with the mvsticism of Plato, or the subtleties of
Aristotle. The metemixsychosis itself is an im]X)rtant feature in this
similitude : for this l)elief is not to l>e looked u{X)n as a mere {X)[mlar
su[)erstition ; it is the main principle of all Hindu metaphysics; it
is the foundation of all Hindu philosophy. The great object of their
philoso])hical research in every system, Brahmanical or Buddhist, is
the di.scovery of the means of putting a sto[) to further transmigra-
tion ; the discontinuance of cor[K)real Inking; the lilx^ration of soul
from IxKly. That such was the leading ])rinciple of the philoso])hy
of Pythagoras we learn from ancient testimony, and it essentially
influences the s[)eculations of Plato. Concurrence in this principle
involves agreement in all the nuxst im|)ortant deductions from it, and
establishes if not a mutual interchange, at least a common origin,
for much of the oldest philasophy of the Greeks and the Hindus.
This is a sul)ji*ct, however, to which I can here but thus briefly
allude, and to which I would rather invite the attention of some of
the eminent scholars of whom the University of Oxford has reason



PREFACE. xi

to be proud, than impair its interest by my own less competent
attempts at its elucidation.

The whole scope and leading tenets of the Sankhya philosophy
have been most accurately described by the late Mr. Colebrooke, in
the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, from various original
authorities, including that now published, the Kdrikd^ or rather
Kdrikdsj of the Sankhya system ; the term designating a collection
of memorial verses, of apothegmatical stanzas, in which the chief
tenets of the school are textually and dogmatically stated. The
Sankhya philosophy is so termed, as Mr. Colebrooke has mentioned,
because it observes precision of reckoning in the enumeration of its
principles, Sdnkhya being understood to signify ^ numeral,' agreeably
to the usual acceptation of Sankhyd^ ^number;' "and hence its
analogy to the Pythagorean philosophy has been presumed." The
term is also explained, however, as Mr. Colebrooke proceeds to men-
tion, to denote the result of deliberation or judgment, such being
one sense of the word Sankhyd^ from which Sdnkhya is derived.

Agreeably to the purport of the word Kdrikd, *a technical or
memorial verse,' the following work consists of a series of stanzas
systematically arranged, though not always obviously connected ; and
asserting principles, rather than discussing arguments. The tract
opens with an explanation of the object of this and of all philosophy,
ascertainment of the means by which the pain of corporeal existence
may be finally and absolutely remedied, and the soul freed for ever
from body : this is declared alone to be philosophy, or the knowledge
of the real nature of all that is, agreeably to the Sdnkhya enumera-
tion of things. These things, in number twenty-five, are briefly
indicated with reference to their relative character, as producing or
produced ; and the work then pauses to explain the means by which
they may be known, or perception, inference, and authority. Re-
verting then to such of the twenty-five things or principles as are
imperceptible, especially to the first material cause, and to soul,



xii PREFACE.

logical proofs of their actual existence are adduced, and the points
in wliicli tlicv agree or differ with otlier tilings, and with each other,
are descril)ed. We have tlien an explanation of the three essential
(pialities of things; purity or gocKlness; ini|)erfection, foulness or
{Mission ; and indifference, stupidity, or darkness. The existence of
a general, ini|KTceptil)le, unse|mrated, universal cause, the sul)stance
of which all is made, the eternal matter of the Greek cosmogonies, is
then argued ; and, as a cHinseciuence of its existence, that also of a
spiritual nature, or soul, is asserti^d. The pro|K*rties of soul are then
detailiHl. We have next the twenty-five 7V////ym, * categories or prin-
ciples,' of the S^inkhya philosophy severally descrilx*d. These all
resolve themsi'lves, as may 1k» inferred from what has preceded, into
hut two, matter and spirit, nature and soul ; the rest are all the
progeny or pnMlucts of nature, evolved s|x)ntaneously through the
ni*ci*ssity of nature's providing for the two purj)oses of .soul, fruition
and lilHTation. These pnKlucts are, intelligence; egoti.sm or indivi-
duality ; eleven senses ten external and one internal, or mind ; five
rudimental elements or elements of elements; and five gro.ss or |ht-
ceptihle elements ether, air, water, fire or light, and earth. The
description of these different categories <>f their nunle and ohjects of
acting, of their nuMlifications and of their eff*ect.s, ocrupies a c^on-
siderahle numlKT of Karikas. We have then a general account of Ik>-
dily condition of two kind.s suhtile and gross ; the latter |)erishing at
death, the f()rmer accom)mnying and investing soul through all the
migrations to which the various conditions of the intellectual faculty,
or virtue and vice, subject it. Those conditions are then detailed at
length, and in all their mcKlifications (^instituting what is called
intelUrtual creation, or life, constHpient u|Mm (x)nduct. originating
with the intellect. But, to give effKt to these modifications form,
its well as life, is s;iid to Ik' necessary ; and hence results personal or
iMxlily creation of various descriptions. Bodily existence, however,
is dcscrilKHl as confinement and |)ain, from which soul is anxious to



PREFACE. xiii

be exempted. Nature is said to labour also for souPs liberation, and
to supply the means, in the display which it makes of its products,
until soul, fully possessed of their real character and tendency, is
represented as casting away all notions of individuality and self, and
is no more condemned to bodily incarceration. The work closes
with stating that these truths were taught originally by Kapila
to AsuRi, and by him to Panchasikha, from whom it descended,
through repeated generations of disciples, to Iswara Krishna, the
author of the Kdrikds. The date of this writer is not known, but
Mr. Colebrooke considers Gaurapada, the scholiast on the Kdrikd^
to be the same as the preceptor of the celebrated teacher Sankara
Acharya, whom there is reason to place in the eighth century.
How long anterior to this the Kdrikds existed in their present form,
we have no means of knowing, but they were avowedly subsequent
to other standard compositions of the school, and evidently repre-
sent doctrines of high antiquity, doctrines exhibiting profound re-
flection and subtle reasoning ; although, like all the efforts of human
intellect to penetrate unaided the mysteries of existence, wholly
unavailing, and too often ending, as Cicero complains, in doubt
and impiety: '^Cogimur dissensione sapientum Dominum nostrum
ignorare."

Some excuse is perhaps necessary for having delayed to publish
the present work so long after the Committee of the Oriental Trans-
lation Fund had sanctioned its publication. The work, as it is now
offered to the public, was ready for press in the course of the year
following that in which it was undertaken. Being desirous, however,
of printing it at Oxford, where the University had liberally resolved
to provide its Press with two new founts of Devanagari letters, I was
under the necessity of awaiting the completion of the types. As
soon as one fount was supplied, the text was printed. It was my
wish to have employed the other and smaller fount for the citations

which accompany my Comment ; but that fount being not yet cast,

d



SIT PRE F AC E.

I have thought it preferable to incur no further delay. It is scarcely
doing ju8tic*c to iy\n:s of the size here employed to place them in
juxtaposition with characters so much smaller as those of the English
alphalx^t; but looking at them by themselves in the pages of the
text, 1 think they will be found to wear a more genuinely Oriental
asiXH.*t than any that have yet l)een fabricated in Euroi)e.



Oxford,
Jnlv 1. iai7.



SANKIIYA KARIKA



sAnkhya kArikA.



I.

1 HE inquiry is into the means of precluding the three sorts of

«

pain ; for pain is embarrassment : nor is the inquiry superfluous
because obvious means of alleviation exist, for absolute and final
relief is not thereby accomplished.

bhAshya.

Salutation to that Kapila by whom the Sdnkhya philosophy was com-
passionately imparted, to serve as a boat for the purpose of crossing the
ocean of ignorance in which the world was immersed.

I will declare compendiously the doctrine, for the benefit of students ;
a short easy work, resting on authority, and establishing certain results.

Three sorts of pain. — The explanation of this Arya stanza is as
follows :

The divine Kapila, the son of BrahmA indeed : as it is said^ '^ Sanaka,
Sanandana, and Sanatana the third ; Asuri, Kapila, Borhu, and Pan-
CHASiKHA : these seven sons of Brahma were termed great sages." To-
gether with Kapila were bom Virtue, Knowledge, Dispassion, and
Power : for he being bom, and observing the world plunged in profound
darkness by the succeeding series of worldly revolutions, was filled with
compassion ; and to his kinsman, the Brahman Asuri, he communicated
a knowledge of the twenty-five principles ; from which knowledge the
destruction of pain proceeds. As it is said ; '' He who knows the twenty-
" five principles, whatever order of life he may have entered, and whether
^' he wear braided hair, a top-knot only, or be shaven, he is liberated
" (from existence) : of this there is no doubt."

The inquiry is in consequence of the embarrassment of the three sorts

B



of pain. In this place the three sorts of pain are, 1. {adhyatmika) natural
and inseparable ; 2. {adhibhauiikiC) natural and extrinsic ; and 3. {adhi-
daivika) non-natural or sujierhuman. The first is of two kinds, corporeal
and mental : corporeal is flux, fever, or the like, arising from disorder of
the wind, bile, or phle&^m : mental is [irivation of what is liked, approxi-
mation of what is disliked. Extrinsic but natural pain is fourfold, ac-
cording to the aggregation of elementary* matter whence it originates ; that
is, it is produced by any created l>eings, whether viviparous, oviparous,
generated by heat and moisture, or springing from the soil ; or in short,
by men, beasts, tame or wild birds, reptiles, gnats, mus<{uitoes, lice, bugs,
fish, alligators, sharks, trees, stones, &c. The third kind of pain may
be called superhuman, daivika meaning either divine or atmospheric :
in the latter case it means pain which proceeds from cold, hcmt, wind,
rain, thunderbolts, and the like.

Where then, or into what, is inquiry, in consequence of the embar-
rassment of the three kinds of pain, to be made ? Into the tneans of
prectudiMsr them. This is the inquiry. Nor is the inquiry mperjlmous.
That is ; if this inquiry be (regarded as) superfluous, the means of pre-
cluding the three sorts of pain being obvious (seen) ; as for example ;
tlie intenial means of alleviating the two inseparable kinds of pain are
obvious, through the a[)plication of medical science, as by pungent, bitter,
and astringent decoctions, or through the removal of those objects that
are disliked, and accession of those that are liked ; so the obvious ob-
struction of pain from natural causes is protection and the like; and
these means being obvious, any (farther) inquir}' is superfluous : if you
think in this manner, it is not so; for absolute, certain, ^wa/, permanent,
obstruction (of pain) is not (to be effected) by obvious means. Therefore
inquir\' is to be made by the wise elsewhere, or into means of prevention
which are absolute and final.

•

COMMENT.

The first verse of the Karika proposes the subject of the work, and
not only of that, but of the system to which it belongs, and of every
philosophical system studied by the Hindus ; the common end of which



iSy ascertainment of the means by which perpetual exemption from the
metempsychosis, or from the necessity of repeated births, may be at-
tained : for life is uniformly regarded by the Hindus as a condition of
pain and suffering, as a state of bondage and evil ; escape from which
finally and for ever is a consummation devoutly to be wished.

The liberation thus proposed as the object of rational existence cannot
be attained as long as man is subject to the ordinary infirmities of his
nature; and the accidents of his condition : and the primary object of
philosophical inquiry therefore is, the means by which the imperfections
flesh is heir to may be obviated or removed. As preparatory then to
their right determination, it is first shewn in the text what means are not
conducive to this end; such, namely, as obvious but temporary expe-
dients, whether physical or moral.

Of this introductory stanza Professor Lassen, in the first number of
his Grymnosophistay containing the translation of the Kdrikiy has given a
version differing in some respects from Mr. Colebrooke's. He thus ren-
ders it : '* E tergeminorum dolorum impetu oritur desiderium cogno-
scendae rationis, qua ii depellantur. Quod cognoscendi desiderium licet
in visibilibus rebus infructuose versetur, non est (infructuosum) propter
absentiam absoluti, et omni aevo superstitis remedii."

In the first member of this sentence, the translation of ahhighdta by
* impetus' is irreconcilable with the context. The sense required by the
doctrine laid down is ' impediment, embarrassment, the prevention of
liberation by worldly cares and sufferings.' So the same word abhighdtaka
is immediately used to mean * preventing, removing,' * depellens.' Pro-
fessor Lassen's text, it is true, reads apaghdtaka^ but this is not the reading
followed by Mr. Colebrooke, nor that of the citation of the text given in
the S. BMshya or S. Kaumudi ; it is that of the S. Tatwa Kaumudi and
S. Chandrikdy and although in itself unobjectionable, yet is not a neces-
sary nor preferable variation. At any rate there can be no question that
the word ahhighdta may be used in the sense of ' depellere,' and that
sense therefore equally attaches to it in the prior member of the hemi-
stich. So in the Bhdshya of Gaurapada we have ddhibhautikasya rakshd-
dina abhighdtah ; ' The prevention of extrinsic pain is by protection and



the like/ It would not bo possible here to render abhighdta by 'impetus.*
By Vaciiespati the term abhighdia is defined 'the confinement of the
sentient faculty (ex[)laiued to mean here * life*), through the im[>ediment
opi>osed by threefold distress abiding in spirit*.* Narayana interprets it
more concisely amhya sambandha], ' intolerable restraint.* ' Embarrass-
ment* tlierefore sufiicicntly well expresses the pur{X)rt of these defini-
tions, or the obstructions oflcred by worldly suffering to the spirit anxious
to be free.

This variation, however, is of no great consequence: the more im-
portant difference is in the second portion of the stanza ; and as Professor
I^ASsen has deviated advisedly from Mr. Colebrooke, it is necessary to
examine the passage more in detail. The following are his reasons for
the version he has made :

'' Ha^c |>osterioris versus {drishit etc.) interpretatio, sicuti scholiastarum
suffragiis [>robatur, a grammatica postulatur. Quod ideo moneo, ne levi-
ter rationem, a Colebrookio, V. summo, in hoc versu enarrando initam
deseruisse censear. Is enim : ' nor is the inquiry superfluous, because
obvious means of alleviation exist : for absolute and final relief is not
thereby accomplislied.* 8ed ycveoTj ne vir summus constructionem par-
ticular chvi sententiam claudentis et a negatione excepta^ male intellex-
erit. De qua re dixi ad Hitop. pnnBm. d. 28. £x interpret. Colebrook.
construendum esset : drishtv sc. miti (i. e. yadyapi drishiam vidya it) sd
{Jijndsii) apdrihd na ekdHt-^ibhdrdt\. Sed ut omittam, particular chti
nullum omnino relinqui locum in sententia, na ino[>portuno versus loco
coUocatum esse, non |>otes <iuin concedas. Male omnino se habet tota
sententia et claudicat. Equidem constnio: drUhte sd (jijndsd) apdrthd
(bhavati) chei (tnthdpi) na (aftdrihd bhavaii) ekdnia — abhdvdi\\. Prorsus
similiter dicitur ndbhdvdt infr. v. ft. Ablativum igitur tkdniyaiyaHloh



abhdvdtj non ad drish'U refero cum Colebrookio, sed ad negationem, quae
cum supplementis suis apodosin constituit. Nam quae post chinna se-
quuntur verba, ad apodosin pertinere semper observavi. Quam gram-
matica postulare videtur, patitur praeterea loci tenor enarrationem, imo
melior evadit sententia. Ad drishie enim relatis istis verbis, id tantum
dicitur, rerum visibilium cognitione non attingi posse philosophiae finem,
liberationem absolutam et perpetuam a doloribus; mea posita enarra-
tione non id tantum docetur, sed additur etiam hoc : finem istum posse
attingi, licet alio cognitionis genere. Tres omnino positiones altero he-
mistichii versu continentur: philosophiae (id enim valet gigndsd, i. e.
cognitionis desiderium) finem esse emancipationem a doloribus certam
et omne tempus transgredientem ; deinde ad eum non perveniri ea via
quae primum initur, quia obvia quasi sit, i. e. remediorum a sensibili-
bus rebus petitorum ope; denique ea remedia cognoscendi desiderium
posse expleri. Sed aliter atque Colebrookius hasce sententias inter se
conjungit noster, et per conditionem efiert, quod ille per negationem
enuntiat."

In this view of the meaning of the verse, there is a refinement that
does not belong to it, and which is not Indian: arguments are often
elliptically and obscurely stated in Sanscrit dialectics, but one position
at a time is usually sufficient for even Brahmanical subtlety. The only
position here advanced is, that the cure of worldly evil is not to be effected
by such remedies as are of obvious and ordinary application, as they can
only afibrd temporary relief. Death itself is no exemption from calamity,
if it involves the obligation of being bom again.

The version proposed by Professor Lassen rests upon his notion of the
grammatical force of the expression chenna or chety ' if/ na, * not :' the
former he would refer to the prior member of the sentence, the latter to
the subsequent expressions. But this division of the compound is not
that which is most usual in argumentative writings. The phrase is an
elliptical negation of a preceding assertion, chet referring to what has
been said, implying, ' if you assert or believe this ;' and na meeting it
with a negatuTy ' it is not so :' then follows the reason or argument of
the denial. Thus in the Muktdvali : ' But why should not Darkness be

c



called a tenth thing, for it is apprehended by perception ? If this be said,
it is not so (i7i chin-na) ; for it is the consequence of the non-existence of
absolute light, and it would be illogical to enumerate it amongst things*/
So in the Sydya Sutra Vritti : ' If by a disturbance in the assembly
there be no subsequent speech, and through the want of a reply there be
defeat; if this be urged, it is not so {iti chen-na), because there has been
no opportunity for an answer t-* Again in the Sdnkhya Pravachana
Bhdshya. S6tra : — ' If it be said that Prakriti is the cause of bondage, it
is not so, from its dependent state ^.* Comment : — ^ But bondage may be
occasioned by Prakriti. If this be asserted, it is not so. Why? Because
in the relation of bondage, Prakriti is dependent upon conjunction, as will
be explained in the following precept ||.' Also in the Veddnta Sara
Vivriti : * If in consequence of such texts of the V^das as " let sacrifice
be performed as long as life endures*' their performance is indispensable,
and constant and occasional rites must be celebrated by those engaged in
tlie attainment of true knowledge ; and if, on the other hand, the attain-
ment of true knowledge is distinct from the observance of ceremonies ;
then a double duty is incumbent on those wishing to eschew the world.
If this be asserted, it is not so {iti chen-na), from the compatibility of
severalty with union, as in the case of articles of khayar or other wood^:*
that is, where there are several obligations, that which is most essential



* 5?^ ?5;sp? ?;?"i ifw ^nft 5Tt^ fffv HRi%^ finf ffw %iiwR

^[IT^ ^T^nniRfw I ^ •'^ ^i!l^*<l ^lfl«n*l si^^ii^



may be selected from the rest. In the same work we have an analogous
form used affirmatively ; as, * But how by the efficacy of knowledge, after
the dissipation of ignorance, in regard to the object (of philosophy), can
the true nature of the essentially happy (being) be attained ? for as he is
eternally existent, knowledge is not necessary to establish his existence.
If this be asserted, it is true {iti chit; satyam). Brahme, one essentially
with felicity, is admitted to be eternal, but in a state of ignorance he is
not obtained ; like a piece of gold which is forgotten (and sought for),
whilst it is hanging round the neck*.' Here it would be impossible to
refer satyam to the succeeding member of the sentence, as the apodosis
being separated from it, not only by the sense, but by the particle apt.
Passages of this description might be indefinitely multiplied, but these
are sufficient to shew that the construction in the sense adopted by
Mr. Colebrooke is common and correct.

Accordingly his version is uniformly supported schoUastarum suffra-
gits. Thus in the S. Bhdshya^ as we have seen, the passage is explained,
drishie sd apdrthd chet evam manyase na ikdntaj &c. ; ^ If by reason of
there being obvious remedies, you think indeed the inquiry superfluous,
no (it is not so), from their not being absolute and permanent.' So in the
S. Tatwa KaumudU after stating the objection at length, the commentator
adds, nirdkarotiy na iti; ' (the author) refutes it (by saying), no, not so:'
kutahj 'why?' ekdntatyantatoh ahhdvdt'\. The S. Chandrikd is to the
same effect, or still more explicit : ' There being obvious means, the
inquiry is superfluous, the conclusion being otherwise attained : if (this
be urged) such is the meaning (of the text), (the author) contradicts it ;
no, it is not so |. This commentator giving the very reading, drishie satiy
which Professor Lassen argues Mr. Colebrooke's version would errone-

^m r^^wi ^m^i ^^^ifaiKsOPd ^f<rq^: t fH^miPd ^i



8

ously require. The remaining scholiast, RAma Krishna, adopts the com-
ment of the Chandrikd word for word, and consequently the commentators
are unanimous in support of the translation of Mr. Colcbrooke.

With respect to the passages referred to by Professor Lassen as esta-
blishing the connexion of the negative with the latter member of the
sentence, instead of its being absolute, it will be seen at once that they
are not at all analogous to the passage in our text. They are declaratory,
not argumentative ; and the terms following the negative particle are the
parts or circumstances of the negative, not the reasons on which it is
grounded. Thus in the Hitopadesa : * What will not be, will not be ; if it
will be, it will not be otherwise •.' So in v. 8. of the Kdrikd: • The non-
apprehension of nature is from its subtlety, not from its nonentity t-' In
neither of these is there any reference to a foregone position which must
be admitted or denied, nor is the negative followed by the reasons for
denial, as is the case in our text.

These considerations are more than sufficient to vindicate, what it was
scarcely perhaps necessary to have asserted, Mr. Colebrooke*s accuracy ;
and they are now also somewhat superfluous, as I have been given to
understand that Professor Lassen acknowledges the correctness of his
interpretation. The commentary of Gaurapada distinctly shews that
nothing more is intended by the text, than the unprofitableness of recourse
to visible or worldly expedients for the relief or removal of worldly pain.
In subjoining therefore the gloss of Vachespati Misra, with a translation,
it is intended rather to illustrate the doctrines of the text, and the mode
of their development by native scholiasts, tlian further to vindicate the
correctness of the translation.

' ^But verily the object of the science may not need inquiry, 1. if there
be no pain in the world ; 2. if there be no desire to avoid it ; 3. if there
be no means of extirpating it The impossibility of extirpating it is



Unflf •? f'ln^ I ?!1T ?? tUflftlfl I fllflfflA 44IIII1PW Hij^t'i I



twofold ; either from the eternity of pain, or from ignorance of the means
of alleviation : or, though it be possible to extirpate pain, yet that know-
ledge which philosophy treats of may not be the means of its removal ;
or again, there may be some other and more ready means. In the text,
however, it is not said that pain does not exist, nor that there is no wish
to avoid it. From the embarrassment of the three kinds of pain. — ^A triad
of pain, three kinds : they are the ddhydtmika^ * natural ;' ddhibhau-
tika^ ' extrinsic ;' and ddhidaivika^ ' superhuman/ The first is of two
kinds, bodily and mental : bodily is caused by disorder of the humours,
wind, bile, and phlegm ; mental is occasioned by desire, wrath, covetous-
ness, fear, envy, grief, and want of discrimination. These various kinds
of pain are called inseparable, from their admitting of internal remedies.
The pain that requires external remedies is also twofold, ddhibautika and
ddhidaivika. The first has for its cause, man, beasts, deer, birds, reptUes,
and inanimate things ; the second arises from the evil influence of the
planets, or possession by impure spirits ( Yakshasy Rdkshasasy VindyakaSy
&c.). These kinds of pain, depending upon the vicissitudes arising
from the quality of foulness, are to be experienced by every indivi-
dual, and cannot be prevented. Through the obstruction occasioned
by the three kinds of pain abiding in spirit, arises embarrassment, or



fd**4i[V<f^4 %f?T I inrnanfwra fif^ ^inft^ H\A¥i ^ i «!iO<



10

confinement of the aentient faculty. The capability of knowing the
impediment occasioned by such pain, is considered the cause of the
desire to avoid it ; for though pain may not be prevented, yet it is pos-
sible to overcome it, as will be subsequently explained. Pain then being
generated, inquiry is to be made into the means of its removal. Tad
apaghdiake: tad refers here to the three kinds of pain, tad having the
relation dependent u{>on its being used as a subordinate (relative) term.
The means (hetu) of removing. — These arc to be derived from philosophy,
not from any other source : this is the position (of the text). To this a
doubt is objected ; As there are obvious means^ the inquiry is superfluous;
if so — • The sense is this : Be it admitted that there are tliree kinds of
pain ; that the rational being wishes to escape from them ; that escape is
practicable ; and that means attainable through philosophy are adequate
to their extirpation ; still any investigation by those who look into the
subject is needless ; for there do exist obvious (visible) means of extirpa-
tion, which are easily attainable, whilst the knowledge of philosophical
principles is difficult of attainment, and to be acquired only by long
study, and traditional tuition through many generations. Therefore,


"^nh %l^ I IRT^: i ^RJ ^•^I^'J f^fl^d ll%fT^ >?^ "^ KW



11

according to the popular saying, ^' Why should a man who may find
honey in the arkka flower, go for it to the mountain ?" so what wise man
will give himself unnecessary trouble, when he has attained the object of
his wishes. Hundreds of remedies for bodily afiections are indicated by
eminent physicians. The pleasures of sense, women, wine, luxuries,
unguents, dress, ornaments, are the easy means of obviating mental
distress. So in regard to extrinsic pain, easy means of obviating it exist
in the skill acquired by acquaintance with moral and political science,
and by residing in safe and healthy places, and the like; whilst the
employment of gems and charms readily counteracts the evils induced
by superhuman agency. This is the objection. (The author) refutes
it ; it is not so. Why 1 From these means not being absolute or Jinal.
Ekdnta means the certainty of the cessation of pain ; atyanta^ the non-
recurrence of pain that has ceased. (In obvious means of relief there is)
the non-existence of both these properties ; the affix tasi^ which may be
substituted for all inflexions, being here put for the sixth case dual ; — as
it is said; ''From not observing the (invariable) cessation of pain of
various kinds, in consequence of the employment of ceremonies, drugs,
women, moral and political studies, charms, and the like, their want of
certain operation (is predicated) ; so is their temporary influence, from


12



observing the recurrence of pain that had been suppressed. Although
available, therefore, the obvious means of putting a stop to pain are
neither absolute nor final, and consequently this inquiry (into other
means) is not superfluous.** This is the purport (of the text)/

The Sdnkhya Chandrikd and S. Kaumudi are both to the same effect,
and it is unnecessary to cite them. The original Sutras of Kapila,
as collected in the S. PravMhana^ and commented on by Vijgnyana
BiiiKSHU, confirm the view taken by the scholiasts.

S6tra: — 'The final cessation of the three kinds of pain is the final
object of soul •.'

Comment : — ' The final cessation of these three kinds of pain, the
total cessation of universal pain, whether gross or subtle (present or to
come), is the final, supreme object of soul f.*

S6tra *• — ' The accomplishment of that cessation is not from obvious
means, from the evident recurrence (of pain) aAer suppression XS

Comment : — ' The accomplishment of the final cessation of pain is not
(to be effected) by worldly means, as wealth, and the like. Whence is
this ? Because that pain of which the cessation is procured by wealth
and the like is seen to occur again, when that wealth and the rest are
exhausted II.*


13



II.

The revealed mode is like the temporal one, ineffectual, for it is
impure ; and it is defective in some respects, as well as excessive in
others. A method different from both is preferable, consisting in a
discriminative knowledge of perceptible principles, and of the imper-
ceptible one, and of the thinking soul.

bhAshya.

Although the inquiry is to be directed to other than to obvious remedies,
yet it is not to be directed to such as are derivable from revelation, as
means of removing the three kinds of pain. Anusravatiy * what man suc-
cessively hears;' dmi^ravika, Uhat which is thence produced, revealed
mode ;' that is, established by the V^das : as it is said ; ^' We drank the
juice of the acid asclepias; we became immortal; we attained effulgence;
we know divine things. What harm can a foe inflict on us ? How can
decay affect an immortal ?" (This text of the V6da refers to) a discussion
amongst Indra and other gods, as to how they became immortal. In
explanation it was said, ** We were drinkers of soma juice, and thence
became immortal," that is, gods : further, " We ascended to, or attained,
efiulgence, or heaven ; we knew divine, celestial, things. Hence then,
assuredly, what can an enemy do to us ? What decay can affect an im->
mortal?" dhurtti meaning * decay' or 'injury:' *What can it do to an
immortal being V

It is also said in the V^das, that final recompense is obtained by
animal sacrifice: '*He who offers the aswamedha conquers all worlds,
overcomes death, and expiates all sin, even the murder of a Brahman."
As, therefore, final and absolute consequence is prescribed in the V6das,
inquiry (elsewhere) should be superfluous; but this is not the case.
The text says, the revealed mode is like the temporal one — drishtavat;
Mike, same as the temporal,' drishietui ttdya. What is that revealed
mode, and whence is it (ineffectual) 1 It is impure^ defective in some

E



14

respects^ and excessive in others. It is impure from (cnjoininia:) animal
sacrifices; as, *' accord iiii$ to the ritual of the aswamedha^ six hundred
horses, minus three, are offered at midday/* For though that is virtue
which is enjoined by the \7*das and laws, yet, from its miscellaneous
character, it may l>c affected by impurity. It is also said ; *' Many thou-
sands of Indras and other gods have passed away in successive ages,
overcome by time ; for time is hard to overcome/* Hence therefore, as
even Indni and the gods |>erish, the revealed mode involves defective
cessation of pain. Excess is also one of its properties, and pain is pro-
duced by obsc*r\'ing the sufierior advantages of others. Here, tlierefore,
by excess, aiimya, is understood the unequal distribution of temporal
rewards, as the conse^juence of sacrifice ; the object of the ritual of the
Vedas being in fact in all cases temporal good. Therefore the revealed
mode is like the temporal one. What then is the preferable mode ? If this
be asked, it is replied. One different from both. A mode different from
both the temporal and revealed is preferable, being free from impurity,
excess, or deficiency. How is this ? It is explained (in the text : It
consists in a discriminative knowledge^ &c. Here, by perceptible princi-
pies, are intended Mahai and the rest, or Intellect, Egotism, the five
subtile rudiments, the eleven organs (of perception and action), and the
five gross elements. The imperceptible one is Pradhdna (the chief or
great one). The thinking soul, Purusha (the incorporeal). These twenty-
five principles are intended by the (thr(^e) terms vyakta, avyakta, and
jna. In discriminative knowledge of these consists the preferable mode ;
and he who knows them knows the twenty-five principles (he has perfect
knowle<lge).

The difference between the perceptible, and imperceptible, and think-
ing principles, is next explained.



COMMENT.

Having taught that worldly means of overcoming worldly evil are
ineflectual, it is next asserted that devotional remedies, such as the rites
cujoinod by the V£*da8, are equally unavailing; and knowledge of the



15

three parts or divisions of existence material and spiritual, is the only
mode by which exemption from the infirmities of corporeal being can be
attained.

The V6das are inefficient, from their inhumanity in prescribing the
shedding of blood : the rewards which they propose are also but tempo*
rary, as the gods themselves are finite beings, perishing in each periodical
revolution. The immortality spoken of in the V6das is merely a long
duration, or until a dissolution of the existent forms of things*. The
V6das also cause, instead of curing, pain, as the blessings they promise
to one man over another are sources of envy and misery to those who do
not possess them. Such is the sense given by Gaurapada to atisayay and
the S. Tatwa Kaumudi understands it also to imply the unequal appor-
tionment of rewards by the V6das themselves : ' The jyotishtaina and
other rites secure simply heaven ; the vdjapeya and others confer the
sovereignty of heaven : this is being possessed of the property of excess
(inequality) t-*

In like manner, the original aphorism of Kapila affirms of these two
modes, the temporal and revealed, that there ' is no difierence between
them|,' and that * escape from pain is not the consequence of the latter ||,'
because * recurrence is nevertheless the result of that immunity which is
attainable by acts (of devotion) §,' as * the consequences of acts are not
eternal**.' Here however a dilemma occurs, for the V6da also says, * There
is no return (regeneration) of one who has attained the sphere of Brahma
by acts (of devotion) ft*' This is explained away by a S6tra of Kapila,
which declares that the V^da limits the non-regeneration of one who has


16

attained the region of Brahni& to him who, when there, acquires discri^
minative wisdom ^*

This discriminative wisdom is the accurate discrimination of those
principles into which all that exists is distributed by the Sdnkhya philo-
sophy. Vyakta^ * ilivX which is perceived, sensible, discrete ;' Avyakta,
* that which is unpcrceived, indiscrete ;* and Jna, * that which knows, or
discriminates:' the first is matter in its perceptible modifications; the
second is crude, unmodified matter; and the third is soul. The object of
the S. Kdrikd is to define and explain these three things, the correct
knowledge of which is of itself release from worldly bondage, and ex-
emption from exposure to human ills, by the final separation of soul
from body.



III.

Nature, the root (of all), is no production. Seven principles, the
Great or intellectual one, &c., are productions and productive. Six-
teen are productions (unproductive). Soul is neither a production
nor productive.

bhAshya.

Mula (the root) prakriti (nature) is pradhdna (chief), from its being the
root of the seven principles which are productions and productive ; such
nature is the root. No production. — It is not produced from another :
on that account nature (prakriti) is no product of any other thing. Seven
principles. — Mahat and the rest ; from its being the great (mahat) element;
this is Intellect (BuddAi). Intellect and the rest. — ^The seven principles
are, I. Intellect; 2. Egotism; 3 — 7. The five subtile rudiments. These seven
are productions and productive: in this manner: Intellect is produced
from the chief one (nature). That again produces Egotism, whence it is
productive {prakriti). Egotism, as derived from Intellect, is a produc-



17

tion ; but as it gives origin to the five subtile rudiments, it is productive.
The subtile rudiment of sound is derived from Egotism, and is therefore
a production ; but as causing the production of ether, it is productive.
The subtile rudiment of touch, as generated from Egotism, is a produc-
tion ; as giving origin to air, it is productive. The subtile rudiment of
smell is derived from Egotism, and is therefore a production ; it gives
origin to earth, and is therefore productive. The subtile rudiment of
form is a production from Egotism ; as generating light, it is productive.
The subtile rudiment of flavour, as derived from Egotism, is a production ;
it is productive, as giving origin to water. In this manner the Great
principle and the rest are productions and productive. Sixteen are pro-
ductions ; that is, the five organs of perception, the five organs of action,
with mind, making the eleventh, and the five elements : these form a
class of sixteen which are productions, the term vikdra being the same as
vikriti. Soul is neither a production nor productive. These (principles)
being thus classed, it is next to be considered by what and how many
kinds of proof, and by what proof severally applied, the demonstration of
these three (classes of) principles, the perceptible, the imperceptible, and
the thinking soul, can be effected. For in this world a probable thing is
established by proof, in the same mode as (a quantity of) grain by a
prastha (a certain measure), and the like, or sandal and other things by
weight. On this account what proof is, is next to be defined.

COMMENT.

In this stanza the three principal categories of the S&nkhya system
are briefly defined, chiefly with regard to their relative characters.

Existent things, according to one classification, are said to be fourfold :
l.prakriti; ^.vikriti; 3. prakriti-viiriti; and anubhaya rupaj neither pra-
kriti nor vikriti. Prdkriti^ according to its ordinary use, and its etymo-
logical sense, means that which is primary, that which precedes what is
made ; from pra^ pr(B^ and itrt, * to make.' This, however, is further dis-
tinguished in the text into the mxiUi pratriti ; the prakriti which is the
root and substance of all things except soul, matter or nature; and
secondary, special, or relative prakriti^ or every production that in its

F



18

turn becomes primary to some other derived from it. By prakriti may
therefore be understood the matter of which erery substance primarily or
secondarily is composed, and from which it proceeds, the primary, or, as
Mr. Colebrooke renders it, ' productive* principle of some secondary sub-
stance or production. This subsequent product is termed vikriti, from the
same root,itrt,' to make,* with ri, implying ^variation,' prefixed. Vikrili does
not mean a product, or thing brought primarily into existence, but merely
a modification of a state of being, a new development or form of some-
thing previously extant. We might therefore consider it as best rendered
by the term ' development,* but there is no objection to the equivalent in
the text, or ' product.' In this way, then, the different substances of the
universe are respectively nature, or matter, and form. Crude or radical
matter is without form. Intellect is its first form, and Intellect is the
matter of Egotism. Egotism is a form of Intellect, and the matter of
which the senses and the rudimental elements are formed : the senses
are forms of Egotism. The gross elements are forms of the rudimental
elements. We are not to extend the materiality of the grosser elements
to tlie forms of visible things, for visible things are compounds, not simple
developments of a simple base. Soul comes under the fourth class ; it is
neither matter nor form, production nor productive. More particular
definitions of each category subsequently occur.



IV.

Perception, inference, and right affirmation, are admitted to be
threefold proof; for they (are by all acknowledged, and) comprise
every mode of demonstration. It is from proof that belief of that
which is to be proven results.

bhAshya.

Perception ;^^aB^ the ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue, the nose, are the
five organs of sense ; and their five objects are respectively, sound, feel.



\



19

form, flavour, and odour : the ear apprehends sound ; the skin, feel ; the
eye, form ; the tongue, taste ; the nose, smell. This proof is called, (that
which is) seen (or perception). That object which is not ascertainable
either by its being present, or by inference, is to be apprehended from
right affirmation ; such as, Indra, the king of the gods ; the northern
Kurus ; the njonphs of heaven ; and the like. That which is not ascer-
tainable by perception or inference, is derived from apt (or sufficient)
authority. It is also said ; *^ They call scripture, right affirmation ; right,
as free from error. Let not one exempt from fault affirm a falsehood
without adequate reason. He who in his appointed office is free from
partiality or enmity, and is ever respected by persons of the same cha-
racter, such a man is to be regarded as apt (fit or worthy)." In these
three are comprised all kinds of proof. Jaimini describes six sorts of
proof Which of those then are not proofs? They are, presumption
(arthdpaiti)^ proportion {sambhava)^ privation {ahhdva)^ comprehension
(pratibhd)^ oral communication {aitihya)^ and comparison (upamdna).
Thus : "Presumption" is twofold, * seen' and * heard.' * Seen' is where in
one case the existence of spirit is admitted, and it is presumed that it
exists in another. * Heard ;' Devadatta does not eat by day, and yet
grows fat : it is presumed then that he eats by night. " Proportion ;" By
the term one prastha^ four kuravas are equally designated. " Privation" is
fourfold ; prior, mutual, constant, and total. ' Prior ;' as, Devadatta in
childhood, youth, &c. * Mutual ;' as. Water jar in cloth. * Constant ;' as.
The horns of an ass ; the son of a barren woman ; the flowers of the
sky. * Total' privation, or destruction ; as when cloth is burnt, or as from
contemplating withered grain, want of rain is ascertained. In this manner
privation is manifold. " Comprehension ;" as. The part of the country
that lies between the Vindhya mountains on the north and Sahya moun-
tains on the south, extending to the sea, is pleasant. By this sentence it
is intended to express that there are many agreeable circumstances com-
prehended in *that country, the name of the site indicating its several
products. "Oral communication;" as. When people report there is a
fiend in the fig-tree. " Comparison ;" The Gravaya is like a cow ; a lake
is like a sea. These are the six kinds of proof; but they are comprised



20

in the three ; for presumption is included in inference, and proportion,
privation, comprehension, oral communication, and comparison, are com-
hended in rieht affirmation. Therefore from the expressions (in the text),
they comprise every mode of demonstration^ and are admitted to he threefold
proof it is said, that by these three kinds of proof, proof is established.
Belief of that which is to he proven results from proof — ^The things to be
proven are. Nature, Intellect, Egotism, the five subtile rudiments, the
eleven organs, the five gross elements, and Soul. These five and twenty
principles are classed as the perceptible, the imperceptible, and the per-
cipient ; and some are verifiable by perception, some by inference, and
some by authority ; which is the threefold proof.
The definition of each kind (of proof) is next given.

COMMENT.

The work pauses in its enumeration of the physical and metaphysical
principles of the system, to define its dialectical portion, or the proofs
which may be urged in sup|K>rt of its principles.

The doctrine that there are but three kinds of proof, is said to be sup-
ported by a text of the V6das : ' Soul is either to be perceived, to be
leanie<l from authority, or to be inferred from reasoning*.* It is opposed
to the tenets of the Naiydyikas and Mimdnsakas^ the former of whom
describe four kinds, and the latter six kinds of proof The proofs of the
logicians vure^pratyaisha^, 'perception;' anumdna\^ * inference;* mpamdnafif
* comparison ;* and sahda^^ * verbal authority.* Of these, comparison and
verbal autliority are included by the Sdnkhyas under right affirmation ;
the term dpta** meaning ' fit, right,* and being applied either to the
VMasttt or to inspired teachers (|, as subsequently explained. The
Mimdnsakas do recognise six kinds of proof; but GaubapAda has either
stated them incorrectly, or refers to a system different from that now
found in the best authorities of this school. KumAsila Bhatta alludes


21

to the sixfold proof of an older scholiast or Vrittikdray but those six
proofs are, as Mr. Colebrooke states, perception, inference, comparison,
presumption, authority, and privation ; and the author of the Sdstra
dipikd excludes expressly sambhava^ pratibhd, and aitihya from the cha-
racter of proofs. With regard to the terms specified, it may be doubted
if exact equivalents can be devised. Arthdpatti is literally, * attainment
of meaning ;' conjecture or presumption, ' inference ;' from which it dif-
fers only in the absence of the predicate or sign from which the subject
is inferred. The illustrations of the commentator do not very clearly
explain the purport of the two kinds of this proof, ' seen' and ^ heard." In
the Sdstra dipikd the first is exemplified by the sentence, '' Devadatta is
alive, but not in his house ; it is presumed therefore that he is abroad.'*
^ Heard,' sruta^ is referred to the V^das, and applies to the interpretation
of precepts by the spirit as well as the letter, as in a direction to offer
any particular article, it may be presumed, that should that not be pro-
curable, something similar may be substituted. Vachespati also con-
siders arthdpatti to be comprised in inference, as well as sambhava^ * iden-
tity* or • proportion.' Privation, he argues, is only a modification of per-
ception; and aitihya J or ' report,' is no proof at all, the person with whom
it originates being undetermined. Pratibhd he does not mention. The
concluding expressions of Gaurapada, Pratijdnvdsa sanjndnaniy are of
questionable import, and there is possibly some error in the copy. The
* objects of proof,' prameya^ are, according to the Sankhy&, all the princi-
ples of existence. Siddhi^ ' accomplishment, determination,' in the last
hemistich, is explained hy pratiti^ ' trust, belief.'



V.

Perception is ascertainment of particular objects. Inference,
which is of three sorts, premises an argument, and (deduces) that
which is argued by it. Right affirmation is true revelation.



^^



22



bhAshya.

Driskia ' seen/ or pratyaksha, ' perception/ is application or exertion
of the senses in refirard to their several objects, as of the ear, and the rest,
to sound, &c. Inftrtuct is of three kinds, subsequent, antecedent, analo-
gous. Inference antecedent is that which has been previously deduced ;
as, rain is inferred from the rising of a cloud, because formerly rain had
been the consequence. SubscHiuent ; as, having found a drop of water
taken from the sea to be salt, the saltness of the rest also is inferred*
Analogous ; as, having observed their change of place, it is concluded
that the moon and stars are locomotive, like Chaitra : that is, having
seen a person named Chaitra transfer his position from one place to
another, and thence known that he was locomotive, it is inferred that the
moon and stars also have motion (because it is seen that they change
their places). So observing one mango tree in blossom, it is inferred
that other mango trees also are in flower. This is inference from
analogy.

As:ain ; premises am argument, and {deduces) that tckick is argued hy it.
That inference. Premises a prior argument; that is, the thing which
has a predicate is inferred from the predicate, as, a mendicant (is known)
by his staff; or it premises the subject of the argument, when the predi*
cate is deduced from that of which it is predicated, as, having seen a
mendicant, you say, this is his triple staff. Right aJjUrmation is true



revelation. — Apta means dchdryas, ' holy teachers,* as BrahmA and the
rest. Sruii means ' the V6das.* ' Teachers and VMas* is the import of
the com|>ound, and that which is declared by them is true revelation.

In this manner threefold proof has been described. It is next ex-
plained by what sort of proof ascertainment is to be effected, and of what
objects.

COMMENT.

The three kinds of proof, perception, inference, and right affirmation,
are here more particularly explained.

The first is defined, * what severally relates to, or is engaged in, an



23

object of sense*. Adhyavasdya is explained by Vachespati, ^ Know-
ledge, which is the exercise of the intellectual faculty f/ NarXyana
explains it, ' That by which certainty is obtained^.' The organs do not of
themselves apprehend objects, but are merely the instruments by which
they are approximated to the intellect : ' neither does intellect apprehend
them (rationally), being, as derived from {praJeriti) matter, incapable of
sense ; but the unconscious impressions or modifications of intellect, de-
rived through the senses, are communicated to soul, which, reflecting
them whilst they are present in the intellect, appears by that reflection
actually affected by wisdom, pleasure, and the like $.'

The explanation given by Gaurapada of the three kinds of inference
is not exactly conformable to the definitions of the logicians, although the
same technical terms are employed. Thus in the Nydya Sutra Vrittij in
the comment on the Sutra of Grautama IT, we have the following : * Three-
fdd inference. Prior, that is, cause ; characterized by, or having, that
(cause); as inference of rain from the gathering of clouds. Posterior,
effect ; characterized by it, as inference of rain from the swelling of a
river. Analogous (or generic) ; characterized as distinct from both effect
and cause, as the inference of any thing being a substance from its being
earthy **.' Here then we have inference a priori^ or of effect from cause ;



24

inference a posieriori, or of cause from effect ; and inference from analog\%
or community of sensible properties; for samdnyato drishiam is 'that
whi(*h is recognised from generic properties, its own specific properties
iH^ini: unnoticed */ The S. Chandrikd gives a similar, or logical, expla-
nation of the three kinds of inference.

The definition of inference in general is tlie subject of the first
meml>er of the second hemistich. The expressions linga^ and linf(l\
are analogous to * predicate and subject/ or the mark, sign, or accident
by which any thing is characterized, and the thing having such cha-
racteristic mark and sign. Thus linga is explained by logicians by
the tenn rydpya^, and iingi by vydpaka§; as in the proposition, There
is fire, l>ecausc there is smoke, the latter is the linga^ ^ydpya^ * major
or predicate / and fire the lingi or vydpaka^ the ' minor or subject,' or
tiling of which the presence is denoted by its characteristic. Inference,
then, is a conclusion derived from previous determination of predicate
and subject ; or it is knowledge of the points of an argument depend^
ing on the relation between subject and predicate; that is, * Unless it
were previously known that smoke indicated fire, the presence of the
latter could not be inferred from the appearance of the former^.' This is
what the logicians term paramersha^ * observation or experience.* Apta^^^
acconling to (jaurapada, means dcharya; and dpta srHti'\'\ implies ' holy
teachers and holy writ.* Narayana expounds it in a similar manner(|,
and adds, that dpta means Jswara, or ' god,* according to the theistical
SdnihyaWW. Vachespaji explains the terms similarly, though more ob-
scurcly. Apta is equivalent with him to prdpta, * obtained/ and yukta,
* proper, right ;' and dpta srmti is ' both that which is right and traditional,
holy knowledge ^^' ;' for srmti is defined to be 'knowledge of the pur-



25

port of texts derived from holy writ ; which knowledge is of itself proof,
as obtained from the V^das, which are not of human origin, and fit to
exempt from all fear of error *.' The first term, vdkya^ is explained to
signify, *the V6da is the teacher of religion t;' and the expression
vdkydrtha is equivalent to dherma^ ' religion or virtue.' ' Religion is heard
by it ; as, ^' Let one desirous of heaven perform ihejyotishiama sacrifice :"
such is a text (of scripture) t-' The texts of the V^das and of other
inspired works are authority, as having been banded down through suc-
cessive births by the same teachers as JaioIshavya says, ' By me living
repeatedly in ten different great creations ||.' So ' the V^da was remem-
bered by Kapila from a former state of being §.' The Mimdnsakas dis-
tinguish between dpta vdkya and vkda vdkya : the former is human; the
latter inspired, authority.



VI.

Sensible objects become known by perception ; but it is by infer-
ence (or reasoning) that acquaintance with things transcending the
senses is obtained : and a truth which is neither to be directly per-
ceived, nor to be inferred from reasoning, is deduced from revelation.

bhAshya.

By inference from analogy ; of things beyond the senses — ^the ascertain-
ment of existing things which transcend the senses. Nature and soul are


H



26

not objects of sense, and are to be known only by reasoning from analogy.
For as the predicates Mahal and the rest have the three qualities, so
must that of which they are effects, the chief one (nature), have the three
qualities ; and as that which is irrational appears as if it was rational, it
must have a guide and superintendent, which is soul. That which is
perceptible is known by perception ; but that which is imperceptible,
and which is not to be inferred from analogy, must be learnt from revela-
tion, as, Indra, the king of the gods; the northern Kurus; the nymphs
of heaven : these depend upon sacred authority. Here some one objects,
Nature or soul is not apprehended, and what is not apprehended in this
world does not exist ; therefore these two are not, any more than a second
head, or a third arm. In reply it is stated, that there are eight causes
which prevent the apprehension of existing things.

COMMENT.

In this verse, according to the translation followed, the application of
the three diflfercnt kinds of proof to three different objects is described :
according to a different version, only one class of objects is referred to,
those which transcend the senses, and of which a knowledge is attainable
only by inference from analogy, or by revelation.

The S. Tahca Kaumudi concurs with the S. Bhdshya in understanding
the terms of the text, sdmdnyato drishtat^^ to refer to anumdndt^^ intend*
ing ' inference from analogy \' A similar explanation occurs in the
S. Pravachana Bhdshya : ' Thence, from reasoning by analogy, the deter-
mination of both, of nature and soul, is effected ||.* It appears therefore
that in this place the text does not refer either to perception or to infer-
ence in general, as evidence of perceptible things, but solely to inference



^ ^ ^ *» ^ * .



27

from analogy » as proof of imperceptible objects. For inference a priori
or a posteriori regards things not necessarily beyond the cognizance of
the senses, like nature and soul, but those only which are not at the
moment perceptible, as fire from smoke, rain from floods or clouds, and
the like. It might be preferable, therefore, to render the verse somewhat
differently from the text, or, * It is by reasoning from analogy that belief
in things beyond the senses is attained ; and imperceptible things, not
thereby determined, are to be known only from revelation.' The version
of Mr. Colebrooke, in which he is followed by Professor Lassen (" ^qua-
litatis intellectus est per perceptionem : rerum quae supra sensus sunt per
demonstrationem vel hac non evictum, quod praeter sensus est, probatur
revelatione*'), rests apparently upon the authority of the S. Chandrikd and
S. Kaumudi. ^ Sdmdnyatas has the affix ttisi in the sense of the sixth
(possessive) case. The ascertainment of all objects appreciable by the
senses, whether actually perceived or not, is by perception : therefore
knowledge of earth and the other elements is by sense ; but knowledge
of things beyond the senses, as nature and the rest, is from inference */

When inference from analogy fails, then, according to all the authori-
ties, the remaining proof, or revelation, must be had recourse to, agree-
ably to the Sutras ; * Oral proof is fit instruction,' and ' fit instruction is
communication of the proofs by which the nature of both prakriti and
purusha may be discriminated t»'



VII.

From various causes things may be imperceptible (or unperceived);
excessive distance, (extreme) nearness, defect of the organs, inatten-



28

lion, minuteness, interposition of objects, predominance of other mat-
ters, and intermixture with the like.

bhAshya.

Non-perception of things here existing may proceed from, their re-
motenessy as of Vishnumitra, Maitra, and Chaitra, dwelling in different
countries; or their propinquity, as the eye does not see the coUyrium
applied to the eyelids ; from deject of the organs, as sound and form are
undiscernible by the deaf and the blind ; from inattention, as a person
whose thoughts are distracted does not apprehend what is said to him,
however intelligibly; from minuteness, as the small particles of frost,
Ta|>our, and smoke in the atmosphere are not perceived ; from interposi^
tion, as a thing hidden by a wall ; from predominance of others, as the
planets, asterisnis, and stars are invisible when their rays are overpowered
by those of the sun ; from intermixture ftith the Hie, as a bean in a heap
of beans, a lotus amongst lotuses, a myrobalan amongst myrobalans, a
pigeon in a flock of pigeons, cannot be perceived, being confounded in
the midst of similar objects. In this way non-perception of actually
existing things is eightfold.

Be it granted, that whatever is to be ascertained (by any means) is ;

by what cause is apprehension of nature and soul prevented, and how is

it to be effected ?

COMMENT.

Reasons are here assigned why things may not be perceived, although
tliey actually exist.

The terms of the text, as illustrated by the comment, are easily under-
stood : the particle cha, in connexion with the last, is considered to imply
the existence of otlier impediments besides those enumerated, such as
non-production, as of curds from milk *. But these circumstances, for


29



the most part, account for the non-perception of perceptible things, and
it is still to be considered why nature and soul, which are not amongst
things ordinarily perceptible, are not perceived *.



VIII.

It is owing to the subtilty (of nature), not to the non-existence of .
this original principle, that it is not apprehended by the senses, but
inferred from its effects. Intellect and the rest of the derivative
principles are effects; (whence it is concluded as their cause) in
some respects analogous, but in others dissimilar.

bhAshya.

From subtilty the non-perception of that nature. Nature is not appre- |
hended (by the senses) on account of its subtilty, like the particles of ]
smoke, vapour, and frost, which are in the atmosphere, although not per-
ceived there. How then is it to be apprehended ? Its perception is from
its ejects. Having observed the effects, the cause is inferred. Nature
is the cause, of which such is the effect. Intellect, egotism, the five
subtile rudiments, the eleven organs, the five gross elements, are its
effects. That effect may be dissimilar from nature : * nature,* prakriti ; \
^ the chief one,' pradhdna ; dissimilar from it : or it may be analogous^ of
similar character ; as in the world a son may be like or unlike his father.
From what cause this similarity or dissimilarity proceeds, we shall here-
after explain.

Here a doubt arises, from the conflicting opinions of teachers, whether
intellect and other effects be or be not already in nature. According
to the S4nkhya doctrine, the effects are in nature; according to the



so

Bauddhas and others, they are not; for that which is, cannot cease to
be ; and that which is not, can by no means be : tliis is a contradiction.
Therefore, it is said —

COMMENT.

Natun; is said to be imperceptible, from its subtilty : it must be there-
fore inferred from its effects.

The effects are the products of nature, or intellect, egotism, and the
rest ; some of which are of a similar, and some of a dissimilar character,
as subsequently explained.

Effect, according to the S4nkhya system, necessarily implies cause, as
it could not exist without it*: but on this topic there are different opin-
ions, thus particularized by Vachespati : ' 1. Some say, that that which
is may proceed from that which is not. 2. Some say, that effect is not a
separately existent thing, but the revolution of an existent thing. 3. Some
say, that that which is not may proceed from that which is. 4. The
ancients assert, that that which is comes from that which is (or etu from
ens). By the three first propositions the existence of nature would not be
proved; for,

^ I • The materiality of the cause of the world, of which the qualities
goodness, foulness, and darkness are the natural properties, comprises
sound and other changes of its natural condition, and is diversified by
pleasure, pain, and insensibility ; but if that which is, is bom from that
which is not, how ran tliat insubstantial cause which is not, comprehend
pleasure, |min, form, sound, and the like \ for there cannot be identity of
nature between what is and what is not.

' 2. If sound, and other diversified existences, were but revolutions of
one existent thing, yet that which is could not proceed from such a
source, for the property of manifold existence cannot belong to that
which is not twofold : the notion of that which is not manifold through
its comprising manifold existence is an obvious error.



^ *i*i|i#wii§ni'i Tmit I



31

* 3. The notion of the Kanabhakshas, Akshacharanas, and others, that
that which is not may proceed from that which is, excludes the compre-
hension of effect in caose, as that which is and that which is not cannot
have community : consequently the existence of nature is not prored ;
and in order to establish its existence, the existence of effect in it must
first be determined */

Of the doctrines here alluded to, the first is said to be that of some of
the Buddhists, who deny the existence of prakritij or any unirersal cause,
or of any thing which they cannot verify by perception. The second is
that of the V^&ntis, who maintain that all that exists is but the vivarttas^
literally the ' revolutions' — the emanations from, or manifestations of, one
only universal spirit. It might be said that the S4nkhya seems to teach
a similar doctrine, in as far as it refers all that exists, exclusive of spirit,
to one common source, and makes all else identical with prakriti. It
differs however in this, that it regards the substances evolved from the
radical prakriti as substantial existences, as effects or products of a cause
which exists no longer except in its effects. The V^d&ntis, on the other
hand, maintain that it is cause which is eternal, and that effects are



WT5R^ ^nf^ irfkwn^ II



32

only its present operations. The popular form of VM4nti8in asaerts,
indeed* that nothing exists but cause, and that its effects, or all that
apiK^ars to exist, are unrealities, illusions, the phantoms of a dream : but
the commentator on the Sankhya Pravachana declares, that the doctrine
of m/iya, or ' illusion,' is modem, and is contrary' to the V6das, and that
those who advocate it are nothing but disguised Bauddhas : ' The cause
of the bondage of soul asserted by those concealed Bauddhas, the modem
advocates of mdyd, is here refute<l */ In the third case we have the
authors s[H*cified as Kunabhakshas, * Feeders upon little,* or upon atoms,
|>erhaps; and Akshachartmus, 'Followers of controversy ;* contemptuous
terms for the Vaisthkikas, who maintain the origin of all things from
primaeval atoms, or monads ; and who may therefore be said to deduce
what is not — the insubstantial forms of things — from actual corpuscular
substance.

The fourth or ancient doctrine, that that which is comes from that
which is, #'115 from 1*115, ro o¥ from ro ov, is the converse of the celebrated
dogma of antiquity, ex mhiloy nihil Jit ; and although in this place it is
especially restricted to the relation of certain effects to a certain cause,
yet it comes to the same thing as regards the world in general, the things
of which cannot be derived from no primary existent thing; agreeably to
the S6tra of Kapila ; ' The production of a thing cannot be from no-
thing t;* Oi^^cy 7iVcTai rV rou /aj} oktck : not only according to Democritus
and Epicums, but acconling to all the ancient philosophers, who, Ari-
stotle states, agreed universally in the physical doctrine, that it was
inifiossible for any thing to I>e produced from nothing : Toirw li to mc^ cV

xfpi ^^iVfn^. Phys. I. 4.

* ^nftJTraft U^^^IIMI HI4Mir<HI ^•M^flH f^^i^n I



33



IX.

Effect subsists (antecedently to the operation of cause) ; for what
exists not, can by no operation of cause be brought into existence. |
Materials, too, are selected which are fit for the purpose : every thing •
is not by every means possible : what is capable, does that to which
it is competent ; and like is produced from like.

BHASHYA.

From there being no instrumental cause of what exists not — non-exist-
ent, what is not — ^there is no making what is not : therefore e£fect is. In
this world there is no making of what is not ; as, the production of oil
from sand : therefore the instrumental cause produces what is, from its
having been formerly implanted. Hence perceptible principles, which
are effects, exist in nature.

Further, from selection of materials. — Updddna is * (material) cause/
from the selection of it : thus, in life, a man who desires a thing, selects
that by which it may be produced ; as he who wishes for curds, takes
milk, not water (for their material cause). Thence effect is.

Again, every thing is fiot by every means possible. The universal possi-
bility of every thing is not ; as of gold in silver, &c. or in grass, dust, or
sand. Therefore, from the non-universality of every thing in every thing,
effect is.

Again, wJiat is capable does that to which it is competent ; as, a potter
is the capable agent ; the implements, the lump of clay, the wheel, rag,
rope, water, &c. (are capable), by which he makes the jar, which is
capable of being so made from earth. Thence effect is.

Lastly, like is produced from Hie. Such as is the character of cause,
in which effect exists, such also is the character of effect ; as, barley is
produced from barley, rice from rice. If effect was not (did not pre-exist),
then rice might grow from pease ; but it does not, and therefore effect is.

By these five arguments, then, it is proved that intellect and the other



S4

rharnrtcriittics do ([)re)rxi!^t in nature ; and therefore production i» of
that which is, and not of that wliich is not.

COMMENT.

Argti meats are iierc adduced to shew that the eflccts or products of
nature are comprised in, and coi*xistent with, their cause or source; cou-
sef|uently tiiey are proofs of tlie existence of tliat primary cause or
source.

It is hiid down as a general principle, that cause and effect are in all
casi*s coexistent, or that effect exists anteriorly to its manifestation ; sat-
kdrgyam* in the text meanint; * existent effect prior to the exercise of
(efficient) cause t;* or, as the phrase also of the text asadakarandt \ is
explained, ' If effect prior to the exercise of (efficient) cause does not
exist, its existence cannot by any means be eflfected !>.' The expression
sat'kdryyam^ therefore, is to Ik* understood throughout as meaning ' ex*
istctnt effcTt,* not the effect of that which exists: and the object of the
stanza is to establish the existence of cause from its (effects, and not of
effects from the existence of cause, as Professor Lassen has explained it :
*' Qua^nam sint rationes docetur ({uibus evincatur mentem ceteraque prin-
cipia eff*ecta esse a rw okti.'" Mons. Pauthier {Traduction de la Sdnkhya
Kdrikd, lOJj) is more correct in his view of the general purport of the
verse ; '' Ce qui n existe pas ne pent arriver a Tetat d*effet ;** but he has
mistaken the particulars— the reasons why that which is not can never
be, for the means which would be fruitlessly exerciM^l for its production :
it is not that such existence cannot be effected ** par la co-operation
d aucune cause materielle,** &c., but because an effect recjuires an adequate
material cause, and the like.


85

Not only has the meaning of this verse been misapprehended by its
translators, but the doctrine which it conveys seems to have been some-
what misconceived by high authority. M. Cousin, referring to this pas-
sage, observes, '* L*argumentation de Kapila est, dans Thistoire de philo-
sophic, Tant^c^dent de celle d'^n^sid^me et Hume. Selon Kapila il n'y a
pas de notion propre de cause, et ce que nous appelons une cause n'est
qu'une cause -apparente relativement a Teffet qui la suit, mais c'est aussi
un effet relativement k la cause qui la pr^c^de, laquelle est encore un effet
par la m^me raison, et toujours de mSme, de mani^re que tout est un
enchainement necessaire d'effets sans cause veritable et ind^pendente."
M. Cousin then supports his view of the doctrine by selecting some of
the arguments contained in the text ; as, ^' That which does not exist can-
not be made to exist ;" and, '* Cause and effect are of the same nature :''•
and he adds, as a third, that ^' il ne faut pas s'occuper des causes, mais
des effets, car I'existence de Teffet mesure I'^nergie de la cause ; done
Teffet ^quivaut la cause." In this instance, however, he is scarcely justi-
fied by his authority, whose object is not to dispense with the considera-
tion of cause altogether, but to prove its existence from that of its effects.
Kapila, therefore, is far from asserting that " il n'y a pas de cause,"
although he may so far agree with the philosophers referred to, in recog-
nising no difference between material cause and material effects: for it
must be remembered, that it is of material effects, of substances, that he
is speaking. His doctrine is, in fact, that on which Brown enlarges in
his lectures on power, cause, and effect — that " the forms of a body are
the body itself; and that all the substances which exist in the universe
are every thing which truly exists in the universe, to which nothing can
be added which is not itself a new substance : that there can be nothing
in the events of nature, therefore, but the antecedents and consequents
which are present in them ; and that these accordingly, or nothing, are
the very causes and effects which we are desirous of investigating." Lect.
on. the Philosophy of the Human Mind, p. 175. Kapila, however, has
not asserted a series of antecedents and consequents without beginning;
and whatever we may conceive of his mula-prakritij his original and un-
originated substance whence all substances proceed, it is a fixed point



36

from which he starts, and the existence of which he deduces from its
effects : the mutual and correlative existence of which, with their causCt
he endeavours to establish by arguments, which, as regarding a curious
and not uniuteri^ting part of the SAnkhya philosophy, it may be allow-
able to recapitulate a little more in detail.

1. Asadakaramit ; 'Because efficient or instrumental cause cannot
make or produce that which is not' Professor Lassen renders this, ' E
nulla nonentis efficacitate, nonens nil efficit. Asat in this passage, how-
ever, is the obje(*t, not the agent ; and karana is employed technically to
denote the efficient or oi>erative cause, the energy of which would be
exerted in vain, unless applied to materials that existed : that which does
not exist cannot I>e brought into existence by any agent. It would be
useless to grind the sesamum for oil, unless the oil existed in it : the same
force applied to sand or sugar-cane would not express oil. The appear-
ance or manifestation of the oil is a proof that it was contained in the
sesamum, and consequently is a proof of the existence of the source
whence it is derived. This dogma, in its most comprehensive application,
is of course the same with that of the Greeks, that nothing can come from
nothing, and makes the creation of the universe dependent upon pre-
existing materials. Here, however, the application is limited and specific,
and as Sir Graves Haughton, in his vindication of Mr. Colebrooke s ex-
position of the Vedanta philosophy, has justly observed, it means no
more than that things pn)ceed from their respective sources, and from
those sources alone ; or that certain sequents follow certain antecedents,
and indicate consec|uently their existence.

2. l^pddami ifrahanai ; * From taking an adequate material cause:
a fit material cause must be selected for any given effect or product.*
There is no difference of opinion as to the purport of updddma; *Such as
the substance evolved, such is that from which it is evolved ;' or as
illustrated by Ciaurapada, ' He who wishes to make curds will employ
milk, not water :* but this being the case, the c^fiects which we behold, or
infer, must proceed from something similar to themselves, and conse-
quently prove the existence of that substance. ' The relation between
cause and effect is the generation of effect ; but there can be no relation



37

(between cause and) a non-existent effect, and therefore effect is*/' and
consequently so is cause.

3. ' From the unfitness of all causes for every effect ;' sarva sambha-
vdhhdvdL There must be an identity of character between the sequent
and its antecedent, and the existence of one indicates that of the other :
a jar is made with clay, cloth with yarn ; the latter material could not be
used to fabricate a water-pot, nor clay to weave a garment. If this was
not the case, all things would be equally fit for all purposes,

. . . ex omnibus rebus
Omne genus nasci possit.

It is not, however, here intended to assert, that '^ idonea causa non est ulla
quam sadj r6 ^v," but that the effect must have a determinate existence
in that cause, and can be the only effect which it can produce; as in the
commentary on this expression in the S. Pravachana Bhdshya : * If effect
prior to production do not exist in cause, there would be no reason why
cause should not produce one non-existent effect, and not another f*'

4. Saktasya sakydiarandt ; ^ From the execution of that which the
agent is able to do.' Active or efficient causes can do only that to which
they are competent: the potter and his implements fabricate a water-jar,
not a piece of cloth; they are not competent to the latter, they are
capable of the former. If effect did not pre-exist, if it were not insepa-
rable from cause, power, or the exertions of an agent, and the employ-
ment of means, might derive from any antecedent one consequence as
well as another.

5. Kdranahhdvat ; * From the nature of cause ;' that is, from its being
of the same nature or character with effect, and consequently producing
its like ; or, according to Vachespati, ' from the identity of cause with
effect \:' * Cloth is not different from the threads of which it is woven,



* ^iT^llg ^R^ ^iHTg iil^^ ^R^ ^N^<nr iil^<^Wri1 5f^wr



S8

for it 18 made up of them */ Here, then, we have precisely the discovery
of modem philosopliy, '' that the form of a body is only another name for
the relative position of the parts that constitute it ; and that the forms of
a body are nothing but the body itself:** (Brown s Lectures:) a discovery
which, simple as it may ap|>ear to be, dissipated but recently the illusion
of * substantial forms,* which had prevailed for ages in Europe. It seems,
however, to have been familiar to Hindu 8i)ecuIation from the remotest
periods, as the commentator on the S. Pravachana, and the author of the
S. Chandrikd^ cite the Vcdas in its contirmation : ' Before production
there is no difference between cause and effect t.' There is good reason,
however, to think that the conclusion drawn from the doctrine by the
Vedas was ver}' different from that of the Siinkhyas, being the basis of
Pantheism, and implying that before creation the great First Cause com-
prehended both cause and effect : the texts illustrating the dogma being
such as, 'The existent ro ow verily was unevolved| — This, the Existent,
was, oh pupil, before all things || — The Unborn was verily before all^/
The Sankhyas, like some of the old Grecian philosophers, choose to
understand by tad, idtim, ro ov, to ey« * the comprehensive, eternal, mate-
rial cause.*

From the arguments thus adduced, then, it is concluded that effect is,
mU kdryam^ ; that is, that it exists in, and is the same with, cause; or, as
CiAVRAFAnA has it, mahat and the other characteristics of pradhdfm are in
pradhiiHii. Sat kdryam is therefore neither ' iK)nendum est existens (joif)
emphatice ita dictum t« mTt^ o», per se ens,' nor * effectus existentis, ab
existente effectum, effectuni a ni ovrt \ the ciuestion is, whether effect
exists or not before production ; and not whether it is prwluced * a rw
ivri an a ta* m^ c!*^'/ It is the production, or apfiearance, of that which is
or is not ; not the pro<luction of any thing by that which is or is not ;
agreeably to the S^tra of K aim la : ' There is no production of that which

* 5? ''RWfp^ fnint Aiu^Hiff^ I ^ ^^%: itptR? ^<^fi|



89

is not, as of a man's horn* — The production of that which is not is im-
possible, as would be that of a human horn f/ Agreeably to the same
doctrine also is the reply made in the S6tras to the objection, that if
effect exists already, existence is superfluously given to it ; ^ It is absurd
to produce what is already extant \.' The answer is, ' It is not so ; for
the actual occurrence or non-occurrence of production depends upon
manifestation ||:' that is, the present existence of an effect is not the pro-
duction of any thing new, but the actual manifestation of a change of
form of that which previously existed : something like the notions which
Aristotle ascribes to ancient philosophers, that all things were together,
and that their generation was merely a change of condition : ^Hv ofioS ra

iravra koi to yivetrOat roiovSe KaOioTfiKev aXXoi(H}<r$ai I and it is CuriouS enough

to find the doctrine illustrated almost in the words of Hobbes : '^ Facien-
dum est quod faciunt statuarii, qui materiam exculpentes, supervacaneam
imaginem rum faciunt sed inveniunt;" or as Vijnyana Bhikshu has it,
' The active exertion of the sculptor produces merely the manifestation
of the image which was in the stone ^.'

Although however, as identical with cause, and regarded as proofs of
its existence ; effects or products, in their separated or manifested condi-
tion regarded as forms only, possess properties different from those of
their source or cause : these differences are detailed in the next stanza.



X.

A DISCRETE principle is causable, it is inconstant, unpervading,
mutable, multitudinous, supporting, mergent, conjunct, governed.
The undiscrete one is the reverse.


40



BHASHYA.

Discrete; intellect and the other effects. Causable; that of which
there is cause ; the temi ketu meaning ' cause/ as synonymous with
upddana^ karana^ and nimiiia. Nature is the cause of a discrete prin-
ciple ; therefore discrete principles, as far as the gross elements inclu-
sive, have cause: thus, the principle intellect has cause by nature;
egotism by intellect ; the five rudiments and eleven organs by egotism ;
ether by the rudiment of sound ; air by that of touch ; light by that of
form ; water by that of taste ; and earth by that of smell. In this way«
to the gross elements inclusive, a discrete principle has cause. Again, it
is inconstfiHi, because it is produced from another ; as a water-jar, which
is produced from a lump of clay, is not constant. Again, it is umpervad-^
ing, not going every where : a discrete principle is not like nature and
soul, omnipresc^nt. Again, it is mutable; it is subject to the changes
which the world undergoes : combined with the thirteen instruments, and
incoqiorated in the subtile frame, it undergoes worldly vicissitudes, and
hence is mutable. It is multitudiHOus ; it is intellect, egotism, the five
rudiments, and eleven organs ; and the five gross elements are supported
by the five rudiments. // is mergent; subject to resolution; for at the
period of (general) dissolution, the five gross elements merge into the
five rudiments ; they, with the eleven organs, into ergotism ; egotism into
intelk^ct ; and intellect merges^ into nature. Conjunct ; conjoined, made
up of parts, as sound, touch, taste, form, and smell. Governed; not self-
depiMident ; for intellect is dei>endent on nature, egotism on intellect, the
rudiments and organs on egotism, and the gross elements on the rudi-
ments. In this way the governed or subject discrete principle is ex-
plained : we now explain the uiidiscrete.

The undiscrete one is the reverse. An undiscrete principle is the con-
trary in respect to the properties attributed to the discrete: that, is
causable ; but there is nothing prior to nature, whence follows its non-
production, and therefore it is without cause. A discrete principle is
inconstant ; an undiscrete is eternal, as it is not produced. The primary
dements are not produced from any where ; that is, nature. A discrete



41

principle is unpervading; natare is pervading, going every where. A
discrete principle is mutable; nature immutable, from the same omni-
presence. Discrete principles are multitudinous ; nature is single, from
its causality : *' Nature is the one cause of the three worlds ;" thence
nature is single. Discrete principles are dependent ; the undiscrete one
is independent, from its not being an effect: there is nothing beyond
nature of which it can be the effect. A discrete principle is mergent ;
the undiscrete immergent (indissoluble) , being eternal : intellect and the
rest, at the period of general dissolution, merge respectively into one
another ; not so nature ; and that therefore is immergent (indissoluble) .
A discrete principle is conjunct (or compound, made up of parts); nature
is uncompounded, for sound, touch, flavour, form, and odour, are not in
(crude) nature. Discrete principles are governed ; the undiscrete is inde-
pendent, it presides over itself These are the properties in which discrete
and undiscrete principles are dissimilar : those in which they are similar
are next described.

COMMENT.

It was stated in the eighth stanza, that intellect and the other effects
of nature were in some respects similar, and in others dissimilar, to their
cause: the properties in which the dissimilarity consists are here enu-
merated.

The generic term used for the effects or products of primseval nature
(vyakta*) means, in its etymological and commonly received senses, that
which is evident or manifest, or that which is individual or specific;
from vt, distributive particle, and anjuy ' to make clear or distinct.' The
purport is therefore sufficiently well expressed by the equivalent Mr. Cole-
brooke has selected, * discrete,' detached from its cause, and having a
separate and distinct existence. Nature (or primary matter) is the reverse
of this, or avyakta f, ' undiscrete, unseparated, indistinct.' If natura were
substituted for tellus^ these lines of Lucretius would illustrate the appli-
cation of the terms in question :



4S

Miiica mndis muhit multarum mniiia rerum
Quod pemiixta gerit tclluK dltcniaque trmdit.

Discrete or separated effect or principle (meaning by principle a tatwa^
or category, according to the Siinkhya classification of the elements of
existent things) is described by its properties, and they are the same
which are specified in the original S6tra. l.Hetumat^, 'having cause*
or origin ;* hetu implying ' material, efficient, and occasional cause ;*
2. yfiii/yatf * temiK)rary ;' for whatever has cause has beginning, and
whatever has a beginning must have an end. At tlie same time this is
to be understood of them in their actual or present form or condition :
* Of their own nature (or as one with their cause) they are eternal, but
they are i>erishable by their separate conditions |.' So in the S6tras
' destruction* is explained ' resolution into cause ||/ 3. * Unpervading^f
' Every one of the effects of nature is not observable in every thing, they
are dispersed as different modifications^/ Vydpti is the essential and
inherent presence of one thing in another, as of heat in fire, oil in
sesamum, &c. 4. Siikriya^*^ * mutable,* or 'having action:* perhaps
' movable* or ' migratory* would perfectly express the sense ; for the
phrase is explained to signify that the eff*ects of nature migrate from one
substance to another : ' Intellect and the rest leave one body in which
they were combined, and enter into the composition of another : this is
their transition : the transition of the gross elements earth and the rest,
composing body, is well known tt-' 5. ' Multitudinous:* many, atUkaW
being repeated in various objects and persons, as ' the faculties in dif-
ferent individuals, and the elements in diff*erent forms ||||.* 0. Supported



43

by, referable to, dsrita*; as an effect may be considered to be upheld by
its cause, or an individual referable to a species; as trees form a wood.
7. * Mergent/ linga t ; that which merges into, or is lost or resolved into,
its primary elements, as subsequently explained. Intellect and the rest
are the lingasy signs, marks, or characteristic circumstances of nature :
and when they lose their individuality, or discrete existence, they may
be said to have been absorbed by, or to have fused or merged into, their
original source. Although, therefore, the application of linga as an attri-
butive in this sense is technical, the import is not so widely different from
that of the substantive as might at first be imagined. Vachespati, ex-
plaining the term, has, * Linga^ the characteristic of pradhdna^ for these
principles, huddhi and the rest, are its characteristics, as will be here-
after explained \ f and the author of the S. Chandrikd has, * Linga is
that which characterizes, or causes to be known || ;' it is the anumdpaka §,
' the basis of the inference :' ' For this effect (of nature) is the parent
of the inference that an undiscrete cause exists^.' (See also Com. on
V. 5. p. 24.) According to these interpretations, * predicative' or * charac-
teristic' would perhaps be a preferable equivalent ; but ' mergent' or ' dis-
soluble**' is conformable to the S. Bhdshya. The commentator on the
S. Pravachana explains it by both terms ' inferential' or ' resolvable :'
' Effect is termed linga^ either from its being the ground of inference of
cause, or from its progress to resolution tt-' 8. * Combined, conjunct,'
sdvayavall; explained by Vachespati, * mixing,' misrana\\\\y or * junction,'
samyoga §§, as the elements combine with one another. It might be said,
then, that nature is a compound, as its products combine with it ; but this
is not so, for their union with nature is not mere * mixture or conjunction,

fi^ ^iriS mfi \ tt ^M^m i "u fiR^wr i ^^ wtm: \



44

but identification from the sameness of the cause and effect*:' anotioo
which distiuf^uishes the pradhana of the S&nkhyas from the first princi-
ples of those Grecian philosophers, who, if their doctrines have been
rightly represented, taught that substances existed either as distinct par*
tides of an aggregate, or component parts of a mixture, in their original
form. In the S&nkhya they separate or reunite as one and the same.
10. 'Goveniedt:* the effects of nature depend upon its existence, and
each in its turn produces its i>eculiar effect or product, in furtherance of
the influence of nature, or in consequence of its existence, without which
they Mould cease to be, and their effects would be null ; as, ^ In the effect
of egotism, M'hich intellect has to produce, the fulfilment of nature is
regarded ; otherwise intellect, being ineffective, would not be able to
produce egotism |.*

The properties of nature, or the undiscrete principle, are the reverse
of these ; it has no cause ; it has no end ; it is omnipresent ; it is inmiu*
table ; it is single ; it is self-sustained ; it is the subject, not the predi-
cate ; it is entire, or one whole ; it is supreme.

Although the especial object of the text here is the dissimilarity
between the effects of nature and their material cause, yet the term
aryakta applies equally to ptirnsha, or ' soul,* also an invisible or undiscrete
principle; and accordingly soul differs from discrete principles in the
same circumstances as nature. In the properties, therefore, of non-caus-
ability, constancy, omnipresence, immutability, singleness, self-support,
sul>stantiveness, entireness, and supremacy, soul and nature correspond.
They differ, however, in other respects, and particularly in thoee in
which nature and its effects assimilate, as enumerated in the succeeding
stanza.


45



XL



A DISCRETE principle, as well as the chief (or undiscrete) one, has
the three qualities: it is indiscriminative, objective, common, irra-
tional, prolific. Soul is in these respects, as in those, the reverse.

bhAshya.

Has the three qualities: it is that of which goodness, foulness, and '
darkness are the three properties. A discrete principle is indiscrimina-
tive ; discrimination does not belong to it : that is, it cannot distinguish
which is a discrete principle and which are properties, or that this is an
ox, that is a horse : such as the properties are, such is the principle ; such
as is the principle such are the properties; and the like. Objective;
a discrete principle is to be enjoyed (made use of), from its being an
object to all men. Common; from being the common possession of all,
like a harlot. Irrational; it does not comprehend pain, pleasure, or
dulness. Prolific ; thus, egotism is the progeny of intellect ; the five
rudiments and eleven organs of egotism; and the five gross elements of
the five rudiments. These properties, to prolific inclusive, are specifieci
as those of a discrete principle ; and it is in them that the chief {or undis-
crete) one is similar : '' Such as is a discrete principle, such is the chief
(or undiscrete) one." Therefore as a discrete principle has three quali-
ties, so has the undiscrete, or that of which intellect and the rest, having
the three qualities, are the effects : so in this world effect is of the like
quality with cause, as black cloth is fabricated with black threads. A
discrete principle is indiscriminative ; so is the chief one, it cannot discern
that qualities are distinct from nature, that qualities are one thing, and
that nature is another ; therefore the chief one is indiscriminative. A
discrete principle is objective; so is the chief one, from its being the
object of all men. A discrete principle is common ; so is the chief one, \
being common to all things. A discrete principle is irrational ; so is the
chief one, as it is not conscious of pain, or pleasure, or dulness. Whence
is this inferred ? From the irrationality of its effects ; from an irrational

N



/



46

lump of clay proceeds an irrational water-pot. Thus has (nature) the
chief one l>eon explained. Soul is in these respects, as in those, the reverse:
this is now explained.

lieverse of both the discrete and undiscrete principles. Soul is the
reverse of both, thus : Discrete and undiscrete have (the three) qualities;
soul is devoid of (pialities : they are indiscriminative ; soul has discrimi-
nation : they are objects (of sense or fniition) ; soul is not an object (of
sense or fruition): they are common; soul is specific: they are irrational;
soul is rational ; for inasmuch as it comprehends, or perfectly knows,
pleasure, pain, and dulness, it is rational : they are prolific ; soul is
unprolific ; nothing; is produced from soul. On these (grounds soul is said
to be the reverse of lioth the discrete and undiscrete principles.

It is also said, as in those, referring to the preceding verse; for as the
chief (or undiscrete) principle is there said to be without cause, &c. such
is the soul. It is there stated that a discrete principle is causable, incon-
stant, and the like ; and that the undiscrete one is the reverse ; that is, it
has no cause, &c. ; so soul is without cause, being no production. A
discrete principle is inconstant ; the discrete one is constant ; so is soul ;
and it is immutable also, from its omnipresence. A discrete principle is
multitudinous ; the undiscrete is single ; so is souK' A discrete principle
is supported ; the undiscrete is unsupported ; so is soul. A discrete prin-
ciple is mergent ; the undiscrete immergent (indissoluble) ; so is soul ; it
is not in any way decomposed. A discrete principle is conjunct; the
undiscrete one uncombined ; so is soul ; for there are no (component)
parts, such as sound, &c., in soul. Finally, discrete principles are go-
verned ; the undiscrete one is inde|>endent ; so is soul, governing (or
presiding over) itself. In this way the common properties of soul and
nature were described in the preceding stanza; whilst those in which
they differ, as i>oss€rssion of the three qualities, and the like, are speci-
fier! in this verse. Next follows more particular mention of these three
qualities, with which both discrete principles and the undiscrete one are

endowe<l.

COMMENT.

In this verse the properties common to crude nature and to its products



47

are specified, continuing the reference to the eighth verse, in which it was
asserted, that in some respects the efiects of nature and nature itself were
analogous. This being effected, the text proceeds to state that soul has
not the properties which are common to nature and its products, but
possesses those which are peculiar to the former ; agreeing therefore in
some respects with crude nature, but dissimilar in every respect to its
effects or products.

The three qualities*, or satfva1[, 'goodness,' rajasX, 'foulness,' and
tamas\l ' darkness,' which are familiar to all the systems of Hindu specu-
lation, are more particularly described in the next verse ; soul has them
not. Pradhdna^ ' the chief one,' crude nature, and its products, have not
discrimination, viveka j, the faculty of discerning the real and essential
differences of things, of distinguishing between matter and spirit, of
knowing self; the exercise of which is the source of final liberation (firom
existence)^.' By the term * objective**' is intended that which may be
used or enjoyed, such as the faculties of the mind, and the organs of
sente; or such as may be perceived by observation, vyiufwatt* such
nature, or pradhdnu^ may also be considered as the origin of all things
inferable by reason. Soul, on the contrary, is the observer or enjoyer, as
afterwards explained. AcMtarmW^ ' irrational ;' that which does not think
or feel, unconscious, non-sentient ; as in the Meghad&ta ; ' Those afflicted
by desire seek relief both from rational and irrational objects ||||;' explained
either * living and lifeless§§,' or * knowing and ignorant^^ ;' chitand*^*
being defined ' knowledge of right and wrong,' or ' of what ought, and
what ought not, to be done ttt-'

The general position, that the properties of soul are the reverse of



vRffin **fw?i ttf^^Tsn tt^ir^fWi mi^



48

those of the products of nature* requires, however, some modification in
one instance. A discrete principle is said to be multitudinous, many*
aneka^; consequently soul should be single, eka^; and it is so, accord-
ing to the S. JiAdskjfa \. On the other hand, the S. Tat tea KawmmJi
makes soul agree with discrete principles, in being multitudinous : * The
properties of non-causability, constancy, and the rest, are common to
soul and nature ; multitudinousness is a property common to (soul and)
an undiscrete principle ||.' The <y. Chandrikd confirms the interpretation,
*The phrase tathd cha implies that (soul) is analc^us to the undiscrete
principle in non-causality and the rest, and analogous to discrete princi-
ples in manifold enumeration ^/ This is» in fact, the S/mkhya doctrine,
as subseciuently laid do^n by the text, ver. 18, and is conformable to the
S(itra of Kapila ; ' Multitude of souls is proved by variety of condition^ i
that is, ' the virtuous are bom again in heaven, the wicked are regene-
rated in hell; the fool wanders in error, the wise man is set free**.*
Either, therefore, Gaurapada has made a mistake, or by his ika is to be
understood, not that soul in general is one only, but that it is single, or
several, in its different migrations ; or, as Mr. Colebrooke renders it
(R A. S. Trans, vol. I. p. 31), ' individual.' So in the S6tras it is said,
* that there may be various unions of one soul, according to difference of
receptacle, as the etherial element may be confined in a variety of ves-
sels tt-* This singleness of soul applies therefore to that particular soul
which is subjected to its own varied course of birth, death, bondage, and
liberation ; for, as the commentator observes, * one soul is bom, not


I ^ ^^ I ^ ^^% ^li*^*#l*Mli inn '^lil

** ^iw^H ^'^ wniw "mift 5?^ ^wit ^i^nt ijrsft ^^^^ i

^^ ^HTfw^%«RI HMlih'l Wl^ll!^ ^l?Tft[6?: I



49

another (in a regenerated body) '^.' The singleness of soul therefore, as
asserted by Gaurapada, is no doubt to be understood in this sense.



XII.

The qualities respectively consist in pleasure, pain, and dulness;
are adapted to manifestation, activity, and restraint ; mutually domi-
neer; rest on each other; produce each other; consort together;
and are reciprocally present.

bhAshya.

The qualities goodness, foulness, and darkness, are severally the same
as what is agreeable, what is disagreeable, and what is indifferent : thus
goodness is all that is pleasure, priti meaning * pleasure ;' being one with
(or consisting of) that (pleasure) : foulness is one with, or consists of,
disagreeableness {apriti) : darkness consists of, or is the same with, dul-
ness ; vishdda meaning mSha^ * dulness, stupidity.' Next, are adapted
to manifestatiany &c. ; artha signifpng ' competency' or ' fitness.' Good-
ness, then, is for the sake of manifestation ; it is fit for, or adapted to it :
foulness is for activity ; darkness for restraint : that is, the qualities are
connected with, or possessed of, manifestation, action, and inertia. They
mutually domineer : they are mutually paramount, sustaining, productive,
cooperative, and coexistent Thus, they are said to domineer mutually ;
that is, they severally prevail or predominate over each other, or they are
displayed by the properties of pleasure, pain, or dulness. When good-
ness is dominant, it overpowers foulness and darkness by its own proper-
ties, and is exhibited or identified with light and joy. When foulness
predominates, it overpowers goodness and darkness, and exists in pain
and action. When darkness triumphs, it suppresses goodness and foul-



^^ ^^5mi7^5TnR:i



o



50

ncAS, and is Huprcnic as one with insensibility and inaction. So they rest
OH etteh other: the qualities combine with one another, like binary atoms.
They produce each other^ as the; lump of clay generates the earthen jar.
They consort together^ as males and females cohabit : as it is said, '' Good*
ness is the consort of foulness, foulness of goodness ; darkness is called
the consort of both f ' that is, they are respectively associates. They are
reciprocally present: they abide or exist reciprocally, according to the
text, *' qualities abide in (pmlities* (that is, the same qualities may be
regarded as different, according to their different effects) : thus, a beauti-
ful and amiable woman, who is a source of delight to every one else, is
the cause of misery to the other wives of her husband, and of bewilder-
ment (insensibility) to the dissolute : and in this manner she is the cause
of the influence of all three qualities. Thus also, a king, assiduous in
protecting his |)eople, and curbing the profligate, is the cause of happi-
ness to the go<Ml, of misery and mortification to the bad : here foulness
(activity) produces the effects of goodness and darkness. So darkness,
by its investing nature, produces the effects of gooclness and foulness, as
clouds, overshadowing the heavens, cause delight u{>on earth, animate by
their rain the active labours of the husbandman, and overwhelm absent
lovers with despair. In this manner the three qualities are reciprocally
present (or perform the functions of one another).

COMMENT.

The three (pialities are here described, by their effects and relations ;
by the production of plea.Hure, pain, and indifference; and by the man-
ner in which thry are detached or combined in their operations and
influence.

The terms /;rf/f and aprili are hen^ used as synonymes of .mi^Aa, * plea-
sure,' and ftukha, * pain ;* rishfUla as a synonyroe of moha, * bewilderment,
stu{>efuction, dullness, or insensibility.* The comi)osition of atma with
these* ivnii», prityatmata, implies '(essential or inseparable presence,* like
that of life or soul in the living bmly. An exact e()uivalent for such a
com|>ound ran s(*arcely {KThaps be supplied, but the sense may be con-
veyed by such expressions as * consists of, comprehends, is one or iden*



51

tical with/ and the like. Atma is here used also to shew that the proper*
ties have positive existence ; that is, pleasure is not the mere absence of
pain ; pain is not the mere absence of pleasure ; as, * Negatives could not
be essential ingredients in any thing : pleasure, pain, and insensibility
are therefore entities ; the word dtma implying being, existence, existent
nature, or property ^.'

The absolute and relative influence of the several qualities is suffi-
ciently illustrated by Gaurapada ; but Vachespati understands the text
as in some respects differently constructed. Instead of considering the
last term, vrittaya1[, as a distinct condition, anyonyavrittaya\y expounded
in the S. Bhdshyay parasparam varttante ||, they are reciprocally present,'
he interprets vritti by kriydy ' act, operation, function,' and compounds it
with ea&h of the foregoing terms §. In all other respects his explanation
of the terms coincides with that of the elder commentator. The passage
quoted by Gaurapada is cited by Vachespati, with some difference, from
the y^das : * As it is said in the dgawu^ all universally present are the
associates of each other : goodness is the partner of foulness, foulness of
goodness ; both are the companions of darkness, and darkness is said to
be the associate of both. Their original connexion, or disjunction, is
never observed If.' The Chandrikd concurs with the S. Tatwa Kaumudl
in the explanation of vritti**. This commentary likewise offers some
additional interpretation of the terms priti^ &c. Thus priti is said to


^ WH ^jpi% ^Mmir< : m^^^ ^^H41^I1 ^^^Mc^* '!^ I **^n^



52



coinprise ' rectitude, gentlenesa, modesty, faith, patience, clemency, wis-
dom :* aprdi, besides * misery/ implies ' hatred, violence, envy, abuse,
wickedness :* and vishddn is not only ' insensibility/ but * tardiness, fear,
infidelity, dishonesty, avarice, and ignorance. Whenever either of these
is obser\'ed, it is referable to the corresponding quality */

In S{)eaking of qualities, however, the term guna is not to be regarded
as an insubstantial or accidental attribute, but as a substance discernible
by soul through the medium of the faculties. It is, in fact, nature, or
prakriti, in one of its three constituent parts or conditions, unduly promi-
nent ; nature entire, or unmodified, being nothing more than the three
qualities in equipoise, according to the S6tra, ' Prakriti is the equal state
of goodness, foulness, and darkness t * on which the commentator re-
marks, * Satwa and the rest are '' things,*' not specific properties, from
their l>eing subject to combination or disjunction, and from their having
tlie pro{>erties of lightness, heaviness, and stren^h \\ and again, ' From
the construction of intellect and the r€^st endowed with the three proper*
ties, like cords wherewith to bind the victim the soul ||.' So in the S.Sdra^
* Goodness and the rest are not the faculties of that (prakriti), being of
the same nature §* — * Such expressions as '' qualities of nature*' are to be
understood (in the same sense) as (the term) "the trees of a forest'*^:*
that is, the forest is nothing different from the trees of which it is the
aggregate, although particular trees or clumps may sometimes be indivi-


63

dualized. In like manner nature is not different from the qualities, but
is the aggregate of them. ' Ingredients or constituents of nature/ there-
fore, would be a preferable term perhaps to * quality ;' but ' quality' is the
more ordinary acceptation of the word guna, and it may therefore be
used, remembering only the distinction made by the S^nkhyas of its
materiality, as a constituent part of nature itself; the qualities being, in
fact, only the conditions of things, and therefore not separable from the
things themselves. It may be thought possible that there is some con-
nection between the gunas which are the constituents oi prakriti^ and the
qualities, passions, or affections of primary matter of the older philoso-
phers, alluded to by Aristotle ; from the changes produced by which on
one unaltered substance all things originated : T99 filv ova-la^ inro^evowrti^f

Tofy Si wadea-i /txera/SoXXowri;?, toSto (ttoij^cIov kqi TavTfiv twv ovrtov riiv apy^v (f>a<riv

eivai. Metaph. I. 3. Another analogy may be conjectured in the identifi-
cation of the two gnnasy satwa and rajaSy with priti, * affection,' and apriti^

* aversion,' as they thus correspond with the (piKla and i^eF/coc, the ' love'
and ^ strife' of Empedocles, as the principles of creation ; respectively
the source of what is good or evil.

The sense in which the several terms for the three gunas is employed
is sufficiently clear from the explanation given of them in the text ; and
the meaning of the equivalents which Mr. Colebrooke has assigned them
must be understood according to the same interpretation. Prof. Lassen
renders them essentia^ impetus^ and caligo; which, similarly understood,
are equally unobjectionable : but as the name of a ' quality,' satwa, is not
perhaps well rendered by * essence,' or even by * existence,' which is its
literal purport, * goodness,' denoting exemption from all imperfection,
seems to be preferable. Impetus is rather the effect of rajasy than the
quality ; and the term ' foulness,' derived from its etymology from ranj,

* to colour or stain,' will better comprehend its characteristic results. The
quality bears a striking analogy to the perturhatio of the Stoics, and
might be rendered by that word, or by ^ passion,' in its generic accepta-
tion. ' Darkness,' or caligo^ expresses both the literal and technical
signification of tamas.



54



XIII.

GooDNESN is considered to be alleviating and enlightening: foul-
ness, urgent and versatile : darkness, heavy and enveloping. Like a
lani|), they cooperate for a pur|K>se (by union of contraries).

BHASHYA.

^woodHess is alleviating^ &c. — When goodness predominates, the frame
is light, the inlellcict is luminous, and the senses are acute. Faulme$$ is
unreHt and vermtHe. — What urges, urgent, exciting : as a bull, upon seeing
another bull, exhibits vehement excitement ; that is the effect of foulnew.
Foulness is also seen to be versatile ; tRat is, a person under its influence
is (*apricious. Darkness is heavy ami enveloping. — ^Where darkness pre-
vails, the members of the body are heavy, the senses obtuse, or inade-
(|unte to the |)erformance of their functions. But here it may be said. If
these qualities are contraries to one another, what effect can they produce
by their several purposes, and how therefore can it be said, they cooperate^
like a lamp, for a (common purpose). Like a lamp, their operation is for a
(common) purpose* : as a lamp, which is com|)osed of the opposites, a
1 wick, oil, and flume, illuminates objects, so the qualities of goodness,
fouhu*ss, and darkness, although contrary to one another, eff(*ct a (com-
mou) pur|>os(*.

This question involves another. It was said (in ver. 11) that a discrete
principle, as \iell as tin* chief one, has the three qualities, and is indis-
criminutive, objertive, and the like. Admitting this to be true of the
chief one (or nature), how is it ascertained that intellect and the rest have
also the three (pialities, and are indiscriminative, and the like f This is
next explained.

COMMLXT.

Tilt* (U*s<Tiption of the* three (pialities is continued in this verse.

iriHHlMvss is alleviating; laghn. * lii^ht ;* it is matter, elastic and elevat-
inu, ireuenitiusx upward and lateral motion, as in the ascent of flame, and
the currents of the air. It is the cause of active and |K*rfect functionality



55

also in the instruments of vitality^; enlightening y prakdsakam^ * making
manifest/ the objects of the senses. The term ishtam, meaning ordinarily
^ wished, desired/ imports in the text merely drishtam^ ' seen, regarded,
considered' — * by the S^nkhya teachers t-' Foulness is urgent and versa-
tile. — The qualities of goodness and darkness are both inert and inopera-
tive, even with regard to their own peculiar consequences ; and it is only
by the restless activity and stimulating agency of the quality of foulness
that they are roused to action ; upashtamhhakam \ being here explained
to signify ' stimulating, impelling,' udyotakam^ pridakam ||, contrary to its
usual sense of * opposing, hindering.' It might be supposed to imply
some relation to the primitive shtahhi^^ ' stop, hinder, oppose, be stupid ;'
inasmuch as the idea appears to be that of action consequent upon
obstruction, or ifiertia, 'reaction.' Thus, as illustrated in the S. Bhdshya,
a bull displays excitement on beholding, or being opposed by, another.
The S. Tatwa Kaumudi has, * The qualities goodness and darkness, on
account of their own inertia^ are inoperative, in regard to the exercise of
their own effects, until excited by foulness. Having been roused from
inactivity, they are made to put forth vigour and energy ; and therefore
foulness is said to be urgent 1^.' The Chandrikd is to the same effect :
' The meaning is this : From the production of combination and activity
by foulness, the definition of that quality is excitement and versatility **.'
It is not necessary, however, to take into consideration the sense of the
primitive shiahhi, for upashiambhaka is not derived from that root, but
from stamhhu'\'\ y a Sautra root ; which therefore, although the meanings of



n»^ri^H H^I^HtPlI HKI<<ffl<ri^ M^Mg^ l ^c|^l<in^ H^IIM|
^STFRTf TRKT IJiSStT I rir«*|^*|mi*^ TST ^ I ** T^ltsf



56

shtabhi arc usually also assigned to it, may take the import required by
the text, of* urging* or 'exciting.*

The (luality of darkness is ' heavy/ ^Mm, causing sluggishness of body
and dulness of mind. It is also varanaka, ' surrouixjding, enveloping/ so
as to obstruct light, retard motion, &c.

But these ((ualities, although contraries, cooi>erate for a common pur-
pose ; as the cotton, the oil, and the flame, although mutually destruc*
tive, combine in a lamp to give light. The common object of the qualities
is the fulfilment of the pur|>ose of soul, as is subse()uently explained.



XIV.

Indiscriminativeness and the rest (of the properties of a discrete

principle) are proved by the influence of the three qualities, and the

al>senc*e thereof in the reverse. The undiscrete principle, moreovert

(as well as the influence of the three qualities,) is demonstrated by

effect ix>ssessing the properties of its cause (and by the absence of

cx>ntrariety).

BHASHVA.

That which is the property of indiscriminativeness and the rest is
proved from the influence of the tliree qualities in mahat and the other
dis<*rete principles : but this is not proved in the undiscrete ; therefore it
is said» by the absence the reverse of il : the reverse of it ; the absence ; the
non-existence of the reverse of that : thence the undiscrete principle is
established ; as, where there are threads, there is cloth ; the threads are
not one thing, and the cloth another. Why so f From the absence of the
reversi' (they are not contraries to each other). In this manner the dis-
crete and undiscrete principles are established. The latter is remote, the
former is near: but he who perceives discrete principles, perceives the
undiscrete one also, as there is no contrariety between them. Hence also
the undiscrete one is proved by effect possessing the properties of cause in
this world : such as is the nature of the cause, such is that of the effect ;



57

thus, from black threads black cloth is made. In the same manner, as
the characteristics of intellect and the rest are their being indiscrimina-
tive, objective, common, irrational, prolific, such as they are, such the
undiscrete is proved essentially to be. From the influence of the three
qualities, indiscriminativeness and the rest are proved to be in discrete
principles ; and from there being no difference between them (and the
undiscrete), and from essential identity of the properties of cause and
effect, the undiscrete principle also is demonstrated.

But it is replied, this cannot be true ; for in this world that which is not
apprehended is not ; but the undiscrete one is, although not applicable.

COMMENT.

It was stated in ver. 8, that mahat and the other effects of prakriti
were in some respects like, and in others unlike, to their original. The
circumstances in which they were dissimilar were specified in ver. 10,
and those in which they agreed in ver. 11. In the latter stanza, the first
of the concurrent properties that was named was that of their possessing
the three qualities; and in verses 12 and 13 it was explained what was
meant by the three qualities. In the present stanza it is asserted, that as
the effects oi prakriti have the three qualities, they must have, as a neces-
sary consequence, the other properties, want of discrimination and the
rest, enumerated in ver. 1 1 ; and that as they have them, their origin, or
prakriti, must have them also, as there is no essential difference between
the properties of cause and effect

The influence of goodness, foulness, and darkness, or the varied afflic-
tions and conditions of all substances, is the obvious cause of perplexity,
or want of discrimination, &c.; being, in fact, the same state or condition.
Traigunya is the influence or any consequence of the three gunas. The
next expression is variously interpreted.

Mr. Colebrooke renders tad viparyaya abhdvdt*y * and from the absence
thereof in the reverse ;' that is, the absence of want of discrimination, &c.



rifaMiti^iHmifi^ I



58

in that subject which is the reverse of tlie material products of nature,
as, for instance, soul, is a negative proof of their existence in the former.
The properties of contraries are contrary. Soul and matter are contra*
ries, and consequently their properties are mutually the reverse of each
other: but one property of soul is freedom from the tliree qualities, whilst
that of matter, or any material product of prakriii, is their possession ;
consequently the former must be capable, and the latter incapable, of
discrimination. The same may be said of the other properties of mahat
and the rest. Thus Vachespati observes: *It (the assertion) is first
plainly or affirmatively expressed in the natural order: it is then put
negatively, or in tlie inverted order ; from the absence thereof in the reverse;
from tlie absence of the three qualities in soul, as the reverse of the pro-
ducts o( prakriti, in regard to want of discrimination and the like *.* The
S. Chaudrikd has a similar explanation : * The reverse of that want of
discrimination ; where that is that is the reverse (of vuihat^ &c.), or soul :
for in soul there are not the three qualities; or, where there is not want
of discrimination there are not the three qualities, as in soulf:* inti-
mating, therefore, that tad, * thereof,' may refer either to the three quali-
ties traigunya, or to want of discrimination, &c.

There is, however, another sense attached to the expression ; and the
reverse is understood not to signify soul, or any thing contrary* to makat
and the rest, but to imply contrariety or incompatibility in the properties
of their origin, or prakriti: that is, indiscriminativeness and the rest are
the pro|KTties of mahat, ice. not only from their i>ossessing tlie three
({ualitii^, but l>ecause there is nothing contrary to indiscriminativeness,
*cc. ill prakriti. This projiosition is indicate<l by Vachespati, who, after
explaining the ptissage as above, adds, 'Or it may be understood as


59

taking for its two subjects vyaJcta and avyakta (discrete and undiscrete
matter), and by the inverted proposition (or negatively) asserting that
there is no reason (to the contrary) arising from one being exempt from
the three qualities*.' The same is more explicitly stated by Gaurapada.
The absence of indiscriminativeness, he observes, as deduced from the
influence of the three qualities, relates in the first instance to vyaJcta^
' discrete matter,' not to avyakta^ or ' indiscrete :' but the same must
apply to the latter also, because there is no property belonging to it
which is incompatible with, or the reverse of, the properties of the vyakta,
or ' discrete matter,' mahat, &c. ; as in the case of the cloth and the
threads of which it is woven, there is no incompatibility between them.

The first portion of the stanza having shewn, then, either simply that
discrete matter is possessed of indiscriminativeness, &c. or that both it and
indiscrete matter are equally devoid of discrimination, proceeds to draw
the conclusion that such an indiscrete cause must exist, endowed with
properties similar to those of its indiscrete effects, because there is no
difference of property between cause and effect ; agreeably to the Sutra,
* The three qualities, insensibility and the rest, belong to both (prakriti
and its products)! :' and Vachespati oliserves, * EffJect is seen to be the
same in its properties with cause. As the properties of the threads, &c.
are identical with those of cloth and the like, so the attributes of pleasure,
pain, and insensibility, evidenced in the effects, which are distinguished
as mahat and the rest, are proofs that similar conditions must belong to
their cause : the existence of pradhdna or avyakta^ as a cause, of which
pleasure, pain, and insensibility are the conditions, is consequently esta-
blished J.'


60



XV.

SixcK s}KTific objects are finite; since there is homogeneousness ;
since effects exist through energy ; since there is a parting (or issue)
of eff ec*ts from cause, and a reunion of the universe, —

BHASHYA.

The undiscretc principle is cause : this is the completion of the con-
struction of llie sentence. Shice specific objects arejinile: as in the world,
wherever the agent is, his limits arc observed : thus, a potter makes
certain jars with certain i)ortions of clay ; so with intellect: intellect and
the other chanicteristics (of nature) are finite, as specific effects of it
Intellect is one, egotism is one, the subtile rudiments are five, the organs
eleven, the gross elements five : from the limitation of these species
nature is their cause, wliich produces finite discrete principles. If nature
were not the cause, then discrete principles would have no limit : from
the measure (or limit) of s))ecific objects, therefore, nature exists, whence
discrete principles are produced. Since there is homogeneousness: as in
the world, that which is notorious is observed ; for having seen a religious
student engaged in sacred study, it follows that his parents were assuredly
of the Brahmanical tribe : so having observed that mahat and the other
characteristics have the three qualities, we conclude what their cause
must be; and in this way from homogeneousness the chief one exists.
Since ejfects exist through energy: in life, that which is effective in any
tiling is active in tlic siune: a iK)tter is able to make ajar, therefore he
makes ajar, not a piece of cloth. Since there is a parting of effect from
cause: the chief one is cause; that which makc^ is cause, that which is
made is effect : the separation of cause and effcKrt : thus ; a jar is compe-
tent to hold curds, honey, water, milk ; not so is its cause, or the lump of
(lay ; but the lump of clay produces the jar, the jar does not produce the
lump of clay. So having obser\'ed intellect and the other effects, it is
inferred that cause must have been separated, of which these discrete
principles are detached portions. Again, since there is a reunion of tke



61

universe (vaiswarupa) . Vistva here meails * the world ;' r6pa, * indivi-
dualization' (or specific fonn) : the abstract condition of the form of the
world is the universe : from its reunion^ nature exists (as cause) ; whence
there is no mutual separation of the five gross elements, earth &c., com-
posing the three worlds ; or, the three worlds are comprised in the gross
elements. The five gross elements are earth, water, fire, air, ether ; which
at the season of general dissolution return in the order of creation to a
state of non-separation, or into the modified five subtile rudiments : they
and the eleven organs reunite in egotism ; egotism resolves into intellect ;
and intellect into nature. Thus the three worlds, at the period of general
dissolution, reunite in nature ; and from such reunion of the discrete and
undiscrete principles, like that of curds and milk, it follows that the
undiscrete principle is cause.



COMMENT.

The sentence is incomplete, the government being in the first member
of the following verse ; kdranam cLsti-avyaktam^ * There is (a general)
cause (which is undiscrete).' Hitherto the subjects discussed have been
the existence of effects, and their correspondence or disagreement with
their cause. It is now shewn that cause exists imperceptible, or un-
discrete.

From specific effects being finite : from the certain or definite measure
of the varieties of discrete principles, as one intellect, one egotism, five
rudiments, and the like. If there were no certain and defined cause, the
effects would be indefinite and unlimited : the water-jar, however, must
be limited by the earth of which it consists, and which, as a distinct body,
is no longer extant. * Homogeneousness,' samanwayaj is defined ' the com-
mon nature of different things*,' as the property of generating pain, plea-
sure, and dulness, which is possessed by intellect and the rest. Effects
exist through energy: * through the energy, ability, or power of cause they



fiwiTsri ?fmR^inn i



62

become active*:' A parting* or issue* of effect from cause, and final
reunion of the separated effect. Vaiswartipa is merely a synonyme of
kdrya^ ' effectt ;' that ii'hich is of various, or every, sort of form, or nature.
The evolution of effect from unseparated cause is illustrated by comparing
nature to a tortoise, the limbs of which are at one time protruded, and at
another retracted ii'ithin the shell : ' As when the limbs which are in the
body of the tortoise protrude, then they are distinguished, or (it is said)
this is the body, those are the limbs : so when they are withdrawn into it
they are undistinguished (from the body)t/ S. Tattra Kaumudi. In like
manner the water-jar or the diadem exist in the lump of clay or of gold,
but are distin^^uished from it only when individually manifested; they
become mere clay or gold again on losing their detached condition : thus
earth and the rest exist in the subtile rudiments ; those and the organs of
sense and action in egotism; egotism in intellect; and intellect in nature:
when manifested or put forth they are separated or distinguished from
their several sources, but at the i)eriod of universal dissolution lose their
distinct form, and become progressively one witli their common original:
the existence of which therefore, us their undiscrete cause, is proved both
by their ap|>carance or separation, and disappearance or reunion.



XVI.

TiiKKK is a general cause, which is undiscrete. It operates by
means of the three qualities, and by mixture, by modification, as
water ; for different objects are diversified by influence of the several
(qualities respectively.


63

BHASHYA.

That which is known as the undiscrete principle is the cause; whence
intellect and the other effects proceed. // operates by means of the three
qualities. — ^That in which are the three qualities, goodness, foulness, and
darkness, is the (aggregate of the) three qualities. What then is that?
The equipoised condition of goodness, foulness, and darkness, is the chief
one (nature). Also, yrom mixture. — In like manner as the Ganges unites
into one river the three streams that descend upon the head of R6dra, so
the (aggregate of the) three qualities, the undiscrete, produces a single
discrete principle; or, as many threads combined form one piece of
cloth, so the undiscrete generates intellect and the rest from the inter-
weaving of the three qualities : and thus from the influence of the three
qualities and their aggregation the discrete world proceeds. But if discrete
principles proceed from one undiscrete, then one form should be common
to all. This objection is invalid ; for it is ^ modification^ like watery from
a variety in the receptacles of the several qualities^ that the three worlds,
derived from one undiscrete principle, assume different conditions of
being. The gods are united with pleasure, mankind with pain, animals
with dulness ; so that a discrete principle, emanating from one nature,
becomes modified, like water, according to the diversified receptacles of
the qualities. * Prati prati implies * several order:' gund sraya^ * a recep-
tacle of the qualities,' by the difference of that receptacle (according to
that several receptacle) in which it is lodged. Discrete principles are
varied from modification ; as the simple element water, when fallen from
the atmosphere, is diversely modified as various fluids, according to its
various combinations, so from one pradhdna proceed the three worlds,
which are no longer of one (uniform) character. In the divinities the
quality of goodness predominates, foulness and darkness are inert; there-
fore they are supremely happy. In men the quality of foulness abounds,
and goodness and darkness are inert ; therefore they are supremely mi-
serable. In animals goodness and foulness are inactive, and darkness
prevails ; and therefore they are supremely insensible.

In these two stanzas the existence of nature {pradhdna) has been deter-
mined : in the next place, that of soul is to be established.



64



COMMENT.

Ill this ven^, bcHide^s the conclusion drawn from the arguments in the
preceding stanza, it is here explained how nature, which is one» produces
divc^rsitied effects. This is said to be through the influence of the three
qualities, the combination or several predominance of which in Tarious
objects is attended with a modification and diversity of that which is
ess(*ntiallv one and the same.

' Modified condition/ according to Vachespati, ' is the character of the
three qualiti(*s, which are never for a moment stationary*/ except when
creation is not : and from this constant vicissitude ensues combination
in different proi>ortions, or the predominance of one or other in different
objects ; for they are always combined, or mixed, in diflferent proportions.
This is the mixture, the blending, or contention of the qualities which the
text intends. Hence proceeds the modification of the original matter; as
rain water, falling upon diflfcrent trees, is modified as the juice of their
different fraits. ' As simple water shed by the clouds, coming into con-
tact with various situations, is modified as sweet, sour, bitter, pungent,
or astringent, in the character of the juice of the cocoa-nut, palm, b^l
karanja, and wood-apple t.* S\ Tatwa Kanmudi. So, according to Cud-
worth, the Italic philosophers maintained that the forms and qualities of
iHMlii^ were only different modifications of primary matter. '' The same
numerical matter," he observes, " differently modifie<l, causing different
phantasms in us, which are therefore vulgarly supposed to be forms and
<{ualities in the things, as when the same wuler is successively chuHged and
IntHsformcil into va[>our, snow, hail, and ire." Intellect. System, III. 426,

It may l>e doubted if the latter portion of the verse should not be


65

preferably rendered, ^ By modification, like water, according to the recep-
tacle, or subject, of the qualities *.' Such is evidently the sense in which
the S. Bhdshya understands it, and such appears to be that of the above
illustration ; the simple water being modified, as sweet, sour, &c., accord-
ing to the tree by which it is absorbed, and the fruit of which it consti-
tutes the juice. So certain objects are fitted for certain qualities ; as the
gods for goodness, men for foulness, animals for darkness ; and nature is
modified in them accordingly ; that quality predominating which is con^
formable to the receptacle: the question here being, not the origin of
things, but of their different properties. Vachespati, however, seems to
make the diversity of objects depend upon the qualities, not the differ-
ence of qualities upon the subject ; explaining the phrase prati gundsraya
visheshdt^ * The diffJerence which is produced by the recipience of each
several quality ; thence, &c.t' The Chandrikd has the same explanation,
adding, * Diversity is from diversity (different ratio) of qualities |.' There
is no incompatibility, indeed, in the two views of the meaning of the text,
as the variety of things depends upon the difference or disproportion of
the three primary qualities, whether those qualities modify, or be modi-
fied by, the subject to which they belong : in either case the variety is not
a different thing, it is only a modification of the same thing, pradhdna.



XVII.

Since the assemblage of sensible objects is for another's use; since
the converse of that which has the three qualities, with other pro-
perties (before mentioned), must exist ; since there must be superin-
tendence ; since there must be one to enjoy ; since there is a tendency
to abstraction ; therefore, soul is.


s



66

bhAshya.

Ag it is saidf ** Liberation is obtaincil by discriminative knowledge of
discTcte and undiscrete principles ;** and whereas the undiscrete has been
shewn to be distinct from the discrete by five arguments (ver. 9), so
soul being, like the undiscrete principle, subtile (not cognizable by the
senses), its existence is now established by inference. Soul is. — ^Why ?
Because the assanhlage of objects is for another's use. — The assemblage of
intellect and the rest is for the use of soul : this is inferred from the irra-
tionality (of nature and its effects), like a bed. In like manner as a bed,
which is an assemblage of bedding, props, cords, cotton, coverlid, and
pillows, is for another's use, not for its own ; and its several component
parts render no mutual ser\'ice ; thence it is concluded that there is a
man who sleeps upon the bed, and for whose use it was made : so this
body, which is an assemblage of the five elements, is for another's use ;
or, there is soul, for whose enjoyment this enjoyable body, consisting of
an aKgr€>gate of intellect and the rest, has been produce<l.

Again, soul is, because the reverse of that which has the three qualities
has been declared: as it was stated in a former verse (11), *A discrete
principle has the three qualities, is indiscriminative, objective, &c.;** and
it is added, " Soul is in these res|)ects the reverse."

Again, soul is, because there must be suj}eriHtendence. — As a charioteer
guides a chariot drawn by horses able to curvet, to prance, to gallop, so
the soul guides the body : as it is said in the Shashihi Tantra^ '' Nature,
direi'ted by soul, pn>cet»ds."

Soul is, Inrause there must be an enjoyer. — In like manner as there must
l)e some one to partake of food flavoured with sweet, sour, salt, pungent,
bitter, and astringent flavours, so, as there is no capability of fruition in
intellect and the other pro<lucts of nature, there must be soul, by which
this l>ody is to be enjoyed.

A<;ain, soul is, because there is a tendency to abstraction. — Kaitalya is
tlu» abstnict noun, derived from kevala, ' sole, only' — for, on account of,
that (abstniction); the practice of it: from the exercise of (or tendency
to) abstraction (for the sake of its own separation or detachment) it is



67

inferred that soul is. That is. Every one, whether wise or unwise, equally
desires imperishable release from succession of worldly existence.

It is next to be determined whether this soul be but one superin-
tendent over all bodies, like the string that supports all the gems of a
necklace ; or whether there be many souls presiding severally over indi-
vidual bodies.

COMMENT.

Arguments for the existence of soul as a distinct principle are here
adduced.

The existence of soul is established by inference : a bed implies a
sleeper ; nature, made up of its effects, is for the production of pain,
pleasure, and insensibility, of which soul alone is conscious ^. But ad-
mitting that the assemblage is for the benefit of another, why should that
other be soul ? because soul is not a similar aggregate ; it is not made up
of qualities and the like, but is the reverse of nature in these respects, as
was explained in verse 11: or, as the commentator on the S6tra, Sanhata
pardrthatwdt^j observes, because the property of pain or pleasure, which
is identical with body, must be different from that which enjoys the one,
or suffers the other. Because there must be an enjoyer. — The existence
of an enjoyer implies the existence of both pleasure and pain ; election
between which cannot be made by intellect and the rest, which are inse-
parable from them, and it must be the act of something else, which is
soul. ' Intellect and the rest are the things to be used {hhogya) or per-
ceived (drisya), and consequently imply one who perceives J.' S. Tatwa
Kaumudi.

The term kaivalya^ rendered ' abstraction,' signifies ' detachment from
the world ;' or, as it is explained, ' absolute suppression of the three kinds
of pain, as a property of sacred writ, holy sages, and inspired teachers or
prophets. It must therefore be something different from intellect and the


68

rest, which arc the same tlung as pain, and cannot effect a separation from
their own essence*.* S. Taiwa Kanmudi. So Vijnana Bhirshu explains
kairaljfa, ' absolute extirpation of pain t-'

The arfi^timents in the text for the existence of soul are so many
oriirinai aphorisms of Kapila; as, 1. 'Soul is distinct from body, &c4:*
:!. * From an agf^regate being for another s use||f 3. ' From (the proper*
ties of) soul being the converse of the three qualities, &c.§'/ 4. 'From
superintendence ••:' 5. * From the tendency to abstraction ♦•/ The com-
mentator notices a different reading of the last S6tra * From nature
not l>eing competent to abstraction :* but this he considers erroneous tt*
The fifth book of the S. PravachaHa contains other S6tras affirmative of
the separate existence of soul.



XVIII.

SiNCK birth, death, and the instruments of life are allotted seve-
rally ; since occupations are not at once universal; and since quali-
ties affect variously ; multitude of souls is demonstrated.

bhAshya.

Lije and death, and the instruments (of life). — From the several allotment
of these : this is the meaning of the text. Thus, if tliere was but one soul.


69

then when one was born, all would be bom ; when one died, all would
die ; if there was any defect in the vital instruments of one, such as
deafness, blindness, dumbness, mutilation, or lameness, then all would be
blind, deaf, dumb, maimed, and halt : but this is not the case ; and there*
fore, from the several apportionment of death, birth, and instruments of
life, multiplicity of soul is demonstrated. Since occupations are not at
once universal. — Yugapat means, ^ at one time/ Not at once ; or, at one
time. Occupatiofi: as engaging in acts of virtue and the like are not
observed to occur at one moment; but some are busy with virtuous,
others with vicious, actions ; some cultivate indifference to the world, and
some acquire true wisdom : therefore, from the non-contemporaneousness
of occupation, multitude of souls is concluded. Also, since qualities affect
variously. — From the contrary nature of the qualities multitude of souls
is proved ; as, in birth in general, one endowed with the quality of good-
ness is happy ; another with that of foulness is wretched ; and a third
having that of darkness is apathetic : hence, therefore, multitude of souls
is proved.

Soul is not agent : this is next declared.

COMMENT.

The multitudinous existence of soul, or the individual incorporation of
soul in different bodies, is here maintained.

Birth is defined to be the association of soul with body ; death, its
detachment: soul being always existent, and not in itself subject to birth
or death; as in the S. Pravachana Bhdshya*: also the S. Tatwa Kau-
mudi ; ' Life is the combination of soul with the pains incident to body,
&c. ; not any modification of soul. Death is the abandonment of those
bodies, &c. ; not the destruction of soul f.* The instruments of life are


70

the or^i^ns of perception and action, with egotism and intellect. ' Allot-^
ment/ niyama, properly ' rule, rcf^ulation/ is explained by vyavastkd,
which may import * distribution ;* as, ' The distribution is in regard to dif-
ferent souls in several bodies*:* so also the S6tra of Kapila ; ' From the
distribution of life, &c. follows the multitudinousness of soul t-* The term
is (^specially understood, however, of the distribution which is laid down
by relip^ious and legal authorities, ' a prescribed distribution or allotment,*
as the commentator on the S6tra observes, after stating, * The virtuous
man is happy in heaven,' &c. (see p. 48), * Souls are many, as otherwise
there would not be the occurrence of such division, or appointment <^
conditions, as is laid down in the Veda and the law \.' If soul were one,
all the accidents, vicissitudes, and interests of existence would simulta-
neously affect all individuals.

But though manifold, as individualized, this individual soul is one and
unchangcnl, through all its migrations into various forms, until its final
liberation. It is the disguise which is changed, not that which wears it,
as has been before explained (p. 48).

The multiplied existence of soul is in especial contradiction to the
doctrine of the VedAntis, of the universality of one supreme soul of the
world, from which all human souls are derived, as in such texts as this;
* One only existent soul is distributed in all beings ; it is beheld collect-
ively or disi>ersedly, like the reflection of the moon in still or troubled
water. Soul, eteniul, omnipresent, undisturbed, pure, one, is multiplied
by the i>ower of delusion, not of its own nature ||/ This is undoubtedly
the doctrine of the V{*das, and the Sankhya teachers, iiiio profess to
receive those works as authority, are obliged to interpret the texts



ir^ ^ fnin^ ^^win wvm ^ k^mm^ i



71

unfavourable to their dogmas in a peculiar manner. Thus the S6tra of
Kapila asserts, ' There is no contradiction (to the doctrine of many souls)
in the unity of the V6das, from its reference to the comprehensiveness of
genus*:' that is, Soul, considered as genus, is but one; its nature and
properties are common to all souls, individualized and manifold in con-
nection with individual aggregates of the products of nature. ' Genus
here means community, unity of nature; such is the purport of the
unity of the VMas ; not indivisibility, from the absence of any motive
(for its continuing undivided). This is the meaning of the S6tra t-' The
subject is discussed at considerable length by Vijnana Bhikshu; but,
notwithstanding his arguments, it is clear that the Sdnkhya doctrine is
contradictory to that of the V6das.

The doctrines of those Grecian philosophers, who maintained the im-
materiality and eternity of soul, conformed to that of the V^das. As far
as we are able to learn of the doctrines of Pythagoras, he taught that
human souls were portions of one supreme soul. Plato held the souls of
men to be emanations from God, through the soul of the world. Souls
and bodies were both portions of the to ei^, the 'one existent,' of the Stoics;
and even Aristotle appears to have conceived the human soul to be an
intellectual energy, derived from an eternal intelligence. Cudworth as-
serts that none of the ancient philosophers maintained the S^nkhya notion
of the eternity of individual souls. '' It doth not follow,'' he remarks,
'^ because they held souls to be ingenerable, that therefore they supposed
souls to have existed from all eternity of themselves unmade. This was
never asserted by theist or atheist. The philosophic theists, who main-
tained (Btemitatem animorum^ did, notwithstanding, assert their essential
dependence upon the Deity, like that of the lights upon the sun, as if
they were a kind of eternal effulgency, emanation, or eradiation, from an
eternal Sun." Intell. Syst. III. 429.



ri'^mlri^fflHi HlrMiiiHiiiaiiSH Hih^HHimf<Kjui; |



72



And from that contrast (before set forth) it follows, that soul is
witness, solitary, bystander, spectator, and {)assive.

BHASHYA.

And Jrom that contrast: the contrast of the possession of the three
qualities. Contrast: reverse. Soul is void of qualities, is discriminatiTe,
enjoycr, &c. The contrast is that presented by these attributes of soul;
and thence, the qualities of goodness, foulness, and darkness being agents
(active), it follows that soul is (passive) witness. This sentence is syntac-
tically connected with the preceding, regarding the multitudinousness of
soul. The qualities, as agents, act; a witness neither acts nor desists
from action. Again, abstraction (detachment) is an attribute (of soul) ;
the pro{>erty of being sole is detachment or abstraction, difference or
distinctness (from all others) ; that is, it is distinct, or separate, from the
three qualities. Next, bei7ig a bystander (is an attribute of soul) : the
condition of a middle man (or looker-on, or neutral). Soul is a bystander*
like a wandering mendicant : as a vagrant ascetic is lonely and uncon-
cerned, whilst the villagers are busily engaged in agriculture, so soul does
not act where the qualities are present. Hence also proceed the proper-
ties of being a spectator and passive. From being a bystander, soul is a
spectator, and is not a i>erfonner of those acts (which it contemplates).
Th<> three qualities, goodness, foulness, and darkness, engage in acts in
the relation of agent and act ; not soul : and in this manner the existence
of soul is demonstrated.

But if soul is a non-agent, how does it exercise volition ? as, I will
practise virtue, I will not commit crime : here soul must be the agent ;
for if soul is not the agent i^then these puqnises cannot be entertained).
This is a dilemma : to explain which it is said —

COMMENT.

In the preceding verse it was stated that soul was many; in this, its
other attributes are enumerated.



73

The conjunction cha^ in the term tasmat-cha^ connects the sentence
with the preceding, or with bahutwam^ * multitudinousness.' The contrast
alluded to is that intimated in ver. 14, and is this : Soul has not the three
qualities, it is discriminative, it is perceptive, it is specific, it is rational,
it is unprolific ; being the reverse, in these respects, of nature and its
effects. Not being an object of sense, but percipient of such objects, it
observes and testifies to the existence of nature and its products, like an
evidence in a lawsuit being plaintiff and defendant. 'That which is
irrational cannot observe, and that to which an object is apparent is a
witness*.' Solitariness is 'exemption from the three kinds of paint;'
or, in fact, total abstraction from the world : this is the necessary conse-
quence of being devoid of the three qualities, which are essentially the
same with pleasure, pain, and dulness ; and from them, therefore, soul is
equally free. From the same cause, absence of qualities and insuscepti-
bility of agreeable or disagreeable emotions, proceeds the next property of
soul, that of being a bystander ; madhyasthay ' neutral, indifferent, uncon-
cerned ;' uddsina, ' neither rejoicing in pleasure, nor sorrowing in pain.'
Qualities, and particularly foulness, are indispensable to activity; and
being without them, soul is consequently inert : the same is considered
to be also the necessary result of its being^' discriminative and unprolific,
or unproductive J.' Vijnana Bhikshu restricts the term sAkshij • witness,'
to the sense of ' beholder,' distinguishing it from the other term, to which
such a translation is more applicable, drashtri^ as importing one who has
the object near to, or before, his eyes ; the latter implies seeing in general :
hence he says, 'Soul witnesses or contemplates buddhi (intellect), and
sees the other principles ||.'


^nffif ftdf I " ^^\q ^n^ '^^s^wf g ^fmrfifrfk



u



74



TiiF.REFORE, by reason of union with it, insensible body seems
Hcnsible; and though the qualities be active, the stranger (soul)
a|)])ear.s as the agent.

bhAshya.

Here soul is said to be i)osse8sed of sensation ; and in connection with
it* intellect and the other predicates of nature assuming the appearance
of sense seem sentient : as in life, a jar with cold water appears to be
cold, with warm water seems to be warm ; so intellect and the rest, from
HHiOH li'iih it, with soul, seem sensible. But the qualities perform the
active application (of sense), not the soul : for although in common it is
said, soul is the doer, the goer, yet soul is not the agent. How so?
ThoHifh ike f/Hfilities be active, (soul) the strantfer appears as the agent.
There liein^ activity of the qualities, soul, which is indifTerent, or in-
active, appears as if it was the agent ; which it is not. Here is an illus-
tration : as a man who is not a thief, being taken up along with thieves,
is susi^ected to be a thief also ; so soul, being connected with the three
active qualities, is sup|>osed, ttif^ugh inert, to be active also.

In this manner the distinction of the perceptible, imperceptible, and
thinking; prinriples (ver. 2. p. 13) has been explained ; from the discrimi-
nation of which liberation is obtained. It is next expounded why the
union of the two (chief) principles, nature and soul, takes place.

COMMENT.

It is here taup:ht that the sentient faculty resides in soul, and not, as it
api>ears to do, in the products of nature; and that activity resides in the
qualities, not, as it apiN^ars to do, in soul.

The term chttami, from chit, * to reAeci,* means in general ' reason,
intelliuence ;* but it is here applied to the |)ossession or exercise of every
faculty pnq»er to a sentient and thinking beinir. It is the attribute of
soul onlv. as will be more distinctly made clear when the functions of the
senses, of consciousness, and intellect are explained, and they are shewn



76

to be merely the vehicles or instruments through which ideas and notions
are conveyed. They seem, however, to act independently, but this is
merely from their union with, or, more correctly, proximity to, soul;
samyoga being explained by the commentators to mean here merely
sannidhdna^ * approximation.' In like manner, soul, which is contem-
plative, not active, mover, though itself unmoved, appears to be active
through a similar contiguity. ' I am sentient ; wishing to do, I do : here
a common origin or subject of action and reflection is apprehended*.'
S. Tatwa Kaumudl. But this is an error, as the site or subject of action
and reflection is distinct t- The term linga in the first line is explained
to denote mahat and the subtile products of pradhdna. Uddslna^ ' indif-
ferent,' is said also to mean * inert {.'

But it appears that there are passages in the Y^das and in the law-
books which attribute agency to soul, and knowledge to lniddhi\\: and to
meet this is supposed to be the purpose of the aphorism, * Agency from
affection, intelligence from propinquity §;' that is, 'The apparent agency
of soul is from the affection (or operation) of buddhi ; the apparent intel-
ligence of buddhi (understanding) is from the proximity of soul ; neither
is actual. Their mutual transfer of properties is like that of fire and iron
in a heated bar, or of the sun and water, in the reflected rays of the
former from the latterly.' S. Prav. S. In like manner the S. Chandrikd
exemplifies the doctrine by reference to buddhi^ the organ of the under-
standing ; and furnishes also an example of the sense in which chetand.



1 /



%fRt)


76

* intcUigonrc,* is to Iw understood : 'Thence the effect (of pradhama), the
category bmUUii, which is unintelli<i;ent, is as^ it were intelligent, (seems to
be that wliich Miys) I know, becomes as it were endowed with know-
ledi^e*:* that is, it is not the understandinc:, but soul, that knows. This,
however, applies e(|ualiy to all the other products of nature, as far as to
the subtile rudiments, whether individually considered, or as composing
subtile body t- They are all non-sentient, or irrational and inert. Their
activity de|K*nds on combination with the qualitic*s; their sentient power
on proximity to soul : and the conjoint presence of these two properti
leads to the erroneous belief that soul is auent, as well as sentient.



XXI.

Foil the sours contemplation of nature, and for its al)straction,
the union of InUIi takes place, as of the halt and blind. By that
union a creation is framed.

BHASHYA.

The union of s<ml with nature Lh for its contemplation (of nature) ;
that is, soul contemplates nature (in the state of) intellect and the other
eff*ects to the t;ross elements inclusive. For that objiHrt is the union of
nature with soul ; and the same union, which is also for the abstraction
. of the latter . is like thv aasiiciatioti of the halt anil b/infl. As, a lame man
ami a blind man, descTted by th(*ir fellow-tnivellers, who in making their
way with difficulty through a forest had been dispersed by robbers, hap-
|)enin^ to encounter each other, and entering; into conversation so as to
inspire* nmtual confidence, agreed to divide between them the duties of
walking and of sc^eing; accordingly the lame man was mounted on the



77

blind man's shoulders, and was thus carried on his journey, whilst the
blind man was enabled to pursue his route by the directions of his com-
panion. In the same manner the faculty of seeing is in soul, not that of
moving ; it is like the lame man : the faculty of moving, but not of seeing,
is in nature ; which resembles, therefore, the blind man. Further, as a
separation takes place between the lame man and the blind man, when
their mutual object is accomplished, and they have reached their journey's
end, so nature, having effected the liberation of soul, ceases to act ; and
soul, having contemplated nature, obtains abstractedness; and conse-
quently, their respective purposes being effected, the connexion between
them is dissolved.

Again, By that^ by that union, a creation is framed. — ^As the birth of a
child proceeds from the union of male and female, so the production of
creation results from the connection of nature and soul.

The text next describes the particulars of all the products of nature.

COMMENT.

The object of the union of soul and nature, or the final liberation of
the former by its knowledge of the latter, is here explained.

' Contemplation,' darsana, is considered to comprise ' fruition,' hhoga.
As nature is devoid of sensibility and reflection, it can neither enjoy nor
observe ; and its existence would be therefore without an object, unless
there were some other one capable both of observation and fruition *.
This other one is soul. But, again, as pain is inseparable from nature,
so enjoyed soul desires, after a season, to be loosed from the combination ;
and this detachment, or the liberation of purified soul, necessarily re-
quires some one from which to be liberated : that some one is nature :
consequently, for the fulfilment of their respective ends — ^the fruition of
nature, and liberation of soul — their mutual cooperation and combination
are essential. ' Abstraction,' kaivalya^ is explained by Yachespati, ' The
cause of the attribution of separation to purified soul, which cannot be



* Ht"l IWR HtWT^Pfft^ ^ ^HH^rfif I



78

without previous union with nature *.' But these results cannot be at^
tained without the evolution of the products of nature, and consequently
they assume their several developments* or, in other words, a ereatmm i$
framed; as it is only in the state of discrete principles that nature is to
be contempIatcHi by soul, and it is only by the exact appreciation of the
same, and of their source, that soul can detach itself from nature. For
both purposes, therefore, the world must exist, as developed from its
material cause.

There are passages in the VMas, however, attributing creation to soul ;
as, ' That was from it — From this soul was ether produced t*' To this it
is replied, that all that is herein intended is the attribution of the act of
the inferior, or nature, to the superior, soul : ' As in the world it is said
that a king triumphs or is defeated, when it is not he, but his army, that
suffers a defeat or achieves a victory \.' S. Prav. Sara.



XXII.

From nature issues the great one ; thence egotism ; and from

this the sixteenfold set: from five among the sixteen proceed five

elements. ,

BHASHYA.

Nature (prakriti) is also termed ' the chief one' (pradhdna), ' the su-
preme* {brahme), ' the undistinpruishcnl* {avyaktam), * the multi-compre-
heiidinc:* (bahudhdudka) and tudi/d. Such are its synonymes. From that
which is devoid of characteristic attributes, or from (crude) nature, the
great one (mahal) is produced : this is also termed ' intellect* (buddhi)*^ it
is also called dsuri^ or ' demoniac ;* tnati, or ' understanding ;* ' notoriety*


79

(khtfdti), * knowledge' (jtuifia), * wisdom' {prajnd). From thence proceeds
egotism, also called ' the origin of the elements/ &c. {hh{itddi\ ' the lumi-
nous' (taiJMa)^ * the modified' {vaikrita)^ * conscience' (abhimdna). From
this the sixteenfold set. — From this, from egotism, the class of sixteen is
deriyed. This consists of the five subtile elements, or the archetypes of
sound, touch, form, flavour, and odour : the synonymes of tan-mdtra are
all words denoting ' subtile' (suishma) : also the eleven organs, the ear,
the skin, the eye, the tongue, the nose, which are the five organs of per-
ception ; the voice, the hand, the foot, and the organs of excretion and
generation, which are the five organs of action ; and, besides these, mind,
making the eleventh, and being an organ of both action and sensation.
These constitute the class of sixteen produced from egotism. From Jwe
among the sixteen. — From the five subtile elements proceed the five gross
elements : as it is said, '* From the archetype sound, ether is produced ;
from touch, air ; from form, light (or fire) ; from flavour, water ; from
odour, earth : and thus from these five rudiments the five gross elements
proceed." As also it is said, ** From discriminative knowledge of percep-
tible and imperceptible principles and the thinking soul (see ver. 2)
liberation is obtained." Now, therefore, intellect and the rest, to the
gross elements inclusive, forming twenty-three categories, have been spe-
cified (in the text); the undiscrete principle has been described (see
ver. 15, 16); and soul has been explained (ver. 18, 19); and these con-
stitute the twenty-five tatwas (physical and metaphysical categories of the
S^khya system of philosophy). He who knows the universe to be com-
posed of these principles — called tatwas, itom the abstract of tad, ' that,'
implying the abstract existence of those principles — as it is said, '' He
who knows the twenty-five principles, whatever order of life he may have
entered, and whether he wear braided hair, a top-knot only, or be shaven,
he is liberated : of this there is no doubt" (See p. 1.) The twenty-five
categories are, nature, soul, intellect, ^otism, the five subtile (or rudi-
mental) elements, the eleven organs of sensation and of action, and the
five gross elements.

It is stated in this stanza, from nature issues the great one. What is
meant by that great one is next defined.



80



COMMENT.

Tbe categories of the S&nkhya system have been before alluded to
(ver. 3. p. 10), in explanation of their mutual relations, and of the proper-
ties which they have in common, or by which they are discriminated
from one another; but we have them here enumerated in the order of
their production, as prefatory to a detailed description of them and of
their functions contained in the following stanzas.

The generic term for the twenty-five principles, tattwa^ or as usually
and with equal correctness written tatwoj is explained by Gaurapada to
mean ' the abstract existence/ astitwa^, ov<ria, essentia^ of /a/f* that; that
thing, which is the object of philosophical investigation, or which has a
real existence, and must be known. The more common etymology, tal,
' that,* and iiram, ' thou,' belongs to the V^d4nta system ; as in the Ma^
kdvdkya^ tat-iwam asi^ ' that (supreme soul) thou art,* implies the identity
of universal and individualized spirit.

We have in the scholia of Gaurapada on this stanza some synonymes
of nature and the two first principles, the analysis of which elucidates
the ideas entertained of them by the Sankhyas. The succeeding stanzas
will aflbrd an opportunity of adverting to the terms used for intellect and
egotism, and we may here confine the inquiry to the synonymes of
nature, or matter.

Prakriti, as has been previously mentioned (p. 17), intimates, that
which precedes, or is prior to, making ; that which is not made from any
thing else*. It is also used relatively, to sif^nify that which is the source
from which a prcnluct is derived ; so that mahai is the prakrili of akamkdr&^
&r. < see p. IH). Here, however, our business is with the primary source
of all material pnKlucts, and the term indicates merely that which pre-
cediHl ipm) proihiction (kriii); what that may have been is left wholly
undefined or unimplied by the particular term. The same may be said
of it agreeably to another etymology given in the Sdnkhya Sara, where



ffiffw I ^ in^ I



81

pra is interpreted by prakrish'ta^ ^ principal, chief, best/ analogously to
its other denomination, pradhdna, * the chief.' Pradhdna is derived from
pra^ ' principal,' and dhd^ ' to hold :' ' that in which all generated effect
is comprehended*.' The next synonyme, avyakta, 'the unseparated,
the undistinguished, the unperceived,' has been also previously noticed
(p. 41) as derived from anja^ ' to make clear,' with vt, separative preposi-
tion, and the negative a prefixed : the term is of as frequent occurrence
as either of the preceding, and is constantly used as a synonyme of pra-
kriti in the Puranas and in Manu. Brahme, which is to be carefully
distinguished from Brahma^ the personified creative power, is ordinarily
applied either to the Y^das or supreme spirit, and is an uncommon syno-
nyme oi prakriti; but as derived from vriha^ 'to increase,' it implies
the first principle of which the expansion becomes all perceptible objects.
Bahtidhdnaka is derived, like pradhdna^ from dhd^ ' to hold ;' dhdnaka,
' the holder' or ' comprehender' of hahu^ ' much', of all things. Mdyd^ in
its ordinary sense of ' illusion,' is applied to prakriti, not by the S&nkhyas,
for they maintain the reality of existing things, but by the Y^d&ntis and
Pauranikas, who regard creation as a delusion or as a sport of the Creator :
it is derived from the root ma, ' to measure,' and may here perhaps imply
either ' comprehension,' like pradhdna, or ' extension.' There is no ex-
planation of the term by any of the Scholiasts. Yijnana Bhirshu quotes
the Y6das to shew that it is synonymous with prakriti f. In the Sdnkhya
Sdra we have other synonymes, as, sakti, * power,' Suva/An ; ajd, * the un-
born, the unproduced ;' tamos, ^ darkness ;' and avidyd, * ignorance ||.'

Now what is to be considered as the sense of these words ? By what
equivalent is prakriti to be best rendered ? Professor Lassen translates
it procreatrix, but this seems to convey too much the idea of personality,
and therefore, although very well agreeing with the original term as used
by the Pauraniks, where prakriti is commonly personified, yet it can



* inlN%sft*f?(^ i^i^^^iH^Qi nvRif^iW I t irnrf ?| nf



82

sK^nn ely l)e considered as indicative of that which not only produces, but
is the thin<; produced, being at once the origin and substance of all
things. Mr. Colebrooke has rendered the term sometimes by ' nature,*
and sometimes by 'matter*/ the former expresses both the parent and the
progeny, and agrees in being also the constant sul)ject of prasopapeia.
It is therefore preferable to perhai>s any synonyme that the English Ian*
gua<j:e can offer. At the same time the correct equivalent is ' matter,*
umteria, quasi mater ^ * the substance and source of material things ;* not,
however, crude, visible, or divisible matter, but that first principle of the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, and of Aristotle, which having neitlier
parts, nor form, nor sense, nor quantity, nor any of the properties of
IkhIv, was yet the one universal, incorporeal, invisible substance from

which all bodies were derived. A<o fii riiu roO yeyovoro^ oparoC koi irarrmt
nicrOfp-tw ^fjripa Ka\ inrofo^ii^ fiirt yiiu fi^rt aipa fiffT^ in/p M'i're %fimp XiywfAa^p MTTt
oTii €K ToiVttJ*' M'/re €^ cSf ravra yty o¥€i/, aXX avoparov €ic6^ n cai afioptpov var-

'We'v. Timauis. See also the Physics, b. III. c. (I. That we are to under-
stand this of the prakriii of the SAnkhyas is evident from the meaning of
its s<*veral ap|>ellations. It is also said by Vijnana Bhirshu, that* the
world is merely modification of form, of which prakriii is the materi-
ality *.* ' It is not individual or formal, but universal material t-* S. Pr.
lihfhhya. Its invisibility is, as we have seen (ver.B. p. 2i)), attributed, not to
its non-existence, but to its subtilty (saukshmya), Prakriii is also defined
Mhe e(|uilibrium of the three qualities |;* and here it differs from the
subject matter of Aristotle in having qualities. These qualities, however,
whilst prakriii is yet unevolve<l, neutralize each other, and are scarcely
(pialiti(*s as rei^ards primary nature, because their loss of equilibrium, or
their activity, is concurrent with the discontinuance o( prakriii as separate
from its products. So far, however, prakriii may be considered as differ*
cut from the brute matter of the ancient physiologists, that it produces


83

products of its own energy or power for a special cause, and is therefore
more akin to the '* plastic nature that acts, evcKa ToSy for the sake of some-
thing." In the S&nkhya system, however, such nature is not distinct
from matter itself, whilst it appears to be a different principle in the
writings of the Greek philosophers, although not always very intelligibly
described ; for, as Cudworth observes of Aristotle, ** he nowhere declares of
this nature of his, whether it be corporeal or incorporeal, substantial or
accidental." To conclude, we are to understand of the prakriti of the
Sdnkhyas, primary, subtile, universal substance, undergoing modification
through its own energy, and for a special motive, by which it is manifest
as individual and formal substance, varied according to the predominance
of qualities, which are equipoised and inert in the parent, and unequal
and active in the progeny.



XXIII.

Ascertainment is intellect. Virtue, knowledge, dispassion, and
power are its faculties, partaking of goodness. Those partaking of
darkness are the reverse.

BHASHYA.

The definition of intellect is ascertainment. Ascertaining (discerning,
determining) is ascertainment: as in the seed the future germinating
shoot is contained, so is determination (in intellect). This is ajar, this is
cloth : that intellect which will so determine is so defined. This intellect
has eight members, according to the twofold affection of goodness and
darkness. The first kind, or intellect, partaking of goodness, is of four
kinds, virtue, knowledge, dispassion, power. Virtue comprises humanity,
benevolence, and acts of restraint {yama) and of obligation (niyama). The
former are said in the Pdtanjala to be, restraint of cruelty, of falsehood,
of dishonesty, of incontinence, and of avarice : the latter are the obliga-
tions of purification, contentment, religious austerity, sacred study, and
worship of Grod. Knowledge has for its synonymes, manifestation, cer-



84

tuiuty, li^ht. It is of two kinds, external and internal. The former is
(knowlodKc of the Vedas and their six subordinate branches, recitation*
ritual, grammar, glossary, prosody, and astronomy ; also (of) the jmramag^
and of logic, tlu^doflr}', and law. Internal knowledge is that of nature
and 9<mh or Uhe discrimination that) this is nature, the equipoised condi*
tion of ^oiKlness foulness, and darkness : this is soul, perfect, devoid of
qualities, {ler^-ading, and sentient. By external knowledge worldly dis-
tinction or admiration is acquired; by internal knowledge, liberation.
DispassioH is also of two kinds, external and internal. The former is the
inditfereiice of one who contemns sensible objects from observing their
defects, or the trouble of acquiring and preserving them ; the inconveni-
vwcv of attachment to them ; their liability to decay ; and the injustice
they cause. The latter is the indifference of one who is desirous of libe-
ration, and ItMiks upon nature as if it was a piece of witchcraft or a dream.
Power is the abstrdct pro|>erty of a su|>erior (or divine) being: it is
ei&rhtfold, ulic capa(*ity of) minuteness, magnitude, heaviness, lightness,
reach, gnitifu^ation of will, dominion, subjugation, and irresistible purpose.
Atomic existence is meant by ' minuteness;* so that a person becoming
at(miically subtile or minute may traverse the world : ' magnitude* is said
of one who may midwe himself a giant : ' lightness* is having limbs like
the fibres of the lotus stalk, or like cotton, so as to be able to stand upon
the tops of the filaments of a flower: 'reach* is attainment of a desired
obje(*t by iroiiig to the place when* it is situated, wherever that may be:
' gratification of will* is obtainintr or efl*ecting whatever is desired: 'do-
minion* is trovernintr the three worlds, as a king: ' subjugation' b having
all thinus subject : ' im^sistible pur])osi'* is compelling the site, rest, and
motion of all things, from BrahmA to a block, agr<?^<^bly to the will of the
|)ersun endowed with this faculty. These* are the four properties of intel-
Ic^ct which soul obtains when the qualities of foulness and darkness are
overcome liy that of goodness.

But ikose jHiriakiNff of darkness are the reverse. — When intellect isinflu*
t*nced by the quality of darkness, then its four properties arc the reverse
of the al>ove; they are, vice, ignorance, passion, and weakness. In this
manner intelli*i*t having eight members, as it is affected by goodness or



85

foulness, is produced from the undiscrete principle having the three
qualities.

Intellect has thus been explained. Egotism is next described.



COMMENT.

The first product of nature, or intellect, is here described by its
properties.

Intellect (buddhi) is adhyavasdya*. It is not easy to ofier a satisfactory
equivalent for this word, nor to understand precisely what is meant by it.
In the Amera Kosha it occurs as a synonyme of utsdhali, * effort, strenu-
ous and continued efibrt, perseverance ;' according to RamAsrama, * pos-
sessing great power]:.' He derives it from sho antakarmmani ||, ' finishing,
making end of,' with adhi§, *over,' and ava^^ *off;' that is, entirely or
absolutely ending or effecting; as in the Hitapadesa: 'The precepts of
knowledge confer not the least benefit on one who is afraid of exertion :
of what use is a lamp to a blind man, though it be within his reach ^^.'
In the Mitdkshara, utsdha is explained, ' Effort (or perseverance) in the
performance of acts accomplishing the objects of man ft-' ^^ ^^ Bhatti
Kdvya we have the word used in the sense of ' wish, purpose, determina-
tion :' * The bird said to the monkeys. You have not studied the law, if at
such a season you wish (or resolve) to die J|.'

In a preceding passage (ver. 5) the phrase prati vishaya adhyavasdya ||||,
' ascertainment of several objects,' was given as the definition of drishia.



^wi I I'll Hldr^n^ium^Ni I



86

'perception;* and the explanation of the Scholiast* huddkitydparajmdmam\
' knowledge, which is the exercise of the intellectual faculty/ was cited
(p. *2:)). The same commentator, Vachespati, here defines iu ' the specific
function of intellect, not differing from intellect itself;* or, to quote the pas-
sage at length, 'Ascertainment is intellect, from the identity of the act and
the agent, as will be explained. Every one who engages in any matter first
observes, or considers ; he next reflects, it is I who am concerned in this ;
and then determines, this is to be done by me ; thence he proceeds to act :
this is familiar to every one. Thence this ascertainment that such act is
to be done is the determination of intellect, which is as it were endowed
with reason, from the proximity of the sentient principle. This is the
H|)ecific function of intellect, not differing from intellect itself; and the
definition of intellect is ascertainment, as that comprehends both its
generic and specific distinctions t*'

The explanation of the S. Chandrikd is to the same effect: ^AdkjfOf-
vasdifu is a sort of modified condition of intellect, as flame is of a lamp;
it is certainty in this form, such an act is to be done by me |.*

These explanations, however, would rather seem to intimate intention,
or volition, or, at least, the determination to act after reflection ; but the
determination or conclusion that such an act should be done, does not
necessarily signify that it shall be done : it is only the conclusion or
ascertainment of its fitness. This function of the intellect, also, is not
indispensably connected with the notion of will ; as in the example given


87

by Gaurapada ; where, in the simple conclusion after consideration, ^* this
object is ajar ; that, is a piece of cloth," no wish, or will, is indicated ; no
act follows. It is clear also that he considers adhyavasdya merely as the
functions of intellect in exercise : they are in intellect, and part of it, as
the germ is in the seed, until brought into activity. Intellect is only an
instrument; that which, having received the ideas or images conveyed
through the oi^ns of sense, and the mind, constructs them into a con-
clusive idea, which it presents to soul. Its function in exercise, there-
fore, is ascertainment or certainty, as described in the S. Pravachana
BhashyUy which explains adhyavasdya^ ' the synonyme, as well as buddhi,
of the great principle {mahat)^ and its specific function denominated
ascertainment *.'

The other synonymes of this principle are, buddhi^ derived from
hudhy * to know,' * knowing, intellect.' Mahaty ' great, the great princi-
ple ;' * The first and most important of the products of nature, and presid-
ing over and pervading the wholef.' Asurip this is a very unusual and
questionable denomination. It occurs only in the S. Bhdshya^ and may
be an error, perhaps for semushiy one of the synonymes of buddhi in the
Amera kasha. It cannot be connected with asura, ' a demon,' as if the
faculty were incompetent to convey divine knowledge ; for one of its pro-
perties, in connexion with the quality of goodness, is jnydna^ ' true know-
ledge.' There is no good reason why it should be derived from Asuri,
the pupil of Kapila, unless allusion is made to some personification of
intellect, as the bride of the sage. No explanation of the word is given
in the Bhdshya, and I must confess my inability^ to suggest one entitled
to any confidence. Matt means 'understanding:' manyate anayd, that
by which any thing is understood. Khydti properly signifies ' fame,'
but here means * notoriety, notion, familiar knowledge ;' as in the Smriti,


88

' The great one it is, whence the familiar notions of the universe are
always produced */ Jnydna is usually the term for 'true or divine know-
ledge ;' knowledge of matter and spirit leading to liberation ; but it is
here employed in its generic purport, ' that by which things are known/
The same may be said of prajnd^ which is also commonly used in the
sense of ' true wisdom,' but here implies merely, * that by which know«
ledge is obtained,' prajudyati anayd^ as Ramasrama expounds it. Several
of these terms, in their technical, as well as literal application, bear an
analog}' to the t^wk of Aristotle, and the ^poVi^n? of Plato. M. Cousin
considers the category to be ' une sorte d ame du monde.* It is, however,
the instrument most proximate to soul, by which the latter perceives,
wills, and acts.

Intellect is of two kinds, or has two sets of properties, as it is influ-
enced or affected by the opposite qualities, goodness and darkness. The
former are, ' virtue,' dherma; * knowledge,' jnyi/iia; ' dispassion,' vairdgya;
and ' i>ower,' aiswaryya. The latter are their negatives, 'vice,' adhenma;

* ignorance/ aJHydna ; * passion,' avairagya ; and ' weakness,' anaiswaryya.
These again comprehend spcH^ific varieties.

Dherma, ' virtue,' according to the 6'. Bhashya, comprehends morality
and religion. The S. Tatwa Kaumudi explains it, * The cause of happi-
ness and liberation f.' As the source of prosperity and happiness in life*
it is the discharge of religious and moral obligations!; as the means of
liberation, it is the observance of the eightfold yoga^ or eight modes of
contemplative devotion ||. Jnydna, or ' knowledge,* is defined by the
same Scholiast to be, ' distinct notion of the difference between the three
qualities and soul §.' ' Dispassion,' vairdffya, is the extinction of rdga^

* colour,* or passion, which like dyes of various hues tinctures the soul^/



^ ^]<8»|<^MMrtll^irfljl4 I ^ iHII<^:


89

' Power/ aiswaryya^ is the possession of superhuman faculties. It is
always termed eightfold, even in the S. JBhdshya, although nine varieties
are there named : one of them, however, * heaviness,' gariman^ finds no
place among the definitions given there, any more than in other authori-
ties. It may be supposed to be included under the faculty of magnitude. >^

The four first faculties, ^minuteness,' animd; tightness,' laghimd;
* reachy' prdpti ; and * magnitude,' mahimd; are explained and illustrated
every where much in the same way. According to Vachespati, the
person endowed with the first can make his way into a solid rock : with
the second, he may ascend to the solar sphere upon a sunbeam ; or, as
Moore has it, '' may dance on a beam of the sun :" with the third, he can
touch the moon with the tip of his finger : and with the fourth, he may
expand himself so as to occupy all space. The latter four faculties are
less distinctly defined, and are sometimes confounded : the shades of dif- /

ference are indeed so slight, that they may all be resolved into one, ' ab-
solute power over matter.' * Gratification of will,' prdkdmyay is generally
defined by ichchhdnahhighdta*^ * unobstruction of wish ;' or, as explained
by Hemachandra, in his commentary on his own Lexicon, ' The wishes
of a person possessing this faculty are unimpeded by the properties of
material nature, such as form and the like ; so that he can swim, dive,
or float in earth as readily as in water f.' This is sometimes adduced in
illustration of the meaning of the next faculty, but less accurately. That,
is termed vasitdy which Vachespati defines, ' absolute subjugation of the
elements and elementary beings |.' The Chandrikd makes it ^ independ-
ance on matter ||,' which is much the same as prdkdmya ; and a similar
confusion occurs in Ramasrama's commentary on Amera, for he illustrates
it by ' swimming or diving on dry land ^.' ' Subjugation of nature' is the
usually accepted import ; as Hemachandra, ' Thus as (with this faculty)


A a



90

any one determines the elements shall be, so they remain */ The next
faculty is ' dominion/ iuia. According to Vachespati, it is ' disposition
at will of the production, arrangement, and expenditure of the elements
and elementary beings t-* Narayana explains it, ' directing or impelling
them at will^/ Ramasrama interprets it prabhutwa, 'dominion, sove-
reignty; under which inanimate things obey command H/ The last
faculty is termeil yairakdmavasajfUd. In Ramasrama*9 commentary he
roads the word kdmdvasdyitd^; and the only variety he notices is that of
the sibilant, which is sometimes, he observes, the dental, instead of the
palatal letter*^. According to the latter reading it is derived from $i^^^
*to sleep;' to the former, from ^A^ft* *to destroy:' in either, with ara
prefixed, meaning, as Ramasrama explains it, ' he who tranquillizes or
destroys (that is, accomplishes) his desires ^/ The reading of Gausa-
i*Ai)A is, however, yatrakamdvasiiyitd^ as one compound ; and the common
definition of the term is ' tnie (infallible) purpose ||||,* wherever exercised:
' Whatever the person having this faculty intends or pro|K>ses must be
complied with by that which is the subject of his purpose ; the elements
themselves must conform to his designs ^§/ The Chandrikd has, ' What-
ever the will proposes, that it obtains ^^/ Hkmachandra, in his text,
ccives the word as in the Bhdshya^ yairakdmdrasayiiwam ; and explains iu
' he who accomplishes his desires, to whatever they may be directed •••:'
and he illustrates it by saying that ' an arhat, or Bauddha saint, can, by



* 7R H^ Hlf^ (i ^RMmi^r^ ) ^<»^mm*irri rt«IMfin^ I
WT ^ inn %I^M^lin<ril I ^ ^iTHTTOTfinTT I ** ^ I



91

▼irtue of this faculty, convert poison into ambrosia, and administer it as
means of vitality *.'



XXIV.

Consciousness is egotism. Thence proceeds a twofold creation.

The elevenfold set is one: the five elemental rudiments are the

other. ,

BHASHYA.

The elevenfold set : the eleven organs. The Jive elemental rudiments :
elementary matter of five kinds, or the radiments, sound, touch, form,
flavour, and odour. What sort of creation proceeds from that which is
thus defined is next explained.

COMMENT.

The third category is here specified, and described as the source of
the senses and their respective objects.

The term here given as the synonyme and definition of ' egotism,'
ahankdra t, is abhimdna |, translated ' consciousness.' The ordinary sense
of both words is pridey and the technical import is ' the pride or conceit
of individuality ; * self-sufficiency ;' the notion that ' I do, I feel, I think,
I am,' as explained by Vachespati : ' I alone preside and have power
over all that is perceived and known, and all these objects of sense are
for my use. There is no other supreme except I; I am. This pride,
from its exclusive (selfish) application, is egotism ||.' The principle, there-
fore, is something more in Hindu metaphysics than mere consciousness,



r
» I



»


92

or coHseienee. It might be better expressed, perhaps, by * le moi/ as it
adds to the simple conception of individuality the notion of self-propeity«
the concentration of all objects and interests and feelings in the in-
dividual.

The other synonynies of this category express rather modifications of
it, as the next stanza intimates. Taijasa, * the active* or ' the ardent**
from tejas *, ' light, splendour, ardour,* refers to its animating or exciting
influence on human actions, in connection with the quality of foolnesa.
lihuiadi^, * primitive element,* and vaikrita\^ * the modified,* as explained
in the lihdshya^ on the next verse, regard its being, in connection with
darkness and goodness, the principle from which the organs and objects
of sense proceed : for it must not be forgotten, that this category id
egotism or consciousness has a physical, not a metaphysical character,
according to the Ssinkhya philosophy, being the organ or instrument by
which the impression of individuality is conveyed to soul. It is in this
capacity that it may l>c considered the primar}* element, the parent of
the rudiments of the elements, or the objects of sense, and of the oigans
by which they are perceived. It is, in fact, the same with both these, as
it is only by the application of our own senses to the objects of sense that
we can become conscious of individual existence.



XXV.

From consciousness, affected by goodness, proceeds the good
elevenfold set : from it, as a dark origin of being, come elementary
|Kirticles : both issue from that principle affected by foulness.

BHASHYA.

When goodness predominates in egotism over darkness and foulness,
that egotism is of the pure kind ; the name of which, according to ancient



93

teachers, was vaikrita^ ^ the modified.' From this modified egotism the
class of eleven organs is produced. The good set : perfect organs ; ade-
quate to their functions : the set is thence called good. Again ; from it,
as a dark origin of beings, Sfc. — ^When darkness predominates in egotism
over goodness and foulness, that egotism is called dark, or, as it was
named by the old masters, ^ primitive element/ bhutddi. From it come
elementary particles ; the fivefold set. The first element of the elements
is darkness ; therefore it is usually called the dark : from that primitive )^

element the fivefold rudimental set proceed. Soth issue from that prin-
ciple (iffected by foulness: that is, the egotism in which foulness predomi-
nates over goodness and darkness takes the denomination taijasa, ' the
active;' and from that both proceed; both the eleven organs and five
rudiments. For the pure egotism, which is vaikrita, ^ the modified,' be-
coming so modified, produces the eleven organs : but to do this it takes
active egotism for its assistant ; for pure (sdtwika) egotism is inert, and is
only able to produce the organs when combined with the active. In like
manner the dark egotism, or that which is called ^ primitive element,' is
inert, and becomes active only in union with the active, when it produces
the five rudiments. Therefore it is said, both the organs of sense and
their objects issue from the modification of egotism afiected by foulness.
The good elevenfold set proceeds from modified egotism, or that which is
afiected by the quality of goodness. They are next particularized.

COMMENT.

The products of egotism are here described as proceeding from three
modifications of that principle, varied by the influence of the three
qualities.

The terms used to designate the ^ pure,' or sdtwika principle ; the
* dark,' or tdmasa ; and the * foul,' or rdjasa ; * variety of egotism,' or
vaikritay bhutddi, and taijasa ; have been explained. According to our
text, as understood by the Scholiasts, the eleven organs of sense issue
from pure or modified egotism, and the five rudiments from elemental
egotism ; both being influenced by ardent or active egotism.' The
commentator on the S. Pravachana has a rather difi*erent explanation,

Bb



-v« »



94



interpreting ikddaiaka, * eleventh/ not * elevenfold :' according to hinit
this eleventh, which is mind, proceeds from the first kind of egotism ; the
other ten from the second kind ; and the elements from the third. **Smira:
The pure eleventh (organ) proceeds from modified egotism. Camm^mt:
Eleventh, is mind, which in the class of sixteen organs and rudiments is
of the quality of goodness ; therefore it is bom from egotism, affected by
goodness, called vaikrita. This is the sense. Hence it follows, that from
egotism, affected by foulness, proceed the other ten organs of sense ; and
from egotism, affected by darkness, proceed the rudiments*.'' This inter*
pretation he defends by the authority of the law-books and Puranas ;
and he gives a similar turn, although rather indistinctly expressed, to the
text of the Karikd. In the stanzas subsequent to this, to ver. 37, the
organs of sense are fully described, and in ver. 38. the text returns to the
elements. It is not necessary, therefore, to enter upon any explanation
of them in this place. There is a remarkable expression in the BkdsJ^^
which presents a notion familiar to all ancient cosmogonies. Gausapada
says, ' the first of the elements was darkness t-* It is the first of the
* elements,* not the first of 'things;* for it was preceded by unevolved
nature, and intellect, and it is itself a modified form of individuality. It
therefore harmonizes perfectly well with the prevailing ideas in the an-
cient world, of the state of things anterior to elementary or visible crea-
tion, when *' chaos was, and night,'* and when

Nullus acihiK* muiuio pnvlK'lNit lumina Titan,
NiH* i\i}\'SL cn»^tvndo ri>|Miraliat aimim Pha»l>e.

In the infiuence of the quality of foulnc^ss, or passion, for the word rajas
has lM>th senses, may be sus|>ectc^ an affinity to the doctrine of an active
principle, the moving mind, the eros, that set inert matter into motion, and
pro<luced created things.


95



XXVI.

Intellectual organs are, the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue,
and the skin : those of action are, the voice, hands, feet, the excretory
orsan, and that of generation.



organ, and that of generation.



bhAshya.

Reckoning from the eye to the organ of touch, the organs are called
' intellectual.' Touched by it, the organ of touch, which is the skin : thence
the term for the skin which is used (in the text), ' that which touches,'
tparsanaka. Intellectual organs are five, as they ascertain or know (seve-
rally) five objects, or sound, touch, form, flavour, and smell. Those of
action^ Sfc. — ^They perform acts, whence they are called * organs of action :'
thus, the voice articulates ; the hands variously manipulate ; the feet ,
efiect motion; the excretory organ, excretion; and the sexual organ,
generation. Thus are enumerated ten organs, five of intellect and five
of action. The character and nature of the eleventh, or mind, is next

described.

COMMENT.

The five instruments or means of perception and five of action, pro-
ducts of egotism, are enumerated in this stanza.

The term ' organs' is correctly applicable to the material instruments
by which perception is exercised ; but it is not to be understood of the
gross corporeal bodies, the visible eye, ear, hand, &c., which are parts of
gross body. The word * senses' would therefore be a less equivocal term,
only that it does not so distinctly convey the idea of an instrument which,
though subtile, is substantial. The original word, indriya^ is defined to
mean whatever relates or belongs to tWra, said to be a synonyme of soul,
the senses being indicative, being marks or signs, of the presence of soul*:



* l<<^iw^rm4$if<f^^*|mci I



96

accordingly each is denominated a tinffa (see p. 24), ' a characteristic fea-
ture or indication */



XXVIL

(In this set is) mind, which is both (an organ of sensation and of
action). It ponders, and it is an organ as being cognate with the
rest. They are numerous by specific modification of qualities, and
so are external diversities.

BHASHYA-

Here, as one of the class of organs, miMd is said to be both. Among
the organs of sensation it is one of sensation, and among those of action
it is an organ of action also. As it |)erforms the function of the organs
of sensation and of those of action it belongs to both. // ponders (or pur-
|>oses) ; whence the term sankalpaka. It is also an organ as being cognate
mth the rest ; for such is the meaning of the word sddhermya. The organs
of sensation and action being (cognate or) produced, along with mind»
from egotism affected by goodness, have this (property, of origin) in
common with mind ; and from this common property mind is an organ
likewise.

Thus eleven organs are produced from egotism affected by goodness.
What, then, is the function (vritti) of mind ? Reflection {sankatpa) is its
function. Sound and the rest are the functions of the organs of sensation.
SiH'crh and tin* rest are the functions of the organs of action. Now are
these various orpuis, apprehending various objects, so created by IsMraraf
or are they self-generated \ since nature, intellect, and egotism, are devoid
of sc*nse : and soul is devoid of action. Thence, according to the S&nkhya
dr>ctrine, a certain s|M>ntaneity is the cause (of the variety of the senses).
Tli(*rf*fore it is added. They are nufnerons bji sjteeijie modijieation qfqmalities^
and so are external diversities: that is« the several objects of these eleven



* MM^tuff^J^ ^^* 1'%*I^U!fc4J!f ^t^rfNwnft I



97

organs, or sound, touch, form, flavour, and odour, which are the objects
of five ; speech, manipulation, motion, excretion, and generation, the
objects of other five ; and reflexion, the object of mind ; these all proceed
from specific modification of qualities. From the variety (or special dif-
ference) of such modifications of the qualities the multifariousness of the
organs proceeds, as well as the diversity of external objects : consequently
this variety is not the work of Iswara, nor of egotism, nor of intellect, nor
of nature, nor of soul ; but from modification of the qualities, produced
by spontaneity. It does not proceed designedly (it is not the result of
a will to act), because the qualities are non-sentient (unconscious or
irrational). How then does it take place? This, as will be afterwards
explained, is in like manner as the secretion of milk is for the growth of
the calf, so the proceedings of nature take place for the liberation of soul,
without soul's being cognizant of them ; so the unconscious qualities be-
come modified by the existence of the eleven organs, and their varieties
are thence derived. Hence the eye is placed in its elevated orbit for the
purpose of looking up to heaven ; and in like manner the nose, the ear,
the tongue are commodiously situated for the apprehension of their re-
spective objects : the organs of action are also distributed conveniently
for the discharge of their several duties of their own nature, through the
modification of the qualities, not as their objects; as it is elsewhere said,
'' Qualities abide in qualities; that which is the function of the qualities
is their object." External diversities, therefore, are to be regarded as
made by the qualities : this is the meaning of the text. Of which nature
is the cause.

The several functions of the organs are next specified.

COMMENT.

After defining mind as an instrument both of sensation and of action,
this verse explains how it is that there are various organs and objects of
sense ; and it is said to depend in both cases upon specific modifications
of the qualities of nature.

Mind is an instrument both of sensation and of action. Its function is
sankalpa, a word that more commonly means ' resolve, purpose, expectar

cc



98

tion ;* M in the Hitapadfaa^ * the crow/ Lagkupatanaka^ wy%^ * All has
been heard by me; and this is my resolve, that we must be friends^/
And Menu : * Desire is the root of expectation ; sacrifice is its productf:*
or, as KuLLUKA Bhatta explains it, ^ Sankalpa is understanding to this
effect, that by a certain ceremony a desired consequence is effected |.*
In lK)th passages the notion of 'conclusion from foregone premises* is
conveyed, and that seems to be its meaning here. Thus Vachespati
explains it : * The mind carefully considers a substance perceived by sii
organ of sense, (and determines) this is simple, that is not so ; or discri-
minates them by their condition of predicate and predicable ||/ Again,
it is said, '' First, knowledge or perception is simple (inconsiderate), like
the knowledge of a child, a dumb man, or the like : it is produced by the
mere thing ; but when, after this, the thing, as distinguished by its pro*
perties, by its genus, and the like, is recognised by the understanding,
and intellect is in accordance with |>erception, that period (or interval) of
determination is the operation of the mind.** Here, then, sankalpa is the
process of reflection, the consideration of the object of simple perception,
so as to form a definite idea, which mind transmits, through individuality
and intellect, to soul. In this way mind is an organ both of perception
and action ; perceiving the objects presented by the senses, and forming
them into a |K)sitive idea. It is further identified with both classes of
organs by originating from the same source, egotism affected by good-
ness; and consequently it consists of the same material §.

The second portion of the stanza conveys a doctrine that is not very
intelligible. The variety of the senses and of the objects of the senses is


99

said to arise spontaneously in them, from specific modification of the
three qualities. Vachespati understands the allusion to external objects
to be merely illustrative ; that is, the internal organs are diversified by
modification of the qualities, in the same manner that external objects
are varied by the same modification*:' and the translation follows this
explanation. In the Bhdshya a different reading in the original occurred,
which would require the passage to be rendered, ' and from variety of
external objects f *•' thus ascribing the diversity of the organs, not only
to modification of the qualities, but to the diversity of external objects,
which require suitable, and therefore various organs for their apprehen-
sion. The reading is, however, clearly incompatible with his argument,
although Gaurapada is somewhat obscure; but the variety is noticed
and admitted by the author of the Chandrikd\.

The S. Pravachana Bhdshya considers the multifariousness spoken of in
the S6tra, which conveys apparently a similar doctrine to that of the jBCariM,
as restricted to mind : * Multifariousness is from modification of qualities,
as the variety of human condition (is from various association): that is, as
the very same individual assumes different characters, according to the
influence of his associations ; becoming a lover with a mistress, a sage
with sages, a different person with others ; so mind, from its connection
with the eye or any other organ, becomes identified with it, and conse-
quently is diversified according to the function of sight and the rest of
the organs with which it is severally associated ||.' The association of
mind with the organs is intimated by the V^das, as in the text, ' My mind
was elsewhere, I did not hear ^.' The very illustration used by Locke :


100

*' A man whose mind is intently employed in the contemplation of some
objects, takes no notice of impressions made by sounding bodies upon
the organ of hearing : therefore it is evident that perception is only when
the mind receives the impression/* says the English philosopher; and
the Hindu infers, that ' the mind must cooperate with the organs of sense,
even for |>erception, as they would othen»'ise be incapable of performing
their functions*/

The materiality of mind, considered as distinct from consciousness,
intelligence, and soul, and as neither more nor less than an internal sense,
a seHsoriumy is much less absurd than the same character of it when con-
sidered as part of, or identical with, soul, as was the doctrine of the Epi-
cureans, whose description of mind, as an organ merely, agrees well
enough with tlie Hindu notion :

Primum ; animum dico mentem quam furpe dicamiis

Emc hominis partem nihilo minus ac manus ac pet

Atque oculei, partes aniinantes totius exstant. LucaxTius, III. 9i.



xxvni.

The function of five, in respect to colour and the rest, is observsk
tion only. Speech, handling, treading, excretion, and generation are
the functions of five (other organs).

bhAshya.

The term ' only* (matra) is to be understood in the sense of specialty,
or the exclusion of what is not specified ; as in the sentence, '' Ahns only
are received;** that is, nothing else is received. Thus the eyes are
observant of colour (form), not of flavour and the rest ; and so of the



* ^^ilQ«1l ^R! WM f'RT WRTTrajHWF^^^fhll^ I



101

other senses. And in this way the function of the eye is colour (vision) ;
of the tongue, taste ; of the nose, smell ; of the ear, sound (hearing) ; of
the skin, touch : these are the functions of the intellectual organs. Speech
and the rest (are the functions) of the five organs of action ; or, speech is
the function of the voice {larynx j &c.) ; handling, of the hands ; treading,
of the feet; dejection of excrement separated from food, of the rectum;
and generation of offspring, of the sexual organs : ' function or object'
being required for each term by the grammatical, construction of the
sentence.

The functions of intellect, egotism, and mind are next described.



COMMENT.

The text particularizes the functions of the organs of sense severally.

The general term for the office of the senses is dlochana *, literally
' seeing, beholding, perceiving, observing/ According to ancient authori-
ties it is said to comprise both the first undeliberative, and the second
deliberative knowledge ; or, in short, what is understood by * perception t-'
The commentator on the S. Pravachana^ who gives this explanation,
observes, however, that some consider deliberative perception to be the
property of the mind only, whilst simple or undeliberative perception is
that of the external senses ; and this appears to be the doctrine of the
Sankhyas : the senses receive simple impressions from without of their
own nature ; whether those impressions are perceived^ depends upon the
cooperation of the internal sense, or mind. The term for ' function' is
vrittiy explained by vydpdra, ' active exercise or application ;' also by
samarthyam, * ability, adequacy ;' and phala^ ' fruit, result.' Gaurapada



fifffir I

Dd



102

has rishaya, ' object ;' and it may be said, that the function and object of
a sense is the same thing, sight being both the function and the object of
the eye. There is some difficulty in translating some of the terms satis-
factorily, although there is none in understanding what is meant by them.
Thus rupa, ' form/ or, as rendered in the text, ' colour,' is the object and
office of the eye ; it is therefore equivalent both to visible substance and
sight. 80 of iabda, ' sound ;* it is both hearing and that which is heard*
Spersa, ' touch,* is the faculty and the substance to which contact may be
applied. In rrura, ' taste,* and gandha, ' smell,' we have the double equi-
valents, as botli words in English, as well as in Sanscrit, express both the
sense and the sensible property. In English, ' voice' is a function ; but
here, at least, vdch^ is also the instrument of speech. In the other organs
of action the function is more readily rendered ; but the difficulty in any
case is only that of language, and the sense is sufficiently explicit.



XXIX.

Of the three (internal instruments) the functions are their
s|)ective characteristics: these are peculiar to each. The common
function of the three instruments is breath and the rest of the five
vital airs.

bhAshya.

The natunil properties, which arc the several characteristics, are the
respective character isiics (as previously deff ned). Ascertainment is intellect
(ver. 23): that also is the function of intellc^ct. Consciousness is egotism
(ver. 24): consciousness is both its characteristic and its function. Mimd
piwders (ver. 27) : such is its definition ; and reflection, therefore, is the
function of mind. Of these three, intellect, egotism, and mind, their
res|)ective characteristics an* their s|>eciflc functions. The functions of
the intcllortual organs, as before explained, are also specific (the same i»



103

the case with the organs of action). But now their common function is
described. The common function of the instniments. — ^The function of the
instruments in common is breath and the rest of the Jive vital airs ; the airs
called prdfui^ apdna^ samuna^ uddna^ and vydna. These are the five airs
which are the common function of all the organs of sense. The air, for
instance, called prdna is that which is perceptible in the mouth and
nostrils, and its circulation is the common function of the thirteen kinds
(of instruments) : that is, where there is breath, the organs acquire (are
connected with) soul (they become living). Breath, like a bird in a cage,
gives motion (vitality) to the whole. It is called prdna^ * breath' or * life,'
from ^ breathing.' From carrying downwards {apanayana)y the air apdna
is so named ; the circulation of which, also, is the common function of
the organs. Samdna is so named from conducting equally {samanayana)
the food, &c. (through the frame). It is situated in the central part of
the body, and its circulation is the common function of the instruments.
The air uddna is denominated from ascending, or from drawing or guiding
best {un-nayana). It is perceptible in the space between the navel and
the head, and the circulation that it has is the common function of the
organs. Lastly, the air by which internal division and diffusion through
the whole body is effected is called vydna, from its pervading (vydpti) the
body like the etherial element. The circulation of that, also, is the com-
mon function of the assemblage of the organs. In this manner these vital
airs, as the common function of the instruments, are explained ; that is,
the common function of the thirteen kinds (of organs).

COMMENT.

Besides the peculiar fiinctions of the three internal instruments, mind,
egotism, and intellect, which as the same with their definitions have
already been specified, they have a common office in the evolution or
circulation of the internal aerial humours which constitute vitality.

The translation limits this community of function to the three internal
instruments only, or to intellect, egotism, and mind; and such is the
interpretation of Vachespati Misra : * The five airs, or life, is the function
of the three (internal) instruments, from being present where they are,



104

aiul absent where they are not*." So the S. Pravachana Bh. explains
the S6tra Sdmanya karana vriiii t ; which is also the phrase of the Kdrikd^
*the function of the three internal instruments (/ Gaurapada, however*
understands vitality to be the common function of all the organs, external
and internal ; or thirteen instruments, ten of the former, and three of the
hitter kind. The expression of the text also is general, and applicable
either to all the organs, or to any of them, as variously understood. The
two meanings are not irreconcilable, although, strictly speaking, the sense
followed in the translation is most correct; for although vitality is the
common function of all the senses, vet it is c^ssentiallv so of the internal
senses only : it might continue with the privation of any or all of the
external senses, but could not, as Vachespati states, subsist without the
internal organs, as it depends upon their existence for its own. So also
the S. Pravachana lihdshya calls the vital airs not only the * functions,*
but * nuMlifications, of the internal instruments ||/ These vital airs are not
to be confounded with iv/yii, or ' elemental air,* for the V^das are authority
for their ditferent origin : ' From him is bom vital air, mind, and all the
senses, heaven, wind, light, water, and the all-sustaining earth ^.* *11ie
attribution of aerial oi>eration to modification of the internal instruments
arises from their being susceptible of a sort of motion similar to that of
air, and from their bein^ governed by the same deity ^/ The vital airs
are, in fact, the vital functions of breathing, circulation, and digestion.
That these functions, resulting from organization, should be supposed to
partake of the* nature of aerial humours, originates very possibly from
some misapprehension of the pluenomena of breathing, flatulence, and
arterial pulsation. The term used by Gai rapada to designate their


105

action occurs syaiidaruiy ^ moving, circulation/ in the copy ; but spandana,
' throbbing, pulsation,' were perhaps a preferable reading. The offices
assigned to them are evidently connected with notions either of circu-
lation or a pulse. Thus Prdna is breath, expiration and inspiration.
Apdna is flatulence, crepitus. Samdna is eructation, supposed to be
essential to digestion. Uddna is the pulsation of the arteries in the head,
the neck, and temples ; and Vydfm is the pulsation of the rest of the
superficial arteries, and occasional puffiness of external parts, indicating
air in the skin. The situations assigned to the five airs by the S. Tatwa
Kaumudi are much less consistent and intelligible. Thus Prdna is there
said to be the function of the tip of the nostrils, head, navel, and great
toes ; Ap&ntty of the back of the neck, the back, the feet, and the organs
of excretion and generation ; Samdna^ of the heart, the navel, and the
joints ; Uddna^ of the head, throat, palate, forehead, and root of the nose ;
and VydnOy of the skin. With exception of the last, it is not easy to
understand how such absurd situations should have been selected. The
S. Bhdshya may be taken as the expression of the earlier notions.



XXX.

Of all four the functions are instantaneous, as well as gradual, in
regard to sensible objects. The function of the three (interior) is, in
respect of an unseen one, preceded by that of the fourth.

bhAshya.

Of all four the functions are instantaneous. — The four are, intellect,
egotism, and mind, in connection with any one of the organs of sense.
Of these four the function is instantaneous in regard to perception, or in
the ascertainment of perceptible objects. Intellect, egotism, mind, and
the eye see form at once, in one instant, (coming instantly to the con-
clusion) that is a post. The same three, with the tongue, at once ap-
preciate flavour; with the nose, odour: and so with the ear and skin.

E e



106

Again ; their functions arc also f^radual in regard to sensible olyeets^^^^Ot
that aggregate of four the function is also (occasionally) gradual (pio*
Krcssive). Thus, a persoq^oing along a road sees an object at a distance,
an4 i.M in doubt whether it be a post or a man : he then observes



characteristic marks upon it^r a bird perched there ; and doubt being
thus dissipated by the reflection of the mind, the understanding discri-
minates that it is a post ; and thence egotism interposes, for the sake of
certainty, as, verily (or, I am certain) it is a post. In this way the func*
tions of intellect, egotism, mind, and eye are (successively) discbaiged.
And as in the case of a visible object, so it is as to sound and the rest of
the objects of {)erception.

But in respect of an unseen one^ the /unctions of the three are preceded bg
that of the fourth. — Unseen implies time past, or future: for instance, in
rc8i>ect to ' form,* the function of the eye has preceded that of intellect,
egotism, and mind, as has that of the skin in respect to touch ; of
the nose in regard to smell ; of the ear in relation to sound ; and of the
tongue in respect to taste. The functions of intellect, egotism, and mind
are preceded in order by those of the senses in regard to time future or
past, whilst ill ret^ard to time present they may be either instantaneouii
or gmdual. Further —

COMMENT.

The conscntanirous or successive oi)eratioii of the three internal and
any one of the external organs in the formation of ideas is here described.

Tlie r<M>p(*rati(>ii of the three internal organs and any organ of sense
may be instantaneous {jfuffa/mt }, like a flash of lightning, or as at the sight
of a tiger, when the rerogiiition of liim« knowledge of his ferocity, con*
elusion of [lersonal i>eril, and determination to try to escape are the
business of one and the s:ime moment : or their operation may be gra-
dual or successive {kramaias)^ allowing leisure, for instance, for the eye
to set\ for the mind to consider, for egotism to apply, and for intellect to
conclude, (vaikapaua rather disarranges the order of succession, and
places the function of egotism last, assigning to it the office of belief or
conviction. VVcnKsPATrs illustration is more regular: ^Thus, the



107

hears the twang of a bowstring ; mind reflects that this must be for the
flight of an arrow ; egotism says, It is aimed at me ; and intellect deter-
mines, I must run away */ Whenever the object is unseen, adrishia^ not
present, whether it be past or be to come, there must have been a prior
perception of it ; that is, as the text is explained by the commentators,
there must have been a prior perception of it by an organ of sense. The
expression of the text, tat purvikd vritti^ * their prior function,' might be
thought to refer to a prior notion gained by the conjoint operation of the
internal and external organs at some former period. This, however,
would be recollection, the seat of which, as well as of judgment or infer-
ence, is in huddhiy or ^ intellect,' alone ; as in the Pdtanjala S6tra, ^ Proof,
refutation deliberation, sleep, memory ; these are said to be the functions
of intellect f.' The prior operation, therefore, is merely perception or
observation by the external sense, alochanam (see ver. 28), conveying
simple ideas to the mind. Taking, then, this prior simple idea acquired
through an external organ, any further consideration of it is the gradual
operation of the three internal instruments. Where the object is present,
conviction may be either momentary or successive : the S4nkhyas main-
taining the possibility of consentaneous operation of the organs of sense
and mind, egotism and intellect, in opposition to the doctrine of the
Vais^shikas, that the formation of ideas is in all cases a graduated pro-
cess: Where the object is absent, the idea must be formed by the
internal organs so far in successive order that they must be consequent
upon a former impression received by an external sense ; but as concerns
themselves, their action may be either simultaneous or successive J. The


108

ilhistrution which occurs in the lihdshya and other commentaries, of the
course of reasoning by wliich the nature of a distant object is determined,
is something like that with which, in the Philebus, the formation of
opinion is elucidated.



XXXI.

TiiK instruments perfonn their respective functions, incited by

mutual invitation. The soul^s purpose is the motive : an instrument

is wrought by none,

BlIASHYA.

Swam is repeated, implying ' several order:* that is, intellect, egotisnit

mind, perform their respective functions, the incitement to which is mu*

#

tual invitation. Akuia implies 'respect and alertness.' They do this for
the accomplishment of the pur/x^se of soul. Egotism and the rest effecting
it thmugh intellect : that is, intellect, knowing the wishes of egotism and
the rest, proceeds to its own [>eculiar function. If it be asked, why it
does so f the answer is, the purpose of the soul is the motive. Soul's pur-
jKise is to l>e fulfilled : for this object the activity of the qualities occurs*
and thence these instruments make manifest the object of the soul. How
is it that (being devoid of intelligence) they act ? They act of their own
acconl. An instrument can bi* tvrought by none. — The purpose of soul
alone causes them to act : this is the meaning of the sentence : an instru-
ment is not made — not roused — to act by any human superior.

It is next specified how many (instruments) intellect and the rest are.

COMMENT.

The circumstances that induce the internal and external organs to
I)erform their respective functions are said to be mutual incitement, and
S|>ontaneous dis|)osition to effect the objects of soul.

The* organs of sense are said to act by mutual invitation or incitement*
Their coo|H*ration in the discrharge of their respective functions is com*
[Kiretl to that of diflerent soldiers in an army, all engaged in a commoo



109

assault, but of whom one agrees to take a spear, another a mace, another
a bow. It is objected, that the organs being declared non-sentient, inca-
pable of intelligence, cannot be supposed to feel, much less to know, any
mutual design or wish, dkuta* or abhiprdya'\; and the terms are ex-
plained to signify the insensible influence which the activity of one
exerts upon that of another, if there be no impediment in the way ; a
sort of sympathetic or consentaneous action. ^AJeuta here means incite-
ment to activity ; that is, at the time when one organ is in action, the
activity of another, if no obstruction hinder it \' * With this view the
several instruments are directed by a presiding power, which may be
termed the adaptation of the mutual fitness of their natures ||.' The
motive for this sympathetic action is the purpose of soul, fruition or
liberation ; which purpose they of their own accord, but unconsciously,
operate to fulfil, in the same way as the unconscious breast spontaneously
secretes milk for the nourishment of the infant ; according to the S6tra,
'As the cow for the calf:' that is, as the milk of the cow of its own accord
exudes for the use of the calf, and awaits not the efibrt of another, so the
organs of their own accord perform their office for the sake of their
master, soul ^. S. Pravachana Bh. They must act of their own nature ;
it is not in the power of any one to compel them to act. Gaurapada's
expression is, ^ Not by any sovereign man IF f perhaps some particle, such
as vd, may have been omitted in the copy, making the sense, ' Neither
by a deity nor a mortal ;' or the phrase may imply, that they are not
compelled to action even by soul, as a divinity ; but fulfil soul's purposes
through an innate property, undirected by any external agent.


^nf^: i|^sMW f?^ k^^^A ^li^UlPH «c|^nl ^RJ#. I ^ ?T %R

Ff



no



XXXII.

IxsTRrMKNT IS of thirtccH sorts. It compasses, maintains, and
manifests : what is to \ye done by it is tenfold, to be compassed, to
l)e maintained, to be manifested.

BHASHYA.

Inslrument. — Intellect and the rest are three ; the intellectual organs
are five; the organs of action are five: all together thirteen. What this
performs is next declared : it compasses^ maiuiains, and manifests; that is,
the organs of action compass and maintain ; those of perception manifest
How many kinds of action there are is next specified. Its action, thai
which is to be done by it, is tenfold; of ten kinds, as hearing, touch, &c.
by the instruments of perception ; speech and the rest by those of action :
and thus by the former, manifestation, and by the latter, comprehension
and sup{)ort, are effected.

COMMENT.

The sense of the term karana^ ' instrument' or ' organ,' is here ex-
plained, as a generic denomination for the external and internal organs.

The instnmients or organs are thirteen ; that is, three internal, intel-
lect, egotism, and mind ; and ten external, or the organs of sensation and
action. Their res{)ective functions as organs have l>een explained : their
eflVcts as instruments are classed under three heads, ' compassing,' aAa-
rana^; ' maintaining,' dfuirana]; and 'manifesting,* prakdsana\. The
first, which means, literally, ' taking, seizing,* and rendered in the text
* compsissing/ signifies ' the application of an organ to the object to which
it is adapted |l/ and is the especial function of the organs or instruments
of action. ' Maintaining/ dharana, ' supporting, upholding,' is, according



Ill

to the S. Bhdshya^ also the office of the instruments of action ; but the
authors of the S. Tatwa Kaumudi and S. Chandrikd assign it to the three
internal instruments, intellect, egotism, and mind, as being especially the
supporters of vitality. ^ Buddhi^ ahankdray and mind uphold, through
their function being designated as the production of the vital airs, &c.*'
The elder commentator could not, of course, admit this doctrine ; for we
have seen (ver. 29) that, according to him, all the senses or instruments
contribute to support the vital principle. All the Scholiasts agree in
attributing ^manifestation, enlightening,' prakdsanaj to the intellectual
organs. The objects to be effected by the instruments are tenfold, re-
ducible to the same three classes : speech, manipulation, walking, excre-
tion, and generation are to be compassed, to be effected, dhdrya-^j by
the actual application of the several organs : sound, taste, touch, smell,
form to be manifested, to be made sensible, praJcdsya : and all of them,
together with the vital airs, constituting in fact animal life, are to be
dhdryya\y upheld or maintained.



XXXIII.

Internal instruments are three ; external ten, to make known
objects to those three. The external organs minister at time pre-
sent : the internal do so at any time.

BHASHYA.

Internal instruments. — Intellect, egotism, and mind are three, from the
difference between intellect and the others. External ten. — The five
organs of perception and five of action are the ten external instruments,
and they are to make known objects for the fruition of intellect, egotism.



112

and mind. Time present: that is, the ear hears a present sound, not one
that is past, nor one that is to come : the eye sees present form, not that
which is past, nor that which is future : the skin touches present sub*
stance : the tongue tastes present flavour : the nose smells present odourSt
nor past nor future. It is the same with the organs of action : the voice
articulates actual, not past nor future words : the hand takes hold of a
present water-pot, not one that has been or is to be : the feet traverse a
present, not a past nor a future walk : and the organs of excretion and
generation perform present, not past nor future offices. External organs,
therefore, minister at time present. The internal ones do so for any tiwu^^^
Intellect, egotism, and mind regard objects of any period : thus intellect
forms an idea, not only of a present water-jar, but of one that has been
or will be made : so egotism exercises consciousness of an object past,
present, or future : and mind considers the past and future, as well as the
present. Intenial instrument is, therefore, for all times.

It is next explained which of these instruments apprehends specific,
and which uns{>ecific objects.

COMMENT.

The difference between the functions of the external and internal
organs, as concerns time, is here explained : the action of the former
being confined to time present; that of the latter comprehending also the
past and the future.

Internal instrument is so denominated from operating within the
body^; the extenial from being applied to exterior objects, making
them known to the internal organization. The term viskaya, * objects* is
also explained by hhogya, * that which is to be enjoyed ;* and rydpdra^
* exercise* ;* and rishaydkhya, ' that which declare or makes objects
known.* It is also definetl as ' that which occasions the exercise of the
functions of the three intenml instruments t/ External sensation is



^K^ I t f^|i^ uimiini^qirn



118

necessarily confined to present objects, but mind, consciousness, and
intellect apprehend from present objects those which have past, or are to
come ; as past rain from the swelling of a river ; and future rain, in the
absence of any other prognostic, from the destruction of the eggs of the
ants *. This last phrase alludes probably to the well known destruction
of various species of the ant tribe, which in the East takes place imme-
diately before the setting in of the rainy season : they then take wing,
and fly abroad in vast multitudes, of which few survive; according to the
Hindustani proverb, ^,1X0 ^* y^ i^^ a^^ ci>>^ >^ t/ J^y^ ' When the
ants are about to die, their wings come forth/ The expression ^^ ants'
eggs,'' pipilikdnda^ is, however, rather questionable. It occurs in both
copies of the S. Tatwa KaumudL



XXXIV,

Among these organs the five intellectual concern objects specific

and unspecific. Speech concerns sound. The rest regard all five

objects. ,

BHASHYA.

The intellectual organs concern specific objects : they apprehend objects
which have specific properties. The intellectual organs of men distin-
guish sound, touch, form, taste, smell, along with objects of indifierence,
pleasure and pain. The organs of the gods apprehend objects which
have no specific distinctions. So, amongst the five organs of action,
speech concerns sound. Speech, whether of gods or of men, articulates
words, recites verses, and the like ; and this instrument is the same in
both orders of beings. 7^ rest — all except speech ; the hand, the foot,
and the organs of excretion and generation — regard all Jive objects : that



og


114

is, sound and the other four objects of perception belong to all the other
or}i;anH; for there may be sound, touch, fonn, taste, and smell in the
hands ; the foot treads upon the earth, of which sound and the rest may
be characteristics ; the excretory organ separates that in which the fire
objects abide ; and the generating organs produce the secretion which is
equally characterised by the five organs of sense.

COMMExNT.

Another distinction is made in the functions of the external instru-
ments, as they regard objects with or without specific characteristics.

Objects are distinguished as having specific characters or effects, sati-
stsha *, and as devoid of them, i/irtv'.sr.v/i/i f; and the instruments are dis-
criminated according to their capability of conveying notions of either.
The organs of sense in mortals can apprehend only those objects which
have specific characters; either sc*nsible, as colour, form, taste, &c.; or
moral, as pleasant, painful, or inditlerent. The faculties of the gods and
of sages can apprehend objects without such characteristic properties,
and which exercise no monil effect, producing neither pleasure, pain, nor
indifTcrence. The S. Tatwa Kaumndi identifies • specific' with ' irross cor-
|)orear objects |, and ' unspecific' with * subtile and rudimentar objects |;
the latter of which are cognizable alone by the organs of holy men and
deities ^. This distinction applies to all the external organs, except the
voice, which in men, saints, and gods can articulate sensible, specific, or
cor|>oreal words alone ; for it is the organ of the voice that is the origin of
spee<*h. Speech cannot, like sound, taste, &c., originate with any thing
gn>ss or subtile exterior to the speaker ; it must proceed from him,
through the agency of a gross material instniment, and must therefore
l>e gn)ss or sensible itself, (iross cor|)oreal mechanism cannot be the
source of a subtile product, and therefore with ever>' order of beings



115

speech must be specific. * The rest,' seshdni referring to the organ of
speech, implies the other organs of action, all of which may regard the
five objects of perception ; that is, they may comprehend them all ; as
' from the combination (or capability) of sound, touch, colour, smell, taste,
in objects like a water-jar and others, which may be compassed or taken
hold of by the hand, &c.*' S. Tatwa Kaumudi.



XXXV.

Since intellect, with the (other two) internal instruments, adverts
to every object, therefore those three instruments are warders, and
the rest are gates.

bhAshya.

With the internal; that is, intellect, with egotism and mind. Adverts
to; takes, apprehends; that is, apprehends sound and the rest at all
three seasons. Therefore these three are warders^ and the rest are gates. —
The rest; the other instruments; instruments being understood. Fur-
ther —

COMMENT.

A metaphor is employed to illustrate the functions of the external and
internal instruments.

The internal instruments are compared to warders, doorkeepers, or to
persons having charge of a door or gate ; not opening and closing it
merely, but as taking note of all that enter : the external senses being
the doors or gateways by which the objects of perception gain ad-
mission.



* MKL^I«ll^l^l<yi m\^A\ M^9|«U^l«l|fM4ir<ir<rri I



116



XXXVI.

TiiKSE characteristically differing from each other, and variously
affected by qualities, present to the intellect the soui*8 whole pur*
pose, enlightening it as a hunp.

BHASHYA.

Thesty which are called instruments : they variousijf affected by qmali-
ties. How affected ? Like a lamp ; exhibiting objects like a lamp. Cha"
racier istically differing; dissimilar, having different objects; that is the
sense. Objects of the qualities is intended. Variously affected by qnali^
ties; produced or proceeding from qualities. Soufs whoU purpose^ — ^Tlie
instruments of perception and action, egotism and mind, having illus*
trate<i the object of soul (as attainable) through each respectively, presemt
it to the intellect y place it in the intellect ; and consequently soul obtains
pleasure and the rest; that is, every object seated in intellect. Further —

COMMENT.

The process by which ideas are conveyed to soul is here described.

Intellect (huddki or mahat) is the instrument or organ which is the
medium between the other instruments or organs and soul; that is, all ideas
dt*rived from sensation, reflection, or consciousness must be deposited in
the chief or great instrument, intellect or understanding, before they can
he made known to soul, for whose use and advantage alone they have
bec*n assembled. They are variously affected by the qualities. — ^They con-
vey impressions or ideas, with the properties or effects of pleasure, pain,
and indifference, arrordintxly as they are influenced by the qualities of
Koodness, foulness, and darkness. In fact these organs are identified
with the qualities by all the commentators. Gaurapaua says, *tbey
proceed or are born from them * :* and in the S. Tatwa KaumudI and



* jj^^mTI^MH I



117

S. Chandrikd they are called also ' products or modifications and varieties
of the qualities ;' thus the former has, ' The external organs, mind, and
egotism are affections of qualities ; they are changes of condition of the
qualities goodness, foulness, and darkness*:' the latter, 'These affections
of the qualities are kinds (or varieties) of them t-' It might have been
preferable, therefore, to have rendered the expression gunavisSsha^ ' modi-
fications or affections of the qualities.'

The progressive communication of impression to soul is thus illustrated
by Vachespati : * As the head men of a village collect the taxes from the
villagers, and pay them to the governor of the district ; as the local
governor pays the amount to the minister ; and the minister receives it
for the use of the king ; so mind, having received ideas from the external
organs, transfers them to egotism ; and egotism delivers them to intellect,
which is the general superintendent, and takes charge of them for the
use of the sovereign, souL The same idea is more concisely expressed
in the S. PravacAana Bh. ' Siitra : In the common employment of the
organs the chiefship belongs to buddhij as in the world. Comment: As
the function of the organs is in common, through subservience to the
purposes of soul, so the most important is that of intelligence ; like the
office of the prime minister amongst the chiefs of villages and the rest,
who are all alike engaged in the service of the king |.' The cooperation
of opposites for a common purpose has been once before (p. 54) compared
to the light of a lamp, derived from the combination of oil, cotton, and
flame.



^mKW^i sfir ^ift^ HTVFi c^t^iJ^ <^ ff iNi^^iPtil^



Hh



118



XXXVII.

Since it is intellect which accomplishes souPs fruition of all which
is to be enjoyed, it is that, again, which discriminates the subtle dif-
ference between the chief principle {pradhd$ia) and soul.

BUASHYA.

All: whatever comes within the reach of the organs, and in all three
(past, present, and future) periods. Fruition: several or respective en-
joyment, through the instrumentality of the organs of perception and
action, whether in gods, men, or animals. The internal instrument intel-
lect accomplishes^ completes or effects ; consequently it is that, agmm^
which discriminates, makes a distinction between the objects of nature and
soul, (or establishes) their difference or severalty. Subtle : not to be ap-
prehended by those who have not practised religious austerities, (or such
distinctions) as, this is nature, the equipoised condition of the three qua-
lities, goodness, foulness, and darkness ; this is intellect ; this is egotism ;
these are the five subtile rudiments ; these the eleven organs ; theae the
five gross elements ; and this, which is different from them all, is sooK
He whose intellect explains all this obtains liberation.

It was said above (ver. 34) that " objects are specific and unspecific :**
which these are respectively is next described.

COMMENT.

The function of discriminating between soul and nature is here also
assigned to intellect.

The immediate contiguity and communication of intellect with sooU as
that of a prime minister and a sovereign, enables it to appreciate the
latter; whilst its being the medium of conveyance to external objects
familiarizes it with them also ; and thus it is enabled to distinguish be-
tween both : or, as explained in the Chandrikd, this discrimination is the
necessary' consequence of its relative function ; for as it conveys ideas of
pleasure or pain to soul, and is in this way the cause of its fruition, it it



119

8ubsenrient to another, to something of a different nature from its own ;
and the knowledge of this is discrimination between nature and souL
'All, sound and the rest, with which the preposition prati (implying
severalty) is to be connected. The fruition is that of souL As intellect
accomplishes this, consequently although it be as it were a chief prin-
ciple, yet it is for another's use, not its own ; and as hence arises the
purpose of liberation, this sense is accordingly intended to be expressed
in the phrase, It is that again which discriminates^ &c. *'



/



XXXVIII.

/' The elementary particles are unspecific : from these five proceed

the five elements, which are termed specific; for they are soothing,

/ terrific, or stupifying. .

BHASHYA.

The five subtile elements, which are produced from egotism, or the
rudiments sound, touch (substance), form, flavour, and odour, are said to
be unspecific; they are the objects (of perception) to the gods, character-
ised by pleasure, producing neither pain nor stupefaction. From these
five proceed the five elements^ called earth, water, fire, air, and ether. These
are said to be specific. From the rudiment smell, earth, proceeds ; from
the rudiment flavour, water ; from form (colour), fire ; from touch (sub-
stance), air ; and from the rudiment sound, proceeds ether. These gross
elements are termed specific. They are the objects of the senses of men,
and are soothing^ causing pleasure ; terrific^ causing pain ; and stupifying^
causing insensibility ; as the ethereal element may give delist to one

I


120

person coining forth at once from within a house» so the same may be
the source of pain to one affected by cold, or heat, or wind, or rain ; and
if he be going along a road leading through a forest, in which he loses
his way, it may then, from the perplexity of space, occasion stupefaction :
so the air (or wind) is agreeable to a person oppressed by heat, disagree*
able to one feeling cold ; and when tempestuous and loaded with clouds
of sand and dust it is stupifying. The same may be said of fire and the
rest. There are other specific varieties.



COMMENT.

It was intimated in ver. 34, that objects were both specific and unspe-
cific ; and it is here explained, that by the former is meant the various
property which the same element possesses at different times, and under
different circumstances, in regard to mortals ; and by the latter, the uni-
form and unvaried operation of the subtile rudiments in respect to the
gods.

The precise nature of the rudimental elements is not very intelligible,
according to their usual identification with what we are accustomed to
consider as qualities, not substances, or sound, tangibility, form or colour,
flavour, and odour; iabda^ sparsa, rupa^ rasa, and gandka. It seems,
however, that we should regard the rudimental elements as the imper-
ceptible subjects of these qualities, from which the grosser and visible
elements, ether, air, light, water, and earth, originate. So Vijnaka
Bhikshu calls them 'subtile substances, the elements which are the
holders (sustainers or subjects) of the species of sound, touch, colour,
taste, and smell ; but in which, as a genus, the three species of pleasur-
able, painful, and indifferent do not occur : they are not varieties of the
f2:ross elements, but in each respectively the elementary property exclu-
sively resides ; whence they are said to be rudiments. In those elements
that elementary property resides alone (without being diversified, as
agreeable, &c.) ; and as there is no distinction between a property and
its subject, that which is a rudimental substance is called a rudiment,
tan mdtra ; the existence of which as a cause is inferred from that of the



121

gross element as an effect*/ Tan m&tra is a compound of tad, *that/
and rndtrtty ' alone ;' implying, that in which its own peculiar property
resides, without any change or variety : so V^chespati explains the text,
^ Sound and the rest ; the subtile rudiments ; for the properties of agree-
able, &c. do not belong to them, they have no quality which is fit for
(mortal) fruition. This is the meaning of the word mdtra'\.'' — * These
rudiments, though not appreciable by human sense, are said to be sensi-
ble to sages and to gods, producing to them pleasure only, from the pre-
dominance with them of the quality of goodness, and consequently of
happiness J.'

The notion of something more subtile than the elements was not
unknown to early Grecian philosophy, and Empedocles taught that they
were compounded of some more minute matter, or of elements of the
elements, aroix^ia aroix^ltav. Plutarch and Stobaeus, according to Cud-
worth, understand by these rudiments of the elements primary atoms; but
it may be doubted if they are to be so understood, for, according to Ari-
stotle, Empedocles held that there were four elements, out of which all
bodies were composed, and which were not mutually transmutable. In
fact the doctrine of Empedocles, which was that of the school of Pytha-
goras, offers another analogy to the Indian, in the assertion, not of four,
but of five elements, according to Plutarch, or the author De placitis phi-
losophorum, 1. II. c. 6, or ether, fire, earth, water, and air. Intellect. Syst.
I. 97. That Empedocles was not of the atomic school is evident from


II



122

Lurrctius, who specifics him as one of those who greatly misunderetood
the principles of things :

Principiis tamrn in renini feccre rninas

Kl gruvitor niagnci iiiagmi cociilere il>i cximi. I. Til -2.

It may l>e suspected that something like the Hindu notion, that the
sense's, or their faculties, and the gross elements, partake of a common
naiturc, is expresse<l in the celebnited, though otherwise not very intelli-
sihle verses of the same philosopher:

Vaif) fikv yap yaiai' u7wiro/iA<r. vdan 6* iidiap
AiOifn A* alOipa hlav, arap irvpi irvp atbt)\ov :

' By the earthy element we perceive earth ; by the watery, water ; the
air of lieaven by tlie aerial element ; and devouring fire by the element
of fire."

As oppose<l to the simple unvarieil rudiments, the derivative grow
elements, which are sensible to men and animals, are susceptible of three
«|ualities; they may have specific or varied effects, may be diversified an
s|R*cies; they are said, accordingly, to be S(x>thing or agreeable*, terrific
or disagreeable t* And stupifying, bewihlering|; that is, they may be
either of these, according to the different circumstances in which the
influence of one or other of the three qualities predominates. When
goodness prevails, whether it be in themselves or in the object affected,
they are iaaia, * tranquil or pleasant;' when foulness, they are gkoru^
Mriuhttul, disagreeable;* and when darkn(*ss prevails, they are ^perplex-
iim,' murha: as V.m mkspati ; ' In the gross cU^ments, ether and the rest,
some, thniugh the predominance of goodness, are soothing, pleasant,
sigreeable. liirht ; scune, thnnigh the prevalence of foulness, are terrific,
painful, n*stless; whilst others, through the influence of darkness, are
stupifyinu, depressintr, heavy ||.*


" ^ipm: I ^ lilTT: I i Tj^: i «

«HUMMri4|| V^^inii: tot: Tmm cT^nr: %f%?!^:iroR?Rf



123



XXXIX.

Subtile (bodies), and such as spring from father and mother,
together with the great elements, are three sorts of specific objects.
Among these, the subtile bodies are lasting; such as issue from
father and mother are perishable.

BHASHYA.

S^ibtile: the rudimental elements, that, when a^regated, form the
rudimental or subtile body, characterised by intellect {mahat) and the
rest, and which always exists, and undergoes successive states of being
(transmigration) : those are subtile (bodies) . Such as spring from father
and mother are the cementers or means of the aggregation of gross bodies,
or by the effect of the mixture of blood and seminal secretion in sexual
cohabitation, at fit seasons they form the enyelopment of the subtile body
in the womb ; that subtile body then is nourished, through the umbilical
cord, by the nutriment derived from the food and drink received by the
mother; and the (entire) body, thus commenced with the triple ingre-
dient of the subtile rudiments, the cognate investure, and the gross ele-
ments, becomes furnished with back, belly, legs, neck, head, and the rest;
is enveloped in its sixfold membranes; is provided with blood, flesh,
tendons, semen, marrow, and bones; and is composed of the five gross
elements; ether being supplied for its cavities (or extension), air for its
growth, fire for its nutriment, water for its aggregation, and earth for its
stability: and thus being equipped with all its (component) parts, it
comes forth from the maternal womb. In this way there are three kinds
(of bodies) : which of these is constant, and which temporary, is next
described. The subtile bodies are lasting. — Subtile ; rudimental elements :
these are lastitig^ constant ; by them body is commenced, and migrates,
according to the imperative influence of acts, through the forms of beasts,
deer, birds, reptiles, or immovable substances ; or, in consequence of
virtue, proceeds through the heaven of Indra, and other celestial abodes.
So the subtile body migrates until knowledge is attained ; when that is



124

attained, the sage, abandoninfr all body, acquires liberation : these sorts
of l)odies, or subtile^ therefore, are called lasting. Suck an issue from
father and mother are perishable. — Having left that subtile l)ody, the frame
that proccHHls from mother and father ceases, even here, at the time that
the breath departs ; the body bora of parents ceases at the time of death,
and merges into eartli and the other gross elements.

What subtile body is, and how it migrates, is next described.

COMMENT.

Objects were distinguished in the preceding verse according as they
were with or without specific or diversified effects : they are here classi-
fied according to their fonns, their origin, and duration.

A question of some difficulty, however, arises here, as to the objects of
the classification. Are they bodies in general \ or are they gross bodies
only? In the pn*c(*ding stanza it was stated, that the subtile elements,
the tan mdirasy were nnspecific ; whilst their eflects, the gross elements,
were 's|K*cific,' visesha. It is now stated, that there are three kinds of
viseshas, * sorts, species, specific differences ;* but it is not explicitly de*
fined oftchat these are the varieties. Mr. Colebrooke, following the prin-
cipal commentators, renders it ' sorts of objects ;* that is, of bodies in
general. Professor Lassen, carrying on the sense of visesha^ * specific,*
from the preceding stanza, considers the variety here spoken of to concern
only gross or |M.Tceptible elementar\' bodice : '' Distincta, elementa que
distincta dicuntur (ver. 3H;. Distinctorum triplex est divisio in subtilia,
a parentibus pn»genita, crassa** (ver. IVJ). He admits that the commenta-
tors are apiinst this interpretation, but concludes rather that they are in

§

error, than that Iswara Krishna should have employed the word visesha
in a double sense*.

The interpretation of Prc»f. I^issen is highly creditable to his critical
acumen and judgment, and is }M>ssibly correct, although it is scarcely
(compatible with the notions of subtilty and durability which the text
as(Tibc*s to this branch of the triad. His view is not, as he supposes,
wholly unsup|>orted by the commentators; for Vijnana Bhikshu simi-
larly explains the stanza, as will presently be noticcMl. The passage



125

is one of some importance, as it regards apparently the history of the
S&nkhya doctrines respecting the nature of that subtile body which is the
immediate vehicle of soul, as we shall have occasion to notice more parti-
cularly, when we come to verse 40. If the meaning of the text be as
Prof. Lassen renders it, it furnishes reason to suppose that the author of
the Kdrikd had introduced an innovation upon the original doctrine, as
will be subsequently indicated.

According to Gaurapada and Narayana, the sorts or species intimated
in this verse are different from those described in the preceding; the
former calls them, as above, ' other varieties * ;' and the latter has, refer-
ring to ver. 38, ' So many are the specific varieties ; but these are not
all, there are others t*' Vachespati's expression, * A further species of
species |, might be thought to refer to the gross elements; but, from
the explanation that follows, it is evident he does not intend to limit
the specific differences to gross elementary bodies. Agreeably to the
explanation, then, in which these writers concur, bodies in general are
threefold, subtile, generated, and elementary ; and consistently with this
view they consider * subtile,' stikshmaj as equivalent to tan-mdtra^ ^ rudi-
mental f thus Gaurapada has, ^ Subtile is the aggregated rudimental ele-
ments, forming a rudimento-elemental subtile body||:' so also VAches-
PATi ; ' Subtile means subtile bodies ; subtile body is one specific object j:'
and the Chafidrikd; 'Subtile are what are called rudimental bodies V.'
Consequently they also conceive the subtile objects spoken of in this
verse to be something entirely different from the gross elementary visishas^
or * species,' of the preceding verse ; not merely sub-species or varieties
of the same : and it must be admitted that there is some inconsistency in
the Kdrikd' s speaking oi subtile bodies being a species oi gross bodies ; of


Kk



126

the imperceptible being a variety of the perceptible. According to Vunana
Bhikshu, however, the text merely intends by 'subtile,* sukskwui^ a modi-
fication of gross elementary body ; a corporeal frame, which is subtile
only relatively, or which is more refined than the second kind of body
specified in the text, that which is begotten : ' The nature of that body
which is the sup|K)rt of rudimental body is explained in the Kdrikd^
'' subtile, generated,*' &c. : here is meant, body aggregated of the five
elements, the (product or) effect of the rudimental elements, which is
subtile relatively to generated body*.* The same notion is again ioti*
mated by expressions which will be subsequently cited ; and there re-
mains no doubt that this commentator understands by the sAkshwui of the
text, ' a subtile variety of gross elementary body,* distimctomm distinetio.
The other commentators understand by it, * rudimental bodies,* eUinkemla
indistincla. Either interpretation is therefore allowable : the latter agrees
best with the philosophy, the former with the construction, of the
original.

In the second variety of bodies of course specific or sensible bodies
only are intended ; bodies generated or begotten are made of the gross
elements, agreeably to the S6tra, ' Body consists of the five elements f :*
they are, however, in some degree distinguished here from the elements;
holding, according to Gaurapada, a middle place between them, and
rudimental bodies serving to combine them; npachdyaka causing upaekt^^
' proximate aggregation ;* the parts of the embryo being derived in the
first instance from the parents, and their development being the result of
the accession of the elements, for purposes which he describes. There
is some incongruity, however, in this explanation, as it makes a distinc-
tion where there is no essential difference ; organized matter being, in
fact, the same with elementary matter. The other commentators, there-
fore, give a different explanation of the term ' great elements,* restricting

fk^^* 1



127

it to inorganic matter. Thus Vachespati observes, * Subtile body is one
variety of objects ; generated bodies are a second ; and the great elements
a third : water-jars and the like (inorganic bodies) are comprised in the
class of the great elements*/ So also the Chandrikd: * Subtile bodies
are those called rudimental ; generated, are gross bodies ; and the great
elements are mountains, trees, and the like t-'

In this threefold division of bodies, as explained by the Scholiasts on
the Kdrikd^ we have, in fact, but two distinctions, subtile and gross ; the
latter being subdivided into organic and inorganic. The twofold distinc-
tion is that which is especially recognised in the S6tras: thus in the
S. Pravackana Bhdshya^ the S6tra, ^ Thence (the origin) of body |,' is
explained, 'from the twenty*three tatwas (or categories) two kinds of
bodies, subtile and gross, proceeded H :' and again, * Gross body is for the
most part generated (some bodies being inorganic), the other (subtile
body) is not §.'

The chief object of the stanza is, however, to assert the different dura-
tion of these three kinds of bodies ; subtile are permanent : and here we
have an argument in favour of the translation adopted ; for no form of
gross body could be considered as lasting: as composed of the elements,
in however delicate a form, it must resolve into them at the time of death ;
whilst the subtile bodies, consisting of the subtile elements, endure either
till liberation V, or until the great Pralaya

Dissolvi quo quseque supremo tempore possint.



f^l^ ^fcT Jfm^ iHi^riVll I ^ ^ll?)HliMWiniH: I **^rT

I


128

XL.

(SroTiLK body), primaeval, unconfincdy material, composed of in-
tellect, with other subtile principles, migrates, else unenjoying ; in-
vested with dispositions, mergent.

BHASHYA.

Primaeval; whilst yet the universe is uncreated: in the first creatioD
of nature, at that season subtile body is produced. Unconfined; uncom-
bined either in the state of animals, men, or gods ; and from its subtilly
wholly unrestrained, or passing into rocks and the like without obstruc-
tion; it migrates; it goes. Permanent: until knowledge is attained itmi-
gnites. Composed of intellect^ with other subtile principles ; having wiakai
and the rest : that is, intellect in the first place, with egotism and mind*
to the five subtile rudiments, to the subtile principles, to the rudimental
elements. It mis[rates; it traverses the three worlds, as an ant the body
of Siva. Unenjoying; without enjoyment: that subtile body becoming
capable of enjoyment only in conse<|uence of acquiring the property of
action, through its aggregation by external generated body. Invested
with dispositions. — Dispositions, as virtue and the rest; which we shall
hereafter explain (see ver. 43). Invested with; coloured or affected by.
Subtile body is that which, at the period of universal dissolution, pos-
sessed of mahat, intelligence, and the other subtile principles, merges into
the chief one (or nature), and, exempted from further revolution, remains
extant there until creation is renewed, being bound in the bondage of the
stolidity of nature, and thereby incompetent to the acts of migrating and
the like. At the season of re-creation it again revolves, and is hence
called linga, ' characteristic* or ' mergent,' or sukshma, * subtile.*

From what cause the thirteen instniments (intellect, egotism, and the
eleven organs) revolve, as has been said, is next explained.

COMMENT.

The condition of subtile body, in regard to commencement, duration*
and term, is here described.



129

The commentators are agreed that the subtile body here spoken of is
the lingaj or the linga sarira, * rudiment/ or ^ rudimental body ;' ordina-
rily, though perhaps not quite accurately, confounded: the linga con-
sisting, as intimated in the last phrase of the Bhdshya^ of thirteen compo-
nent parts, intellect, egotism, and the organs of sense and action ; whilst
the linga sarira adds to these a bodily frame, made up of the five rudi-
mental elements. In this form, however, they always coexist, and it is
not necessary to consider them as distinct : thus the S6tra of Rapila
states, 'one linga of seventeen*;* that is, according to the Scholiast,
' in the beginning, at creation : there is but one rudimental body at
the period of creation, consisting of an aggregate of the eleven organs,
five rudimental elements, and intellect t*' This was at first embodied
in the person of Hiranyaoarbha, or Brahma, and afterwards ' multiplied
individually, according to variety of actions |.' In this enumeration
egotism is omitted, being included, according to the commentator, in in-
tellect. ' Unconfined/ asakta^ means unobstructed, capable of passing
into any bodies. The next epithet, niyata^ translated ' material,' is ex-
plained by Gaurapada as above, by nitya, * permanent, lasting ;' and
Vachespati attaches to it the same signification, ' It endures till the
period of universal dissolution || ; and the S. Pr. Bhdshya observes, also,
that it ceases, or is destroyed, only at the same season ^ : a property, of
which it may be observed by the way, that it furnishes another reason
for identifying the sAkshmay or ' subtile body,' of the foregoing stanza
with the linga^ or ' rudimental body,' of this verse. The Chandrikd ex-
plains niyata differently, ' distinct in different persons ^.' The composi-
tion of subtile body is explicitly described by Vachespati : ' Subtile body
is an assemblage of intellect, egotism, the eleven senses, and the five



Hl^ I <l4iK^f<^ir4y M^ri^l^lflLI ^HlHirri^H^^ I t^ffm

l1



ISO

elements^/ He ascribes, however, to this a specific or * diversified ex-
istence, from its endowment with senses, which are the sources of plem«
sure, pain, or indifference t-* The commentators agree that subtile body
is subject to enjoyment or suffering only through its connection with
generated body; understanding apparently thereby, not its abstract capSf-
bility of either, but the actual condition in which it partakes of them; for
it is repeatedly declared that the seat of enjoyment and suffering is
butidhi, or ' intellect ;* through the presence of which as an ingredient
in subtile body, it is immediately added, the latter is invested with ' dis-
positions,' bhavas; that is, with the properties of intellect enumerated in
ver. 23, virtue, vice, knowledge, ignorance, &c. The term bkdca was
rendered by Mr. (^olebrookc in that place by ' sentiments,' but in another
(vcr. 43) he expressed the same 'disi>ositions,* which, as far as relates to
the mental bhavas, appears to be a preferable equivalent. Of the conse-
quences of these dispositions, reward in heaven, or punishment in hell,
dead, decomposed animal body is no longer susceptible : ' In a dead body
there can be no sense of pleasure or pain ; this all admit |.' In order,
however, to be placed in circumstances leading to such enjoyment or
suffering, generated body is necessary ; and therefore subtile body mi-
grates, saMsaraii, goes from one body to another continually : hence the
world is called sansdra, ' migration* or ' revolution.' ' Through the influ-
ence of intellect the whole of subtile body is affected by dispositions or
conditions, in the same manner as a garment is perfumed from contact
with a fragrant champa flower ||/ S. Tatwa Kaumudi. Subtile body is
calliHi linfra from its consisting of those principles which are so termed,
either from their indicating or characterising that nature from which
they proceed, or from their being ultimately resolvable into it. Thus the


131

ChandrikA has, ^ Linga, from designating, apprising*:' Gaurapada, as
above, * It merges into nature at the season of dissolution :' and Vaches-
PATi, ' Linga is so termed because it suffers resolution (laya)^ or from its
characteristic indication of the source from which it proceeds t-' See
also remarks on yer. 10. p. 43.



XLL

As a painting stands not without a ground, nor a shadow without
a stake, &c. so neither does subtile person subsist supportless, without
specific (or unspecific) particles.

BHASHYA.

As a picture without the support of a wall or the like does not stand ;
as the shadow does not stand without the stake (the gnomon of a dial) ;
that is, without them does not exist. The term et cetera comprises (other
illustrations); as, water cannot be without coldness, nor coldness without
water ; fire without heat ; air without touch ; ether without extension ;
earth without smell; so by this illustration it is intimated that it, the
rudiment (linga)^ does not subsist without unspecific or rudimental parti-
cles. Here also specific elements are implied, or body composed of the
five gross elements ; for without a body, having specific particles, where
can the place of the linga be ; which, when it abandons one corporeal
fi^me, takes refuge in another. Suppartless ; devoid of support. Subtile
(person) ; instrument of thirteen kinds : this is the meaning of the text.

For what purpose (these subtile elements are embodied) is next
described.


1S2



COMMENT.

In the preceding verse it was stated that subtile person migrated, or
as soon as deprived of one body it took refuge in another. It is now
explaine<l why this must be ; and that it proceeds from the necessity of
something to give to subtile principles asylum and support

The text accordingly states, that the ' rudiment/ the linga^ cannoC
exist without such support; but with regard to the support itself there is
some difference of opinion, the passage being variously read and in-
terjireted.

Gaurapada reads the expression, aviifshair vind^ ' without unspecific
particles ;* by which he states that he means the ' rudimental particles,*
the luH m/itrwt. He adds, that specific particles, gross elementary bodies,
are also necessary ; using the terms avisesha and viUsha as they were
before employed (ver. 38), to represent severally the rudimental and g^roes
elements. Vachespati and Naravana read the phrase visishair vinA^
' without si>ecific particles ;* but they use the tenn ' specific* apparently
in its general acceptation of ' species,* without reference to its technical
emplo}^nent in ver. 38; for they confine its purpose to that of ^sobtile
bodies.* 'Without specific particles; without subtile bodies: that is the
meaning*.* S.Tattva Kaumudi. 'Without specific particles; without veiy
subtile bodies : the rudiment {linga\ being unsupported, does not remain;
but being supported by subtile bodies it exists t*' S. Chandrikd. So ftr
therefore, although the reading be diff*erent, the interpretation appears to
be thc^ same. The linga^ or ' rudiment* — for it is to be observed, that it ia
this which is spoken of by lioth text and comment, and not the lingm
iuirlra, 'rudimental body* — cannot subsist without a bodily frame. Whenea
that fmme is derived, Gaurapada makes sufficiently clear. The limgm^
or ' rudiment/ consists of but thirteen principles — the unclothed faculties
and sensi's: the rudimental body, by which they are aggr^ated and

• ftRT Wraftfn l4VSH'M(l<r<f*|tii: I t r4«pii<ri||^qM9(|



133

defended, is a tan mdtrika body, composed of the rudimental elements
(p. 123). This again, for worldly existence, is enveloped in a bodily
frame of gross elementary composition.

It may, however, be suspected that the authors of the S. Tatwa Kau-
mudi and the Chandrihd have not attended to the distinction, and that
they intend by their ^ specific or subtile bodies' only one of the ^ species,'
or visishasy which may be intimated in ver. 38 ; a modification of the
gross elements enclosing, not the naked ^ rudiment,' the lingaj but the
' rudimental body,' the linga sarira. Such, at any rate, is the interpreta-
tion of YiJNANA Bhikshu, who, commenting on this stanza of the Kdrikd^
explains ' specific particles, those which are called subtile amongst gross ;
a species or variety of gross elements :' and he says, that ^ the definition
of subtile body which is given in the preceding stanza, ^^ composed of
intellect with other subtile elements" (p. 128), as compared with the
expression of the present verse, proves that there is a distinction made
between subtile body and the specific variety of the gross elements,
which is also called subtile *.'

The question then is not one merely of a difference of interpretation,
but it is a difference of doctrine. According to GaurapAda's explanation,
which appears to be the original theory, living bodies consist of two
parts, one of a subtile, and one of a gross nature ; the latter perishes or
decomposes at death ; the former may live on through the existence of
the world : the latter gives cover to the former, which is the immediate
vehicle of soul, and accompanies it constantly, through successive perish-
able bodies, until soul's liberation, or until a period of universal dissolu-
tion restore its component parts to their primitive and common parent.
To this body the term of linga sarira, * rudimental body,' is properly ap-
plied ; it is also called dtivdhika, that which is swifter than the wind in
passing from body to body ; and, as Mr. Colebrooke observes, ^' it seems

M m



184

to be a compromifle between an immaterial soul and the difficulty which
a gro68 understanding finds in grasping the comprehension of indiridual
exiBtence, unattached to matter." Tr. R. As. Soc. 1. 32.

But some of the expounders of the S4nkhya doctrines haye not thought
even the rudimental body sufficiently material for the purpose d inde-
pendent existence, when separated from gross body ; and a third corpo-
real frame has been devised for its support, to which the present Terse at
the Kdrikd and the other passages which seem to allude to a subtile
form of specific or gross elementary matter relate, according to Vijmana
Bhirshu : ' Having abandoned gross body, a support is necessary for the
passage of rudimental body to other regions, and another species of body
is established*/ This is more particularly explained in the same writers
commentary on a somewhat obscure S6tra immediately preceding: * "In
the body, which is the receptacle of the receptacle of that (rudimental
body) ; for the denomination of hodjf is applied to one as it is to the
other/* That is, the receptacle or support of that rudiment, which will be
described as composed of the five elements, is supported or contained in
hoAy constituted of the six organic ingredients (bones, blood, &c.); to which
the name body is applied, from the same being applicable to the sense of
the word adhishhana {deka, ''body,** being understood apparently in either
case '' containing** or '' comprehending**). The corporeity of the Tehicle or
receptacle ((uthishikdna) arises from its relation to the (aggregate) Umgm;
the corporeity of gross body, from its being the receptacle of vehicukr
body. This is the meaning of the text. We have therefore three (kinds
of) body established t/ Quoting a passage which appears opposed to


135

this, and to intimate, as Gaurapada has done, a twofold distinction only
of bodies, the same writer observes, ' What is said in writings, upon the
authority of the Y^das, that there are but two (kinds of) bodies, arises
from their identifying the rudimental and vehicular bodies as one, as they
are mutually permanent and subtile *•' This is no doubt correct ; but it
is very unlikely that the elder writers admitted any form of the gross
elements to be equally permanent and subtile as the rudiments from
which they proceeded. In the institutes of Manu, for instance, although
the doctrine there laid down is of a different tenor from that of the
S&nkhya system, we have but two kinds of bodies, a subtile and a sub-
stantial one, described : ' After death another body, composed of the five
rudimental elements, is immediately produced, for wicked men, that may
suffer the tortures of the infernal regions t*' Manu^ XII. 16. We have
here, then, a body composed of the five rudimental elements. In the
Bhagavad Gita it is intimated that soul retains the senses and mind in
the intervals of migration : ' At the time that spirit obtains a body, and
when it abandons one, it migrates, taking with it those senses, as the
wind wafts along with it the perfume of the flowers \'

If Yachespati be correct in his interpretation of the word pwrusha^ the
Y6da makes one kind of subtile body of the size of the thumb : ' '' Yama
drew forth violenUy the subtile body, as big as the thumb." — ^The speci-
fication of the size merely denotes minuteness ; extraction of soul would
be absurd ; and therefore by purusha must be meant ** a subtile body," that
which reposes in gross body l|.' This, agreeably to the older doctrine, would


136

be rudimental body; according to later refinement, vehicular. It is
the latter which, as Mr. Colebrooke mentions (Tr. R. As. See. I. 33) in
Patanjali*s Yoga s6$tra^ is conceived to extend, like the flame of a lamp
over its wick, to a small distance above the skull ; and which, according to
M. Cousin, is '' la fameuse pens^e intracranienne, dont on a cm faiie
r^cemment une d6couverte merveilleuse/* Hist, de la Phila$ophie^ I. ISA.
The notion of some corporeal, however subtile, envelopment of soul-^
the €iim\ov^ umbra^ manes^ simulacrum^ spirit, or ghost — giving to invisiUe
and intangible soul some visible and tangible materiality, ** such," as Good
(Translation of Lucretius) observes, '' as will at least enable the soul to
assume some degree of material configuration, and to be capable of cor-
poreal feelings, however spiritualized and refined, even after its separatioa
from the body*' — has prevailed in all times and in all ages. Nor was the
doctrine confined to the people or the poets : such of the philosophers ta
maintained the immateriality of soul, attaching to it, until its final purifi«
cation, some portion of corporeal substance, or some substantial, though
subtile investure, or oxifia, or vehicle. Thus Cudworth (vol. III. 517)
states, that ' the ancient assertors of the soul's immortality did not soppoae
human souls, after death, to be quite stripped stark naked from all body,
but that the generality of souls had then a certain spirituous, vaporoos, or
airy body accompanying them; as also they conceived this spiritoous
body to hang about the soul also here in this life, before death, as its
interior indumcnt or vestment, which also then sticks to it when that
other gross earthly part of the body is by death put off as an outer gar-
ment/' It also appears, that '' besides the terrestrial body, and this spi-
rituous body, the ancients held that there is a third kind, of a higher rank.
peculiarly belonging to such souls, after death, as are purged and cleansed
from corporeal aflfections, called by them <rwfia ai^yoc/^, or a luciform
body.*' The authorities cjuoted by Cudworth for these opinions are new
Platonists, or Christian writers of the fourth and fifth centuries ; and it
seems not unlikely that they borrowed some of their notions from the
doctrines of Christianity. They profess, however, to repeat the tenets of
Pythagoras and Plato; and Cudworth asserts, that the distinction of two
interior vehicles or tunicles of the soul, besides that outer vestment <tf the



137

terrestrial body, is not a mere figment of the latter Platonists, but a
tradition derived down from antiquity. Mosheim, in his translation of
Cudworth, has entered, in a note, very fully into an inquiry as to the
origin of the opinion of a subtile body investing soul, and concludes,
^' Vetus hsBC opinio aut si mavis superstitio, ab ipsis fere Grsecorum
heroicis temporibus ductaf and Brucker, in reference to his observa-
tions on this subject, remarks, '' Hoc vero magna doctrina et ingenio
demonstravit Mosheimius banc de vehicuio opinionem non demum in
juniorum Piatonicorum cerebro enatam esse sed fuisse dogma cause
antiquitatis." Hist. Philas. I. 714. Although, therefore, less clearly ex-
pressed than by the Hindu writers, the early Greek philosophers en-
tertained similar notions of the nature of the subtile body, which was
inseparable from soul until the period of its final exemption from trans-
migration.



XLII.

For the sake of soul's wish, that subtile person exhibits (before
it), like a dramatic actor, through relation of means and consequence,
with the aid of nature's influence.

BHASHYA.

The purpose of soul is to be fulfilled, therefore nature proceeds to
action. This (purpose) is twofold, apprehension of sound and the other
objects of sense, and apprehension of the difference between qualities
and soul. Apprehension of sound and the other objects of sense is enjoy-
ment of sensual gratification, as fragrance and the like in the spheres of
Brahma and the rest : apprehension of the difference between the quali-
ties and soul is liberation. Therefore it is said. For the sake of souFs wish
subtile person is active. Through relation of means and consequences. —
Means (or antecedents) are virtue and the like: consequences are their
results, such as their ascending to heaven and so forth, as we shall here-
after explain. By their relation; their connection. With the aid of

Nn



138

natures influence ; of the influence of the chief one, nature. As a king in
his own kingdom does what he wishes of his own authority, so by the
application of the supreme authority of nature, through the relation of
means (or causes) and consequences, subtile body exhibits : that is, nature
commands subtile body to assume different conditions, by taking differ*
ent (gross) bodies. Subtile body is that which is aggregated of subtile
atomic rudimental elements, and is possessed of thirteen instruments (or
faculties and senses). It assumes various conditions, by its birth, amongst
gods, animals and men. How does (it exhibit) ? Like an ocfor, who wh^i
he enters upon the scene is a god, and when he makes his exit is again
a mortal : or again, a buffoon. So the subtile body, through the relation
of causes and consequences, having entered the womb, may become an
elephant, a woman, or a man.

It was said (ver. 40), " Subtile body migrates, invested with disposi-
tions.** What those disfxisitions are is now described.

COMMENT.

The circumstances on which transmigration depends are here said to
be the purpose of soul, enforced by the authority of nature.

SouPs purpose is either fruition or liberation ; and to accomplish one
or other of these, subtile body passes through various conditions, assum*
ing different exterior forms, as an actor puts on different dresses to per-
sonate one while Rdma^ another while Yudhishihira^ or again, Vatsa\
The purpose of soul is enforced by the power, authority, or influence of
nature t- Vibhuitcay as illustrated by Gaurapada, means 'kingly or
supreme authority.' Vachespati understands it as ' universality* rather,
as in the text of the Purdna: 'This wonderful vicissitude is from the
universality of nature |;* that is, from its invariable presence and conse-
(pient influence. But besides these motives, the purpose of soul and



1S9

influence of nature, which may be regarded as the remote and proximate
causes of transmigration in general, it is still necessary to have what may
be regarded as a special, or exciting, or efficient cause ; the reason of the
particular migration ; the cause wherefore, in particular instances, subtile
body should ascend from the exterior frame of a man to that of a god, or
wherefore it should descend from the exterior frame of a man to that of a
brute. This depends, then, upon the relation of certain occasional or
instrumental means or causes, nimittas*^ with their incidental conse-
quences or effects, the naimittikasli; as virtue and vice, which lead seve-
rally to reward and punishment after death ; that is, to regeneration in
an exalted or degraded condition. Thus the Chatidrikd explains the
terms : ' Nimitta is virtue and the rest ; naimittika is the effect, having
the nimitta for its cause, as gross bodies, &c. By the relation or connec-
tion of these two, subtile body, assuming the form of gods or other beings,
performs its part {.' Professor Lassen has been needlessly perplexed by
this verse, and has strangely rendered it as follows : ** Corpusculum hocce
propter genii causam effectum, ludionis instar se habet ad has modo ad
illas originarias et derivatas conditiones pronum, post conjunctionem pro-
creatricis cum potestate sua."



XLIII.

Essential dispositions are innate. Incidental^ as virtue and the
rest, are considered appurtenant to the instrument. The uterine
germ (flesh and blood) and the rest belong to the effect (that is, to
the body).



Mn^ I ^ ^rfifrftra I t f^rfiro v^ifi^



^mr<u!0< MPi^iti ^4^<rri I



tiS*<*iHtf*^H FM^ fcT'f ^TB^ ^5fK



140

bhAshya.

Dispositions (hhavasy ' conditions*) of being are considered to be three-
fold, innate, essential, and incidental. The first, or innate^ are those four
which in the first creation Mere cognate with the divine sage Kapila«
or virtue, knowledge, dispassion, and power. The essential are declared;
these were four sons of Brahma, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and
Sanatkumara; and these four dispositions were produced with them, who
were invested with bodies of sixteen years of age (or perpetually juvenile
bodies), in consequence of the relation of causes and effects (or in conse-
quence of merit in a former existence) : therefore these dispositions are
called essential, hicidental are those derived through the corporeal form
of a holy teacher ; from which (in the first instance) knowledge is inci-
dentally obtained by such as we are ; from knowledge comes dispassion ;
from dispassion, virtue; and from virtue, power. The form of a teacher
is an incidental product (of nature), and therefore these dispositions are
termed incidental: ** Invested by which, subtile body migrates** (ver. 40).
These four dispositions are of the quality of goodness; those of darkness
are their contraries : as above, *' Virtue, &c. are its faculties partaking
of goodness ; those partakini; of darkness are the reverse** (ver. 23). Con-
secjuently there are eight dispositions, or virtue, knowledge, dispassion,
power, vice, ignorance, [)assion, weakness. Where do they abide ? T^iy
are considered appurtenant to the instrument. Intellect is an instrument,
and to that they are appurtenant ; as in ver. 23, '* Ascertainment is
intellect; virtue, knowledge," &c. Effect ; body. The uterine germ amd
the rest belong to it ; those wiiich are born of the mother, the germ amd
the rest, or the bubble, the flesh, the muscle, and the rest, which are
(generated), for the development of the infant, in the union of the blood
and the Si*minal fluid. Thus the conditions of infancy, youth, and old
age are produced ; the instrumental causes of which are food and beve-
rage; and therefore they are said to be attributes of the effect (or of the
body), having, as the instrumental cause, the fruition of the sensual plea-
sures of eating and the like.

It was said (ver. 42), ''Through the relation of means and conse-
quences:** this is next explained.



141



COMMENT.

We have here an explanation of what is to be understood by the^term
dispositions^ used in a former passage (ver. 40).

The translation of bhdva * adopted by Mr. Colebrooke in this place is
'disposition:' in the passage referred to he had employed, as above
remarked, ' sentiment ;' but it was there changed, in order to preserve
consistency. Neither word perhaps exactly expresses the purport of the
original, nor is it easy to find one that will precisely correspond. In some
respects 'condition,' mode, or state of being, conditio, as rendered by
Professor Lassen, is preferable, as better comprehending the different cir-
cumstances to which hh&va is applied ; although, as he has occasion sub-
sequently to remark, it does not very well express all the senses in which
bhdva occurs. These circumstances or conditions, according to the ob-
vious meaning of the text, are of two kinds, or intellectual and corporeal.
The first comprise virtue, knowledge, dispassion, power, and their con-
traries; the second, the different periods of life, or embryo, infancy,
youth, and senility. They are also to be regarded as respectively cause
and effect ; virtue, &c. being the efficient cause, or nimitta ; bodily con-
dition the naimittikaj or consequence ; as Yachespati explains the object
of the stanza, ' which,' according to him, ' distinguishes incidental cause
and consequence, the latter being the incidental conditions of body t-'

But besides the division of conditions or dispositions into the two
classes of intellectual and corporeal, they are also characterised accord-
ing to their origin, as sdnsiddhikoy prdkrita, and vaikrita, rendered in the
text ' innate, essential, and incidental.' Prof. Lassen translates them
conditiones ahsolutte, pendentes ah origine, pertinentes ad evoluta principia.
Both the two first are innate, and some further distinction is necessary.
' Superhuman' or ' transcendental' would perhaps best explain the first,
as they are, according to the commentator, peculiar to saints and sages.
According to Gaurapada, they occur only in one instance as the cognate



♦



HT^J I ^ fH(*4fl ^l*lfll* 'if PlH^f^ I ^^fdiil 5f*4ffl<Mi I



00



142

conditions of the divine Kapila, the author of the S&nkhya system. The
second class, M'hich may be rendered 'natural/ agreeably to his view,
which is a little mystical, originated with the four holy and chaste sons
of Brahma. The third class, those which are incidental or constructiTe,
vaitrita, belong to mortals, as they are produced in them by instruction.
Vachespati recognises but two distinctions, identifying, as in the trans-
lation, the innate (sdnsiddhiia) with the essential (prdkrita) dispositions,
they being both swdbhdvika^ ' inseparable, inherent,* not the production
of tuition, and opposing to it the constructive or incidental (vaikritika)^ .
A similar account of their origin as in the lihdshjfa is given, but under
these two heads only : ' Thus in tlic beginning of creation the first sage«
the venerable and great Mnni Kapila, appeared, spontaneously endowed
with virtue, knowledge, dispassion, and power. The incidental and un*
spontaneous dispositions were produced by the cultivation of the means
(of producing thcni), as (tlie lessons of) Prachetasa and other great
Rishis^S These dispositions or conditions are dependent upon the in-
strument, that is upon huddhi^ or ' intellect,* of which they are faculties,
as was explained in verse 23. The states or conditions of life depend
upon the body, and are the immediate effects of generation and nutri*
ment, the more remote effects of virtue, vice, &c.



XLIV.

By virtue is ascent to a region above ; by vice, descent to a r^on
Ik'Iow : by knowledge is deliverance ; by the reverse, bondage.


143



bhAshya.

By virtue ascent. — Having made virtue the efficient cause, it leads
upwards. By upwards eight degrees are intended, or the r^ons of
Brahmd, Praj&pati, Soma, Indra, the Gandharbas, the Y^shas, the
Bikshasas, and Pis&chas : the subtile body goes thither. Or if vice be
the efficient cause, it migrates into an animal, a deer, a bird, a reptile, a
vegetable, or a mineral. Again; by knowledge^ deliverance: knowledge
of the twenty-five principles ; by that efficient cause, deliverance : the
subtile body ceases, and (soul is) called ^supreme spirit' (paramdtmd).
By the reverse^ bandage : ignorance is the efficient cause, and that (efiect)
bondage is natural (prdkrita)^ incidental {vaikdrika)y or personal (ddkshina),
as will be explained : ** He who is bound by natural, incidental, or per-
sonal bondage is not loosed by any other (means than knowledge)."

Next, other efficient causes are declared.



XLV.

By dispassion is absorption into nature ; by foul passion, migra-
tion : by power, unimpediment ; by the reverse, the contrary.

bhAshya.

If any one has dispassion without knowledge of principles, then from
such dispassion unpreceded by knowledge occurs absorption into nature,
or when the individual dies he is resolved into the eight primary elements,
or nature, intellect, egotism, and the five rudiments ; but there is no libe-
ration, and therefore he migrates anew. So also by foul passion ; as, I
sacrifice, I give gifts, in order to obtain in this world divine or human
enjoyment; from such foul passion proceeds worldly migration. By
power J unimpediment. — ^Where eightfold power, as minuteness, &c. is the
efficient cause, then non-obstruction is the efiect. Such power is unim-



144

pcded in the sphere of Brahm&, or in any other. By the revene^ the
contrary. — The contrary of unimpediment is obstruction, which proceeds
from want of power, everj' where obstructed.

Thus sixteen efficient causes and effects have been enumerated : what
they comprehend (or amount to) is next described.

COMMENT.

In these two verses the efficient causes of the various conditions of
subtile body and their effects, or its conditions, are detailed.

These causes and effects are collectively sixteen, eight of each : the
former are positive and negative, as diversified by the qualities of good*
ness and foulness (ver. 23); and the effects respectively correspond.
They are accordingly.

Cause. fiffcct.

1 . Virtue. 12. Elevation in the scale of being.

3. Vice. 4. Degradation in the scale of being.

5. Knowledge. 6. LilK'ration from existence.

7. Ignorance. 8. Bondage or transmigration.

9. Dispassion. 10. Dissolution of the subtile bodily form.

11. Pa^&ion. 12. Migration.

1'). Power. 14. Unim|XHiiment.

15. Feebleness. 16. Obstruction.

By 'virtue,* dhernuty both religious and moral merit are intended.
Asccnty going upward, is elevation to a more exalted station in another
birth ; the term sthdna implying both place and degree. According to
Gai'rai*ai)a, this ascent is eightfold, and the subtile frame may after
death assume a new Ixxly amongst the various classes of spirits, Pis&chas,
R/ikshasas, Wikshas, and Gandherbas; or may attain a place in the
heaven of Indra ; of Soma, or the moon ; of the PrajApatis, or progeniton
of mankind ; or even in the region of BrahmA. It is a curious, thou^
|>erhaps an accidental coincidence, that the Syrians and Egyptians ena«
merated also, according to Plato (Epinomis), eight orders of heavenly
beings : their places, however, seem to be the planets exclusively. The



145

author of the S. T.Kaumudi understands by ascent^ or elevation, ascent to
the six superterrestrial r^ons,Z>ytfy ovBhuvar loka^ the atmosphere; Stver
lokay the heaven of Indra ; MaJuir loka^ Janatoka^ and Tapoloka^ worlds of
sages and saints ; and Satya loka^ of Brahmd. By degradation he under-
stands descent to the subterrene regions, Patdla^ Rasdtala^ Sec. These
notions are, however, not incompatible, as rewards and punishments in
heaven and hell are but temporary, and subtile body must even after-
wards assume terrestrial form, and undergo a series of migrations before
escape from the bondage of existence can be finally accomplished.

Bondage is said by the commentators to be of three kinds, intending
thereby three different errors or misconceptions of the character of soul
and nature ; the prevalence of which precludes all hope of final emanci-
pation. ' These errors or bonds are, 1. Prakrit ika ; the error or bondage
of the materialists, who assert soul in nature (or matter) : 2. Vaikritika ;
the error of another class of materialists, who confound soul with any of
the products of nature, as the elements, the senses, egotism or intellect :
and, 3. DdAshina ; the error or bondage of those who, ignorant of the real
character of soul, and blinded by the hope of advantage, engage in moral
and religious observances :' as Yachespati *• These errors confine the
soul to its subtile material frame for various protracted periods ; as, for
instance, in the case of those who identify soul with sense, for ten num-
wantarasy or above three thousand millions of years (3,084,480,000).

By dispassion occurs * absorption into nature,' prakriti 2ayat; or, as the
Kanmudi and Chandrikd express it, * resolution into the chief one and the
rest {.' Gaurapada makes the meaning of the phrase sufficiently clear :
according to him it signifies the resolution of even the subtile body into

pp


146

its constituent elements : but this is not in this case equivalent to liberm-
tion ; it is only tlie term of one series of migrations, soul being immedi-
ately reinvested M'ith anotlier person, and commencing a new career of
migrator)' existence until knowledge is attained.
The remainder of the text requires no explanation.



XLVL

This is an intellectual creation, termed obstruction^ disability^

acfpiiescence^ and jperfectness. By dis})arity of influence of qualities

the sorts of it are fifty. .

BHASHYA.

This aggregate of sixteen causes and effects is called ait intelleetmai
creation. Pratyaya means buddhi, * intellect.* *' Intellect is ascertain*
ment,'* &c. (ver. 23). This intellectual creation is of four kinds, obstrmt^
iioH^ disability^ acquiescence^ and per/ectness. In this classification, dambt
(obstruction) is ignorance ; as M'hen any one beholding a post (at a dis-
tance) is in doubt whether it is a post or a roan. Disability is when, even
though the object be distinctly seen, the doubt cannot be dissipated. The
third kind is called acquiescence; as when a person declines to doubt or
determine whether the object be a post or not; saying. What have I to do
with this. The fourth kind is per/ectness ; as when the delighted observer
notices a creeper twining round the object, or a bird perched upon it, and
is certain that it is a post. By disparity of influence of qualities. — By the
unequal (or varied) influence of the qualities of goodness, foulness, and
darkness, acting on this fourfold intellectual creation, there are fifty mo-
difications of it : and these kinds in which severally goodness, foulnen^
or darkness prevails, and the other two are subordinate, are next pw«

ticularized.

COMMENT.

In this and the five foUoM'ing stanzas the modifications of the causes
and consequences, or the conditions of existence produced by the intd*



147

lectual faculties, as influenced by the three qualities, are detailed and
classified.

By 'intellectual creation/ pratyaya serga*^ is to be understood the
various accidents of human life occasioned by the operations of the intel-
lect, or the exercise of its faculties, virtue, knowledge, dispassion, power,
and their contraries. Pratyaya properly means ' trust,' but is here consi-
dered to be synonymous with hnddhi. It may be understood as imply-
ing ' notion ;' and pratyaya serga is the creation or existence of which we
have a notion or belief, in contradistinction to bodily or organic existence,
of which we have an idea or sensible perception ; the bMta serga f, or
' elemental creation/

Existence then, dependent on the faculties of the intellect and their
consequences, is further distinguished as of four kinds : 1. ' Obstruction,'
viparyaya^ is explained by Yachespati 'ignorance' (ajndna)^ by Gaura-
PADA ' doubt' (safisaya) : 2. * Disability,' asaktij is imperfection of the in-
struments or senses : 3. Tushti is ' acquiescence' or ' indifierence :' and,
4. Siddhi is ' complete or perfect knowledge/ ' In the three first are com-
prised the seven intellectual faculties, virtue and the rest (see p. 88), all
except knowledge, which is comprehended in perfectness {.' S. Tatwa
Kaumudi. This is the collective or generic division. Each genus is again
divided so as to form fifty species, according as they are afiected by the
three qualities, or the predominance of one, and the depression of an-
other ||. The species are enumerated in the succeeding verse.


148



XLVII.

There are five distinctions of obstruction; and, from defect of
instruments twenty-eight of disability: acquiescence is ninefold;
perfectness eightfold.

bhAshya.

Five distinctiams of obstruction ; namely, obscurity, illusion, extreme
illusion, gloom, and utter darkness: these will presently be explained.
There are twenty^ghl kind$ of disability from defect of instrumemts; which
also we shall describe. Acquiescence is ninefold^ being the kinds of know-
ledge partaking of the quality of foulness in an ascetic. Perfectmeu is
eightfold^ which in holy men consists also of the kinds of knowledge
partaking of the quality of goodness. These will all be explained in
order ; and first of obstruction.

COMMENT.

We have here the fifty varieties of intellectual creation, or conditions
dependent upon the faculties of intellect, simply enumerated under each
head respectively.

The text in each case is limited to the enumeration of the number of
the varieties, leading their designations and descriptions to be supplied
by the scholia : accordingly we have in the Bhdshya the five distinctioiift
of obstruction si>ecified. They are referred to in the text, in the suc-
ceeding stanza, for the purpose of enumerating their subdivisions, and it
is unnecessary therefore to enter upon the detail here.



XLVIII.

TiiK distinctions of ol)scurity are eightfold, as also those of il
sion ; extreme illusion is tenfold ; gloom is eighteenfold, and so is
utter darkness.



149



bhAshya.

Obscurity is eightfold ; final dissolution being so distinguished through
ignorance ; as when a person thinks that soul merges into the eight forms
of prakritij or the five rudiments, egotism, intellect, and nature, and
thence concludes, I am liberated : this is eightfold obscurity. The same
is the number of kinds of illusion ; in consequence of which, Indra and
the gods, being attached to the possession of the eight kinds of super-
human power, such as minuteness and the rest, do not obtain liberation,
but upon the loss of their power migrate again : this is called eightfold
illusion. Extreme illusion is of ten kinds^ accordingly as the five objects
of sense, sound, touch, form, taste, and smell, are sources of happiness to
the gods or to men. In these ten objects (or the five objects of sense
twice told) consists extreme illusion. Gloom is eighteen/old. — ^The facul-
ties of superhuman power are eight sources, and the objects of sense,
human or divine, are ten, making eighteen ; and the feeling that makes
men rejoice in the enjoyment of these eighteen, and grieve for the want
of them, is gloom. Utter darkness has in like manner eighteen varieties,
originating with the eightfold superhuman power and the ten objects of
perception ;/ but it applies to the profound grief felt by one who dies
amidst the abundance of sensual delights in the season of enjoyment, or
who falls from the command of superhuman faculties : that is utter dark-
ness. In this manner the five varieties of obstruction, obscurity and the
rest, are severally subdivided, making sixty-two varieties.

COMMENT.

The five kinds of obstruction, ignorance, or uncertainty, alluded to
in the preceding stanza, are here specified, and their subdivisions enu-
merated .

* Obstruction,* viparyaya*^ means, properly, whatever obstructs the
soul's object of final liberation : it is consequently any cause of bondage,



Qq



150

of confinement to worldly existence, or of perpetual migration, and is
therefore one of the four elements of the creation of the world ; as, if
spirit was not so confined, created forms would never have existed* So
the S6tra of Kapila has, * Bondage is from obstruction^;* but liberation
depends on knowledge: bondage therefore arises from ignorance, and
ignorance or error is obstruction. Gaurapada accordingly uses Mnjayatt
' doubt* or ' error,* as the synonyme of viparyaya ; and the specification of
its sub-species confirms this sense of the term, as they are all hinderances
to final emancipation, occasioned by ignorance of the difference between
soul and nature, or by an erroneous estimate of the sources of happineaa,
placing it in sensual pleasure or superhuman might.

The five varieties of obstruction or error are, • obscurity,* tamos ; • iilu*
sion,* moha ; ' extreme illusion,' nmhamoha ; ' gloom,* tdmisra; * utter dark*
ness,* andhaUimisra. The distinctions are more subtle than precise, but
their general purport is sufficiently obvious ; they all imply ignorance of
self, and thirst of pleasure and power. Another enumeration, that of the
Yoga^ or Pdtanjala school, as repeated by Vijnana Bhikshu, calls the
five species, 'ignorance' {avidyd), * egoism* (asmitd). Move* (rdga)^ • hate'
(dwesha), and 'idle terror* (abhinnHa\ as fear of death and the iike|.
They are called also in the same system, ' the five afflictions ||.* These
are identified with the species named in the text. Obscurity is that igno*
ranee which believes soul to be sealed in primary nature, or one of its
first seven products ; and is therefore eightfold. Illusion is that egoism
that exults in the appropriation of the eight superhuman faculties ; and
is conse<iuently eightfold also. Extreme illusion^ or love, is addiction to
sensual objects, as they are grateful respectively to gods and men : there-
fore this class of impediments to liberation is tenfold. Gioom^ or hate, is
of eighteen kinds ; ten as affecting the ten objects of sense, or the five
divine and five human, as before distinguished, and termed by GAVftA*


161

pAda, dr%shtd*y • seen,' perceived by men ; and anusravikd t, * heard tra-
ditionally/ by men, of the gods : and eight connected with the possession
of the eight superhuman faculties. The mental conditions here intended
are those of fierceness and impatience, with which sensual enjoyments
are pursued, or superhuman powers are exercised. Utter darkness, or
terror, is the fear of death in men ; and in gods, the dread of expulsion
from heaven by the Asuras : in either case the loss of pleasure and power
is the thing lamented ; and as their sources are eighteen, so many are the
subdivisions of this condition. These distinctions are said to be the work
of former teachers ; as in the S. Pravachana Bhdshya : * The subdivisions
are as formerly described : that is, the subdivisions of obstruction, which
is said to be of five species, are such as were fully detailed by former
teachers, but are in the S6tra but briefly alluded to, for fear of pro-
lixity^.'



XLIX.

Depravity of the eleven organs, together with injuries of the
intellect, are pronounced to be disability. The injuries ctf intellect
are seventeen, by inversion of acquiescence and perfectness^

BHASHYA.

From defect of instruments there are twenty-eight kinds of disability ;
this has been declared (ver. 47) : these are, depravity of the eleven organs^
or deafness, blindness, paralysis, loss of taste, loss of smell, dumbness,
mutilation, lameness, constipation, impotence, and insanity. Together
with injuries of the intellect: as, together with these, there are twenty-
eight kinds of disability, there are seventeen kinds of injuries of the



152

intellect. By inversion of acquiescence and perfectness: that is, there are
nine kinds of acquiescence, and eight of perfectness ; and with the cir*
cumstances that are the reverse of these (seventeen), the deven above
Hpocified, compose the twenty-eight varieties of disability. The kinds of
injury of the intellect which arc the reverse of (the sorts of) acquiescence
and })erfectness will be understood from the detail of their varieties.
The nine kinds of acquiescence are next explained.

COMMENT.

The various kinds of the second class of conditions or disability are
here enumerated.

' Disability,' asakti, or incapability of the intellect to discharge its
|>eculiar functions^, is the necessary result of imperfection of the
or of any of the organs of perception and of action. But besides thi
which are sufficiently obvious, such as blindness, deafness, and any other
organic defect, there are seventeen affections of the intellect itself equally
injurious to its efficiency. These are described as the contraries of the
conditions which constitute the classes acquiescence and perfectness.
Under tlie former head are enumerated, dissatisfaction as to notions of
nature, means, time, and luck, and addiction to enjoyment of the five
objects of sense, or the pleasures of sight, hearing, touching, &c. The
contraries of perfectness are, want of knowledge, whether derivable from
reflection, from tuition, or from study, endurance of the three kinds of
pain, privation of friendly intercourse, and absence of purity or of
liberality.



NiNK sorts of acquiescence are propounded; four internal, relat-
ing to nature, to means, to time, and to luck ; five external, relative
to abstinence from (enjoyment of) objects.



^lil'lfki H'MIMK I


153

bhAshya.

Five internal sorts of acquiescence. — ^Those which are in the individual
are internal. They are said to relate to nature^ to means, to time^ and to
luck. The first is, when a person understands what nature is, its being
with or without qualities, and thence knows a principle (of existence) to
be a product of nature ; but knows this only, and is satisfied : he does not
obtain liberation : this is acquiescence in regard to nature. The second
is, when a person, ignorant of the principles (of existence), depends upon
external means, such as the triple staff, the water-pot, and other imple-
ments (used by ascetics) : liberation is not for him : this is acquiescence
in regard to means. Acquiescence in regard to time is when a person
satisfies himself that liberation must occur in time, and that it is unne-
cessary to study first principles : such a one does not obtain liberation.
And in the same way acquiescence as relates to luck is when a person is
content to think that by good luck liberation will be attained. These are
four kinds of acquiescence. Five external, relative to abstinence from {en-
joyment of objects). — ^The external sorts of acquiescence are five ; frdm ab-
stinence from enjoyment of (five) objects of sense ; that is, when a person
abstains from gratification through sound, touch, form, flavour, and smell ;
such abstinence proceeding from observation of (the evils of) acquiring,
preserving, waste, attachment (to sensual pleasures), and injuriousness.
Acquiring is pain (or trouble), for the sake of increase, by the pasturage
of cattle, trade, acceptance of gifts, and servitude. There is pain in the
preservation of what has been acquired ; and if they be enjoyed, they are
wasted; and waste, again, is vexation. When attachment to sensual
pleasures prevails, the organs have no repose : this is the fault of such at-
tachment. Without detriment to created things there is no enjoyment (of
sensible objects) ; and this is the defect of injuriousness. From observing
then the evil consequences of acquiring and the rest, abstinence from
enjoyment of the five objects of sense is practised ; and these are the five
sorts of external acquiescence. From the variety of these internal and
external kinds proceed the nine sorts of acquiescence. Their names are
differently enumerated in other works, or ambhas, salilam, ogha, vrishii,
sutamasj pdram, sunetram, ndrikam, and anuttamdmbhasikam : and from

R r



154

the reverse of these kinds of aequiescence, constituting the varieties of
disability, injuries of the intellect arise, named (according to the last
mentioned nomenclature) anambhas, asalilam^ and so on. From the coo*
trariety of these, therefore, are inferred the injuries of the intellect.
Perfectness is next described.

COMMENT.

The different kinds of acquiescence, apathy, or indifference, are spe-
cified in this verse.

The kinds of acquiescence, content, or complacency, tuskti^ are of two
descriptions ; internal or spiritual, ddhydtmika^ and external or sensible,
hiihya. Gaurapada explains the former, ' being in self or spirit V Vaches-
PATi defines them, ' Those kinds of acquiescence are called internal whidi
proceed from discrimination of self, as different from nature !•' According
to VuN ANA BiiiKsHU, they are those principles or sentiments which preside
over collected or composed soul \. Of the different species, the first, or
that which relates to nature, acknowledges it as the radical principle of all
things, but expects that as every thing is but a modification of nature, so
nature will effect all that is necessary, even liberation, for example, and
the individual / remains passive and complete ||. Another person, as the
means of liberation, adopts a religious or mendicant order, or at least bears
the emblems, as the staff, the water-pot, and the like : the term vividikd
used in the lihdshya is of doubtful import, and is perhaps an error. Others
suppose that liberation must come in time, or at least by a long con-
tinued course of meditation. Others imagine it may come by good luck ;
and contenting themselves with these notions or practices, omit the only
means of being freed from existence, discriminative meditation. The five



<ii^c4wiHi<iuiifw^i: I t wruTR ^hrnnrfv^w ^^H^ i

II ^IgflnfcKMiil^ : qr<H!m: ^fiftsf^l HfiriM W (^) ^ iVfflftl



155

external kinds of acquiescence are self-denial, or abstinence from the five
objects of sensual gratification ; not from any philosophic appreciation of
them, but from dread of the trouble and anxiety which attends the means
of procuring and enjoying worldly pleasures ; such as acquiring wealth,
preserving it, spending it, incessant excitement and injury or cruelty to
others. Besides the terms ordinarily significant of these divisions of
acquiescence, the Scholiasts specify other words, the usual sense of which
is quite different, and which may therefore be regarded as the slang or
mystical nomenclature of the followers of the Yoga. There is some dif-
ference in the precise expressions, but they are of a similar purport
in general. The first four, the synonymes of the internal modes of ac-
quiescence, are alike in all the authorities; or, ambhas*, ' water;' scUilali,
also ' water ;' ogha \^ ' quantity ;' and vrishti ||,' ' rain.' Gaurapada then
has for the five exterior modes, sutanuis^j 'great darkness;' pdra^j 'shore;'
sun£tra**j *a beautiful eye;' lufrtta tt> 'feminine;' and anuttamdmhhi"
sikaXX, ' unsurpassed water.' Vachespati makes them, pdram^ supdram\\\l
* good shore ;' apdram §§y * shoreless ;' anuttamambhas ^^y ' unsurpassed
water ;' and uttamdmhhas ***, * excellent water.' The Chandrikd has the
same, except in the third place, where the term is pdrdpdra ttt» * ^oth
shores ;' with which the S. Prav. Bh. agrees. No explanation of the words
is any where given, nor is any reason assigned for their adoption.



LI.

Reasoning, hearing, study, prevention of pain of three sorts, in-
tercourse of friends, and purity (or gift) are perfections (or means
thereof). The fore-mentioned three are curbs of perfectness.


156

BHASHYA.

limsoning ; as when a person always reasons, What here is truth f
What is the future ? Wliat is final felicity ? How may I attain the object
(of my existence) ? and from reflecting in this manner, the knowledge is
ac(|uired that soul is diflcrent from nature; that intellect, egotism, the
rudiments, the senses, the elements, are several and distinct. In this
manner knowledge of the (twenty-five) principles is attained, by which
liberation is accomplished. This is the first kind of perfectness, called
reasoning. Next, from knowledge acquired by hearing proceeds know-
ledge of nature, intellect, egotism, the rudiments, the senses, and the
elements ; whence lil>er€ition ensues : this is perfectness by hearing.
When from stuily, or the |>erusal of the V^'das and other (sacred) writings,
knowledge of the twenty-five principles is acquired ; that is the third
kind of {>erfectness. Prevention of the three kinds of pain. — When, for the
purpose of preventing the three kinds of pain, internal, external, and
su{)erhuman, a holy teacher has been attended, and liberation is derived
from his counsel ; then this constitutes the fourth kind of perfectness.
This is threefold, with reference to the three different sorts of pain, and
makes, with the three preceding, six varieties of perfectness. Next, iji-
tercourse of friends; as when a friend, having acquired knowledge, obtains
lil>eration : this is the seventh kind of {>erfectness. Gijt; as when a
{>erson assists holy men, by donations of a dwelling, of herbs, of a staff, a
wallet, foo<l, or clothing; and (in requital) receives from them knowledge,
and thus obtains libenition : this is the eighth sort of {lerfectneas. In
other lM)oks these eight kinds of perfectness are termed tdram^ sutdram^
tdratdram^ pramodam^ prammlitatn, pramodamdnam^ ramyakam^ and sadd^

pramnditam. From contrariety to these, the injuries of intellect which

occur, or causes of disability, are tenned atdram^ asutardm^ &c. ; thus
completini; the twenty-ei^ht kinds of disability, as in the text (ver. 40),
'• Depravity of the eleven orgxms, together with injuries of the intellect,**
&c. Thus the contraries of the sorts of acquiescence being nine, and the
contniric^ of the kinds of perfectness being ei^ht, they form seventeen
injuri(*s of intellect; and these, with the eleven defects of the oigans*
constitute twenty-eight kinds of disability, as previously stated.



157

In this way the various kinds of obstruction, disability, acquiescence,
and perfectness, have been affirmatively and negatively described. Again,
the forementioned three are curbs of perfectness. — Farementianed ; that is,
obstruction, disability, and acquiescence ; they are curbs of perfectness :
threefold curbs from their severalty. As an elephant is kept in check
when restrained by a goad (or curb), so, impeded by obstruction, dis-
ability, and acquiescence, the world suffers ignorance : therefore aban-
doning them, perfectness alone is to be pursued ; for by a person having
perfectness knowledge is attained, and thence liberation.

It was stated (ver. 40) that '' subtile body migrates, invested with dis-
positions:'' those dispositions were previously said to be virtue and the
rest, eight in number, modifications (or faculties) of intellect ; which again
have been described as modified by obstruction, disability, acquiescence,
and perfectness. These (together) constitute intellectual creation, also
called dispositional (or conditional) : but subtile body is called a rudi-
mental (or personal) creation, extending throughout the fourteen sorts of
created things. (See v. 53.) It then becomes a question, whether souls
purpose is accomplished by one kind of creation, or by both ? This is
next explained.

COMMENT.

The different kinds of perfectness are here specified.

By 'perfectness,' siddhi*^ is here to be understood the means of perfect-
ing or fulfilling the purpose of soul, or the conditions essential to its
attainment ; the circumstances productive of knowledge ; the necessary
consequence of which is exemption from future transmigration, 'f Reason-
ing, hearing, study, intercourse of friends, and gift, are secondary kinds of
perfectness, as subsidiary to the prevention of the three kinds of pain.



s s



158

which constitutes a triple principal class : they are resi>ectively distin-
^lished as objects, and the means of effecting those objects/ jS*. Talwm
Kanmudl. Reasoning, according to Vachespati, is ' investigation of scrip-
tural authority by dialectics which are not contrary to the scriptures:'
and investigation is defined, ' refutation of dubious doctrine* and esta-
blishment of positive conclusions */ ' Hearing is oral instruction, or
rather the knowU^dge thence derived, or knowledge derived either from
hearing another person read, or from expounding a work t-* S. Pr. Bh.
Intercourse €}f frienils\ is explained in the S. Tatwa Kaummdi to signify
* dissatisfaction with solitary inquiry, and discussion with a teacher, a
pupil, or a fellow-student ||/ Vijnana Bhikshu defines it, ' acquirement
of knowledge from a benevolent visitor, who comes to give instruction ^/
Va<:iiasi>ati and Naravana agree in rendering ddna^ — ^which Gacra-
PAUA explains by ' gift, liberality,* particularly to religious characters
— by siuiHAi^*, 'purity;* meaning the purity of discriminative know-
ledge ; deriving it from the root Haip tt« ' to purify ;* and not from
dfi\\. 'to give.* The fonner cites the authority of Patanjali for this
sense of one kind of perfectnc^ss : ' Undisturbedness of discriminatiTe
kn()wledg(\ that is, purity ; which is not attained except through loDg
repeatcil and uninterrupted practice of veneration. That is also compre-
hended in discrimination by the term dana\\\\. He also observes that
i)tlH*rs interpret it "gift, by which a sage, being propitiated, imparts



H i %;m ni^ i H itum wf^ I J ^fiwrfk: I « gro 1^



159

knowledge *.' The S. Prav. Bh. gives this interpretation only t- The
term for * curb/ ankusa \y is the goad or iron hook used to guide an
elephant: it is here explained by nivdrana, 'hindering;' and 'as ob-
struction, disability, and acquiescence hinder perfectness, they are to be
shunned ||/



LII.

Without dispositions there would be no subtile person : without
person there would be no pause of dispositions : wherefore a twofold
creation is presented, one termed personal^ the other intellectual.

BHASHYA.

Without dispositions^ without intellectual creations, there would be no
subtile person^ no rudimental creation ; from the non-assumption of re-
peated successive bodily forms, without the necessary influence of ante-
rior conditions (or dispositions). Without person, without rudimental
creation, there would be no pause of dispositions ; from the indispensability
of virtue or vice for the attainment of either subtile or gross body, and
from the non-priority of either creation, they being mutually initiative,
like the seed and the germ. There is no fault in this, for (the relation)
is that of species, it does not imply the mutual relation of individuals.
Thence proceeds a twofold creation, one termed conditional (or intellec-
tual), the other rudimental (or personal). Further —

COMMENT.

It is here explained that a double condition of existence, a twofold
creation, necessarily prevails ; one proceeding from the intellectual facul-


IGO

tioii, the other from the rudimental elements ; each being indispensable to
the other.

It was statc^d (ver. 40) that subtile body migrates, invested with dis-
positions : and it was then explained (ver. 43, et seq.) what those disposi-
tions or conditions were, viz. the conditions of the intellect (described in
ver. 23), or virtue, vice, knowledge, ignorance, passion, dispassion, power.
and debility. These were said (v. 46) to constitute an intellectual crea-
tion, or a series of conditions originating in affections of huddhi^ or the
intellectual principle. But the effects of these dispositions, the conse-
i|uenc(*s of virtue or vice and the rest, can only be manifested in a bodily
state, and therefore require necessarily a creation of a different character,
personal or rudimental creation, such as subtile body, investing the im-
perceptible products of nature ; intellect and its faculties included. Nor
is such a creation indispensable for the existence or exercise of the intel-
lectual conditions or sentiments alone, but it is ecjually necessary for their
occasional cessation : thus virtue, vice, and the rest necessarily imply and
occasion bodily condition ; bodily condition is productive of acts of vice
and virtue ; vice and virtue, again, occasion bodily condition ; and so on :
like the seed and the tree, each mutually generative of the other; the
tree bears the seed ; from the seed springs the tree, again to put forth
see<l ; and so on for ever ; neither being initiative, neither being finaL
But one result of bodily condition is knowledge ; knowledge is liberation*
when soul is disengaged : subtile body then resolves into its rudiments,
and the dispositions or conditions of the intellect terminate. In this way
tlicTe are two creations, the bhdvdkhya *, that termed ' conditional* or
* intellectual ;* and the lingakhya t, that called ' rudimental* or ' personal/
Both these seem to be considered by the text, as well as by GArRAPADA
and Vachespati, as varieties of one species of the Pratyaya aarga^ or
' int(*ll(rtual creation.* The commentator on the S. Pravachama so lar
agrees with them, but he seems to restrict the two kinds more closely to
a creation of intellec*t, regarding the linga as buddhi itself, and the hkiwm



HT^n^: I + fww^: I



161

as its conditions or dispositions. Thus, commenting on this verse of the
Kdrikdy he observes, ' Bhdva signifies the modes of the apprehension (or
the faculties) of intelligence, as the properties knowledge, virtue, and the
rest. Linga is the great principle, or intelligence *.' He calls them both
samashii sarga, * a collective or generic creation.' By the other commenta-
tors, however, the linga is also called the tanm&tra^ or ' rudimental crea-
tion t^' sind it further seems to imply 'gross body ;' for ' fruition, which is
one of soul's objects, cannot be accomplished without both bodies ; with-
out the receptacle that enjoys, and the objects to be enjoyed ;(.' The
author of the Chatidrikd has accordingly adopted a totally different ver-
sion of this passage, understanding by bhdvdkhya, not any reference to
intellectual creation, but the creation of sensible objects, the objects to be
enjoyed ; lingdkhya^ or ' personal creation,' being the enjoyer : ' Without
the hhdvaSj or present objects of sense, the linga ^ or aggregate of im-
perceptible principles, intelligence and the rest, could not be means of
fruition ; whilst without intelligence and the rest there could be no pause,
no cessation, of the means of enjoying sensible objects. This is the pur-
port of the text ||.' And he defines linga to be ' that which is only indi-
cated, which is actually not visible, as intellect and the rest;' and hhdva,
' that object which is perceived or apprehended by the senses, the class
of sensible objects §.'

The succession of the two kinds of creation, as mutually cause and
effect, is said by Vachespati to be eternal, and without a beginning, as



Tt



162

(*von ill the conunencement of a kalpa bodily existence results from the
ronditioiiH of similar existence in a former kalpn*.



LIII.

TiiK divine kind is of eight sorts; the grovelling is fivefold;

mankind is single in its class. This, briefly, is the world of living

iH'ings. ^

BHASHYA.

Divim\ of eiffhi soris; Br^ihrna, Prajapatya, Saumya, Aindra, Gsin*

dherha, VAksha, Rakslutsha, and Pais/icha. Animals, deer, birds, reptiles,

and immovable substances are the five grovellipig kinds. Mankind is

shtgh. In this way there are fourteen sorts of creatures, there being

tliriH' classes in the three worlds. Which is supreme in each is next

explained.

COMMENT.

The intellectual or rudimcntal creation hitherto des<*rit>ed has been
that of cn*ation genendly ; we now have an account of s{>ecific or indivi-
dual creation, compose<l of fourteen classes of beings.

The fourteen classes of beings arc, first, eight superhuman, or lirdkma^
that of Bkaiima and other supreme go<ls ; 2. Prajapatya, that of proge-
nitors, the Menus, the Rishis, or divine sages; :i. Saumya^ lunar or pla*
nctarv ; t. Aitidra, that of Indka and divinities of the second order;
.">. (iafulherlm, that of the demi^mls attendant on Indra, and of similar
beings; (>. lidkshasa, that of demons, foes of the gods; 7. Ydksha^ that of
tin* atten<lants of Kivkka; H. Paisdcha, that of mischievous and cruel
fiends. These* are divine or superhuman beings. The ninth class is that
of nutti, which contains but one s|>ecies. We have then five classes of



163

inferior beings ; or, counting from the preceding, 10. Animals, or domestic
animals, pasu; 11. Wild animals, as deer and the like, mriga; 12. Birds;
13. Reptiles, or creeping things, including fish sarisripa; and 14 Sthd-
vara, fixed things, such as vegetables and minerals. These constitute the
vyashii serga *, specific or individual creation ; or, as denominated in the
text, the bhautika sarga, the creation of bhutas, ^ beings ;' or elemental
creation ; the forms of things requiring the combination of the gross
elements.



LIV.

Above, there is prevalence of goodness : below, the creation is

full of darkness : in the midst, is the predominance of foulness, from

Brahma to a stock.

BHASHYA.

Above : in the eight divine regions. Prevalence of goodness : the ex-
tensiveness or predominance of the quality of goodness. Above is good-
ness predominant, but there are foulness and darkness also. Belotv, the
creation is full of darkness. — In animals and insensible things the whole
creation is pervaded by darkness in excess, but there are goodness and
foulness. In the midst, in man, foulness predominates, although goodness
and darkness exist ; and hence men for the most part suffer pain. Such
is the world,/ro9i» Brahma to a stock; from Brahma to immovable things.
Thus non-elemental creation, nidimental creation, conditional and ele-
mental creation, in beings of divine, mortal, brutal, and (immovable)
origin, are the sixteen sorts of creation effected by nature.

COMMENT.

The various qualities dominating in the different orders of beings are
specified in this stanza.



«q(«ti*lJ I



164

The coexistence of the several qualities, with the predominance of
one or other of them, in different beings, has been previously explained
(p. 54), as well as the different orders or states of existent beings; con-
stituting, according to Gaurapada, sixteen forms or kinds of creatioD:
that is, a))parently, each of the four classes of beings proceeds from four
modifications of nature ; or, from the invisible principles, from the snbCtlo
rudiments, from the conditions or dis|>ositions of intellect, and from the
gross elements.



LV.

TiiKRE does sentient soul experience i)ain, arising from decay
and death, until it be released from its person : wherefore pain is of
the essence (of Ixxlily existence).

BHASHYA.

There: in the bodies of gods, men, and animals. Pain produced by
deeaif, and produced by death. Sentient soul: soul having sensibility.
ExjHtriences : soul experiences; not nature, nor intellect, nor egotism, nor
the rudiments, senses, nor gross elements. How long does it suffer pain?
this (the text) discusses, lentil it he released from its person. As long aa
it is in subtile body, composed of intellect and the rest, it is discrete (or
individualizetl) ; and as long as niiirratory body does not rest, so long, ia
brief, soul sutlers pain, arising from <lecay and death, in the three worlds.
I'ntil it be released from its person: until the discontinuance of subtile
I>ers4in. In the cessation of subtile body consists liberation; and wbea
liberation is obtained, there is no more pain. By what means, then, can
lilM^ration be effected f Whenever knowledge of the twenty- five princi-
ples, the characteristic of which is knowledge of the distinctness of soal
and ImmIv, is attained ; or whenever a jHTson knows that this is nature*
this intellect, this egotism, these are the five nidinients, these the eleven
>ens€'s, these the five elements, and this is soul, separate and dissimilar



165

from them all ; then from such knowledge proceeds cessation of subtile
person, and thence liberation.

The object of the activity (or development of nature) is next explained.

COMMENT.

The presence of soul in these creations, and for what period, is here
specified.

Having defined the different objects which form the twenty-five cate-
gories or tatwas of the S4nkhya philosophy, the text now comes to the
main object of that and of all Hindu systems, the final dissolution of the
connection between soul and body. The rest of the Kdrikd is devoted to
the illustration of this topic. In this verse it is said that soul experiences
pain in the different stages of existence, until its corporeal frame is dis-
continued ; for soul itself is not susceptible of pain, or of decay, or death :
the site of these things is nature, but nature is unconscious, insensible;
and the consciousness that pain exists is restricted to soul, though soul is
not the actual seat of pain ; its experience of pain depends upon its con-
nexion with rudimental person, of the material constituents of which,
decay, death, and pain are concomitants. ' Pain and the rest are from
nature, they are properties of intelligence. How do they become con-
nected with sense? Soul (purusha) is that which reposes {sete) in body
(jmri): subtile body is immediately connected with it, and becomes
thereby connected with sense *.' S. Tatwa Kaumudi. When soul is re-
leased from body, its susceptibility of pain ceases : pain is therefore of
the essence t of its own nature ; that is, it is the inseparable concomitant
of bodily creation, according to Patanjali, as quoted in the S. Ckandrtki:
' All is pain to the wise, through the conflict of opposite qualities, and
by the sufferings arising from afflicting vicissitudes \ ;' that is, from the


uu



166

dread of death and the reiteration of birth ; to which even the conditions
of spirits, sagos, and frods are subject. Thus the S6tra of Kapila : *Tlie
pain of death, decay, and the rest is universal*;' as explained in the
S. Prav. lihdshya: 'The pain of death, decay, and the rest is the com*
mon portion of all beings, whether above or below, from Brahma to im-
movable thin^ t-* ^ ^dso another S6tra : ' It is to be shunned, from
the connection of successive birth by the thread of regeneration ||:* that
is, according to the commentator, * since regeneration is unavoidable, even
after ascent to the regions above ; and in consequence of the succeflsion
of births, that regeneration must be in an inferior condition ; even the
world above is to be shunned Ij.' Gaurapada and Vachespati take no
notice of the expression, * Pain is of the essence/ The S. Chandrikd ex-
plains it, ' Creation is essentially of the nature of pain §/ Rama Krishs*
calls it, ' Former acts;' the acts of a former life^.



LVI.

This evolution of nature, from intellect to the special elements^
is perfonned for the deliverance of each soul respectively ; done for
another*s sake as for self.

BHASHYA.



This (or Mhus, this,* itycsha) implies conclusiveness and
(that is, in this way all that has been hitherto described). Erolntiom ^
nature: in the instrumentality or act of nature. Whatever evolution t^



167

nature, from intellect to the special elements : that is, (the evolution) of
intellect from nature ; of egotism from intellect ; of the rudiments and
senses from egotism ; and of the gross elements from the subtile. Is per-
formed/or the deliverance of each soul respectively. — This evolution is
effected for the liberation of each individual soul which has assumed
body, whether brute, human, or divine. How (is it effected) ? It is done
for another's sake as for self: as, for instance, a person neglecting his own
objects transacts those of a friend, so does nature ; soul makes no return
to nature. As for self; not for self: for the sake, in fact, of another is
the apprehension of sound and the other objects of sense, or knowledge
of the difference between soul and qualities ; for souls are to be provided
(by nature), in the three worlds, with objects of sense, and at last with
liberation : such is the agency of nature ; as it is said, '' Nature is like a
utensil, having fulfilled soul's object it ceases."

It is here objected, Nature is irrational. Soul is rational ; then how can
nature, like a rational thing, understand that by me, soul is to be provided
in the three worlds with the objects of sense, and at last with liberation ?
This is true ; but action and cessation of action are both observed in
irrational things ; whence it is said —

COMMENT.

The object of nature's activity is here said to be the final liberation of
individual soul.

Nature is properly inert, and its activity, its " motion" or evolution,
takes place only for the purpose of soul, not for any object of its own. The
term is drambha, ' commencement/ ' successive origin or beginning,' as
detailed in former passages : that is, of intellect from crude nature ; of
egotism from intellect ; and so on. This is the spontaneous act of na-
ture : it is not influenced by any external intelligent principle, such as
the Supreme Being or a subordinate agent; as Brahma, it is without
(external) cause *.' * But it is objected, Nature being eternal, her works



* H^S^ ^iTt ^ni^^ ^ *I*\MI<I^H|W|*K4!!: I



168

should be »o too; and forms once evolved should therefore endure for
f'vcr. To this it is replicnl, The work is done for a special purpoeet the
liberation of individual soul ; and that when this is accomplished, nature
ceases with regard to that individual, as a man boiling rice for a meal
desists when it is dressed t*' 'ff- Tatwa Kaumudi. According to Gavka-
i»A»A, and to the text of the following stanza, nature so acts spontane*
ously ; but the incompetency of nature, an irrational principle, to institnte
a course of action for a definite purpose, and the unfitness of rational mniI
Co regulate the acts of an agent whose character it imperfectly appre-
hends, constitute a principal argument with the theistical Sinkhyas tar
the necessity of a Providence, to whom the ends of existence are knowii,
and by whom nature is guided, as stated by Vachespati : * But whether
this (evolution) be for its own purpose or that of another, it is a ratioDal
principle that acts. Nature cannot act without rationality, and therefore
there must be a reason which directs nature. Embodied souls, though
rational, cannot direct nature, as they are ignorant of its character;
therefore there is an omniscient Being, the director of nature, which is
Istcara, or (lod t-' This is not inconsistent with the previous doctrine,
that creation is the evolution of nature : it is so, but under the guidance
of a rulin<; Power. The atheistical S^nkhyas, on the other hand, contend
that there is no occasion for a guiding Providence, but that the activity
of nature, for the purpose of accomplishing soul's object, is an intuitive
neroHsity, as illustrated in the ensuing passage.

iprffk nt^i^l« Ufiri<rMVIrll %7R: I ^ 'if ^^IjlH %iR! wfti



169



LVIL

As it is a function of milk, an unintelligent (substance), to nourish

the calf, so it is the office of the chief (principle) to liberate the

soul.

BHASHYA.

As grass and water taken by the cow become eliminated into milk,
and nourish the calf; and as (the secretion ceases) when the calf i^
grown ; so nature (acts spontaneously) for the liberation of soul. This
is the agency of an unintelligent thing.

COMMENT.

The intuitive or spontaneous evolution of nature, for soul's purpose, is
here illustrated.

As the breast secretes milk for a purpose of which it is unconscious,
and unconsciously stops when that purpose, the nutriment of the young
animal, is effected ; so nature, though irrational, constructs bodily forms
for the fruition and liberation of soul ; and when the latter is accom-
plished, ceases to evolve. The illustration is from Kapila, as in the
S6tra, ' From irrationality the activity of nature is like (the secretion of)
milk*.'



LVIII.

As people engage in acts to relieve desires, so does the undiscrete
(principle) to liberate the soul.

bhAshya.

As mankind, being influenced by desire, engage in acts of various
kinds for its gratification or fulfilment, and desist when the object is



* ^I%fR^ ijli^ilRfd TWTSfRI I



X X



170

accomplished, so the Chief one, active for the purpose of liberating soul,
desists, after having effected the twofold purpose of soul ; one, cognizance
of enjoyment of the objects of sense ; the other, cognizance of the difier-
ence between soul and qualities.

COMMENT.

Another illustration is here given of tlie activity of nature.

According to Vachespati, this verse is an explanation of the phrase
(in ver. 5H), * For another's sake as for self*;' assigning, in fact, an object
to nature, the accomplishment of its own wish ; autsukya being rendered
by ichchhd^ * wish :* and this wish, which is, ' the liberation of soul, being
gratified, nature desists t-*



LIX.

As a dancer, having exhibited herself to the spectator, desists

from the dance, so does nature desist, having manifested herself to

soul. ^

BHASHYA.

As a dancer (or actress), having exhibited her performances on the
stage in dramatic representations, rendered interesting by the display of
love and other passions, in situations drawn from history or tradition, and
accompanied by music and singing, desists from acting when her part is
finished, so nature, having exhibited itself to soul, in the various charac-
ters of intellect, egotism, the rudiments, senses, and elements, desists.

What the cause of such cessation is, is next described.

COMMENT.

An illustration is here given of the discontinuance of natures activity.
Ranffa, properly a stage or theatre, is said in the S. Talwa Kamamdt



• ^fT^ir^im^ , t m flOs^HHUMHlft fsrrtlT^ i



171

to imply also the audience *. A dancer is equally an actress, narttakiy
at least was so in ancient times. The dancing girls of Hindustan are
rather singers, than either actresses or dancers.



LX.

Generous nature, endued with qualities, does by manifold means
accomplish, without benefit (to herself) the wish of ungrateful soul,
devoid as he is of qualities.

BHASHYA.

By manifold means. — Nature is the benefactress of soul, of unrequiting
soul. How ? By the characters of men, gods, and animals ; by circum-
stances involying pain, pleasure, and insensibility ; by the properties of
the objects of sense : in this way having by various means exhibited her-
self to soul, and shewn that ^ I am one ; thou art another ;' having done
this, nature desists. Thus she accomplishes the wish of that (soul) which
is eternal, without benefit (to herself) : as a benevolent man gives assist-
ance to all, and seeks no return for himself, so nature pursues or efiects
the purpose of soul, without deriving from it any advantage.

It was said above (ver. 59), '' Having manifested herself, nature de-
sists." It is next shewn what she does, having desisted.

COMMENT.

This verse may be considered as a further explanation of the ex-
pression in ver. 56, '' Nature labours for the benefit of soul as if for self,
but not for any advantage.''

* Generous, benevolent t *•' ' Not expecting a return ; for it is not true
generosity to do good to another with the expectation of requital |/

* ifr^Pri ^gn^ ^KlPilH: mriM< | i;|M<vSg|4|rri I tgipKr



172

S. Chandrikd. 'Soul being devoid of qualities (ver. 19), is coDsequently
devoid of action, and can therefore do nothing by way of return *.* Na-
ture *• accomplishes, goes to/ charaii or dcharati, or * effects,' kurute. The
last word of the verse is differently read.



LXI.

XoTiiiNo, in my opinion, is more gentle than nature ; once aware

of having l3een seen, she does not again expose herself to the gaze

of soul.

BHASHYA.

There is nothing in the world more soft (gentle, timid) than nature,
in my opinion : for which reason (nature's) opinion consults another*s ad-
vantage. Wherefore nature says to herself, '* I have been beheld by that
MHil/' and dot*s not again present herself to the view of that soul ; that is,
she disap|>ears from the presence of soul. That indicates what the text
means by gentle.

It (the text ?) declares Istvara (God) to be the cause of the world : thus;
'* I>'t this ignorant, brute, godless (soul), for its own pleasure or pain, go
to heaven or hell, sent (thither) by IswaraS' Others say, spontaneity is
cause*: '* By what (or whom) the swan is created white, the peacock of
many colours ;" that is, they are so naturally (or spontaneously). Here,
tluTcfore. the Sankhya teachers have said. How can beings endowed with
qualiticm^ procreed from Istrara, who is devoid of qualities? or how from
soul. fKpially devoid of qualities \ Therefore (the causality) of nature is
rendered probable. Thus; from white threads white cloth is fabricated;
from black threads black cloth : and in the same manner, from nature,
en<lowed with the three qualities, the three worlds, endowed with the
x\\Tw qualities also, an* produced. This is d(*tennined. Iswara is without
qualitic*s: the oriirin of the three worlds endowed with qualities, from



* ^^^W 'pilftff^Tff li^l^iM^lPiM! 4M«Klf«l|«i^ I



173

him, would therefore be an inconsistency. By this (same reason) soul
also cannot be cause. According to some, time is cause : '^ Time is the
five elements ; time destroys the world ; time watches, when all things
sleep ; time is not to be surpassed.'' There are but three categories, the
discrete principle, the undiscrete principle, and soul ; and by one of them
time must be comprehended. Time, then, is a discrete principle ; for na-
ture, from its universal creative power, is the cause of time ; spontaneity
merges into it (nature): and time, therefore, is not cause ; neither is spon-
taneity. Nature alone, therefore, is cause ; and there is no cause of
nature. She does not again expose herself to the gaze of soul. Therefore
it is my opinion that there is no cause more gentle, more enjoyable, than
nature, such as Iswara and the rest.

It is said familiarly in the stanzas of the text, '' Soul is liberated ; soul
migrates :" on this it is observed —

COMMENT.

Nature being once properly understood by soul ceases to act.

Nature being once fully seen — that is, known or understood — by soul :
disappears, goes no more into its sight ; it ceases to be, with respect to
that individual soul. Why is this ? Because it is the most soft, the most
gentle or timid, sukumdratara^ of all things. The term himdra^ properly
implying * soft' or * young,' is explained by the Scholiasts to signify
* bashful, modest, unable to bear the gaze of soul *.' Vachespati. Suku-
mdratara salajja t, Narayana and Rama Krishna. In the S. Bhdshya it
is rendered hy suhhogyatara\y 'more fit to be enjoyed;' but this refers
less to the metaphorical illustration, than to the doctrine, of the text, and
might be rendered/ more plastic;' there being nothing so suitable as nature
(matter) for the cause or origin of sensible objects. The S. Tatwa Kaumudi
amplifies and explains the illustration : ' Nature is like a woman of virtue
and family : such a one, of retired habits and modest looks, may be, by



174

some inadvertence, surprised in disabille by a stran(;e man, but she takes
good care that another shall not behohl her ofl'her guard. Nature being
once fully seen by disc*riniination, has too much matronly decorum to
allow herself to hv looked at a second time*/ The S. Chamdrikd has a
similar exposition 1 • The S. Pravachaua Bh. cites this verse in explana-
tion of the Sutra, '' Upon the detection of her faults, there is no further
approach of nature (to soul); like a woman of family ^f that is, *When
nature finds that soul has discovered it is to her that the distress, &c. of
misxnition are owing, she is put to shame by the detection, and ventures
no more near soul ; as a woman of family keeps aloof from a husband by
whom she knows her faults to have been found out. And this is consi-
flered its an additional reason for the discontinuance of the activity of
nature ||.' This is my opinion^ refers to what has precetled, there is nothimg
more {rent h\ as is shewn by the term Hi; also by the lihdshya of Gacba*
PADA. It is clear, therefore, that the expression refers to the author;
such is his opinion ; that is, he does not here dogmatise, and say that
nature is actually mort; timid or soft than any thing else — for the phrase
is merely a figure of speech, a metaphorical illustration — but that it seems
so to him ; the words having the force of' methinks, it seems:* ' Nature,



mn1iir<ll ^ mL^irrflrri I ^ Hf^rriiPM fc^^^^SWfW TO fit
^Sft 4lM«M4U miT^TW I fc^^^^rf^ I " ^^^ Ufi^: Tift



175

it seems to me, or methinks, is the most soft, timid, retiring, of all things,
and cannot bear to be stared at rudely : once seen, therefore, as she is,
she takes care, like a truly modest matron, to be seen no more/ Such is
the obvious purport of the text, which is merely a further illustration of
the idea conveyed in ver. 59. Gaurapada has gone out of his way rather
to discuss the character of a first cause ; giving to sukum&ratara a peculiar
import, that of ' enjoyable, perceptible ;' which nature eminently is, and
is therefore, according to him, the most appropriate source of all percep-
tible objects, or, in other words, of creation.



LXII.

Verily not any soul is bound, nor is released, nor migrates ; but

nature alone, in relation to various beings, is bound, is released, and

migrates.

BHASHYA.

Therefore, from that cause, soul is not bound, nor indeed is loosed, nor
migrates ; for, because, nature, in relation to various beings — in relation
(or connection) with celestial, human, or brute forms, in the character of
intellect, egotism, the rudiments, senses, and gross elements — is bound, is
liberated, or migrates. For soul is of its own nature loosed, and goes
every where, and how therefore should it migrate ? migration being for
the purpose of obtaining something not previously obtained. The phrases,
therefore. Soul is bound. Soul is loosed or migrates, originate in igno-
rance of the nature of migration. From knowledge, the end of soul and
existence, the real nature of soul is attained. That being manifest, soul
is single, pure, free, fixed in its own nature. Consequently if there is no
bondage there can be no liberation of soul. It is therefore said (see next
verse), "Nature binds and liberates herself;" for where subtile body,
composed of the rudiments, and having a triple cause, exists, such body
is bound with triple bonds ; as it is said, '' He who is bound by the bonds
of nature," of nature's products or of works, " cannot by any other be



17C

loosed*' (sec Comment, ver. 4«'j). Such a suhtilc body is affected by Tirtue,
vice, Ike.

Nature is bound, is loosed, and mignites. How is next described.

COMMENT.

The subjection of nature, not of soul, to the accidents of bondage,
liberation, and mif^ration is asserted in this verse.

The doctrine here laid down seems at variance with what has pre-
cede<l, and with the usual purport of the notions that attach the accidents
of bondat^c and liberation to soul. Apparently, however, the difference
is one of wonls only.

Soul is incapable of action, consequently is not liable to change. It
cannot be bound, as the consecpience of acts which it does not perform ;
and as it is never in bondage*, it cannot be set free. The application of
these* tcTms to soul, therefore, is to be understooil in a relative, not in a
positive* sense*; and their positive signification is properly restricted to
nature. It is nature that is bound, nature that is liberated, nature that
undergoes change or migration. \Vh(*n nature attaches herself to soul,
when she sc*panites from it, the converse is equally true, soul is attached
to, or is s(*parated from, nature; and is consequently said to be bound, to
be se*t fr(*(*, to undergo change. But soul is passive in all these things;
it is nature that is active, that binds, loosinis, or changes form. Gaura-
r\i).\*s explanation of these subtleties is not very clear, but such appears
to be his understanding of the text. So also Vachespati : *Soul is with-
out qualities, and exempt from vicissitude. How then can it be liberated?
To soul, not liable to change*, th<*re could apply none of the circumstances
termed iMPiutasfi'. arising fnmi acts, sutlerinsxs, or conse*iousnc^ss : nor could
worldly ('liaii<j;t> or niit;ni(ioii, aiiotluT name for which is death, affect soul,
incapable of action *.* The same connneutator adds, ' These circum-


177

stances, which are in truth the acts and conditions of nature, are ascribed
to and affect soul as the superior, in the same manner that victory and
defeat are attributed and relate to a king, although actually occurring to
his generals ; for they are his servants, and the gain or loss is his, not
theirs *.' So Naravana explains the text : * Binding is the confinement
of nature, in the various forms of intellect, &c. ; and bondage and libera-
tion are attributed to soul only through the contiguity of intellect, to
which they belong, and not to soul t-' It is from ignorance only that
bondage and liberation are ascribed to soul; as by the S6trat, as ex-
plained by the Scholiast, ' Binding and liberation, or endurance of, and
exemption from pain, are not (conditions) of soul in reality or absolutely,
but (are considered as such) from ignorance ; for the binding and libera-
tion mentioned are (conditions) of nature ||.' So also the S6tra§, 'From
actual pain suffered by nature proceed binding and liberation, and from
its attachments ; that is, from its being affected by virtue and the rest,
which are the causes of pain ; like an animal ; that is, as an animal may
be bound or loosed, when entangled in a rope^.' The distinction, after
all, is little more than nominal, except as it is the necessary consequence
of the inactivity attributed to the soul.



^ ^ Hwm4iifi^ riftri*4[<l^iri ir?^!^ ^ ^ ri<mW)rri mm i



z z



178

LXIII.

By seven modes nature binds herself by herself: by one, she
releases (herself), for the soul^s wish.

bhAshya.

By seven modes. — ^Thcse seven have been specified, as virtue, dispa^u
sion, power, vice, ignorance, passion, and weakness. These are the seven
modes (or conditions) of nature by which she binds herself, of herself.
And that same nature, having ascertained that souFs object is to be
accomplished, liberates herself by one mode, or by knowledge.

How is that knowledge produced \

COMMENT.

Nature is bound by seven modes, and liberated by one.

Nature binds herself by acts of whatever kind, especially by the facul-
ties of intellect, enumerated above (ver. 23). She binds herself of her
own accord. She frees herself by one mode, by the acquisition of philo-
sophical knowledge. * Nature binds herself (in her own work), like a
silkworm in its cocoon*/ Sutra. Atman is here uniformly explained by
suui, * own self



LXIV.

So, through study of principles, the conclusive, incontrovertible,

one only knowledge is attained, that neither I am, nor is aught mine,

nor do I exist.

BHASHYA.

iVo, by the order explained, the study of the twenty-Jive principles^
knowledge of soul, or the discriminative knowledge, * this is nature, this



179

is soul, these are the rudiments, senses, and elements/ is acquired. Nei-
ther I am: I am not. Not mine: not my body ; that is, I am one (thing),
body is another. Nor do I exist : that is, exempt from egotism. This
is conclusive^ incontrovertible: free from doubt. Viparyaya means ^ doubt,*
with the negative prefixed, ^ absence of doubt ;' and visuddha^ ' pure ;'
pure through absence of doubt. Single. — There is no other (true know-
ledge). In this way the cause of liberation is produced, is manifested
(individually). Knowledge means knowledge of the twenty-five princi-
ples, or of souL

Knowledge being attained, what does soul ?

COMMENT.

The knowledge that is essential to liberation is here described.

It is acquired through study of the twenty-five principles, tatwdhhydsa ;
familiarity with them ; frequent recurrence to them : it is finite or con-
clusive, aparishha ; it leaves nothing to be learned : it is perfect, as being
without doubt, aviparyayavistiddha : and single, the one thing needful,
kSvala. What sort of knowledge is this? or what is the result it teaches ?
The absence of individuality ; the notion of the abstract existence of soul.
Neither I am^ nor is aught mine^ nor do I exist : that is, there is no ac-
tivity, nor property, nor individual agency. / am tiot precludes action
only *. Indeed Asy the root, together with bh^ and kriy are said to signify
action in general f. Ndsmi therefore signifies, not * I am not,' but ' I do
not.' The S. Tatwa Kaumudi then proceeds : * Thus all acts whatever,
whether external or internal, ascertainment, consciousness, reflection,
perception, and all others, are denied as acts of soul : consequently, there
being no active functions in soul, it follows that neither do I (as an indi-
vidual agent) exist. Aham here denotes " agent ;" as, I know, I sacrifice,
I give, I enjoy — or so on, implying uniformly the notion of an agent —
nor is aught mine : an agent implies mastership ; if there be no agent


180

there can be no nb»trncl mastership (or possession)*.* The same ao*
thority (;ives also a different readinf^ of the first expression, ndsmi^ ex-
phiining it nd asmi, ' I am male;' or purusha^ ' unproductive of progeDy/
of actst- The S. Prav. lih.^ rommentiiif^ on this verse of the Kdrikd^
has, ' Neither I am, denies the a^^ency of stml ; nor (is aught mine), denies
its attachment (to any objects) ; nor do I exist, denies its appropriation
(of faculties) |/ The Siitra is to the same effect: ' From relinquishment
(consequent oxi) study of principles; this is not, this is not||:' that is, of
all the objects proceeding from prakriii, not one is soul. The phraseology
is ascribed to thc^ Vedas, and a similar passage is thence cited : * Hence
comes the conclusion, it is not, it is not (soul), it is not (soul is not), from
it : such is not so ; it is difftTent, it is supreme, it is that very thing (that
it is). It is not, it is not, (means) soul. Such is (the phrase), It is not|/
&c. And the Chmnlrikd explains the terms similarly : * J am mot means
I am not a^ent ; therefore I am distinct from the principle of intelli*
uence. Sot mine is pain: exemption from being tlie seat of pain and
the rest is thence determined. Sor do I exist: by this, difference
from egotism is expressed *^.' Rama Krishna re|>eats the words of the



^MIMKI iHlwf^ HfrtiMllf^ ^llMllf^ ^H^Iitlf^ ^MIMKI^llt ^



181

Chandrikd. By these expressions therefore, however quaint or question-
able, we are not to understand negation of soul. This would be a direct
contradiction to its specification as one of the categories of the system,
one of the twenty-five essential and existent principles. It is merely
intended as a negation of the soul's having any active participation, any
individual interest or property, in human pains, possessions, or feelings.
/ amj I do, I suffer y mean that material nature, or some of her products,
(substantially,) is, does, or sufiers ; and not soul, which is unalterable and
indifierent, susceptible of neither pleasure nor pain, and only reflecting
them, as it were, or seemingly sharing them, from the proximity of
nature, by whom they are really experienced*: for soul, according to
the V6das, is absolutely existent, eternal, wise, true, free, unafiected by
passion, universal t- This verse, therefore, does not amount, as M. Cousin
has supposed, to '' le nihilisme absolu, dernier fruit du scepticisme."



LXV.

Possessed of this (self-knowledge), soul contemplates at leisure
and at ease nature, (thereby) debarred from prolific change, and con-
sequently precluded from those seven forms.

BHASHYA.

By that pure (absolute), single knowledge soul beholds nature, like a
spectator, at leisure and composed; as a spectator seated at a play beholds
an actress. Composed: who stays (or is involved) in self; or staying or
abiding in one's own place. How is Prakriti; debarred from prolific
change ? Not producing intellect, egotism, and the other effects. Conse-
quently precluded from those seven forms: desisting from the seven forms



^llt fW: W^ ^^ f^i^H^ f^J I



3 a



182

or modes by which she binds herself, or virtue, vice, and the rest, and
whi(*h are no longer required for the use of soul, both whose objects
(fruition and liberation) are effected.

COMMENT.

Soul, |>ossess<Hl of tlie knowledge descrilied in the preceding stanza,
or divested of all individuality, becomes indifferent to, and independent
of, nature, which therefore ceases to act.

Soul contemplat(^s nature, like a si>ectator, prekshaka^ one who beholds
a dancer or actrc^ss; at leisure, ams/Ai/ri, or without action, nishkri^;
and at ease, sustha. This is also read strastha, 'calm, collected in self*;*
or mraknla, ' unagitated.' Nature conse<|uently has nothing more to do.
The ol>jects of soul, fruition and lil>eration, having been effected, by
knowledge, the other faculties of intellect are needless.



LXVl.

II K desists I)ecause he has seen her ; she does so, liecause she has
I)een seen. In their (mere) union there is no motive for creation.

BHASHYA.

Out* present at a play, as a spectator, (ceases to l>ehold;) so one,
single, pure soul desists. One (nature\ knowing I have been seen by
him, stops, ceas4*s. Nature is the cme, chief cause of the three worids;
there is no second. Although form have terminated, yet from specific
difference there is, evc^u in the cessation of (the cooperation of) nature
and soul, union, as a generic characteristic. For, if there be not unioa,
whence is creation f There beunr uhwh t^f* these two; that is, of nature
and soul ; there being union from their universal diffusion : yet there is



* ^TW: H (**<•<, f?Tlf?T I



183

no further occasion for the world; from the object of creation being ter-
minated. The necessity for nature is twofold ; apprehension of the ob-
jects of sense, as sound, &c. ; and apprehension of the difference between
qualities and soul : when both these have been effected there is no further
use for creation ; that is, of further creation (of future regeneration) ; as
in the case of a settlement of accounts between debtor and creditor, con-
sequent on accepting what is given, when such a union is effected there
is no further connection of object : so there is no further occasion for
nature and soul.

If upon soul's acquiring knowledge liberation takes place, why does
not my liberation (immediately) occur? To this it is observed —

COMMENT.

The final separation of soul from nature is here indicated, as no further
purpose is answered by their continued union.

The first part of this stanza repeats the illustrations given in preced-
ing verses (61 and 65) : " Nature, having been fully seen or understood,
ceases to act. — Soul, having seen or understood, ceases to consider;'*
becomes regardless, upekshaka. Consequently there can be no future
reunion, no future creation. For mere union of soul and nature is not
the cause of the development of the latter, constituting worldly existence:
the motive is, the fulfilment of the objects of soul. The activity of nature
is the consequence of her subserviency to souls purposes ; and when they
are accomplished, all motive for action, all inducement to repeat worldly
creation, ceases. ^ The two objects of soul, fruition and discrimination,
are the excitements to the activity of nature ; if they do not exist, they
do not stimulate nature. In the text the term motive implies that by
which nature is excited in creation (to evolve the world) : which cannot
be in the nonentity of the objects of soul*.' Vachespati. So also Na-



184

RAYANA : ' In the (mere) union of these two there is no motive for the
prcMiurtion of tlie world */ With the accomplishment, therefore, of the
objects of soul, individual existence must cease for ever.



LXVIL

By attainment of jx^rfect knowledp;e, virtue and the rest become

causeless ; yet soul remains a while invested with body, as the potter*8

wheel continues whirling from the effect of tlie impulse previously

given to it.

BHASIIYA.

Though perfect km}wledge, that is, knowledp^e of the twenty-five prin*
ciples, he attained, yet, from the eftV'ct of previous impulse, the sage con-
tinues in a bodily condition. How \ Like the trhirling of a wheel; bb a
I>otter, having set his wheel whirling, puts on it a lump of clay, fabricates
a vessel, and takes it off, and leaves the wheel continuing to turn round*
It does »i}from the effect if previous impulse. — From the attainment of
perfect knowledge, virtue and the rest have no influence upon one who m
{>ossi*sscHl of such knowledge. Tlu^se seven kinds of bonds are consumed
by perfect knowledge : as seeds that have* be(*n scorched by fire are not
able to germinate, so virtue and the rest are not able to fetter soul.
These then, virtue and the rest, not being (in the case of the yog-t) the
causes (of continued bodily existence), body continues from the effects of
prt*vious impulse. Why is there not from knowledge destruction of pre*
sent virtue and vice f Although they may be present, yet they perish the
next moment, and knowh^d^e destroys all future acts, as well as those
which a man does in his present bmly by following instituted obsenr-
suices. With the cc*ssiition of the impulse the body perishes, and then
liberation (H'curs.

What liberation, is next specifu*d.



* WVtl *i41^Sftr HHkM IR^ irttSR HlWIfd I



185



COMMENT.

A reason is assigned why pure soul is not at once set free from body.

This stanza may be considered partly as an illustration of the preced-
ing, explaining the continued union of soul and body even after know-
ledge is attained. It is also a kind of apology for the human forms of
Kapila and other teachers of the S&nkhya doctrines, who, although in
possession of perfect knowledge, lived and died as men. The sage, or
YoffU is no longer susceptible of the accidents of virtue, vice, passion, dis-
passion, and the rest, which are the proximate causes of bodily existence ;
and his continuance in the bodily form arises from the effects of virtue,
&c. lasting after the cause has ceased ; like the whirl of a wheel after the
impulse that set it going has been withdrawn. *As, when the potter's
work is done, the wheel, in consequence of the impulse or momentum
given to it, continues revolving, but stops when the period under such
influence has expired ; so virtue and vice, incident to body initiative and
mature, constitute impulse *.' The effects of former acts of virtue and
vice, then, cease when the impulse derived from them is worn out ; and
the possession of knowledge prevents all future acts. Gaurapada appa-
rently suggests a difficulty with respect to acts done in the present body ;
such as the observance of the Yoga, or performance of prescribed rites.
These acts may be performed by a sage possessing perfect knowledge,
and should therefore produce certain consequences. They lead, however,
to no results ; for as far as they are themselves concerned, they are but of
brief duration, perishing as soon as performed ; and with regard to any
future effects, they are anticipated, prevented, or destroyed, by the pos-
session of knowledge. Such seems to be the purport of the passage, but
it is not very perspicuous.



3b



186



LXVIII.

When sejiaration of the informed soul from its corporeal frame
at length takes place, and nature in respect of it ceases, then is
absolute and final deliverance accomplished.

bhAshya.

When bodily separation is accomplished, by destruction of the effects
of virtue, vice, and the rest. In resjtect of it, having accomplished its
object, nature ceases: then absolute, certain— ^/fita/, unimpeded— ^lelira^-
ance^ liberation, consequent upon the condition of singleness. Soul ob-
tains singleness (separation), which is both absolute and final.

COMMENT.

This verse refers to the first stanza, and announces the accomplish-
ment of what was there statcil to be the object of inquiry, absolute and
final liberation.

When the consequences of acts cease, and bo<ly, both gross and subtile,
dissolves, nature, in resiKK't to individual soul, no longer exists; and soul
is one, single, free, ArtviAi, or obtains the condition called iairalyamL
This, according to Vacukspati and Nak\vana, means * exemption frooi
the three kinds of pain *.' (vavrapaua gives no definition of the term,
except that it is the al>stract of kcvalai. What the condition of pure
separated soul may hv in its liberated state, the SAnkhya philosophy does
not MH^m to hold it ne(*essary to inquire.



' ^:^i^irt^r»m ^i^rf^nm? i ' ^ptw ht^


187

LXIX.

This abstruse knowledge, adapted to the liberation of soul,
wherein the origin, duration, and termination of beings are consi-
dered, has been thoroughly expounded by the mighty saint.

bhAshya.

Soul's object is liberation : for that (purpose) this abstruse^ secret, know-
ledge (has been expounded) hy the mighty saints by the divine sage Kapila.
Wherein^ in which knowledge, the origin^ duration^ and terminationj the
manifestation, continuance, and disappearance, of beings^ of the products
(or developments) of nature, are considered^ are discussed. From which
investigation perfect knowledge, which is the same as knowledge of the
twenty-five principles, is produced.

This is the JBhdshya of Gaurapada on the Sankhya doctrines, pro-
pounded, for the sake of liberation from migration, by the Muni Kapila ;
in which there are these seventy stanzas.

COMMENT.

This verse specifies by whom the doctrines of the text were originally
taught.

The commentary of Gaurapada closes here in the only copy of the
MSS. procurable ; and consequently omits all notice of Iswara Krishna,
to whom a subsequent stanza of the text attributes the Kdrikd. In the
Bhdshya it is said that the work commented on is the S&nkhya declared
by Kapila ; but that the Kdrikd is not the work of Kapila, the other
Scholiasts agree. It is also difi*erent from the S6tras of that teacher, as
given in the Sankhya Pravachana, although it follows their purport, and
sometimes uses the same or similar expressions. Gaurapada may there-
fore probably only mean to intimate that its substance is conformable to
the doctrines of the S6tras, not that it is the work of the Muni. These
doctrines, he adds, are contained in seventy stanzas ; of which, however,
our copy has but sixty-nine. The verses of the Kdrikd^ as usually met
with, are seventy-two ; but there also reference occurs to seventy verses.



188

as comprising apparently the doctrinal and traditional part of the texU
derived fnnn older authorities. Either Gavrapada thought it unneces*
nary to explain the concluding three verses of the Kdrikd^ or there it
some omission in the copy, or they do not belong to the work. The coo-
cluding verse is evidently inaccurate, the metre of the third line of the
stanza bein<j; defective.

The K AIM LA to whom the Sankhya philosophy is attributed is vari-
ously des<TibcHl by different authorities. In a verse quoted by Gauea-
HADA, in his comment ui)on the first stanza of the text, he is enumerated
amongst the sons of Brahma. Vijn vana BiiiKsar asserts him to have been
an incarnation of Visusr *. He refers also to the opinion of a Vedanta
writer, that Kaimla was an incarnation of Agm, or ^ fire,* u|>on the au-
thority of the Smritif ; but denies their identity. There does not appear
to be any gcxKl authority for the notion. Kapila is a synonyme of fire,
as it is of a brown, dusky, or tawny colour; and this may have given rise
to the idea of Aom and the sage being the s<ime. The identification with
VisHMT rests on better grounds. The |H>pular belief of the Vaishnavas
is, that there have been twenty-four AvaUirds of Vishnv, and Kapila is
one of them. The earliest authority for this specification is no doubt the
Rdmdyann, in which Vamdkva or Vishnu is said by Brahma to aMume
the form of Kaimi.a, to protect the earth against the violence of the sons
of Sa(*ara, searching for the lost steed intended for their father *s onra-
medha. * | Brahma having lu^ard the words of the gods, who were bewil-
dercnl with the dread of destruction, replied to them, and said, Vasudeva

^^4 ^^VT ^WT m*j<^w ^fbnn



189

is the Lord, he is Mddhava, of whom the whole earth is the cherished
bride ; he, assuming the form of Kapila, sustains continually the world/
So also the Mahdbhdrata : ^Then spake incensed, Kapila, the best of
sages ; that Yasudeva, indeed, whom the holy Munis call Kapila *' Ac-
cording to the Bhdgavat^ he was the fifth incarnation of Vishnu : ^ The
fifth Avatdra was named Kapila, the chief of saints, who revealed to
AsuRi the S&nkhya explanation of first principles, which has been im-
paired by timet-' Book I. s. 12. The latter half of the third book de-
scribes him also as an Avatar of Yasudeva, but as the son of Devahvti,
the daughter of Sayambhuva Menu, married to the Prajapati Kerddama.



LXX.

This great purifying (doctrine) the sage compassionately im-
parted to Asuri, Asuri taught it to Panchasikha, by whom it was
extensively propagated.

COMMENT.

Purifying ; that which purifies from the defects which are the cause
of pain ; pdvana or pavitra. Greats chief, principal, agryam, mukhyam.
This verse anticipates an objection that may be made to the authority of
the text; as it may be said. Although the words of Kapila must com-
mand attention, of what weight are the lessons of an uninspired teacher ?
The answer is, that they are the same which were originally taught by
Kapila himself to his pupil Asuri. According to the passage cited by


3c



190

Gavrapada, in his notes on the first stanza (p. 1), Asuri is also a son of
Brahma. He is mentioned elsewhere as the pupil of Kapila, and pre-
ceptor of Panchasikha, but there are no details of his history. Of Pan-
CHASIKHA there is some account in the Mahdbhdrat^ on occasion of his
visiting Janaka, king of Mithild^ and imparting to him the S&nkhym
philosophy. He is there also said to be named likewise Kapila^; which
the commentator explains to mean that he was like Kapila» being the
disciple of his disciple t> as the text proceeds to call him ; ^ He, the long-
liv(^d, whom they term the first disciple of Asuri {.* He is also called
Kapileya, from his being, it is said, the son of a Br&hroaDi named
Kapila. ' AsuRi went to the sphere in which that which is Braktme^ the
mystic -named, and multiform, and eternal, is beheld. His disciple
was Panchasikiia, nourished with human milk : for there was a certain
Brahman matron, named Kapila, of whom he became the son, and at
whose bosom he was fed ; thence he obtained the denomination of Ka-
piLEYA, and divine imperishable knowledge ||/



LXXL

Received by tradition of pupils, it has been compendiously written
in Ari/a metre by the piously dis]K)sed Ihwara Krishna, having
thoroughly investigated demonstrated truth.

(V"iifi^^H I ^ iHi^» Tfm fv^


191



COMMENT.

'Succession or tradition of pupils/ sishyaparamparA : each pupil be-
coming teacher in his turn, as is the case with the Pandits to the present
day. It rarely, if ever, happens that any branch of Sanscrit literature is
acquired by independent study: every science is studied under some
teacher of eminence, who can, not unfrequently, trace his traditionary
instruction upwards for several generations. The interval between Pan-
CHAsiRHA and Iswara Krishna is not particularized, but was probably
considerable, as no allusion to the author of the Kdrikd occurs in the
older writings. If his commentator Gaurapada be, as is not unlikely,
the preceptor of Sanrara Acharya, Iswara Krishna must date anterior
to the eighth century.



LXXII.

The subjects which are treated in seventy couplets are those of
the whole science, comprising sixty topics, exclusive of illustrative
tales, and omitting controversial questions.

COMMENT.

We have here in the text reference to seventy stanzas, as comprising
the doctrinal part of the S&nkhya. In fact, however, there are but sixty-
nine, unless the verse containing the notice of Kapila be included in the
enumeration ; and in that case it might be asked, why should not the
next stanza at least, making mention of the reputed author, be also
comprehended, when there would be seventy-one verses. The Scholiasts
offer no explanation of this difficulty.

The sixty topics alluded to in the text are, according to the Raja
Vdrttika^ as cited by Vachespati, 1. the existence of soul; 2. the exist-
ence of nature ; 3. the singleness, 4. the objectiveness, and 5. the sub-
servience, of nature ; and 6. the multifariousness, 7. the distinctness, and
8. the inertness, of soul ; 9. the duration of subtile, and 10. that of gross,



192

body. These are the ten radical categories. To them are to be added,
the five kinds of obstruction, nine of acquiescence, twenty-eight of dis-
ability, and eight of i)erfectncss ; making altogether sixty. Another
enumeration specifies the sixty categories or objects: 1. soul ; 2. nature;
3. intellect ; 4. egotism ; 5 — 7. the three qualities ; & the class of the Atc
rudiments; $). that of the eleven senses or organs; 10. that of the fiTe
elements. These are the ten radical paddrthasy or categories. The re-
maining fifty are the same as those previously enumerated. In conse-
quence of comprehending all these topics, the Kdrikd is a system, a
sdstra; not a partial tract or treatise, or pro karana^; although it omits
the illustrative anecdotes and controversial arguments. The Kdrikd
must consequently refer to the collection of Kapila*s aphorisms, called
Sdnkhya Pravachiuia. This work is divided into six chapters, or adkjfdj^;
in the three first of which are contained all the dogmas of the system
furnishing the materials of the Kdrikd ; the fourth chapter is made up of
short tales or anecdotes, dkhydyikds^ illustrative of the S4nkhya tenets ;
and the tif\h is appropriated to the refutation, /^^irar/ic^a, of the doctrines
of different schools. Exclusive of these two subjects, Iswara Krishna
professes, therefore, to give the substance of the S. Pravachama^ or of the
Sutras of Kapila assembled in that collection.

The AkhydyikAs arc in genenil very brief and uninteresting. The
S6tras, in fact, supply only a subject for a story, which the Scholiasts
may expand much after their own fancies. Thus the Sutra, * From in-
struction in tnith, like the kings son t-' On which Vijnana Bhiuhu
narrates, that ' there was a king s son, who, being expelled in infancy
from his native city, was brought up by a forester, and growing np to
maturity in that state imagined himself to belong to the barbarous race
with which he lived. One of his father's ministers having discovered
him, revealed to him what he was, and the misconception of his cha-
racter was removed, and he knew himself to be a prince. So sonlt from


193

the circumstances in which it is placed, mistakes its own character, until
the truth is revealed to it by some holy teacher, and then it knows itself
to be jBrahme */

The controversial portion of the original S6tras is as brief as the nar-
rative, and, from the nature of the subject, much more obscure. The
argument is suggested, rather than advanced, and it remains for the
Scholiast to amplify and explain it. A specimen of the mode in which
this is effected will best exemplify the darkness and difficulty of this
part of our subject. Some modern followers of the V^danta assert that
liberation is the attainment of (pure) felicity. To this it is replied : ' Ma-
nifestation of felicity is not liberation, from its not being a property f.'
Thus explained by the Scholiast : ' The condition of happiness, or that
of attainment (or manifestation), is not a property of soul. The nature
(of soul) is eternal, and is neither an object to be attained, nor the means
of attainment. Therefore the attainment of happiness cannot be libera-
tion. This is the meaning (of the S6tra |).' ' Attainment of happiness in
the region of Brahma and the rest is a secondary (or inferior) sort of
liberation ; as to maintain the contrary would be in opposition to the text
of the y^da, which says that a wise man abandons both joy and sorrow ||/



^M<^M> sf M^fa^m*i vi^Tt ^rrfisBr ^r^* ^ f^Rr^^fiT ^ w



3d



194

' Further; if attainment be a faculty of raul, what sort of faculty is it? Is
it constant or temporary. In the first case, there may be, even in the
state of accomplishment, still the existence of the object of soul : in the
last, inasmuch as there is perishableness of all that is engendered (or,
that which has a l)et^nning must have an end), then eternal liberation is
subject to termination : therefore the attainment (or manifestation) of
felicity is not chief or real liberation ; and the assertion that it is so, is a
false conchision of the modem V6d4ntis: this is undeniable*/


*!nH^HIi|i^*4



r<<<r^ri :



^n^q^irfNT^TO^:



isO'TI^MK^riHIvi^Q^fl:



hI1*ihi i^'^vfi^HimfMftiH*!



^ffmifsnn^TrR^*^


^lS!fli4mnTOIH*4Jll HM-^lfH^MRh^nfcPMH^rllii; Ijftif:



#n^ Hb^



Mf4S^i)lfl<lil



TTW Rkmf^rtH ^TRTOTftSl^ W^l05Tn? II
^I4jfii '*R(r*5^ ^t^: M^ifV'^Wm I

Itfi ^^ "ft?^ "TTftl ^^'nt •ITT ^Hlili I


l|MI|fk^l«4



B



[ ^ ]

Hy^lri^4lVjfHmrilf<^) II ^ ^r«IT ^^^Hl^lfHMIfllf^^l^l un^T
15 I d<fi4Mlrt^ ^m I HFI ^:^fl^ iMfHMIdiit ^5^^ ^

^inv I ^rTfvjSf?nsw t^rfi^nsfironTt w: 1 1% ^BU^qnlT ^i^

^ flf^Rn f¥%%T ^RT^ff h


fww: I TTT

wif^Oi I *i 1^^1*4 ^^n^ (<<,^i*t^ f^f<fl^»rtJ I irt ^ "fti^


C 9 ]


Jjf^H^mi UVT5? I


[ ^ 3

ffk n<|»rH«4^Ki*i5»!*irM«fl ffir n^fw: linn

lOfriM^fri: I TWfnWTf^iKI^fmRf fjflf f^|)OlU^^ WU^ ^WIT

0K •V ^ 0K ^^^^ ^ •

N*Kt M*<^1I«5.^IH!! M*i*W<l«5.^ll^ 1!1!T?^ ^RJ MH*l^l*Jfll

TRT% %^ nw "^ inn%? Rifi*^^Oi I ?3i <^1% nij'i ^^5 '""^


fVW inmrf*?^ Tjiniftrfi: imrorfw i li i


[ M ]
^Rinf^ HMH*il^lfH I tWiimftlJ W^^' W^TT* nflWT \m^ '^^


ftr^v



I


IMI


null W%^ ^Nl^lClf ^ Hlf^PlM^I^ ^umHi4^ VS U^ f B^tHm^ l I


L


[ 9 ]


T'TRRt 'HM^Ifll •T^Mf4**l^ t •U^MIHIW'MI |iA«1 fWflf ^W


[ b ]


n^i^cil'^ ^ ^iJTrift ^ M§m<Mi|^Mi ^OPf! ^unft ^f^T^ 51 ^
ITTJ^ iTOTrt: ^li^n# I ??fW ?riNfw^^


[ ^ ]

^JnHif J *li^«r 'iJlf^^: ^^ "^ ^•fflPrt dW4lit^ ^Hil^ I ^



f*"^M^ ^rfW ^*^i<*i<3 ^wrfiT ^^^iiHi^ *<m!h ^!^

T^ VlO<*4in6|i<l ^l^iPrt H^RTi^ ^rflR H Rk^IM^^^ ^flTli



Mfl^^llfl^l



ll'



^31^ ^i!i^ (V'^sH ''nf^ ^^^n^ •irr ^r«nn i
imVHiifl* I wnv^pnRTH II ri^iuiiim^ tinni ^tttk 'n


B


[ ^ ]

VU^IH^^I^lfHMIrilf^^ II VM ^niT ^llRRTfiTOTiTTfiHnjTOT ^nfc


ffRWJ I ^RT

mHII JjiWff ^IT^ f%^ WT^ l^tfw* TH^Ift c^ST^lft ^tfllt


C 9 ]


^l^«< ^l4fOrilfH *lfi^ ff ^rfiWTt

<(^ri4<^if<Hi^iir^^^«i: I innsfinRt Hi^MdH fw: i f?nN


[ 8 3

T^^JITJ MH^1I<^II^ Ml^Wll'^innU If^iH^'y ^W M^Hfl^HI

f?T ^ th^^i^ 'nit PTfuftf I "nnntt f^r^rfiTJ ii •? wpim ft^

HHI?!i %!? ^CT ^ irRT%5T ftrfW^fif I ^ c^f^ utrt ^1| WW



fVfW impofi^ uimftrfi: imnrrrfii i H i


[ M ]

U7^^ iTOT^ ^iH#<iM!ifH f^iifn H^Oii 1 1^ TTRTwrftT Sftrfiri I

^RinfjT i1l*MH*4l^lfH I ^'•imflt W^^i ^RT^: irfiWT %fiTO ^TO

TT^ ^ TpT 11 ^n»T8ft ^nn i tm v^ -^hk: ^b^j ^*hi*m^ i
tft Hrri^MW^*s!wr44rH II %fTO inn I iRftf?f <!ft^ Tnnm

^ ilftpft TRiaiftfif Iff ^fiflf II ^M*4M* IRT I 'UfiH T^R:
^?^ ^ n«i*i I liHlf^ ^ ITRnorfir fV^ CVli<^«Tl^rilfH I
Tnrrjrn^ rtM<«lmfl<^4v'<l l ^R H<4HNHrriHrritnM*JIH»m^

"WMI^T niTT^T MUKuf^ri^^fOni "fHipN: I M^^f^fi: inn


inn ^I^STTRR "^^M-iKlX^'Inli UIHH'Ic^W 'iQinwiifiniii Til


«i«ii««ink CCI<V«iHMI<^f^^l^lfHn^4l4|J|irirfl4fil4MMI f|l%!


C « ]


TTHIRt ^1' Wirt I •?^M<»|**ln^ I WWRTinn |i$^«1 "ftrf^ ^W|

iwn^ I ^nsnmror^^FrfaiT: ^rtm«iMif«if ift i ^ ^ifw ftw


Hhw^*^^ •



[ b ]


l<^f<n\ ^ ^srnft ^ ri^m<Mii^M! ^OPh ^wift if^^c^ •? ^

^f^W HM<lif^ f1r4iiui I ^HW fli*<*M4IHMI^ tijtt 4liw**l4^



[ ^ ]



^iniRT: ^t^;^ ^5T<^: ^ ^ fl^Prt ^kH\i{^ W^ I ^


^ ^^<if<*i**i ^»j*4f<rH ^ii<i^ir« f^^i Nim<iH%5:i;n?!r

r><rn^r*4rri ^*^\M\ ^ 1 ^niS^ HVR ^f|<ry ^ril'^f|*4a\ !l i > j^riM^^'

^ vjOi*<in6if<i ¥mu fikHi^ ^M H nh-^M<^^i ^PiV^

%RT^f^ ^^i^*K ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ iwR <^ JurflPrt II inn



■i 4


[ <lo ]
"^ rt«*<nrt«*llfVl M5€H^I*|fllfH^ I CT 'TORI

w«ns^ 'mw^ iwPT un?5wnT ^'insjf rilitiHi hvrW in?!9
iiip^: nin^ Hf% II inn M^n»*i ^nK ^^iFirR^nil iwinnwRt i


^ HturfPRm: 4lii^<$MI<UI n<mi*4HHIrl^ I cHH Wm^



[ '\'\ ]



f«m4^ ^HK TWM*4f^ ^i*J^Mn^'i^*JHHlflM^I ?f?T II w'n ^l*{l»*i
<JH4^^H^d^ifirH*'MH-4*n^rt^fJ^riHI'lirrq<KI<^ri4^xr7T3rq

n^ II Tf^ twh+iPm «mi^iri II ^^nfhfffinifhTwm \|*4if^H>d
nvpr^TWERTOff 1^ ?Tff n^fHri H^^mri Ti^n^ I rrem§ii



rT^ inn



^nK riPmOri^^mi cnr^ijHsniw^^jn^ ttor inn "^

♦4M«Jrm«rt|ff^ I ^f^rM ^HK f^sf HVR inn ^ f^W!



nvT^ inn ^ ijHWiiPt^jfi-: i ?t ¥f^i#qH ^fk i ^n^^ ^ fsr

<«t^M*4*M* inn "^ "^'n^ f^n^SRR: l qff "^^ ^■^^.l^-MtS^'?^:

wmi^i^i I «mhMMM4t: ^miwt ire^iFr w'st ^ fVn!mft%



u



/. ..*--•



<v



[ <l^ ]


^m: ^p^s'inR^: ^nqts'^fifri^: ^r^s'Tfin^ w irflfsr i

rsnfr f^^ w^ ?ww ftr^si tit
mw<«^i^4i iRm: I ^nms'^Tfinro tr^ ^#% 7^: ijj^



[ ^ ]

*|rMi<4ir>ri ?^ ^gn lij^inirf ii^MH^n^i ^i^nififr P<<f^<ui ^t^



irt: ^1^ in? ^3FiPf iT^rfir ir^ 'jv^ii^ uri ^m ^ri i4) f^^ i Pmi ^^rf^

^TT^TOtW^T I ^r^Tf ^rf?^ ^pOTJ M<W f^^slU H*<rtH4 ^i*nl

^fi<M^ H^Pd r^J]n!*irc|^r*n4H4| lK»r< TWR ^^ ^iIH^IA
»1wn^iTWTf I



[ vi ]

^KU I ^I^UUM vilely «l^4^l«Mfh«irMnil I HH I


^ «i<^i'j^iA4«Hi^ «i4ii^4(i«iiih«<rM fNtirMNmr wfts


[ «^M ]

^ini: « rifU^^^i^ xrw^ iRT ff^Tcit ^RFi ^R^ ^n?^ ^z^

^Qfrt •? "<R T^ ^ I H«llftdl TWR *K^* ^ UR^PKnSf^MT
^ ^ni|*m^HI ^IfPfTTRT M<.4:M< f<<HH[1 ^Tlfw ^I^I^Jr^Mnf^H*



^nOTfT ^HMWHln^l ^?ft»R riP^q^y dfalJUi if^rft ^li^



^TOT ^|W|H4<m HVR I il^ ^4<^lfl ^WT 'Hll«hrilfll ^ftftr



f?^rfl^ iR^ifHw fVjinr ti«j^««i^ 'mi ^»n(^Tnim i 4mhX%

^nK ^TTT HI*l^l\*<M tifww Minn HMIMUMjimfllV) H^
9fVl|ni? <4W^^ ^^P^^ W5T nSrMM4jfflHl '''1^ ^ ^^


^^5'itsfWHt^HMIit^ *^^r«i ir|%W I H9 I


1^ *MfH*minisJMI'*4l5|» Umri ifif

^nmr h^^^t^ frUtjiflnTi w^d«4Hifi^ M«i|j^n^ i iwi ^n4iP


Hi^*Ih^*4|(<K)'M: I llthi J[^ ^Snwn Vll^ri li*HI 3|»44[h ^ ^



[ "it .]


^^ppMnf^rn^Tn *j^m^^h "ftnr i 'nn timA 4**Hfii ^vm


^JW^n^ ^4*^ ^nf^ fro ^^^^rfn ^simfvfft ^|^ nfii i

«|.il«4iiuivuj 41U||«ihn: TTftrniPK^ iTOW: ^^: I iWT isNl|

MPiUNit xmft^ i^^^oT^ v^^ %^<Tr ^fonv: ^^s%<



. ir ■ "Si



[ n ]


*i!WI ^(V(Pft Pm^lrt^ irflHFTFlft^mfilftffT I ^Rirtt: ITOT



^^5^w ^*Trt %sFm^ inn iwTR^
#iHt TRsmi ^:5|5Trt ^ >^^iiq^ ^'^j: T*^»ndf^ i!^ irO


C ^0 ]
fk 1^: ^ttm4lP i HHT1 i^fWlf I f^ ^T^ ififw: M'ld*l W#t


WTfFin^nriT^: ^mh»*<i'^i^^: T^npurfi^re:


H^^ ^^d^|H|«t<ri: I '^ ^^ "ftj^ ^TSf^ "^^ ^T^ W^ni' I


m ^TO ^im %^: ftr^ li^ ^inCT fsr^ t^-O^pHmi^M



C ^ ]


ijjIhiQ ^IWf^^ ^^ffll


[ ^9 ]


« *iRw^^nt w^ TS^ ^nfN* fW^ « Sire^ tPs



'H^Hrr^ '


"««V^il^f^^


I ^^^J^^^^m FTsW


[ ^ ]


^Pfi^l^'H'T ^R ^HIIUM* flH'^^'S ^lll^^^H^ ^|*H|4^^^J ^pif
%l^iiin^4||f)|| ^|fH^lt|iHKi^^Kl^rM<illf^ I im HAH'* ^ ^ftlft


[ ^M ]



k. -w



w jj^Pcm^ i ^^ ^rrorqi f?[%^ Jj^ujirfi u^N^. i hvr iren


»' :i



H



[ H ]



f^ HHUJUHMI f^f^ci n^ffi ^*J!!J|MI ^(T^W ^ftlH^ffl IIWI

^rf^i^ ttRi i^aj^ ^ii<^ TOT wng^ "^^ ^fk ^n?^ ?ifif wwtv

^?ri Ifftnp H^«iffi «i^f^* 'Wl inft f!^ ♦I'ltfi ti^tVnn 5Rip%



^■.*



[ ^ ]



'flTT ijr^i "^urfi^ ^sfirfW Hf<»^*j|i^ I



^



^wK^^iPM ! «4Hl l <941fri '^4)< ^ mP«^ I ^CT i!f^ i>Oi(lK > rt<l<( H^



[ ^b ]


«i^#HH*lq TT^ ^wrflT srnftlf ^ ^ ^f^Wif "^Tg^f^ ^WWR ^5*1

^if^^ f^i? jj^Th ^<Tf^ fsTf^HNftrfir H^^aiw i



C ^ ]


flHllX^Ml ^l«^mMII ^ mPlf^SlM ^^ iSr'ITlETf


7/<<y "



•=T



WRTn^"WW ^CT lift SKlRl! i^ffti I ^ I



wnrftf iNiftj ^'wftj ^4ui4)ffi jiw^jn; i f^c^r^n^ i


C ?o 1



f?l *l4^n?^iHllH^**lO H^iSrtlf^ ^ HH'i 'g;^^'^ mxwM 1|A


^^ — J..



r. ?<» ]

^nff|^ TjRl^ i.^rt**<l^l<lM^ ^Md'^l^l^^i 4M^rt«^l^lll^: ^If^

f?r^ f^ I ^RTS^ fti!f^' I



/

^jisHiw-^iiir^!! w'ifhf iT^rrf^ ^T?nr(K Hf^Tft[few ^i^

»TiiT ITrtj T«B[fk rlHIKyi fN%^ ^?^ fHfMl Tfif *4imfH^^I



C ?^ ]



n^ftrfk ^» IPTO^ li^rcfH iTfinftpf ^t^t i ftR ir^ir^ ^^



fW ii«ii^4*jii miwii<*i^ inn f'm wrt



f%^ iiwT ^wmJiijn ^ Divfif wnwif^v ^Ih^wfp^ ftsif



C 9? 3
ft^ ^fMt 'W ft?IT 'Hi^T^H ggl^H '^T^ ftqf ftiii^^rf^nij^



^: M^IiRu! uf^ ^ ^ f^^l^Pri i|><4^4M : tj^P^^M*: i



, . •■('■



[ ^ ]


C ?M ]

s^ _ri___. _♦ _._ ft ♦ f» s-> ^ , ^ s __.rL_.^

^W ^^M* ftrftlW .^I^'I ^ftrftR? lITJift ^*l(<*^ ^iflsjfMj^m


mft ^j^sItt ^*H<(rt inn ^s^f <n^ tft: ^nrrft? ^ft^ «if*4



C ^% ]


1J^ Utinwn



W^ I Tim ^MiP^ii^ ^Bing^ wngr^i ^^ ^ iNr: i


C ^ ]



?nTOWH^?m H^: UcT^SslHlftM^f^ #s^ ijffii^ Tft^

<^IHI*llfi M"«lfMM^IJ ^<yr4^^l* ♦4l«iMIM!l*45|rt J^ ^i%l<i|* "<W


4lfl|4ilH«Mrilill|(H4iMf^fie<l)lll|4UMl4)) Ij^^ril ^PlR WHW ^


[ ?t ]


^TR^RT^m I inn ^Ml^l ^lc^*< ^Rt^ HMIlflUI Vi UNI

**ii*i^i*li ^Mi^i ijftr^jFi •iiftj ilt^ isfk I nwi m*M^m^i


[ ?e ]


ijn4 tn^r i[wim i[^tm ftrf^i i ^:fiRiv'irt^^*4i«[ifw% wfiw
^n^^n ^15^ ftrf^ < ^!^^5?nR^?[n^- fwMT *<^41^i ijfff ^z

^F^ fro: ^syjrftjrf^: fti%: ^ -m V<^^*^^\^^%^^^kAy



[ «o ]

mf I


t


[ *l ]



ftpwPTt HN^^ff wiWPTt %*n^;^SiWt5ni ^5^- itor^


M



[ 8^ ]


•T "^ W^» M^l*! IT^T^^


I 8? 3


^r>n <^ti» ijft<^^ ^ifk WR fn^-^Vj f^isin^ ipnii^ *ihhhi*<h



''5^'WI TRTWTR inJirT fH«l^fl IT^fif J I M^ I


§lhHIA4IH inKr«3T fH^lfl (H^fll "^ f'K ^(Oi<ll^ I



WtV* 'H^TTf Wn[^ I ^CT^J JgTJ^ flTPlfff %\ti\ T^ giill^W* I



iWTRRUIW 5TTft *Jti|rt srrfil #RTjil *fll*^



[ «M ]



i|f^4(^fl%4^i)4i! '^«n^ ^^^ ^rorflf %fiT i ^r ^|u ifw ^bmi
j^l^ ^'^ ^wrfif «MMf<M<^ ^ wnfti^ •? iHfih w^^^^^pii


N



[ « ]


TT^fif "JTRlfH "^[^V l^Hl^^^^flilfl: ^W: I %M I

^ftmi J ^^^ ^WT Oiii*si*is^Rw«1 •nWf "JTRrfn ^v^in ^iflii


fti hA^m ^jftwftifT^wn^ n^i?rfiftyiRtw5t ir^spw^tmiifti'j



I ii9 ]


^•4l*i*K<UMliU v.nif^ ti«^Mif^ ^•MH*JH|(h t»**i*sji*i*i <?VT


C Ot ]


wW %'^FWWFi?tl| ^Wl


IS^I



VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.



1 HE text of the Kdrikd has been in the first instance derived from a
copy in the handwriting of Mr. Colebrooke, which he had prepared for
the press. I have collated this with Professor Lassen's edition and with
a very good manuscript in my own possession. Besides these, the differ-
ent commentaries include the text, and the Sdnkhya Pravachana Bhdshya
cites many verses of the Kdrikd. Altogether, therefore, the text may be
considered as printed upon a collation of eight copies, which may be thus
referred to : A. Mr. Colebrooke's transcript ; B. my MS. copy ; C. Pro-
fessor Lassen's edition ; D. the text in Gaurapada's commentary ; E. that
in the Sdnkhya Tatwa Kaumudi; F. that in the Sdnkhya Chandrikd;
G. that in the Sdnkhya Kaumudi ; and H. the passages of it in the Sdn-
khya Pravachana Bhdshya. Of the Sdnkhya Tatwa Kaumudi I had three
copies, and two copies of the Sdnkhya Chandrikd. I had but one copy of
the Bhdshya of Gaurapada.



P. 1. 1. 1. ri<fHMIri^ A.D.G. ri<MMIriii B.C.E.F.

P. 2. 1.14. ^5: ^:^ would be more correctly %^J^* Wilkins, r. 53.
In noticing this deviation from rule, however, my chief object is to ob-
serve, that such deviations are frequent in the MSS., and that, although
I have corrected some of them, I do not regard them in all cases as errors
or inadvertencies : they seem in general to be intentional, and to be de-
signed for the sake of greater perspicuity.

P. 3. 1. 9. For Pcl^ni read P^V^fl

P. 5. 1.17. For rrfW^ read rifHI^

P. 5. 1.18. irnTSrr^T^TO^TJT. As intimated in the translation (p. 21),
these words are of questionable import, and possibly erroneous. The



o



VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

want of another copy renders their correction hazardous, but in all pro-
bability the first term should be nf?RT or H(n*ntt^ ordinarily • light' or
'shining,* but perhaps here said to denote ^TPE?' abode, place;* or the
construction may be llflT^T — 'W'^ltftf^H'i implying 'conformity,
adaptation/ from W^ ' according to,* and 411^ ' to sit/

P. a. V. «. Hfflfd— uf^r« D.

P. 8. V. 8. ^^M — 4H^M G. which Professor Lassen has followed. All
the other copies concur in the first reading, which the sense of the verse,
as explained by the scholiasts, requires.

P. 10. 1. 1 1. For ^ read ^

P. 11. 1. 4, 5, 7. Some blanks occur in this part of the MSS. of the
Bhashyuy which have been conjecturally supplied ; as, ^mfl^ * * V^

and OTHH^ - - %^ ^ ^ - - ^Hl^Pli and KVi ^IHMI - - IHIR

How these have been supplied may be seen in the respective passages.

P. 11. 1. 1 1. For "^[^^ read "^^

P. 12. 1. 10. For ^(f^T^ and 4lfHHm read ^rf^^H^

P. 13. 1. 2. For ^fiH^ read ^Hrt*4fh

P. 13. V. 13. Professor Lassen changes ^inHH^ to >;IM%JMni which
he derives from ^H 'stabilire, firmare.* All the MSS., however, read tbe
word with the cerebral, not the dental sibilant, and there is no doubt of
their accuracy. The rule of Panini by which a radical 1| is changed in
inflexion to ^^ \k\f^\^. V W not applying to this word, which is derived
fn)m ^J*^ cl. r> and !). This root is the subject of a special rule, by
whi(rh it is provided that after a pre|>osition containing the vowel "^or^
the radical ^ shall be clian^ed to ^. Of course after ^, W is changed to
?, making T(T7^. The original rule is Panini, 8. 3. 67. ^iiP^ I

IWI^^'. WTf^ I ^rR^Wtfk M(i^!%Ilffl ; to which we may add ^Hlf
Mlfk, whence ^HinH^

P. 10. 1. 14. iMl«Hiq<4«i has been substituted for the VI^I41^«I of
the MSS., which is evidently incorrect.



VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

P. 16. 1. 15. For ^nigxrnWR^ read 7T^MJ|U|7i

P. 16. V. 17. H. reads B^ for flMlff. The sense is the same.

P. 16. 1. 18. For "irraj read ITtPBJ

P. 17. 1. 7. For iM^lrtll read iHtf«llctii

P. 17. V. 18. For ^HH— ^FR B. D. Either word is correct.

P. 19. V. 20. >4<4r<|<I^H B. D. omitting ?[f?T. The sense is unaf-
fected, and the metre is preserved by reading the final syllable long.

P. 19. 1. 8. The third word should be ^5^T#^
P. 19. 1. 19. For ^T^ f^PTOT read clTlfHRHm
P. 20. 1. 9. For ^rf^FrRT read ^U^I^C
P. 21. 1. 1. For ir^hR read iptt^

P. 22. V. 24. The second line is read i^r^4| U.^l^^l^i4!dl*^l^« M^^i^^
B. and U.iil<VJ4i«|J|<iJ49dl<44|^: xnETTP^ld^rT: D. The sense is much
the same, but the last is wrong as to metre. It is evident also from the
comment that follows that it is a mistake, and that the final words should
be Mt4^i$<4— qT|cv(H|<in^ri being the explanation of IT^^

P. 23. V. 26. MI^MflMlfH B. HT^TOT: E. In the first line, m^fi
'll^Sfllm is the reading of B. C. E. F. but D. confirms the text, not only
by the same terms, vtl^tH^M^IM, but by explaining the term fM^v4ii

P. 24. V. 27. «||^H<I^ A. E. F. m^M<lll B.C.D. The difierence
involves a difference of interpretation, as noticed in the Comment (p. 99).
The explanation of the Bhdshyay D, is so clearly incompatible with the
reading «miH^TiT that in the first instance I corrected it to «||^H<^i:
as in the same page, 1. 15, 18, which should be read, agreeably to the MSS.,

P. 24. 1. 23. For iT?^ ^ read if?^ ^JiH, and for ^^ ^ read "^^: ^
P. 25. V. 28. %>HlU^4 ^•^' H^K CD. The variations are immaterial.
P. 25. 1. 12. For xrf^TSmt *<<*f^rH'1: read Trf^^snTRcTtlfn!:
P. 26. 1. 6, 7. For ^f^f^^MI read ^ffl f<f<.4|MI



VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

P. 2ii. I. 3, &c. t^n^*i ought perhaps to be W^5f . See Translation,
p. 105.

P. HO. I. 2*2. After n^H^fSl some such word as qiW should be in-
serted, although it is not in the MS. : it occurs in the passage when
re|)eated in p. ^x^

P. 27. 1. «. For ^^ read ^^

P. 29. I. 3 and 15. For ^J^l^f^— 'J^Jlfif read ^^Jlf^— 'JCi^
P. 2». I. 4. For Uiil^H^fnl read H^I ^ Mij^t
P. 30. 1. 1 1. For TTPIT ^ read l||U|r^4J

P. :)0. 1. 14. ^^iiHin* whicli is the reading of the copy, should pro-
bably be W^TTTf^ ' after departure' or ' death.*
P. 30. 1. 21. For Uri^ read TTWt

P. 31. 1. U. ^ct^ 1k^ been coiijecturally supplied, the writing of the
ropy being verj' indistinct.

P. 31. 1. 16. The MS. has MVIt^l. which has no meaning, and has
lieeii therefore conjectundly changed to "^Jlft^

P. 31. 1. 20. Instead of ^^T^ iiU)c|9||rf^ it is possible that the phrase
sliould be ^'0^*1^*^^^MH^ * from the influence of iniquity.*

P. :i:). 1. 11. A passage has been here omitted: it should run, JI^U^

'^nfk: I ^]^l*Jt5MM<mcHnM*?^Eif ^. It has l)een given in the
Translation, p. 137.

P. 33. 1. la. For fcl^M^li read Pcl^M^i

P. »J. V. 47. ^I^m I), wliich is allowable.

I^37. I. 4. n«^l^lClt} was read in the MSS. ri«^l^|f|||1 which
was evidently an error.

V. 37. 1. IH. I'or inPFT^ read ri^^l<TI

I>. 3n. I. 1. The MS. lias* f^^H^lTRBflt^fTTTTH^ which the sense
shows to bc' crronfous.

P.lW. I. II. For ^^ read ^[^^T



VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.

P. 38. v. 50. ^|U||n«{<mit|riM E. The difference is unimportant. F.
has HFTT^TT which is incorrect ; HMiJlMi^lHI D ; and D. F. read

fNfHf^ril for ^ifOTm

P. 39. 1. 9. After imT insert ITt^ llfif

P. 40. 1. 9. For ^rr^rqt read ^TT^T^

P. 40. V. 53. The reading of this verse is materially varied in D, al-
though the sense is substantially the same :



^wraiTts^ fVm



Professor Lassen has n*^*«n**l, which is not warranted by any MS. and
although perhaps a defensible, is an unusual form of the derivative. G. has

P. 42. V. 56. H«in^l1l D ; and the variation is advisedly, as appears
by the comment.

P. 43. V. 59. ^rn*TR im)|V.i|— lin4^4| D. But the term of our text

«

is used in the following comment.
P. 43. V. 60. For T|<fri— ^P^TT D.
P. 44. V. 61. U^fri** ^TrCfft C ; which is manifestly wrong.

P. 44. 1. 6. Although suspecting some error in this citation, I had no
means of correcting it. Before printing the translation, however, I met
with the passage correctly given in the commentary of M adhusudana
Gupta upon the Bhagavad Gita, and have rendered it accordingly in

p. 172. It should be, ^J^ ^nJi4IV|lS^*ll*IHi ^^:^^:

P. 44. V. 62. rifHI^muiriSTT E ; and ^TIT is explained ^JTRVT^
l!ptt« The particle is not inserted in any other copy. C. is singular in
the order of the words, and transposing ♦J'"<n and ^«ln
P. 45. 1. 5. Instead of ^f^Ul^r^ read ^iH^^ri

P. 46. V. QQ. A. B. E. F. G. agree in reading ^M<HH|f*||, although, as
Professor Lassen justly objects, ** metro refragatur." D. gives the cor-

recter reading ^Miriiil, explaining it >9Hvni f^^^l IT'KT IJ^PI H|iin*



'I



VARIATIONS AND CORRECTIONS.
This copy also varies in the beginning of the hemistich : vi^M ^imm^^

P. 47. I. 4. For "^^W read l|<%llfJ|

Other variation.s tlian tliose specitied above may no doubt be dis*
covered in different manuscripts, and even in those which have been
consulted; but they are in general palpable blunders of transcription,
unwortliy of the honour of being per|>ctuate<l in print.



iiHiniiiiiiiji

3 2044 024 164 162



A HNE IS INCURRED IF THIS BOOK IS
NOT RETURNED TO THE UBRARY ON
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED
BELOW.


D WICENER



tn^ ^t* _ t



"^^rfcLlFD


* to W\



i£££J^



, \ \2 F. N ^-



7r..^'v



^m



AMOBLl



^Klds



TL



C.\l



JCELU.iJ



1..



iimiiiiiiiq

3 2044 024 164 162



A FINE IS INCURRED IF THIS
NOT RETURNED TO THE L JULY
OR BEFORE lilE LAST DATE ST/
BELOW.


mm



C/.\[



JCELLiilJ



-■■. "* "♦
