Abominable Snowmen: Legend Come to Life (Sanderson, 1961)
=========================================================
The first major English survey of yeti/sasquatch evidence: fourteen chapters of case reports from five continents plus appendices on footprint analysis and Himalayan fauna — Ivan T. Sanderson's 1961 classic, public domain. Scan via Internet Archive.

pyRAhiio eooKS T.i*ia2


75c


TOO WEIRD TO BE TRUE?

TOO AMATING TO BE REAL? STRANGE
ACCOUNTS OF CREATURES BEYOND BELIEF-

AU UERIFIED FACT


Abominable Snowmen-strange, weird half-men. hatf-beasts
who have roamed the face of five continents since the
nng of time. Arelhey mytti-or ate they astoonfing.iri^i^'--^
able fact? ^

Ivan T. Sanderson, famed explorer and naturalist, draws the
tuth about these amazing phenomena from out of the
^ows of legend, The result is a definitiveiy researched, ,
ullcriy fascinating report on the astonishing “other men" ^
who have haunted mankind from prehistory to tomorrow.... !



II ABOMINABLE SNOWMEN; L-ECEND^OiiK-TD iiFP o'VNncRCQN.


WHAT ARE THEY?

THE HAIRY GIANTS OF VANCOUVER
ISLAND ... THE “MOUTH-MAN^' WHO
CRAVES ONLY RED MEAT . . . THE
THING THAT RIPS TONGUES OUT OF
CATTLE . . . THE "WIND MAN" OF
RUSSIA • , • THE "STINKERS" OF MA¬
LAYA.

These are only a sampling of the published
cases of submen, trolls, and what used to
be called "Apemen." documented and dis¬
cussed In this definitive book by an emi¬
nent field biologist.

THE ABOMINABLE SNOWMEN (ap¬
pearing for the first time in an up-to<late
and revised edition) Is the masterwork on
this subject that has challenged the skep¬
tics, and kept thousands of readers utterly
spellbound.



ABOMINABLE

SNOWMEN

LEGEND COME TO LIFE


An Account of Reports on the
Existence of Ultrft-Primttlva
Hominlds on Five Continenb


Nnw Itavfseif Abri^gmMl


IVAN T. SANDERSON

FX.S.. F.R.G.S., F«Z.S.


A

PYRAMID BOOKS • MEW YORK



DcWCtTlOS*

r> Sr'TscrJ and \fo7tiguf Beuvtlmans

M A#. tfHTj *V 4 Jntf*'


AMMIHAUS SMOWMCN

U9«nd Cmi* »a iif«

A PrtAMJO (OOK

hr err«n0«mMtt wjih ChllisA |»ok Compony

OB»#p Saoh Cempofty •dirtpn pwbllih«4 1f41

^fomid •dhf»n pwMiM N^mb4r. \U9


All Ughti fteMrvvd

P*S««I In tho Unha<r Skpta$ of AmeriM

rrUWfD aooxs «m pwbllkhtd by 9yraml4 PubflnlTont,

444 Modiwn A«tnw«, Now York, N«w York 10032, U.dX



Contents


Foreword to thb Repmnt EomoH

1. A Certain Unpleasantness 43

A Brief History of ABShiery

2. UEJQurriHjs Woodsmen ....... S7

Reports from Carutdo (2860 to 2920)

3. FlATBER SaSQOATCSBIIT 83

More R£ports from Canada (2920 to 1940)

Ai XsB /^PPbUtANCB OP BlOFEET .m.m .*..98
SUB More Reports front Canada (1940 to 2960)

5. FOOTPIUNTS ON TBB 3aMD$ OP . . . ... ll3

AbomiaabU Affain in the US.

6. In Ode Own Back Yard ....-.. 140

• Happenings in Northern CaUfcrnia

7. Late North Americans .......... 160

Hyperbole from Our Northwest

8. On thb Traces of 172

ASatrs In Central and South America

9. AFRfCA-^THfi '*Da1KB5T” 201

Some Rumors and Some Flat Statements


10. Tkb Ba9T*-tbb '*MmBfaou9".... 226

Reports from Sumatra and the Makzy Peninsula

11. Thb Ob£AT MiX'Up ... 248

Things in the Indochinese Peninsula

12. Anvonb por Everest? 264

ABSMs in the Himalayas and the Great Gutler

13. THb Western Approaches ... 286

Russian Findings In the Caucasus and
Thereabouts


lA The Eastern Horizon ... 307

CuTTSRf Conditions on the Great Mongolian
Uplands

Aj^psodix A. Trb Importakcb op Feet 327

An lehnoiogical Analysis of
ABSMery


Appeocbi B. OnoMi Iswlvbo ...-. 338

The Known Mommaiian Fatota of
the Hlmalayon Area

BmiocRAPtfY -... 340

Books by Ivan T. Saniwrson.-. 354

1«>EX -..... 355


PORSWORD TO THE REPRINT EOmON


HBTOfty 1$ curreatly taking & otosi peculiar and remarkable
turn. In Che dimmest and fanbest paati Man presumably
koaw practically ooihlng but then throughout thousands of
miUema be gradually acquired wisdom and an ever'increaa-
ing underatandsflg of his enviroiuneot This culminated in
the dawn of what we call the scientific age. Theii something
very curious happmed.

Oq the one hand, our knowledge of the world we live ia
started (o advance with ever'increasing momentum; but, on
the other hand, ever more matters that had interested our
ancestors were tossed into a sort of intellectual trash can
on the grounds that they were preposterous, 2 am peaking,
of course, of wbat we now call the ^'Western Worid.’* The
peoples indigenous to other continents—other Europe

and North America, that is—did not so toss out these thiogi.
Now, we of West” have reached an unpasae.

Starting about 1920, I suspect, there came a great,
spontaneous, unheralded, and apparently unprovoked
change in public, if not scientific, opinion. People as a wbde
began to quesdoa everything—religioa, science, our soda]
orgaftfearioQ, and even our history, at least os (aught Things
that bad been either forgoneo or suppressed for over a
century if not two suddenly began to crop up all over the
place. Ai first, however, these were mostly of a very factual
and pragmatic oaiure; the revolutjoD in ideas did not come
until forty yean later—(I k year in which this book was
written.

One of tbe results of these two ebangeovers is the "turn"
In history whkb I mentioned at the outset Year by year,
siace about a.o. 1920, more and more allegedly new dis-
eovBries ore being traced ever farther back in historical
tune, la fact, the history of ;use about everything has sud*
Apeakiog hiitoricaUy^^^taned to be pished ever
farther bock in time, generaUy. Take simple items like the
first metai working, tbe first vUlege senkmcot, tbe firtt

7



writieo records* the Qm iit» the first boats; eveo (he fis«
Mao! Forty years ago, aothnpolopsts gave the inpnasioa
of bfipg convinced that Modem Mao first saw the light
rouBd about 50,000 years ago. Now* the dale (in our years)
is heading for the 2 -mlUioa mark.

By the end of Worid War I we Westerners seen to have
come (0 the blissful cooctuaioo (hat* even if we did oot have
all the details filled in, we knew the overall picture of every*
thing The Scopes (Mookeyville) Trial was proclauned a
Iriunph of scientific logic over traditional belief; the BibU*
cal sutcasents on crealioo were said to be purely allegorical:
sdeotific trulb to be proven. Everybody sort of relapsed into
a new tfitelJeclual utopia. Both rriigion and science bad baas
challenged but both hod proved their points->by sanaible
comprennise, made possible by (he equally sensible emidoy-
ment of logic. Both were perfectly correct; it was cnerely a
inaeser of semantics. It is nowhere stated in the Bible th^
God created the world precHdy oo a Friday in the year
4004 a.C. as Bishop Usher has said; science never said (hat
it was created precisely Ut 4004'bUlion B.c, Both were
nercly figures of speech.

Uofortunaiely both were figments of the imagloatioit

Unpleasant things continued to turn up and wiib In*
ertasioi regularity and insisMace. These were Items that did
iMK fit into either the old traditiooa] pattern of Betiefa, or
into the new scientific logic. Most of them bad been around
literally since ever, but they had just died away, increasin^y,
since (he inception and acceptance of scieotlfic method
(A)gy. They were dubbed *'old wives' tales” and then, decile
tbdr persistence among laymen, were progressive deni¬
grated ontil even the least seboefied country bumpkin cante
to laugh at them. The job was almost completed by 1920.
But (hen something happened.

People sraried dredging up these old wives' tales and
writing about them. They were colorful; they were historic;
they were just clean fun. But, as such papular trash began
to blossnn, people staned saying things like; ”Hey. That's
not so damned stupid as you think. My grandmother ..
(and so on),

Encouraged by this, more and still more people began ao
dredgeng-^od in family attics* b historical societies, in old
books, and in the classics even unto the Bible. And within
a decade, there were those who were showing tbs audacity
to stale that some of these things were not old wives* tales

8



bot {BCtiuS accounts by tZialr owa new wives—“And ($ 00*1
you try to argue wiib beri budr*

Tbu*, cartaio aspects of hlstocy began to reverse tbeta*
selves; and the classic example U that of which we write,
and which we have dubbed ABSMery for sbon. This begui,
for the Western world, io 1920-21 wiib the coining of ib»
cateby monicker “Abominable Snovmjan." This was greeted
with boois of deiisioB but the uunoet glee by ibe Bciliali
press.

Kevertbelesa, it just would not go away, and Ihreagbout
the twenties and thirties the business built up and up with
ever more evidence from <in this case HioMlayan) sioua*
taioeen, aulitary and other government persoppel. and evea
travelling scientists. Reports kept pouring out of (his area,
and all to the effect that the ioiiiaj silly suggcstk>o that (hers
was (is) a creature In central Asia the oame of which was
(mis) traaslated as The AbOtninable Snowman, was actually
not silly at all. And so insistent were these reports that the
etay*at-hocne scientisB were forced to try to refute tbt
matter.

la this they not only failed miserably, but they opeoed a
new flood gate of dernlon and speculaiioo among tbe j^ess
and the public because tbeii arguments and their attempted
icfatadeod were manifestly iO peurile. The aet result was a
renewed outburst of repons, coming from ever more
respected, reliable, and official persons.

This whole business was, up until World War II, an
almost exclusively Brirish aftair; but immediately thereafter,
it became fully Interaedonal Swiss, Japanese, Argeniinians,
Austrians. Russians, Mongolians. AmericaBS, New
Zealuidcn, and even Indiaas and Ihc local KepalU
and Tibeians got into the act; and still ever more precise
and categoric reports that these creatures really exist, and
are not just old (Himalayan) wive’ tales, resulted, But tbe
siay-at-bomes and the other “experts,” who had oever been
within live thousand miles of the Himalayds, continued to
ram and to scoff. No such thing could be, they stated, be¬
cause it was imposiiblci however just who said so, they did
not offer to stale!

Then tbc whole business broke out like a rash is both
North America and Russia.

True scientists besan (0 prick up their ears; pr^ser
expeditions were organized; newspapers, and millioDaires,
and govemmenis poured money into the effort; and tfuly
concrete evidence began to come in. First, it was mere


reports: then plester casts ot footprints; then ludrs; then
pUe$ of excremrat; then photographs of "beds"; and finally
some 6(111 photographs and a film. Tlie embattled experts
had now to contend not only wid: the general public, the
travellers, officialdom, the pres s , and the literate scholars of
over half (he world, they had aUo to battle a very fiimly
entrenched battalion in their own midst These were an
intemacional group of absolutely topnotch scientists» and
notably physical anthropologists, holding much higher
postfions than theirs, and with far greater credits to tbdr
titles.

The next, and, as of (he time of writing, final stage was
then initiated. This was (is) bibliographical and historical
* research into the matter; and this not only within the limited
confines of western literature and reco^ but worldwide,
and with notable emphasis on Asia. Literally within months,
the result was a sort of landslide revecaal of history. Every¬
where one tufTied, ever more records of these AfiSMs
cropped up—and everywhere from Indonesia to Sweden,
and from China to Ireland. They even turned up all over
North, Central, and South America. And as the years have
passed, this flood has oat only burst the dam but brought
to light soraethiog tise.

This ia that the whole business was never an old wives*
tale 10 the fi/si place, but s perfectly straightforward his¬
torical record of fact, and of oor ancestry and of that of our
prehistory, and cultural and political written history. It Is
only now, after having reached what we thought was the
end of a road, that we have really started to uncover just
what is what, and what really happened in the past.

This book is an historical record of that history; and a
history of this historical reversal.

IVAS T- SAKDER80N

Coiumbla, New Jersey


10



ABOMINABLE

SNOWMEN


MAP I. DISTRIBUTION OF A6SMS BY CONTINENTS


MAP I. QJSTRIBUTION OF ABSMS BY CONT1NEMT8

The surface of the Earth Is somewhat clearly divided be¬
tween areai of two kintii. One. which we ceH the land but
which includes certain peripheral areas at present under Mi¬
lo w seas, forms rafts of certain kinds of rocks of lighter den*
sity, some 40 miles thick. The ether, which constitutes the
ocean floors, is covered by a much thinner layer of these
strata. The hydrosphere—or water capsule of our eartfwflnds
Its own level due to gravity. As a result, the first areas are
subaerial. h>e latter sub^ueous. The former are “land*
masses"; the latt^ "oceans" (with adjacent seas). The M
are not, however, the Continents, which are specific land
areas, with associated promontories and islands, each of
which has an unique histcry, structure, ficra. and fauru. Th^
are seven in number, with the Islands in the South Pacific
forming an additional ur>iL Current reports of. and myths,
legends, and fofkim pertaining to. ABSMs are now recorded
from five of the Conti r>ents.


13


MAP |}. WORLD VEGETATION

The most impoftent feature of the lar>d*surface of the ear^
to enimels (and thus to men) is the type of vegetation that
elothes it There ere seven mejor t^ee—the equatorial closed-
canopy forests^ the c^en orchards and tropical savannahs; the
scrublands and hot deserts; the steppes, prairies, end parh-
lands of the temperate zones; the closed<anopy deciduous
and coniferous forests of b^e higher latitudes; and the tundras
and barrenlands of the polar circles. These girdle the earth,
in that order, from equator to poles. In successIva belts, but
all of them waver to north and south and expend or contract,
continuously, and in a variety of ways. These varlatioiis am
dua solely to the Influence of the mejor ocean eurrenU.
Altrtude has no effect on this belting; but on mountains the
auccession Is repeated vertically, irrespective of latitude.
AfiSMs appear to occur only In mountainous regions end a1*
most otclusJvely In those vrhich lie in the forest belts. The
one exception Is eastern Eurasia.


18



MAP lit HUMAN RACES



16


MAP III HUMAN AACES

Today, th« antirs land surface of the earth, apart from
Antarcttca, the Greenland Icecap, and a number of islands,
mostly in the polar regions. Is officially ^'inhabited" by Modem
Man. Actually, he lives on considerably less than a tenth of
the total land surface. Modern Man is divided Into two veiy
distinct groups—the Primitives and the Non*PrimItJves. The
former consist of the Australoids of Australia and. In part.
Melanesia: the Bushmen of Southwest Africa*! the little
Negrillo Pigmies of central Africa*! and the Negrito Pigmies
of the Andaman Islands, the Malay Peninsula, and the Philip¬
pines.* There are three divisions of the Non-Primltlvee—the
Mongoloid, the Caucasoid, and the Negroid. Of the Tu^ Mre
are five subdlvlslonsi of the second, three; and of the third,
two, but with archer group—the Ham it ic—derived from inter*
mixture widi one of the Caucasoid groups. Currently, the West
Caucasoids and the Sudanese Negroids have greatly extended
their range, notably to the Americas. [* Not on map due to
scaled


17



KAP tv. NORTH AMERICA CVECETATIONI


f^«n(,«rMW


M^tMMOTcms
4 9«ltilKMW


MAP IV. NORTH AMERICA {VEOCTATION]

This continent should be regarded as reaching from the
Arctic Ice Raft to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. It is divided
Into three partst first* into a western and an eastern, by the
Greet Barrter, ^ dividing line running roughly down the llOth
Meridian. Secondly, tne eastern half Is sub-divided latrtudi-
nally about the 45th pareMel; to the north being closed forest
end tundre; to the aoutti, open forest (parklands) end prairies.
The midwest, southwest, and Mexico are arid ar>d covered with
scrub and desert The rest is mountainous, and forested al¬
most exclusively with conifers. In the Mexican Sierras thera
are soma tropical forests, Along the eastern fringe of the
continent lie the Appalachians, and there U another uplartd
area In Labrador, The valley of the Mississippi and Its tribu*
taries form extensive, swampy bottomlar>ds.


19


MAP V. CENTRAL WESTERN NORTH AMERICA

This Is an arbitrarily chosen area, designed to bring out a
manber of different physical features. It represents an area of
soma 1,900|000 square mllesi of which some 1450.000 are lartd.
This Is cut diagor«lly by the Great BarHer>»hefe represeirted
by the Rockies—that extervds from the Arctic coast to Vera
Cruz on the Gulf coast To the east of this are lowlands
covered In the north, by the great boreal coniferous forests
artd. In the south, by the prairies. In the south lias the Great
Basin, actually an uplartd. desert plateau covered with parallel
ranges of n>odest mountains. Between the Sierra Nevada and
the Southern Coastal Ranges there is the flat gutter known
as the Sacramento Valley. The rest is subdivided into a series
of mountain blocks as shown. Each Is quite distinct in form,
composition, fbra, and fauna. II Is around the peripheries of
these that ^SMs have been reported. The coast, from the
OI)inpics north, is mostly precipitous and without any coastal
plain at alL


21


5TAT&5


MAP VI. BRITISH COLUMBIA

This represents an area of some 270,000 square miles. Ninety
per cent of this Is uninhabited, despite the enormous con¬
glomeration of the City of Vancouver, ^ old capital of Vfc>
toria on Vancouver IsierKf, and the somewhat extensive
cultivated areas on that island and about the lower reaches
of Oie Fraser River from Agassiz vrest. The coastal plains of
Puget Sound edd only 2 per cent. The whole of It, apart from
Vancouver Island, the Fraser delta, and the Puget Sound area,
is mightily mountainous and great parts are not trufy ex¬
plored, though there are now excellent large-scale maps re¬
sultant from aeriaJ stiiveys. The Olympic Mountains and the
coastal fringe northward around Vancouver Island and north
of the lower Fraser River are clothed in an immensely tail,
several-layered "Rain Forest” with conifers predominating
(the laigest trees in the world are found here) and choked
with mosses, ferns, and a broad leafed undergrowth. The other
areas are heavily forested but for their peaks.


23


MAP VM. NORTHERN CAKFORNIA

}ma area on this map represents epproximatety 45«000
square miles. All biit s small portion at the extreme south
around San Francisco, and a sliver of the upper Sacramento
Valley, are mountalrts. These are not excessively high Urt are
very steep and closely packed, with deep narrow gorges be*
tween. However, the various blocks contained within this area
are not at all homogeneous. The ml^ty Cascades are volcanic
ar>d much larger ^an the coastal ranges. The Klamaths are
the “oldest" from a faun I Stic point of view; the Trinities are
newer and of somewhat different phyto^ogra^ic constItu-
lion. Along the coast, from Just south of Cape Blanco, but a
little way in from that coast to a little south of San Francisco
Bay is the land of the great Redwoods (Sequoia sempervfrans).
The whole mountainous part Is clothed In almost unbroken
forest and ABSMs have teen reported from Clear Lake In the
south to the northern edge of the SIskiyous and beyond to
the northeast


2 $



MAP VIH. GUATEMALA


MAP vni. GUATEMALA

Tba position of tho Republic of Guatemeli end the overall
Area of this Jtiap is shown by the square In the box, which, in
turn, encompasses what rs popularly caiied Centrai America.
Guatemala is divided into two very distinct perts->the north*
am, called the Paten, which is a lowlsnd. heavily forested
plateau: and the southern which is rwuntainous and where
there are large mimbers of volcanoes, both active and idle.
To the west, these mountains ere contiguous with the eastern
rim of the Chiapas In Mexico. The southern coastal plain ia
arid. In the northeast comer of the country, which reKhes the
Bight of Honduras In the Caribbean, U>ere Is a limled sealevef
triangle containing ^e ao<alled "Lake Isabel"—actually the
Laguna da Izabal. This Is really an arm of the sea and is com
nected to It by a rlver>like channel. The area from which
ABSMi have been reported centers around the peak named
SanchA in^the Sierra de Chuacus.


27



MAP IX. SOUTH AMERICA


MAP IX. $OUTH AMERICA

Ihh continent Is most noteble for Its leek of associated
blends, it Is today composed of three subcontinents joined
by extensive fowlands. The former are: first* the Andean chain
of mountains and their contained Alto P/anos; the arKlent
Quiana Massif: and, the eastern uplands. The last b divided
krto two parts—the mountains around the Matto Grosso
mmps and the vast arid Gaatingss. Between theae three
major upland blocks there are three enonnous drainage
basira—these of the Orinoco, Amazon, and La Plata. AM these
are multiple river systems with Innumerable tributaries that
meander through extensive forested lowlands. Surrour^ii^
the upland massifs ar>d bordering ^ese rrvtr basins are Inter¬
mediate plateaus. Thase are mostly clothed in savannahs. In
the southern tip of the continent, south of the La Plata, these
Intermediate lowlands are covered with the tall grass Pampas
and farther south with scrub. In the extreme northwest them
b a block of equatorial forest on the Pacific side of the Andes
cut off abruptly to the south by the excessively arid western
coastal fringe. ABSMs have been reported from this Colombian
area; from the Guiana Massif: from the mounteins around the
Matto Grosso: and from a few points In the central Andean
highlands. “Bigfeef' have long been rumored from the Pata¬
gonian rngiort, but the matter b there muddled with ^
Ground-Sloth business.


29



MAP X APftICA


MAP X. AFRICA

Africa IS the second largest and most compact of the coiv
tinents. Apart from Madagascar, which is hardly a part of it,
and Fernando Po In the west, H also is singularly lacking in
peripheral Islands. Its northern rim is really e part of the
continent of Eurasia and, lying as it does today north of the
great Sahara Desert, has not only a different climate but, to a
large extent, flora and fauna differing from that of the rest of
the continent Africa is divided into three parts--8 northern
d€«rt belt: a central forested belt; and a southern desert
belt However, further confusion is produced by there being
extensive and almost over-all highlands all the way down the
eastern half of the continent and other extensive upland
blocks in the northern deserts and in the western half of the
forested equatorial belt Africa also has three large basins,
but all are inland and without any real outlets. Two—El Juf
and the 6odele^-now lie in the deserts. The third is that of
the Congo, the second biggest riverine system in tht world.
The tall, closed-canopy, equatorial forests are actually rather
limited in extent and are clearly divided Into four parts, frt
the west and cent^. The lowland coastal forests of the east
are not 7*£*P and are more arid. ABSMs are reported from
three forest areas, with a rumor from the fer southwest


31



U.S.S.R.



MAP XI. NORTHERN ORIENTALU (POLITfCAL)



32


MAP XI. NORTHERN ORIENTAIIA {POLITICAL)

Orientalla is today, from a political point of view, an ap*
palling hodgd'podge. ^is continent lies to the soirth of Ute
southeastern end of Eurasia, all of which Is Chinese. (Most
countries have for centuries recognized Tibet as being a part
of that hegemony.) To the west, it is bordered by Iran arid
A^anistan. and a thin eastward extensive of the latter sepa¬
rates it from the U4.$.R. The greater part of it is covered by
India and the two pieces of Pakistan. The eastern half is
about edoalty divided between southern China proper and
el^ other sovereign states—Burma. Thailand. Laos, Viet Min,
Vietnam. Cambodia. Malaya, and Indor^ia. In addition, there
are wndry territories (such as Sarawak) of other status, and
some small colonial possessions. Right in the middle are the
Independent kindgoms of Nepal, the territory of Sikkim, and
the indeterminate Autonomy of Bhutan. The isJand of Ceylon
is an Independent country; and there ere also sundry tiny
enclaves, such as the Portuguese colony of Qoa:.


33



MAP t\l OR»ENTALIA


MAP XM. ORfENTAKA

Geo^raphicairy, Tibet h a pert of Orientaila but, due to rts
ertfeme aititude, It rs connected with Euresre. Orientalid is
divided into six peris—India, the Himalayas, Indochina, south¬
ern China, Melayo-lndonesie, and the Philippines, (For the
test three subdivisions, sec Map X.) In this continent wo have
three major levels—lowlands, mountains, and super-mountains.
Most of the first are clothed Jn equatorial forests but there
b a large desert area In western Pakistan, and most of south-
ern China lies in the temperate forest belt and has a dis-
tir«rtly Mediterranean flavor. The mounteir>s fall Into seven
major and many minor bJocks: there are two complexes In
India, the Arakan, the Indochinese Massif, the Annams the
southern Chlr>ese Massif, and the Fukien complex. Lesser
blocks are on the peninsulas and Islands. The Hrmateyas
constitute a special region. The ranges of that name are Im-
^ftsely long but narrow, and are erected upon a huge upland.
9 — The Chinese Piedrnont


35


EAST AND SOUTH ORIENTALIA


EUAASIA


• HKiH£A nOMTAM

(AMve nt


p.MAKAH
§-|f«P9'0»INUS
^•jQvnf cHmeae


SlNO-T/BETAH

fwrgAu


noNTWNe

rouJT


• LOVlAWe$


vMOKTANE

UOCK9


aipNf$e
^ wnMr


tnnnMTt vammanm


MAP xni. EAST AND SOUTH OR]ENTAL»A

The eastern half of Oriental ia is also enormousty complex
from the topographical and phytogeographical poirrts of view.
Its central core Is the huge Indochinese Peninsula—a vast
mess of mountain ranges running from north to south—that
iles between the Indian and the Chinese lowlands. This abuts
southward onto a vast lowland which constitutes Thailand.
Prom this depends the Malay Peninsula. Around It He a
diadem of islands, starting with the Andamans and Nicobam
in the Bay of Bengal on the west; encompassing the greater
Indonesian islartds of Sumatra. Jeva, and Borneo on the
south; and continuing on via Palawan to the Philippines and
Fonnosa (Taiwan) on the east Between and among these are
literally hundreds of thousands of other smaller Islands; plus
another string along the coast terminating in Hainan. The
southeastern end of the continent is '*W8llece's Line*'—run¬
ning between the Philippines, Borneo, and Java on the one
hand, and the Celebes and the Australoid Islands on the
other.


37


MAP XIV. MALAYA AND SUMATRA



36


MAP XIV. MALAYA AND SUMATRA

This smell area Is one of the most peculiar In the world In
K there are living a large number of animals not found any-
where else, Atiile the only relatives of these are found far
away. Most odd. and still least known of ell. are the Barlssan
Mountains of south Sumatra, In and around which ASSMs,
particularly in the form of the pigmy Sedapa. have been for
centuries alleged to exist. These and other unknown primates
are reported fitm the east Sumatran lowland forest and the
swamp belt, and from the Inner montane block of the Malay
Peninaula. The Mentawi Islands have unique apes and
monkeys.


39


MAP XV. EASTERN EURASIA

This most complex geographfcdl setup in the world forms a
vast triangle some 3,OOC miles along Its western face, which
is the great barrier abutting onto the Russian steppes: some
2.S00 miles aiong its southern curve, which runs from the
Pami^ along the southern dm of the Tibetan Plateau to
Sikang: and 3.000 miles from there along its eastern face to
meet the Barrier in eastern Siberia. The whole of this is
basically a high pleteau, the central portior^ being a hot
desert Upon this, and aii around its rtm. He immense moun¬
tain ranges. In the south, there is a super*upland. the plateau
of Tibet, with even greater ranges upon ct It 1$ en astonishing
fact that the greatest of all mountain ranges in the world,
that forms the southern dm of the Tibetan Plateau and corw
tains the Everest Block, has no recognized neme in English.
The Tibetans aird the Nepalese know this as the “Mother of
All Mourttains" or the Muh-Dzhura rDzhung pBthOm. The
Karakorams are the western end of this range. d>» The Ever¬
est Bloc.


41


1. A Certain Unpleasantness

A BRIEF HISTORY OF ABSMERY

In IS$7, a maior in the Medical Corps of the British Indian
Anny» Lawrence Anstine Waddell, LL.D.. C.B.. C.I.E..
F.L.S., F.A.I.—i.e Doctor of Laws. Commander of the
Bath, Commander of the Indian Empire. Fellow of the lin-
netn Society. Fellow of the Aothropological Institute—was
meandering about in the eastern Himalayas doing what that
father remarkable breed of men were wont to do: that is, a
bit of shooting, some subdued exploring, and a certain
imcuoi of ^politicking.** Like many others of his ilk, be
wrote a somewhat uninspired and uninspiring book about it,
aainspiriogly named Among ihe Himalayas. The Maior was
a oonnal sort of chappie and a sportsman, but his hunting
was not of the feverish ninety^one-gun-in-closel variety of
today; quite the contrary, be would take a few birds of types
he coosidered to be legitimate game for his pot or to keep his
eye in for grouse-shoots oo his next home-leave in Scotland,
and he banged away at **tygarT" whenever (be local natives
could rustle one up. But he was not scrambling about the
Hiindayas primarify for what we nowadays call ''sport.'* He
was just puttering—that lost 19th<eplury British art—be*
cause be had some time olT. and official sanction to make use
of it as be would.

Despite the limited intelligence attributed to I9Kh-century
Briiish*Indian Army colonels, they were really a most re¬
markable breed—almost a mutation—for, from some hidden
depths of their public-school educations, and the remoter
recesses of their ancient family traditions, they dredged up a
wealth of wisdom, and they often developed an extraordi¬
narily keen interest in the world about them wherever they
happened to land. Most of them were sort of mild pbiloso*
plm; many turned out to be briliiani linguists and great

43



scht^sn: and they were often both leaden o^ isea and
students of animal life. They have been grossly maligned by
almost everybody, lau|hed at as supcr^Blimpa, and oeglectcd
88 historians. But if you will just read (heir maunderings
carefully, you will gamer therefrom a trove of both literary
and factual gems.

Take this Major WaddeO, for Instaoce. While pounding
over one of (be unpleasanter bits of Sikkim, b vile weatber.
he came upon a set of tracks made by some mature walking
OD two legs and bare feet that, he says, weot oo and on. over
the freezbg snow, not only uktog the line of least resistance
at every turn but marking out a course b conformity with
the easiest gradients that brought whoopa of admiration even
from the Major's mountaiA>hore porters. He remarks almost
casually upon this remarkable achievement aod wondera
vaguely ooi what manner of mao, but M^hat sort cf creamre
could have made them, and why it should have decided (o
cross this awful pass b (be first place. The Major did not
realize when he penned this thou^t just wbat be wu ettrt*
bg: though '’startbg'* is perhaps not the exact word to de>
scribe his remarks, for what be recorded was already ancient
history when Columbus sailed for (be West Indies. It just ao
happens (bat. as far as popular recognition is concerned, his
was one of (be earliest mentions to appear in print b the
English language, in what may be called modem timea, of

t whal has latterly become known as the ‘'abominable $now>

f

At that time nobody b w*hat we now eaQ (be Western
World paid the sll gbtest atteo lion (o this extraordinary r e port
—at leas aa far as we know. It jutt went bto tbs record as e
statement; for one could hardly, in tbat day and age, call any
profiouncemcni on the part of anybody with such notable
honors s lie, or even a **traveler's ule." It was therefore as¬
sumed chat some religious chap must bave preceded the gal¬
lant Major over that parlicular route and somehow
managed not to die of fronbile, sun-Mindness, or surva-
tion; and it was remarked (bat be had done a dashed good
job of negotiiiing the pais. There the manor rested.

Major Waddell's hook was one of noany wntten about
the end of the last century wbw the Western World was
complacently sure (bat it knew more or less everything
about aB ccuniries, with tbe posable exceptions of *nbet
and (be holy dry of Mecca which, it was tbCA considered,
were rather unsporting in thni (bey did not welcome dvl-
Uzed EngHahmen. All sorts of ^rtiog gentry weoi wan-

44



<krjng about the fnoges of **Tb6 Empire’* with rod aod gua
and later wrote about tbeir experiences. Tbrir effuriou
were read by both tbe previous and the upcocoiog genera'
tioos of colomo] pioneers, but by few others. Wbat they
said was not taheo too seriously by the general, nooempire*
building public. However, many of these gentry also sot^
milted official reports on certain less publiclaed aspects of
their activities to their superiors; and these were taken Very
seriously.

Unfortunately the great body of such reports are not pub'
iisbed and many of them are either lost In some srchtve or
truly lost forever. There are others that are still top*8eoret
and unavailable, so that their very existence is often con-
jecturaL Yet every now and then one stumbles upon sudi n
report that is estremety tectalizing. Tracking down the
original is a frightful chore and one of the most tinie<on*
suming and frustrating expedeoces. One is balked at every
turn but not, 1 would stress, by any deliberate or organized
defense on the part Of auihorily. Official archives are pr^
served for tbe benefit of all and are open to inspection by
all. and even the topmost secrets are in time released as
mere historical dejecta, Tbe trouble U dmply that tbe origi¬
nal reporters, and more so (hose reported lo, did not lay
any store by or place any specific value on esoterica, or
onythicg other than tbe primary mstter at hand, which was
often of a diplomatic or political nature, so that the items
that interest us most were never indexed or catalogued.
You just have to pbNV through mountains of material quite
extraneous to your pairicular quarry and hope to stumble
upon casual asides that are pertinent to iu But one does
occasionally so stumble.

Now X should slate, without further ado and quite
frankly, that t am preju^ced In favor of official as opposed
to any other form of reports and for the followtog reasons.
In this country we do not, let’s face it, have much respect
for the law or its potential uadi we have recourse to it or It
requires our submission. Until we have been on a witness
stand, almost all of us believe that perjury—which is simply
a legal term for lying in the law’s presenc e s hould be the
easiest thing in the world, but even those of us who say
that laws are made only U> be broken, soon Rod that it is
not. Few think twice about telling a fish story in the comer
bar, but there are very few, even congenital idiots, who
won’t think before tcUiog it in a court of law. When, there-
fore, somebody voluntarily makes an official statement,
when there is no profit motive involved, I have always fell

45



it fMMKuble to unune that it k quite liksi; true, Tlw
Bridsb beppee to have a partlcuJar reapeet far tbeir lav,
lad British oadaldom. doplte what bas bm said about
its eoiodii poUdes. fan alvayi beea reoiartably akruiftie.
Britkb consuls aad other cdfidals just did oot report a ktf
^ rvbbah to their service beadqu&rten. Bveo paper vaa
Bcaree ia odaot British outposts and the held officers did
OM duttcf easeotial reports with btzam trivia uoleea
they cosaldend Ibem to be of real import We ipproa^
therefore, Ihe foliowiog official report with a certala quota
of awe.

It appean that ia 1902 firilisb lodlao officialdom was
concer&ed with the striogiiig of the first utegraph Hoc
• from Lhasa, the capital of 'met. to KaJimpoog, Darjeeling
hi Bengal Provioce of ladia |ust louih of the Sikkim border
(see Map). The job eatail^ first, golog ioto Tibet ai^
then sQlogiDg the cable out When the crew reached a
pass named Chumbithang near a place caDed Jeiep-Lo oo
the Ubet-Sikkiro border, ao nictdeat occurred
prompted ao offidal report A dosen worhen failed to
return to camp one evening aod a military posse waa ee«
DcA day to search for thm at the scene of their opera*
tiens. No trace of the missing men were found, but the
soldiers during their wide search for them found a remed-
able creeiuie asleep under a rock ledge—or ao the report
goes. The soldien were loffiaas. oot Gburkhas or mountain
loUCi aod is of significance because bad they beso tbey
would doubdes have acted differeotly, The Indiana had
no qualms about shooting tbis croatore to death immedi*
ately. It proved to be hmnan rather than animal in form,
though covered with thick hairy fuc. to thia pomt the
leport is official. Then it becomes unofficial but for one
minor aside to the effect that a full report together with
tbe beast was shipped to tbe senior British political officer
then resideat in Sikkim, who is correctly naswd as one Sir
Gbarlee BelL

Tbe unofficial sequence I take from an enraordinary
book by John A. Ked entitled /adoo. This is the mon
startling la that it even meoliooa an Incident apparently lost
and certainly forgotten over half a century before, yet
stetei that tbe information therein given was obtained fim*
hand. The author iuibs that be met in 1957 in Darjeeling a
retired lodian soldier named Bombahadur Qietri, who
claimed that he waa among ffie party that killed this crea¬
ture, and that be personally aaamioed ik He is also alleged
to have laid (hat U was about 10 feet tall, covered with ^

40



bd( for B aikftd face» and that it had "loog yeHow fafiga.**
Further. Mr. Ked nys (bat Bombthtdur Chetri told MrO
that (be eucatis bad bees packed \n Ice tod shipped to
SBAM Six Charlea BeH, but that he did not beW asythios
fortber of H. Nor, eppaieotly. did Mr. Ked; and nor have
U (bough I have spect a lot more time aad eoer^ (has ibe
Item mi^t aeem to warrant is a fruitiese eodeevor to trace
AiRber reporta, official or othoiwiee. Ibia is tbe more ag«
gravatiog since it it the earliest report that 1 have found on
the aotual (or evec the alleged) capture of any form of
(vbat we iball beocefortb be eiUIng u ABSM-^-i.e, * 1 bB
•bomioable sDOwmeo,*' by wbat we must, also fox lack Of
any establiahed ovef'all oarne. call the ‘Western Worid.**
SB ttae OrleoiaJ Region.*

Neveitbeiess, H a by so tncaos the cmly such report,
sor actually tbe earliest on record, for as ««ihtll pr eaeofl y
^ it was preceded is two If sol three other contirteats by
pist as definitive statemests and in some cates offlde}
at that

And this brinp up toother point that I should endeavor
!0 riear up forthwith.

I would have preferred to start this story where all stoi^
ks should begis, which b to say at tbe beginning. However,
despite a ctamaology that I have compiled over ibe yearsi
such a proendure would be qien to at least two serious
defects. Firu, It a almost dally, and now widi increasing
leropo. being added to almost all along (he line. vdiOe Ha
origins are regressing ever farther into the recorded past}
sec ond, it would be extraordinarily dry and orerfonttil ia
the eyes of aoy but extreme speciiUsia. 1 have felt, tbera-
fore, that the history of (bis whole ABSM bueiness will be
snacb better understood if ic is unfolded upon the cbroool-
egy of its discovery and progress; a sort of history of a
bteoty. This is. fuilber. herein recorded ddibentdy from
what we called above the "Wesiem'* point of ^ew, in that
b is a chronological record of bow (he matter was brou^t

* The term "ARSM" is coined from (be beft'knowo aamc for
nee Uod of those erea^une of which we speak, namely tbe
Abotthuble Snowman. As b e:^aiQed taler, this (arm b hw
correct, hiappropriate. and misleading even ie (be ease in which
h was first ai^lisd; while it cannot poaslbly be ap^ied to at

least go per cent of the s^ipareatly most varied and (suite dsf-
fareiK creatures involved, end now reported fram five eon-
Ihwota. The tann ‘'Wesien World*' ie this cme has a cultora!
rasber than e regiooal sense; birt by the Oriental Region is to
be understood a very procme geognphica] vaiL

47



to the att«DUoft ot (he Wcscctd World. In thli. i( will boos
be seen (h«t a greater pen of (be discoveriea made have
coax to light ia revene. For instaace, it baa only been
witban most receot years (bat (be earliest accounts have
come (0 Light, and the further research workers probe lolo
the whole matter, the farther back (be orlgios of the whole
ABShf affair recede, while (be wider does their distributioo
become both in fact and in report, Tbus. in treating of tbe
history of this matter, we must bear in mled tbai what ap¬
pear (0 U8 to be discoveries are tnore nearly revelatioos.
because the ma>oriiy of the world^-whicb ts. of course.
non-Western—has. to some degree or another, knowo all
about the business for ceoturles. while we have remaiaed
completely oblivious of and to it.

For these reasons, I divide our chronology into five
stages and call these as foQowi: fl) the anciect period,
prior to the l5th<cotury expauion of Europe, (2) the
(lark ages, from 1500 to U$0, (3) that of tbe Explorers.

about 1&80 to 1920. {4) that of the mountaineers.
1920 to 1950 and (5) that of the searches, from 1950 to
I960. All of this, however, applies primarily and most ea*
sentially to the Himalayan area of tbe Oriental Region
wherein this buaness was primarily unfolded for os. Tbe
same periods, of course, exist in rime elsewhere, such as
North America, but they cannot be founded on ibe same
criteria or named after the same claases of eoirepreneucs;
Behind this chroooiogy and everywhere lies an immense
period of what 1 cal! naCrve knowledge. This trails off m(o
the dim mists of (he extreme past and into ft^ore and
myth: an area which is only just now being taken into ac¬
count as serious history rather ihan mere make*believe.
Thus, in other parts of (he worid our story has often
jumped straight out of (he "native** period into that of
icientifle study.

While ABSMs were ncK only reported but also reported
upon, and even officially, in other parts of (be worl<^
vide: Canada—Long before the travels of Major Waddell,
and while specimens (as it now turns out) are tUeged (o
have been captured or killed long before that, we of tbe
West became cognizant of these happeoings or alleged
bap^oiags only very recently. Abo, it now traaspirea,
detailed and more property critical Informatioa on (he sut^
ject was even being published la eastern Eurasia centuries
age^for instaace in Tibet, Cbiaa, MongoLU, and Mao-
churia'—and some refiectioas of (his had filtered through to
Europe as eariy as Reaaasance limes, as is exemplifled in

48



certain curious statemecio In the works of Marco Polo.
Miflioos of people were Iben taking all this as a matter of
course but. the whole thiog bdsg completely foreign to
Eun^an co&ditioos or ev^ thought at that time, it made
DO impressiofl upon what we now call the Wesiero World
Qatil OUT fourth period—namely that of the mountaineers.

fust how foreign it was prior to that period la clearly
demonstrated by ibc reception, or lack of jl. given to i
report published in a scientific |ouma] (Froettdings of ths
ZedegfeaJ Society of London) in the year 1915, and the
bftef commeftts upon it made at the time. The report was
read before the society by a very welUkeown botanist and
scienlific explorer named Henry J. Elwes, and consisted
of portions of a letier received by that gentleman from a
Pmstry Officer by the flame of J. R. O. Gent who was
sutioned in Darjedifl|. This read as follows;

I have discovered the extsteoce of another animal but
eanool make oat what il Is, a Mg monkey or ape per-
hapa^ there were any apes fn India. It is ■ beast of
very high elevadons and only goes down to Phalut In
the cold weather. It It covert with longlih hair, fece
also hairy, the ordinvy yeUowlsh-browii coloar of the
Bengal menlrcy. Stands aboot 4 feet high and go 0 aboot
OB tbe ground chiefly, Ihougb I think b can abo dimh*
The peenliar featim b that its tracks «re aboot 18
Inches or 2 feel long and loes point In the opposite direc¬
tion to that io which the animal b moving. Tbe breadth
of the track b aboot d locbea. \ take It be walks on Us
knees and shins Instead of oa the sole of hb foot He b
Imown SI the JuogU Adml or Sogpa.^ One was woirying
a tot of coolies worldng In the foretf below Phalut in
December; they were very frightened and would not go
farto work. 1 set off as soon as I cooJd to try and hag the
beast, bol before I arrived Ihc Forester hid been letting
off a goD and frightened ft nway, so I saw aottbig. An
old ehoultidar of Phalut told me he bad freqocotly seen
them Id the snow there, and coofinned tbe desertion
the tracks.

It b a thing that practicaOy oo Englbhmaa has ever
heard of, hot aO tbe natives of the higber vUlagca know
aboot i(. All I can ay b that if Is not tba Nepal Langur,
boi Pre impressed opoo people op there that I want In-
fonnation Ibc iwA tima. one b about.

^ This b also the name of a koowfl tribal group of people in
a remote valley of the Uimalayu.

49



Thh report, which would today probably cause ^uite a stir
in certain circles, though for various and quite exposed
reasons, secou hardly even to have been commented upoo.
It would probably have betn dismissed altogether^and,
most likely not published io the Proceedings—had it not
been read by such a person as Elwes. As it was. the general
impression left was that perhaps a new species of monkey
had been found and some local folklore embellished. But,
Doexpectedly. Henry Elwes then saw fit to make a state¬
ment of his own to the effect that in 1906 he had himsdf
seen the same or a similar creature in another pan of the
Himalayas. Most aggravatingly, be either did ooi give fur¬
ther details or they were ckm recorded at ibe Lime, and
after be died his notes were lost while no mentkHi of the
inddeat was to be found In any of his published writings.
Zoolopsis were appareuily quite impressed at (he time
becatue of the standing of Elwet, but the matter ne%er got
further than (he closed confines of professional zoology.

It was, mweover, not until 1920 that the Eogllsb-speak-
ing public, outside of the limited audience earlier served by
the writings of travelers in the Orient, was in any way
made aware of this wh^ business, and, as is so often (be
case, it was even then more by accident than by design.
ThU pari of chit story is most intrigumg as well as being a
sort of turoiog point in Western ih In king, and not only
upon this but upon many other mauers. But before telling
you the details of this little comedy, 1 just want to diverge
a moment to Impress upon you oocc again the fact that
what theo look place, while a revelation, was more par-
ticularly so to the Aagfo-Saxon world. A decade before
(1907). a certain thea young zocriogist named Visdiinir
A. KhakhJov started an eaiended survey of similar reslteri
throughout central Gurasia and submitted a long report oo
Tt to the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Russia; Nether¬
lands authorities had been pestered with annoying (to of¬
ficialdom) reports of a like nature era (mating from Sumatra;
the French had undergone (he seme in (ndo-China: and the
Brazilians In (heir country: while even in British Cdurnkna
both the courts and the Crown itself had long been bothered
by citizens seeking to make depositions on closely related
matters. Thus, In retrospect, the happenings of 1920 lose
a great deal of (heir import if not of their impact.

In that year an incident occurred that was impressive
enough but which might have been either wholly or tem¬
porarily buried had it not been for a coocsienahoo of al-
most piffling Id fact, without these mistakes It is

60



almost certain that the whole matter wouJd have remaiDcd
is obseufiry and might even dow be coaaidered in to ait-
tBe}y different Hght or tn the states of such other mysteries
as t^t of ‘'sea'monftera." This was a telegram sent by Lt
CtH (now Sir) C. K. Howaid-Buryi who waa on a rccon'
ftaiwtin gg expediCioQ to the Ml Everast region.

The expedition wat approacbiog the northern face of
Everest, that is to say from the Tihetao side, and when at
shout 17,000 feel up on the Lbapka-La pass saw, and
valched through binoculars, a nuin2>et Of dark forms
ipoeiag about oo a snowfield far above. Ii took them some
Hoc and considerable effort to reach the snowficid when
creatures bad been but when they did so they found
krge numbers of huge footprints which Colooe) Howard-
later stated were about *1bree times those of cormal
taMDAns" but which he nonetheless also said be thought bad
been by '*% very la^e stray, grey wolf.*' fffie extrsor-
Warily illogical phrassog of this staiemcDl will be dJs-
coned later on, but It should be noted here (hat a large
^wty of people bad •icen several creaoires moving about,
am }us( **0 wolf,** and that it is bard to see how the Colonel
eouJd determine iu color from its tracks, Further, wolvea
cannot walk oo two feet only: and, in any case, there are
ao wolvea there!) However, despite these expressions, the
Sberpa ponen with the expedition disagreed with cbem
most firmly and stated that tlie tracks were made by a
aeature of buinan form to which they gave the name
iiftoh'Kofismi.

Colonel Howard-fiury appears (o have been ioirigued by
this scrap of what he seems to have regarded as local folk-
Inrt, but, like ail who have bad contact with them, he had
sDch respect for the Sherpas. that he included the tocidcni
ia a report that be sent to Katmandu, capiul of Nepal, to
be telegraphed oc to hb representatives in lndi& And this
is where the strange mistakes began. It appears that Cob-
od Howard-Bury in noiiog the name given by (he Sherpas
either mislran si iterated it or miswrote it; be also failed to
realize that he was dealing wiih one of several kinds of
ertamres known to the Sherpas and (hat they, on this
occasion, apparently both in an endeavor lo emphasize
this and for the sake of clarity used as a generic term for all
of ibea. the name kangdi, which was a word foreign to
their language. This is a Tibetan coJIoquialum in some
yeas, and is ilaelf partly of foreign origm even there,
ID that kang. b ^parenily of Chinese origin while ml is a
fOcm of Nepalese meA. The combioatioo ihus meant ’*aoow

61



creature." His meioh would better have been written meJi-
ieh, a name of which we shall hear rnuch. and which turns
out to mean the meh or man-wied teh or wiM creature.
However, the Indian telegraphist then got In the act and
either he dispatched this word os. or it was transcribed m
India, as meich.

The recipients In India were unfamiliar wHh any of the
languages or dialects of the area but they were impressed
by the fact that Howerd-Bury bad thought whatever it
might be imporiant enough to cable a report, so they ap>
pealed to a soil of fount of univeRol wisdom for help. 'Ihis
was a remarkable gentleman named Mr. Henry Kewman
who has for years writtai a most fascinating column tn
the Calcutta Statesman on almost every conceivable sub¬
ject and who has the mosi incredible fund of informatioa
at his finger bps. This gentleman, however, did not really
know the local laoguagea or dialects of eastern Tibet and
Nepal either, but this did not deter from giving an
immediate translation of this meich kangmi which, he
stated caiegoncaily, was Tibetan for an "abominate snow>
mao." The result was like (he explosion of an atom bomb.

Nobody, and ootably the press, could possibly pass up
any such delicious term. They seined upon it with the ut-
moat avidity, imd bestowed upon it enormous mileage but
almost without anything concrete to report. The British
press gulped this up and (he public was delighted. Then
there came a lull In the storm. During ihJs time, rl now
transpires, a number of eager persons started a fairly sys¬
tematic search for previous reports on these abominable
creatures, aud they came up with sufficient to convince
their editors that the story was not just s flash tn a pan, but
e fuU-fledged mystery that had actually been going on for
years.

Thus, the ‘birth" of the Abomioablo Soowman per se
may be p^ecbcly dated as of 1920. And once it was
launched rt gathered momentum. As we shall seo later
when we come to examine the actual reports from the
eastern Himalayan region, almost everybody who went
there, and notsbiy the mountaineers, reported either seeing

''auowToea," iboir tracks, or bearing Uiem; cairns

and other objects moved by them; or relating information
secondhand that they had gleaned from the native popula¬
tion. The business reached a crescendo in 1939 with the
publication of several qaite long accounts in boob by
well-known and much respected explorers such as Ronald

52



Kaulbaeh. Then came World War H and the matter faded
mto limbo. But it did not by any means stop.

No sooner was the war over than the onslaught on Mt.
Everest was resumed and along wibi this came a new ap>
proach to the ABSM affair. Everybody appears to have
felt it incumbent to at least mention Che matter even if he
could not contribute anything new or material to the story.
Yet, there were very few who did not have something
ctracrete to offer and indeed, I acn unable to name one
who didn't. Wbat is more, prior to World War H. this was
an ^jDOSt exclusively Biidsh affair, though there was a
book on the first American Khrakoram Expedition, entl*
tied five Miles High, that was most perlinem. ft has now
become intercatioasl as a result not only of expeditions
going to the area &om many nations and of multinational
composition, but also because of reports that came to light
but which were originally made during the war. Also, for
the first time, rq»rts by wbat may Ik called native for-
eigneis began to appear.

The whole subject of "natives** U a sorry one and It U
rather muddling to Americans because, to them, it has
several meanings, none of which Is exactly synonymous
with the term as developed, and understood among the
Britisb. It was tbe declaration of itidependenco by a num¬
ber of Asiatic nations that brought confution, in that,
while these peoples were manifestly native to tbeir own
eouatriea, they suddenly beoame no longer "natives'* m the
precise British sense, so that what they said had to be ac¬
cepted and assessed In an utircly new light Whereas,
while anything stated by such people prior to the wax could
be passed off as a mere '^Dative tale” or a story 'by some
benigbled native." it bad now to be treated with respect
as a Btatement by a responsible eiltacQ. What is more, an
Indian traveling through Nepal to Tibet also became just
as ffioeb a "foreigeer” as any Britisher—and, in some
cases, actually more so. because there were places where
more Britisbcn bad been living longer than any Indians.
This proved extremely awkward to the British at fireUend
it took about a decade even for (heir phlegmatic gCnlue
lor compromise aloog with a fairly genuine common d^
cency and belief in good manners, to gala the upper band.

Despite U>e iatematiooal scramble, it was again the Bri¬
tish who attracted world attention to tbe matter of AfiSMs
and it was still tbeir meuntaineers wbo did this. Tbe roo«t
notable was Mi. Etk Shipton who on still another recoo-
naiasance o£ the Everest Bloc came upon a long set of

53


|Tmgtr4—by any nieana for the first time In tus life^-aod,
after foUowing (hetn for some distance, noting they were
definitely bipedal but negotiated almost impossible obstaclei
that would be hard for even an experieoeed mouataineer
to do, took & series of clear photographs of them. These
were published in the much respected Ulusirated London
Sews, ool a publicatioo given to elaboration, irrespoosible
reportage, or the mounting of iDtematicnal jokes. This
time everybody had to lake the matter seriously; and they
did, but in a variety of ways. The public, as is its pragmatic
wonu took it at its face value. The press Ucerally bowled.
The explorers cheered a bit. But the scientists flew into a
positive tantrum; an altogether undignified performuce.
the effects of which have not yet worn off and will not do
so for many years. This waa in 1991 and h marked the
oext turning point in the history of ABSMery,

Up till then the matter bad been primarily a “Wes te rn"
■nd notably a British prequJsite; It hod also been a child of
Ibe pi^ular press with a sort of minor cold war goiiig oo
between the mountaineers and the zoologists. Now. how¬
ever. a new agency entered the picture, a polyglot assort-
ment of people of various bents that can only be termed
“TTte $earchers."

Since the turn of the century there had contmued to be
outright explorers as w'eU as putterers and sportsmen in
tbe field and ool a few of these continued to stumble
upon ABSMs, or tracks and other evidence of ibeir pa»-
iog. None of these, however, had aoy prior interest b tbe
matter and. like the mouaiaineers. had been lo the Hima¬
layas primarily for other purposes. On the other band, the
»bo(e affair was, until Eric Shipioo published bis photo¬
graphs. really nothing cnore ihas a oews-glmmiek though
the pros bad had to tread warily with the reporu made by
proflument persons and especially the mouatalneers en*
gar^ jp the attack on Evercsi, which bad official hacluAg.
The scientific world had not been quite so circumspect At
the outset, it dcaounced the whole thing as, first, a fraud,
and then a case of misiakeD ideotity, and it stuck to this
story: and it still In large part sticks to it today, even lo the
extent of deliberately ridtcullng such men as Shrploq aod
Kaulbach. But after their completely unsuccessful anempi
(0 set 5niipton*s 1951 fiodiogs at nought, which backfi^
with considerable public unpaci, a son of revolution
b^ao within the ranks of tcience.

Some topaotch scientists—not juit technicians and self*
appointed experts who happened to be employed by sci-

54



eoCific org&nizaiioas—started to investigsto tbe wSioJe
lurter vpoB tnily scieotific principlee. Wliat is mora, ibese
scientists were pruoarily aothropofogists [as opposed (o
zoologQU] and tka waa of tbs utmost slfoificafice, for tbe
latter had permaneady closed the door oo the wb^e quea-
ckw when they could not prove chat it was a hoax, itatiof
flatly that all AfiSM tracks were made either by bean or
EDonkeys. Also, there were afithropologica] axpeditioos aC'
tually going into the fleld these too began to report
discoveries similar to those of the tnouDUineers. Notable
among the fleldworfcert were E>r. Wyss^Dunaat of a Swiss
expedition. Professor von FUrer-HainMndorff of the School
of Oriental and AMcan Studies, and in particular Prof.
Rend voa Nebesky*Wo)kowia. Aniong th^ not engaged
b fieldwork were Dr. W. C. Osman Hill then of the Zoo>
logical Society of London in England. Dr. Bernard Heuvel-
mans, Belgian zoologist, lo Paris, and latterly a whole
group of Russian scientUts led by Prof. B. F. Porsfasov.

It was the press, however, that was in the end first in the
field with as expedition aimed primarily at the ABSMs.
This was Mganized by the Daily Mail of London and went
to the Himalayas in 1954. It was a curious outfit and it waa
MK very successful but ii imtiated a new phase in the his¬
tory of this mystery. It was led by a reporter Ralph Izzard
and had among its members a professional zoologist, Dr.
Biswas of Calcutta and also a man named W. M. (Gerald)
Russell, whose experience was of great significance though
nobody seems to have realized tl at that time. However, U
was once again directed by mountaineers. Tbe aiguifieacce
of this escaped everybody then and to a very great extent
uia does. Tbe universal impression bad been gained over
the yean that the Abominable (as then supposed) Snow-
man, whatever it might be, was a denizen of Ihc anowfields
and therefore inhabited the iq^pennost slopes of tbe Hima*
lavas. As a resale, hs pursuit was looked upon primerny aa
a moufitaioeering job and was therefore given to the pro¬
fessionals and tbe experts in that field of sport. The idea of
including a scientist and especially a zoologist, bad never
occurred to anybody previously. Tbe idea of including a
man with the particular skills and experience, as well as
traimog, oi Gerald Rtissell has oot even yet, H seems,
dawned upon anybody.

Russell alone among the wbok army of investigsTore b
really the ooJy mao qualified to tackle the problem, for be
ia a profeeaional collector, which ii eooething ab^lutcly
diflerent from either hunters or sportsmen on the one

95



hADd, or research sckatists on the other. Thea again, oo
A£SM is a denoen of aof saowAdd—naturalty; and as
sboold be obvious to any suse peraoo oc a mofflcnt'a coO'
skieralloo, for io such places there U oothing to eaL All
tujQ out to inhabit dense inouBtaio forests. Thus, just about
the last persons suited to search for tbein are mountaineers
(who have a positive pasMon for c1ind>ing mountains above
all else, it should be pointed out), while sportsmen and
hunters are litile bener for other and even more obvious
reasons.

This is a somewhat sensitive of first

importance. The techniques developed over the ages for
hunting are basically aggressive, be they noisy as is 'beat¬
ing." or silent as in “stalking.** Further, the dog—which is
not only a docnesiie but aer^ty aa artificial animal—has
been extensively used in bunting. These methods obtain the
quickest results, in the largest amounts, of what Is specifi¬
cally desired. Collecting, on (be 04h^ hand, should best be
almost sail rely passive. Silence b one of its features In cer¬
tain of its aspects but almost aa much noise is permissible as
In bunting In certain eircumsunces. To obtain snimals not
normally bunted, the lev ground covered the better but
the longer the collector must til and wait fc^ the animals
to become used to his presence, ihe noises he makes, and
the effluvia be gives off in the oormal course of '‘living."
As many artificia] ihiogs as possible must be elimlaated;
and most aoably dogs. meuJ (espceiaJly meui cleaned
with niineril oils), and suchlike that are not indigenous to
the wild. Given lime, eny wild creature, however timid,
will come to investigate the collector, whereas it will fly
before the hunter long before ti is detected.

Even zoologists, unlesa they have had exteative cotiect-
fng experience m the field, are little better, for they, poor
souls, are hustled about by everybody else into and out of
the least Ukely areas for proper iovesiigatioo. aod are m
any case supplied in advance with a sort of "book of rules"
that goes far to negating ihe search for anything that is
not already known.

The Doily Mail expedition did, fiooetheleas, Include
aroong its ranks, and deliberately, a very experienced zool¬
ogist with field experience b the form of Dr. Biswas, and,
quite fortuitously m the p er s on of Gerald Russell, the first
and only man on any ABEM expeditioo iraioed to tackle
such a collecting problem. It abo accomplisbed something
else, in that h {Aiblicized Ihe whole matter and served
ootice Do everybody lhal the pr e ss was oo longer over-

&6



•wed by wiiat they bod termed ‘‘scieotifle opinioD,** but
trom then on took the affair for graoied u having
traduated from the category of the "silly season filler.’* In
fact, it pitted the way to acme aerious endeavor deaigned

10 try to solve the mystery. This cballenge was taken up by
quite a new type of operator.

The Daity Mail eapeditioo returned in 1955, and in that
tame year an Argentine mountaineering eapeditim artd
another British party (of Royal Air Force alpinists) r»>
ported having encountered tracks and other evidence of
ABSMs. The Mlowiog year John Keel, already mentioned,
tude bis trip through the country and. as stated in his
bock published in 1958. tracked eod sighted an ABSM. At
Oe some time, the Russians were coodueiing investigetiona
lod getting ready to make a concerted attack upoa the
problem. There were also quite a number of others in the
field, while the few serioui students at home began to bring
to light all manner of related Items from tbe past.

The busiest of these scientific sleiuhs and the mofl open*
minded and bes(*informed was (he zoologist, Dr, Bernard
Heuvelmans, who bad for long specialized lo the collection
and examination of evidence for the existence of any crea¬
tures as yet unknown to and unidentified by zoologists. It
was he, moreover, who Am brought the findings of tbe
Hoflanders in the East Indies, the French in Indo-China,
and to a very considerable utent that of tbe South Ameri-
on explorers to light. The American edition of these find-
mgs by Heuvelmons, On iht Trucilr of Unknown Animals,
was published by Hill and Wang of New York, in 1958.
However, tbe most ligniffcant personal ity to enter the
Arid was the prominent Texan, Nfr. Thomas B. Sick.

Tom Slick, as he was known to everybody ^ and all over
tbe wc^d. was a most remarkable mao. To Americans he

11 probably best known because of the airline that carriea
kfi name, which is itself s natural advertisement with
amusing connotations in the English language. Then, in the
world of commerce he was widely known for his potitlofl
*1 the mysterious world of oil and the very down-io*Banh
world of beef: but, his international reputation b based on
kb extraordinary efforts in the cause of worid peace. Tom
Stick did many other things and was not only a patron of
b«a a driving force in many purely icicotific endeavors. He
established the second larged privately endowed research
Qnji In tbe world, in the form of the Southwest Research


*Mp xiifV wis killed in a plane crash la MonlaoJ In 1962.

67



lostitute tietf his bone town of Sea Aatoaio, end adjaceot
to this aoother large organizailon ior educational promo*
Cioo. I am often aaked (o deeorlbe thU man, and my ra*
sponse is mvarlably the same; namely, to say simply that,
for all his activities and the vascness of his outlMk and
elTon, he Is less like the popiUai conceptioo of a Texan
(ban anybody 1 have ever net Tom Slick did things aad
very forTUDare!y he became intrigued with the buuoess of
AfiSMs. Despite ridicule, especially among many of those
closest to him, he set to work upoo It with the determiaa-
lioo that be, almost sloae is the Western World it seems,
wag capable of and willing to apply,

I sp^ of Tom Slick at length because it was be. and he
ttlmoAt alone, who by his quiet penuAsion heaved this
whole irksoine business out of a sort of ten-ring. iDteraa>
tjooal circus, into the realm of serious scicciific eodeavor;
while be also stimulated others in EoglaotL Fraoce. Italy.
India, and elsewhere to work on the problem, by means of
personal contacts and by the exercase of sympathetic erv
couragtoienL Fioally, be did one marc thing. Thii was to
break out of the coa£ocd limits of the Himalayan area of
the Orienial Region and direct atteation end proper eSort
to Other parts of the world, such as California, which
are proving to be every bit as impOTtani la regards to
AB5Ms, if oc( much more signillcuit eveo the up*
lands of Eurasia. He began his own persons! tsveaigatiODS
by a trip to the Himalayan r^on in 1957.

In 1957. Tom Slick. to|etber with F. K. Joboson,
mounted the first full-fiedged expedition to the Himalayas
for the specific and sole purpose of investigating ABSM&
Tliis saw the extremely fortuitous bringiog together of
Gerald Russell and the brothers Peter and Bryan Byrne,
and was the beppieet event that hod until then bappeoed
to ABSMery. For the first time in history the leadership
was DOi given to mountaineers or huntem, but to persons
with collectiai experience vbo believed that the quarry
was real, was multiple in fonn. and that, to all Its forms, it
lived in the forests as opposed to od the upper saowfields.
As a result, this expediiioo came closer to obtaining coin
Crete results than any other before, and produced more
straight evidence of the existence of such creatures than
all other expeditions put together (for details see Chapter
12 ).

In the some year, howAvec, tbc Soviet Academy of Sej*
ences had established a special commission to co-ordinate
the findings oi Seva's! groups who had been working oo

56


problem la countriei w>thlA the Soviet tphere, ThcM
•orfcen hed brought to Iigbt the uiotiishing reports of
Khakblov made to the Academy io 1914, but which had
beea sbeived; they had before them the current report of a
Dr. Pronin, a hydrologist of Leningrad Uoiversiry who
■Aeged he had ^eeA an ABSM in (he Pamirs; they had a
•cal lb of maierlal from the Mongol iao Peoples' Republic
isJ a lot from Chino; aad they had decided to mount
proper scientific eicpedftioRs to investigate. These were four
m number sod were put into tbe field ia 19SS-^-ofle to the
Caucasus where a creature oamed the '‘Wind Man" had
been rumored for centunes: one to the north face of the
Everest Bloc; one to the Mongoliaa region: and one to
ibe Pamirs, whidt. for ceriaio odd reasons they consid¬
ered to be the breeding ground of the ABSMs. Meantime.
Aiey started the publication of their over*all findings in tbe
fcrm of booklets (see Chapters 13 and 143 and concur*
rendy with this, a series of studios on fossil men. and
particularly the NeaDderlbalers, Also, a wealth of pre¬
viously unpublished material, some histotlcaJ and some
corrent appeared io certain Russian magazines—noubly.
Tekhnika Mofodrozhi.

These Soviet activities shed an entirely oew light cdi
&e wheie busiocss, and aHo put it on such an altogether
lagher plane that Western scientific circles were obliged
fe> change their attitude toward the matter quite drastically.
No longer could they simply avoid the issue by saying that
d bed been explained or that its protagonist.s were merely a
^loch of amateur enthusiasts pursinog a faciasy. At the
ume lime, a cenain nervous irriiatiofi was to be detected
■ (heir pronouncemeatn, because the press juu then began
harping on (be case of the Coclacanih fish discovered
oA the southeast coast of South AMca. Tbls bad at fim
been ealJed a hoax but had fioally had to be accepted aa
bviog proof of the fact that not everything about the life of
this planet is known. Obviously, creatures confidently
thought (0 have been deeeady ext met for teiu of millions
of yeara can stlU be around.

Further, it was the Russians wbo fim stressed, though
perhaps more by inference, aometbing that those scientists
a the W«i wbo hod been taking the madcr seriously
bad been harping oa for some lime. This was that the
•hole problem is an anthropoiogicaJ rather than a zoologi¬
cal matter In other words, all the Sino^Soviet evideocc
pnoied to ABSMs bebg primitive Hcminidi <l.e. Men)
rather than Pongtds (i.e. Apes) or other nonbumao crea*

S9



tures. thus linking them with known fossil forms sucb u
CiffanropUhfcitg, the PitheenDtbrnpipes, and especially the
Neaodertbalen. And. ia doing this, U)ey also emphasized
another point.

That was ihe now very obvious but totally Ignored fact
that there is not just ooe creature called The Abominable
Snoviinan, but a whole raft of creatures distributed almost
all over Che world, of very considerable variety, and of as
many as three distinct type in the Tibeian*Hinialayaa area
alone. This suggestion was of course not merely obnoxious
but positively horrific to the orthodox scientists who were
still vebemeotly denying even the possibility of tbe eru-
teoce of even one such entity. Tbec, tbe final bombshell
laaded. At this point in my narrative I must confess to a
considerable embarrassmeot since I must apeak in tbe first
persou and I do this with much diffidence.

In 2958, I received a number of reports of an ABSM in
California. At first, this sounded quite balmy even to us
—and we ere used to the most oulrageous thin gs a nd got
itself filed a/noog W’hat we call jcrieana, wHicb is to say
those damnable aod unacceptable items of tbe categories
cdlecied by the late Charles Fort. However, it so bsfv
pened that I was pri\^eged to spend the year 1959 touring
the North American continent gathering material for &
book on its geology, topography, vegetational cover, and
wildlife. Before leaving. 2 bad a research specialist—Stan¬
ley I. Rowe< with wboin I bad long been associated—
prepare lor me from his files, from ours, and from other
sources, the details of any and all oddities and enigmas
reported from this cootinent. by states and provinces.
These 1 investigated as a news-reporter as I went along;
end when I come to oorthoro California 1 foil into Ibe
most extraoidfnary sute of affairs that 1 have ever en¬
countered in my life. 'Hus was no Idle rumor but a full*
fiedged mystery and a straight dowu-the-line, hard-boiled
news-story.

This 2 tell in detail in Chapter 6. so suffice it to say here
that I found there clear and most coavinclng evidence of
the existence of a form of ABSM of mort outstanding
qualities. Bui worse was to follow for. prompted by this
astonishing discovery, I went aside in Briiisb Colambia to
investigate their long-renowned Sasquaich, only to find
that it was just as definite, and apparently identical to ibeae
Oh-M{iJis (or "Bigfeet'*) of C^ifornia. Subsequent re¬
search bas« wbat H more, brought to light a mass of uiber
reporu of similar things from Qu^ec, the Canadian North*

60


veft Terricories, the Yuion, tltf Idaho Rockies, Washio^
M, and Oregoo.’

*niis brings us up to (be dale of wfiling. except to oote
that a large lapancse expedition weoi in I9i9-^ to the
HLualayas specifically to seercb for AfiSMs; while there
vefe other expeditions io tbai area, lo Sumaixa, and in
Califoreia, fined out for ibe purpose. Finally, later this
year <1960), ^r Edmund Hrilary. backed by American
ipoA&ori and with Marlin Perkins, Director of ibe Lincoto
Park Zoo of Chicago accomputying him as zoological
expert, conducted an expedition to the eastern Himalayas
with this pursuit as his second nsajor (Elective.


'These aflahs in our Northmen were suoimarlzed lo two
arUctes in Tfue Magazine for October, 1^59, and January. 1960,
and sol a whole new phase of ABSMery ta motioiL

61



2. Ubiquitous Woodsmen

REPORTS FROM CANADA (1060 TO 1920)

In my open lug remark? in the previous chnpter 1 said (bat
1 was going to tell ihis story to (he cbnmology of discover¬
ies made by the Western World, starting about ibe year
I 860 , rather than according to straight bistoricai chro¬
nology. Having briefly outlined these discoveries from that
date up to Ihks year, I landed up in the northwcstein corner
of Noilb America. 1 bow find that this U just the place
where I have to commence my detailed reporting and for
several reasons. By way of explanation 1 resort to a map
(Map 1): a procedure that, I am afraid, you wifi discover
I nearly always do.

ABSMs have now been reported from several dozen
areas scattered all over five of the continents. At first sight
ibis distribution does not appear to make any sense at all.
This is a misconcepitoct but to go into the whys and
wberefors thereof at this juncture would cot only be cx-
baustifig but more or less incomprebensibie. Nonetheleu,
one cannot just go barging off all over the world reponing
on this and that, both in lime and space, without some
ordered plao. Skippiag urounC and back and forth over
oceans to point out ahnilaritics would be altogether
aggravating. Some orderly procedure Is therefore called
for; and very fortunately there Is a ready-made one that
will serve many purposes. This is to adopt the travelogue
approach, starling out from some specific point, visiting all
the other necessary points, and ending up where we began.
Doing (bis in the pursuit of ABSMs just happens to
be most coovenicni, and for a number of reasons, If we
take northwestern North America as our starting point, we
wUl be able ro dispense with a great deal of verbal garbage
and dupUeaiioo.

1 therefore propose to take you on a journey starting

62



from westcfn Cao^d^ lOuth through the Americex lo Peia*
gooid. then back up to the soulhem edge of the Amazon
haAi; then hop over the Adaotic to West Aftica, proceed
through or rather around the Congo Bo^io and over (he
eastern u^aods to the forested coastal lands of East Af¬
rica. From there, we wlH jump over the Indian Ocean lo
(he island of Sumatrsk proceed from there up (be Malay
Peniiuula to ihe main body of the great lodoOtinase
peninsula, then rum sharp left in Assam and travel along
(he Himalayas lo the east Pamirs, and on southwest through
Penia to the Caucasus. This will he a turnabout point from
which wu will rctuni cast to the Pamirt, on to the Kunlu&s,
then to (he TjBn*Shan8, Ab-Tau, Alials, and Sayans,
From (here we will go south through the Khangais aod
over the AJa^ban Desert to the N'an-Shans and on to (he
ra^ntains of Szechwan, Here will be another (umabeul
pom( from where we will go north again through the
Tsui*Hngs and the Odos to the Khingans, lo this last lap
oa our way home we will be following a lot more than
ABSMs, Bj>d in following these we will cross over the
Bering Straits to and through Alaska and the Yukon back
to our startiog pobt in British Columbia and ^cifically lo
a small plnce turned Yale, on the middle Fraser River (see
Map VT).

It was near ibis place lhal soroething frightfully import¬
ant happened in the year 11184: on the morning of July 3,
M b mutter of fact. The gorge of the Fraser narrows dong
ihu stretch so that rock walls tower on either side. Today,
two railroads and the main west-lo-eosi Canadian highway
**l.**®®^ through this point and the little township of Yale
clings to the bank of the river on one side, and is dotted
about a narrow meadow on the ocher. Since I beg to be
regarded exclusively as a reporter for the duration of the
forthcoming ji^mey. the best thing for me to do is to
dhotc Ihe original report oo whai luppened there on that
day. This goes as foQows, w taken from the Victoria
newspaper, Th^ Daily British Colonm:

YALE. B,C., JCLY 3. l8B4^la (h« immediate vF
dnlty of No. 4 IniiDd, situated some 2ft Rules above this
village, are bluffs of rock which have hirheno been on-
eonaounfable, but oo Mobday moralag last were succro^
fuUy scaled by Mr. Oaderdonk‘s employees do the
rtgoto train from Lyttoo. Asusted by Mr. CoetoSon.
the British ColuinlMa Express Company's loeaenger. a
Bomber ^ gentlemen from Lyitoa and poioti east of

93



r


ttut place, after constdenble trooble Bod peritons clfoib*
Ing capbmd a creature wbo loa; Cnily be called half
uan and half beast. “Jackc,” as the creature has beea
called hj his capturers. Is someUtbg of (be gorOla type
standiog about 4 feet 7 inches ia beleiit and weighing
127 pounds. He has long, black, strong hair and re*
scmbles a human being Mtb one excepdon, hia entire
bod^i excepting bh hands (or pawe) and feel are coverad
whb glossy hair about one Inch long. His fore arm is
oneb longer a man's fore arm, and be poss c se os
estraordJnary streiylb, as he wlU take hold of a stick
and break it by wrenching or twisting if, which no maa
living could break In tfae same way. Since bis captnra
be is very reticent, only ocesdooally ottering a noise
which Is half baric and half growl He b, however, bo«
coming daily more attached to his keeper, Mr. George
Tdbury, of this place, who proposes shortly starting for
London. Eogtand, to eahildl him. Hb fevorile food so
far b berries, and he drinks fresh mltu with evident
reliah. By advice of Dr. Uanitington. raw meats have
been wiiHbeld from Jacko. as the doctor thinks ft would
have a ftndency to make hJia savage. Tlie mode of cap¬
ture was as foOows: Ned Aastio, the engineer, on com¬
ing in sight of the bluff at tbe eastern end of the No. 4
tnoncl saw wbal be supposed to be a man lying aticep
at dose proximity to (he track, and as qokk as thought
blew the signal to apply the brakes. The brakes were in-
stonily ^»plJed, and is a Few socands the train was
brought to a standstUJ. At this moment the su^HMed
Hwii sprang np, and uttering a sharp qukk bark began
to climb the steep Coaduefor R. J. Oaig and Ex¬
press Messenger Costerton, foQowed by the baggage man
and brakesmen, lumped from tbe train and knowing
litey were some 20 mlontcs ahead of time, Immediately
gave chase. After 5 minutes of perilous climbing tbe
then supposed demented Indian was comfled on a
profecting sbelf nt rock whore he conld neither ascend
nor descend. The query now was bow to coparo him
alive, which was quickly decided by Mr. Ccalg, wbo
crawled on his hands and knees uolD he was about 40
feet above the cieature. Tskrng a small piece of loose
rock be let tl fall and It bad the desired effect of render¬
ing poor Jacko incapable of raristnsce for a time at
least. The bell rope was then brought np and Jadco was
now towered to terra firma. Aflm* binding him and |^-

64



ing hfm in i baggage cart "off was soanded aod

Um (raio started for Yale. At Ibe staCfoa a Large crowd
who bad beard of tbe capture by telephone from Sptiz-
7 U0I Flat were assembled, aod each one ajudou to baea
tbc first look at the moostrosltyf bat they were disa^H
poiDtcdf as Jacko had been luken off at tbc machioe
shops aad placed In charge ot his present keeper.

The quesdon naturally arises, Uow came Tbc creature
where It was first seen by Mr. Austin? From bruises
about its head and body, and apparent soreness »ace tQ
captnre, It fe supposed that Jacko ventured too near Ibe
edge of the bluff, slipped, fell and lay where found ontU
die soond of the msh^ train aroused him. Mr. Thomas
White, and Mr. Gouln, C. &. E., as welt as Mr. Malor»
who kept a small store about half a mile west the
tunnel durfag the past 2 ycara. ha«e meotioned having
seen a curious creature at different points between
Comps 13 and 17. but no aneadoa was paid to tbvir
tCDiArks as people came to the conclosion that they had
either seen i bear or stray lodiao dog. Who can unravel
the mystery' that sow soiroonds Jacko? Docs he belong
to a species hitherto unknown hi tUs part of the con-
tsoeof or is be really what tbc train nen first thought bo
was, a crazy Indian?

Now, whatever you may ihink of the press, you cannot
Just write off anything and everything reported by jl that
you don’t like, don't believe io. end don't w&ot. Further, to
a newspaperman, ibis report is excel tent, being factual,
giving names that were obviously earful ly checked even
to rides such as the C. B. E. of Mr. Oouin, and hardly
being u ail speculative. In fact, it is really a model report
and one that same presented ay newsmen might well emu*
l&tc. Then, the persons concerned were not a bunch of
citizens with names only to identify them; they were mostly
people with responsible positions who must have been
widely known at that lime throughout the area, for the
railroad played a very important part ia (he opaalng up
and dcvelopmeot of lower BriiUh Columbia. The reporter,
moreover, himself look a very common-seDse view of the
business when he inquired what manner of creature this
might be and stated QatJy that it was completely human
but for being covered with silky black hair and having
exceptional strength In its arms. The sslnioe opinions of
others—such as. that the similar if not identical creature
seen before might bas’e been a bear or a ‘'stray Icdlaa dog*

65


^are recorded “straiglii'* and wfthoui facerioo? comment
Tho whole thing cannot in fact b« fighiiy dunuased. It
therefore has to be most seriously considered.


The story has been publicized for some 50 yem now,
so that ai!ieioaados of ABSMery can often almost quote
it verbatim but, although 1 must here class myself among
these repoftoflal limpets. I wi^ to put on record one
thought about it that has always stayed with me. This
stemmed from a commenc made in another peper shortly
after the original story was published, and which asked
quite without faceikmsoess abo but with a alight air of
mystidcatioc, how anybody could suggest (hat this **Jacko’'
could have been a chimpanzee that bad escaped from a
circua. This little aside puts the whole affair io a remark¬
ably vivid light, for we tend to forget that it was penned 75
years ago In a country that was then only recently con¬
nected with the rest of the world. Also, it was writ ten
before paUeontologiso had demoostrared that true mon¬
keys and. more so. ibe apea (l.e. Poogids), never have
existed in the Western Hemispbere.

This creature was captured, and it H absolutely sure (hat
It existed io “captivity” for some dme (a reporter in 1946
interviewed an old gentleman is Lytion. B.C, who re¬
membered having seen it): it was not boinan. yet It wu
more so than it was anything else; it had definitely been
captured on the Fraser River, therefore, there had to be
some explanaiioo of how it got there and what it was. The
standard aoswers to these questioos today would undoubt¬
edly be (hat K was <11 a bo«, or (2) a “cross”—though
betwecD what and what would doubtless aot be suggested,
(3) a throwback—end probably an “Indian** one. (4) a
little boy who bad been tost yeera before on a hunting trip
and either managed to survive all on his own or been fed
by wolvea. (5) a mentally defective glandular case from an
''Institution." or (6); aod most likely of all. an ape escaped
from a baoknipi circus. Surprisingly, the locals and even
hard-boiled oewspapermen of the lime did not indulge in
any of these lanerday foibles: rather, they asked t straight
question and poo-poobed any oullander’s suggestion that H
was a chimp escaped from a circus. They even Inquired
as to whether it migbi be a very primitive form of human
or an as yet unidentified ^>edc8 of great ape. and in cither
case Indigenous to the area.

1 may be properly accused of baipiog on this case, but
1 think that of almost ell ABSM reports h is perhaps the
most cogent. It toed: place juW within the “age of reason**

66


(todey» perhaps, rather t mKnomer) in a country (beo
inhahiiad and beint* opened up by the most extremely
pragmatic Wesicmcn of predominantly hard*heaJed An-
gloSaxoo stock, at a time vvhen there was little call for
pboacy scosaliocalism. U was not just a report of tracks
or other aceoodary Items, oof even of an aJlesed sightiog;
It was A clear and JcAnice account of a capture by known
people with aU the witnesses needed for confirmation. Quite
apart from aoythmg else, it alone seta at notigbt the con¬
stant refrain “Well, why haven't wc ever caugbl ooe?”

This is by no means (be only ABSM that has been
caught, but it is the only one that I know of that was
caught by wbat we must call for lack of a belter phrase
“Westerners.*' and it la this ctJture that is the most skepti¬
cal. the most stubbora. and at the same time the most
interested. Of course, the cnorc aggravaiiog part of tbe
business Is that there i& no proper end to the Jseko storyt
and no physical evidence of hk existence bas come do«m
to us—at kvi as far as anybody so far knows. What ac¬
tually happeoed is not recorded: the only inkling that I
have trac^ being a remark by Mr. Stepheo Franklin, staff
writer of Weekend magazine, in his exceUeot article dated
April 4, 1959, io which it is stated (and I quote) (hat “The
editor of the Inland Sentinel inopportuetdy chose this
taoath (tbe one In which iacko was captured) to hump bis
oewspaper and bis pres.vs up the canyon from Yale to
Kamloops, and didn't publish an edition for several weeks."

This sttiemeni is itself a kind of non sequUur since (he
original reports come from The Daily Britiih Cohnht. of
Vitoria. 1 made somewhai etiensive search for nay series
on the forlorn iacko in a Yale paper of old, but was unable
to unearth even the morgue of die Inland Sentinel wbkh
moved ro Kamloops. Jacko. sad to tell, just “dropped out
of the news" wthoul apparently further comment: perhaps
the most enigmatic figure ever to appear in the pages of
bisiory and poteniiaily one of the most important.

Would iIlbI we could unearth the end of this story and
team wbai did happen to him. for he musl have eilber ( 1 )
escaped, (2) died, or (3> be^ IdlJed, and in the two last
even Is It is possible that some pan of him may have been
preserved and be lying either Ifi somebody's atfic iruok. or
even io a museum. And do not for a moment get the idea
that (be latter Is impossible.

Jacko, however, 1$ not )us( as Isolated unp that suddenly
appeared upon (be scene and (hen disappeared. Before hH
capture either be or one of his species had been reported

67



from the same Met by Mr. Alextnder CauJfteW Anderson
t well-kflowo explorer and an executive of the Hudson *
Bay Company, who was doing a ‘'survey" of ihc newly
opened territory and seeking a feasible trade route through
h for his comptny- He reported just such hairy hominids as
having hurled rocks down upon him and his surveymg
party from more than one slope. That was la 1864. Many
Years later. Mr. J. W. Bums (now retired and Uviog in ^o
Francisco) who bad devoted a lifeline to the study of ibis
business, unearthed ao old Ameriodian woman from Port
Douglas at the head of Harrison Lake (see Map VI) wte
alleged, and brought some seconders to confirm, lh« she
had been kidnapped by one of ih«e crtaiures in the year
1871 . kept by it for a year, but finally returned by it to hCT
tribal hcme«e«l because she “aggravated it so much
(though, she said. It bad treated her with every considera-
lloo), This old lady died in 1940 at the age of 86. MpTwh
abducted she was 17 years old and was, she staled, forced
to swim the Harrson River by the ABSM and then carried
by him to a rock shelter where its aged parents dwelt 'nua
account coiJ»« from Mr. Bums who had tor years enjoyed
the confidence of this retiring Amerind. It has been em¬
bellished m various ways by others to the effecls that the
giri had rosin plastered os'er ber eyes by the creature; that
she became pregnant by U: and that she subsequently gave
birth to a balf-breed that cither was stillbom, died shortly
after birth, or is stIU hidden by hec people from the eye
of the white man. She oever said any of Ibese things to Mr.
Bums but adhered lo ber suaightforward story till ber

death. , . « f

Nor is this woman’s story unique. All the Amerinds of
southern Briiisb Columbia. WaahingtM State. Or^n,
parts of Idaho, and the Yuroks and the Huppas of oorlb-
em California rot only have similar tales to tell but a
bistory of these croaiurci so complete and extensive tbai il
would take a volume to lell in iiself. The poor Amcrinda
have always been and stCU are regarded by Amerkom a^
Canadians as “natives," wluch indeed they are. but In the
same light as the British used to regard the inhabitants of
all countries other then their own or at least beyond the
confines of western Europe. The stories told by. and the
traditions of, Amerinds are not. therefore, regarded os of
much worth or reliability. Nooelbeleas and despite the fact
that these pw^le did not previously write and have bad
even today little If any contact among themselves over any
distance, ibcir report* upon these local ABSMs are abso-

66



hit«ly the same aU the way fnm (he Mackenzie Range (n
Alaska tbroufh the Yukoos and British Columbia, down
through WashingioD and Oregon to California, and back to
the western flank of (he Rockice in Idaho. There are tradi-
tions and folk-tales spread over an even wider area among
l2iese people, but this is another matter. I tun here speaking
of perfecUy atraightferwanj. up-to-date accounts of en¬
counters with such creatures that have been made by
them ever since (he white man flrst got to speak with them
and which bkvt come in from one source or another an¬
nually every year since the capeure oi Jacko-1 will interject
some of these as 1 go along.

Before doing so. however. [ must pot on record that I
do not share the old British or whai seems to be the cur*
rent Amertcao opinion of ‘'Datives” and never hove. Fur¬
ther. as ft working reporter, having now been privileged to
travel extensively throughout just the five continents with
which we are concerned in this story. I would state that
I find die so<aDed ‘'native" in some respects on the whole
more reliable than The foreigner, and (he white foreigner is
particular, First, (hey scco to me to know their cotmdy
better; secondly, ihoie of them that are country folk are
almost invariably coosummatc naturalbts and know tbdr
local fauna inside out (and much belter than we do); third,
if they like you and feel that you are not going to laugh at
everything they say. they are very pragmatic and are will-
jog to leU you. straight, what Is what in their opinion;
lounh, provided one appreciates the very basic fact that to
many noo-Eurt^eans there is a non material world (bat is
jtw as real as the material one. one can readily distinguish
between stories of one and (he other, and may even with¬
out giving oflaoae ask the teller to which category any story
belongs. NVhen my joh was coJkcling animals for selenUflc
toflliuTiona in out of the way pars of the world—a pro-
fewon I puRued for two decades—t always asked the
natives for infonnation on flidr local fauna. While all
people may display, and often do so, lapses or gaps In their
knowledge, and so just do not know an animal that has
always been right under chrir noses, what they do tell has,

I found, Invariably (urned out w be the truth. Mere than
Uus, some people, such as the Mayas of Yucatan, are abso¬
lutely incredible “taxonomists" in (hat they differentiate,
and have names for every type of animal, so that in one
case I found out after long and paiieat recording pbo*
«c^y that they even had the spiders of their country
daisiaed, all in just the same way as docs our modcra

69



zoology. Hien finally, T would also put oa record that I
have a particular respect for the nonprofessicaal American
"Indian* as he is so incorrectly and lu^bilously caUed.

My «1fe and 1 have lived with various of these peoples
—and they are as varied a lot as *'E4]ropeans'* if ncpt more
so^-ofi and on for inany years; wc did so in rather ex^
eeptionaJ circumstances in ibai we vere neither their em-
ployen nor employees, were not interested specif cally in
their "culture,” art, or anything else, but had several mu-
tuaJ Interests with them in their crops, stock, local wildlife,
and plants. My wife bas an exceptional knack of Icaroiog
ian^ages by ear and under appropriate circumstances and
in local costume she esn look like almost any race oa earth
while i. as a "doctor” or "nediciiK pers^” was on the
one head unobtrusive and luofiensive to them while, oa
tbe other, having my wife with me 1 coidd browse arouod
la the obscurer comers of life without giving concern to
the elders or alarm to my male contemporaries. Thus, by
simply llviag alongside these peopl^and going to their
dances only for the fun of it instead of to study tbeir
alleged Implications, and so fortb—we came to chat
around tbe evening fire of many things. Wbile I have found
the African the most enjoyable company at such times of
genuine relaxation, and the Malayan peoples the most in'
formed (sometimes terrifylagly so to a European), it has
bcea tbe Amerinds that T have found to be tbe most down
to earth and pragmatic. Many of these peoples—and they
are the first to admit It; roar with laughter at the fact: and
will not be offended by a sincere friend sayiog so—love to
drink alcohol and sometimes indulge in stimulants that we
class as narcotics, and when they do so they con very
readily become uproarious in all maaoei of ways. At these
times they will concoct the most delicious imagery com¬
pounded of mysdeUiD, aneJent tradition, and personal
whim, and, while there may be all manner of hislorical
gems to be gleaned from such outpourings, none of It
should be taken as •'exact science.” When, however, they
are stone-cold "sober.* in the striclest sense of that loose
term, they con give ou; information of a caliber that would
do justice to a Yale professor. Don’t ever underestimate
tbe Amerind or his knowledge! I shall not forget a remark
made to a partner of mine, who has also lived with these
people and likes them very much, so that they acein to like
him. He was making csheusilve inquiries into this very
matter of ABSMs, when an old genrieman—a doyen of
bb tribal unit and a pillar of the local church—suddenly

70


bunt out with **Obl Don't teU me the white men bevo
finally gotten eround lo thatr'

Let us» nooetbeless, ignore the Americds for tbe moment
and eoDceotrate on the uoioldiog of ABSMery in and
about Bntiih Columbia as reported by "white men" or
allegedly witneued by them. This history is now just about
100 yean old, starting with Mr. Anderson of tbe (ludsoa’s
Bay Company. During this period some paleface appears
to have reported aa ABSM incident almost every year and
they are now dobg so in droves, to such an exaggerated
extent that even Qiambers of Commerce (vide that of
Hanison Lake, the leading re&ort area of the vast city of
Vancouver) have gotieo into the acf« and one sees large
cuiouu of tbe creatures along highways advertising any>
thing from motels and garages to bakeries, cleaning ser¬
vices. and speedboats. Most notable contributions to this
tradition have been made in the years 1901, 1904, 1907,
1909, 1910. 1912. 1915. 1924. 1936, 1939, 1941, 1948.
1954, I95S, 1956, and. 1959. And oil but two of tbeu were
**sightiogs" or rather personal encounters, but usually con¬
firmed by more ibaa one witoess—not just dreary foot¬
prints found in snow or mud, banks of hair, overturned
barreb. or piles of excremeot This is leally a pretty as-
tonishisg piemre and makes afiairs even in Nepal look
somewhat picayune.

All of (his ceoiers around the lower Fraser River and
notably around Lake UarrisoA. Therefore, 1 resort, as us¬
ual, to a map <Map M) io <tfder to cut down verbiage. All
of these repoas have been published before, and o^en so
many times ibat there are those who feel that the proccu
has been protracted ad naustam. Nevertheless. I am. as I
have said, myself reporting and 1 do oot know of any one
place where all of (hem have been brought together io
chronological order. That anything like this could have
been gcang on for a century right m our front yard—it
being politically in Canada—is amaxing enough but we are
to get an eveo more profound }olt when we come to tee that
the very same thing has been going oo in our own back
yard—tJ> wit. in Washington, Oregon. California, and. ac¬
cording to none otber than Theodore Roosevelt, at one time
at least, in Idaho.

The opening gambit was a sworn statement made by a
highly respected lumberman who had also been most suc¬
cessful as a limber-CTuiscr and prospector, named Mike
King. This gentleman had bad to peoeirate an isolated area
in (he Dortb of Vancouver Island Id 1901, alone, because

71



his Ameriodian emploTces refused even io rater it oa any
account hut mostly because they said that It was a temiory
of U»e "WUJmen of flie Woods " From other accouixK of
Mr. King it seems that he was not a man to be diverted
from esseatial busloess Toudoe by sucb stories, but that he
bad a profound respect tor the local "natives" because
they had guided him to a reasooable fortune on more than
one occasion simply by their real knowledge of the country
and the timber that grew in tL Some days after penetrating
^is wild area, Mr. King tapped a ridge and spotted below
a creaTure squattiog by a creek washing soote kind of roots
and arraoging them tn two neat piles beside him, or her, on
the bank. This should be compared with the specific re¬
maria made by Mr. Ostman (see Chapter 3.) on the same
subiecl. In my iaterview with Mr. Ostman, he stressed the
collection of roots bv the creatures and even named the
plant most chosen, also the careful washing aod slacking
of these, Perhaps be got the notion from reading thb
account, but personally I doubt It. King’s natural instinct
was to raise his rifle and sight, for the creature was large,
covered In reddish brown fur, and thue potentially danger¬
ous. By the time the fact that brown bears don’t wash
tools and stack them up had penetrated, he realized that
he had some kind of hominid in bis sights and he lowered
the rifle. The creature took off. running like a man and.
as Mr. King later reported: "His arms were peculiarly loog
and used freely in climbing and brush-ruoning [ie. scram¬
bling on all fours through scrub]." Kiag descended the
sbpe and inspected the spoor left by the departed one. and
noted that it was a distinctly "buman foot but wiih pbe-
nomenally tong and spreading toes." ^

On reading the original account from n old clipping to
a company of easterners some years ago, I heard some¬
body murmur, "And so eadeth the first lesson.” And so
Indeed! For. alihough that »tatemenl has been repeatedly
recounted and Mike King has been repeatedly said to have
riaboraied. no further direct quotes appear to be ewant.
Ths is the war that unexpected things happen. I know
from the few that I have experienced. You are not pre¬
pared for them; by the time you have managed to bring
your senses to bear upon them, (hey are up and away; and
you are left gafxng, with a blurred impression all around a

‘This remark, and particularly the word "lonff" used to de-
acrlb© ihe rocs, richer chan the whole fool, i» moei pertinettt m
we shall see when we come to examine die itacks of tbo
Oh-Malis.


72


single vivid enterpiece. Whet mote no jw add ntUesa you
want (0 be a tattler? Mike King apparently had both the
decency eod the common tense to say what be bad to say
and then shut up.

The next lot to have a similar encounter (la 1904) were
out huotiog near Great Central Lake on Vancouver Island.
Tbeir names were J. Kincaid. T. Hutchins. A. Crump, and
W. Bua$, four cilirens oi QuaJicum. They were apparently
beating the bush, and put up adut titey afterward de¬
scribed as ft boy ABSM that was covered with brown hair
but had long head-ftair o/td a beard. This is a very odd
report in that it otherwise crops up only once or twice hi
all the aoceuQtt of ABSMs, and b. catagoncally. eoetfary
to all the other reports by everybody who has alleged that
be or she has seen these creatures at close range.

The third classic report is dated 1907 and was made by
die Captain and crew of the cosstal steamer Capilana oo
their rcfum from a routine cruise during wbicb they bad
called at a small laoding named Bishop's Cove, Thara,
they said, (be eotlre Amerindian populalion bed come
charging aboard begging for asylum or outright emigration
due to a huge monkey-like, human •shaped creature tbit
bad beeu clam>diggiag along their beach for a number of
nights in succession, and which gave vent to most disturb¬
ing bigb'pircM howb. These people readily Idemifled iba
creature but insisted that It had moved into ihrir territory
with its family, if not its whole clan, and that it would not
brook any interference by a few poorly amted humus.
The comments on this report are rather illuminating as
they display a cunous acknowledgement of the preeeoce
Of such "Wildmen*' and the fact that, while they are ac¬
cepted as being basically peaceable and koown to mind
dielr own bu^css. and while they avoid organised meo in
masses, they tend to adopt a nasty tone when ii cornea to
bunting and collecting rights, and appear then to regard
the Amerinds as interlopers and a nuisance. In 1907, how¬
ever. (he attitude of even ihe Bneish towatd real priinj-
tives was going through a peculiar phase; halfway between
the concept of the *Vorthlcss rtaeive" and (hat of the
**noblc savage.** The Amerinds had proved an unreliable
M)or force, while eenain other notwEuropeaas had tuned
out to be far too ctvilizcd for rank cxploilaiiofi. The idea
Of really primitive creatures had not yet been abandoned
and everybody was still undecided just how to behave
toward them. The (bought that we might be dealing wth
sub-hominids did not, of course, occur to anybody pr^

73



fesasg any e<Juca^on {afwr all, Darwin was hardly cold as
of then) but it r«maioed to oo way illogical to tb* unedu¬
cated, and it was played oo by the press.

This may io some measure accotmt for the solemnity
with trfiich a discovery made in 1912 was greeted. I got
Ibis report from Mr. Sums, memioned above. It came to
him from the principal, a Mr. Ernest A. Edwards, who
Hates that be was residing at Shusbwap, B.C., at that^ date,
and that be aad Ws vrife bad uoearthsd ou the small island
cf Neskain a Utile way off the coast, a human skeleWn
that they found protruding from the bank of a rtver, The
location was not^ for its abundance of "arrowheads of
Amerindian origin. This skeleton b stated to have Beared
“from skull to aakel-joinis—7 feel 6 inches, so with feet
and scalp, the person mint have been eight feet ull." Mr.
Burns received this information in a lettar from Mr. ba*
wards in 1941, and this Included the further comniCTU
that '% together with my wife, examined the jaw. The
teeth w«i« of huge siae. but jo perfect condiuoo—no
cavities noticeable. The jawbone was so large that it woulfl
span my face ea^y at the chedt bones. Together wth the
help of Indians, ! crated it and shipped it to Ke*ham
Museum. North Wales, England, where I bcUevo « still a
tn bis acknowledgement, the Curator of the mu.«um was
greatly astonished, remarking among oihec observauons.
tbni it was hard to believe such jaws and teeth ewsled ut

human beings.” . „ _ .

The receipt of such inlelllgcnce as this naturally prompts
an almost fiendish "Ho-bo! what is this?" on the part of any
reporter, so I wrote to the Curator of the museum sf««-
fied and got the following reply from the LibrariATi of ine
town of Wmxhajii (not Rexham, there bang no such towB
Id Wales or anywhere else in Great Britain) t ’Wth regard
to your query, I have checked the Minutes of this esiah-
lishmeni [i c. museum end public library! for the yeara
1912. 1913. and 1914. end there is no Hirauon of the r^
ceipi of a skeleton. Yours sincerely, Clifford Harris, F.L.A.

Repons of the disco^wy of the skeletons of giant hu¬
mans or humanoids are extremely niunerous, and have
been comiog In from all over this cootineat foj
Tears. They constitute a subject of ibeir own which I have
endeavored to pursue for a long time now but, 1 regret w
have to sav. without any success. One and all have jmt
'•evaporated*' like this, but 1 must admit, very often wiinm
tbe portals of some museum which had acknowledged re-
daDi of the relic. There is tbe famous story of the forty

74



cDUmmifled fiaata io Mammotb Cive. Keatucky; of the
pants In giaot coffljia in some uooemed cave In Uuh; of
others dug up ifi a peat bog in West Virginia and allegedly
shipped to the SmithsODian; and of others "preserved** to
aundjy small county museums in Nevada. I have volumi¬
nous correspoodeim on file on these items birt 1 bave
sever yet managed to obtain sight of any single bone. This
k odd because human giants are not really terribly rare
P have seen it stated that there are several ihousand men
over 7 feet tall living today in the United Stotes) whereas
sud) persona is the past would probably have bees re*
girded with some awe and might ^ expected to have bm
accorded rather special burial, so augmenting our chances
of unearthing them.

The matter of skeletal remains of ABSMs is» of courc,
of first importance and second only to the procurement
of a whole living specimen. The chance of unearthing a
akeleton of one is not quite so unlikety as one might sup-
pose, for It now iraiupircs that very primitive peoples in*
deed leeni to have performed deliberate intements, if
only to clear away refuse from a cannibalistic meal in a
cave. Some ABSMs might well be or have once been at
&ich a level of "culcvral" development and it is constanOy
reported by the Ajoerinds in this area that their particular
local variety indulge something to hibematjon, or at
least winter inaelivity equivalent to that of ibe local bears»
and that they do this in caves. Tbh preseou a di^ioas
aspect of these traditions bowever, because, in the abseoco
of limestone strata m the area, caves are rarities. Noao-
Ihckss. there arc ca>«s io volcanic rocks of certain kinda
and some have been adleged to bave been found in the
mountains around Hatrison Lake. There is one story of sudi
that pertains to ABSMs. This again 1 got from Mr. J. W.
Bums. It goes as follows and comes from an Amerind
Mined Charley Victor, a reiident of Chilliwack oa the
lower Fraser;

The flnt time I came to know aboot these people [(be
local ABSMs, now named SasquatchesJ. I did not see
anybody. Three young men aad mystf were piekta^
salmonberries cn a rocky nountam dcqM S or d —
from the old town of YaJe. (n our search for berries we
•oddenly stOBMed upoo a targe opentag In the side cd
the mountain. Tbis discovery greatly wrpiiied aD of »»
for we knew every loot of the montaiB. and Mver knew
DOT beard (here was i cave in (be vidiut}'. Outside ^

76



uootb of tte c*?« there was an enorraooa fconWer. We
peered Into the cavity Mit couian*t see anything.

We gB^ered come pitchwood. llahted it and began to
esplwe. Btrt before we got very far from Ae entrance or
the cave, we came upon a sort of stone house or en-
dosore. It w» a crude affair. We coulii’l make a
(horongb osarntnalioii, for onr pitchwood kept going
out. We ieft. bcendllng to return la a conple of days end
go on exploring. Old ladians, to whom we told the story
irf our discovery, warned us not to ventore near Ae cave
min, as It was surely oecopied by a Sasquatcb. That
was the first time 1 heard eboni tbe hairy nen Aat re-
habit the moontaliis. We, however, disregarded Ae ad¬
vice of Ae old men and sneaked off to explore A«
hot to ow great disappoinlmeoe feuod the boolder roDed
brto Ae mottth and fitting It » nicely that yoi
suppose it had been made for that purpose.


This story seems lo me lo have a certaju nng of ^th
about it, and the idea of using a boulder as a aoM, cuner
for protective purposes or for concealment of a hte^ng-
chamber, is not in any way illogical or jmpoisiblc. pete
is, however, it should be pointed out, a modem wadency
to. ss It were, ebase anything elusive back into caves, and
especially wild mem probably because of all ihai has been
written, from archaeological texts to comic bTOks, ^oul
“Cave Men.” The raaiofity of pnmitivc bomtuds Ad not
live in caves; simply, becaase the number of caves ay^-
able was, except In a few specItJ areas, very limiied.
[Further, Aey may have first entered them to g« away
from either heal or rain as much as from cdd.] Yet, the
remains of early men and animals arc better and more
readily preserved In cave fioore lhan out lo the op®,
while locating Open-air camping sites is very cnarey. Inc
idea Aat men went through a cave-living phase, o^r
the world, has therefore gained wide crcdcocc. Sasquatdws
could just as well hole up in ke-caves made by ibeni^lw
in deep snow, as some bears do. But caves should be
searched most diUgently for remains or other evidence ot

Aeir occupation. . .. .

It was not loo far awsv from this alleged cave site lial
the next eocounicr of '•bich wc have record and that 18
documented, pwora to. and witnessed by more than one
person, look place la 1915. A Stauiiory Declarahoa of
this was swmo to m Sepwmhcr of 1957 by one of the

76



particlpaou* Mr. Chari ei Flood of Wwimlnster, B.C Thia
foca 8$ follows:

I, Charles Flood of New We^lftsler (formafy <rf
Hope) declare the foDowing story to be true:

I am 7S yean of age aod spent most of my Kfe peo»>
pectiog in the local moimtafass to the south o< H^e,
toward the ABtiicao boundary and is (he ChOttwack
Lake area.

Id 1915. Donald McRae aod GretP Hlcki of Agiidt.
B.C. aod mysetf. explored an area over an unknown
divide, on the way back to Hope, near die Holy Ctob
MoDBtains.

Green Ukks, a half-breed Indian, Rdd McRae and
me a story, be claJaicd he had seen alliptars at what be
called AlUsator lake, and wUd bnmana at what he called
Coogar Lake. Out of curiosity «e went wUb hta; be
had been there a week previous looking for a fur trap
line. Sure eoongh, we saw his afl^tors, bot they were
black, twice tbe size of lizards In a small mud lake.

Awhile further up was Cougar Lake. Second yesn be¬
fore a 6re swept over many square miles of mount^os
which resulted la large areas of mouDEaln buckk-bury
growth. Greea Mkks suddenly stopped w and drew oor
alteutloo to a large, light brown creatnre about $ feet
high, standing on Its hind kgs (stmiding upright) pulttng
tbe Nrry bushes with ooe hand or psw toward him and
poltiDg bernee in bh month with the other hand, or paw.

I stood still wondertog, aod McRae and Green IBcki
were arguieg. UJeks said “It La a wild man^ end McRae
said 'll b a bear.*' As far u I as concemod (he saaage
creatnre looked more like e boman being. We seen
several black and brown bear on (be trip, bu( (hat (Ung
looked allogetber different. Huge brown bear are Isovni
to be in Alaska, but have never (Men seen in southern
British Columbia.

This document brings up two qoeriions (list I should
discuss briefly fortbwiib. The first » the mailer of the Law.
As 1 have already aaid, wc ir this country do oot bave
much respect for this aspect of buman organization and
ofuo lend to (he observation that *iaws arc only made to
be brokea." This b nol so in some other countries how¬
ever, aod ibe Canadian have an miense respect for ibeir
kws aad for eutbority In general. Canadians will scoff at
the suggestion ihai ooe of their countrymen is more likely

77



Ml to lie before > jwlice of the peece iheii “ ,i^iv m
but it Ii nooethelca > fad that a Can|«l.M ti more Idtely o
make such a depaatiou if bis vcrac.Iy hM beM calkd to
question and/or wants lo assert '’5

will thlok longer and mote carefully about his “

made before esublisbcd authority

he sBT therein be mendacious and thereby cause any dis-
ir htSi to others, he wiU be held fully actable,
^us, these sworn Bslemeats and others that *

rather strong impUcaiion. The other matter if the totro-
duction of an almost classic red herring.

Ao ineiplicably high perccoiagc of aU eso ^ ,

guuSis turn up other unespected and apparently
Srs that are often just as weird if not "'O'*
the origioal ob|eci of pursuit. In
“alligatoR" is quite

oniy two in number, one species I**"?

J^Missippi Valley and around the Oulf coast to Bon^

the other to the YangtsclUeng Valley of
“ailigtior" has, howeeer, become a

the CTOcodilians. and it is also applied *5^^“

to varioos lizards that spend most rf ihtur
water. Popular oamea are also very dangerous m *»'
b^tne^laccd in the most outragetw “

the designaQon of a species of tortoise m f""da M a
"gordier^wben that is the name for a group of stuall inatt^
iM:^«herwjse cUFed grovittd'Sfluirrels. Reptiles are, ho^

Tvlr. SSSlS^d^XTntrth. «*>?'*"«,»* “X'lV to «5

even southern British Columbia would be unl^ly, to ^

the leasL Yet, there is a species of salamimdCT

phibian named itairocociio«psl found m

^anl selamander of the mountain stremne of JepM U ^

Csrty iced to every winter. The mere

creature as an .Bigator in this «

upon its other features, but then who is lo

ca^ be. There is volcenieity in the area,

hot or wirm springs and lakes there. Al». »'
toe. one or other of the present-day secies of alHgal^
masr have gotten either from Chum to
vice vma. The oolv route tor such ao emi^UQO is ow
the Bering Suaiu; thus pasmg through what is now Bn i

Columbia along the way.* -j « K,i«dr. w

This mallet of volcanicity and hot springs bnnfis la lo

•R«eot d«oreri« indicated
be • fiiriy large equeilc Uart Indigeaoui to tha unt.

78



aAot2i«r really quiie fabuloiu item of Ca&odlfto ABSHery.
TIus ifl matter of tbe lower Nabanm area of the
Northwest Territories. If you go to the wesiera part of the
Northwest Territories you will looaer or later be told
about the place where banana trees bave been growo. This
sounds quite wacky but, if you pursue the matter diligently,
you will learn that in the area of the ;uncijoa of the Liard
and South Nahanoi Rivers (see Map V). lying against (he
vast mounUin barrier which cuts our entire cootineot frwn
the mouth of the Mackenzie River on (he Arctic Sea to
Vera Cruz on the Gulf of Mexico, abutting on to (be
ceotral plains like a monstrous wall, there is a voicanie
area where hot springs are found. There have been missioa
ftaiiooB along the Liard for over a caneury and it ii quite
true that at these, magnificent vegetables are grown out in
the open in the brief but intense summer. Also, they have
beeo raised indoors, and among the Utter bave been a
number of banana trees. However, this area, which lice at
(he south esd of the vast Mackeo^ Range, has I eng bcea
one of myth uod fantasy. The reporu emanating from
(here cannot better be summed up (hao by quoting a
oiriuma from a publication oaroed Doubt, the periodical of
the Fortean &^ety of New York. It was founded by (he
laie author, Tiffany Thayer, in ccnjunciion whb several
other notable persons such as Ben Hecht, in memory of,
and 10 cany on the work of Charles Fort, that assiduous
editor of borderline repcrti for so many years, ThU
reads in part, when speaking of an expedition said to bave
been organized to visit the area:

Thb VeUey, nnmber mm kgeod of the NoriUnsda,
*** background, storks of tropl^ growth, hot
spnnp. bced<bontlDg noantmlnaiea, caves, pcftristodc
mensten. wafiJog winds, and loot gold mines. Actnal tnrt
etrtlfies the hot springs, (be wsOJof winds, and some
person or pemes who ddigfat in lopj^ olf prospectors'
A* Ihe prC'hbtorle moosters, Indlaw have rv
tnnied from the Nahaonl coairy wRh fairly Kcurafe
drawing of mnstodons burned on raw hide. The ove
rreent Usiory began .some 40 yean ego (efcta 1910)
when the two MacLeod broken of Fort Slapaco were
found dead in the vaDej-, and feportedly decapitated
Already the lodians shunned the ptace beeuie of fti
aammotb grizzlies” and **€r9 spirits wailhig Jn tU
tinyoBsJ"

Canadian police records show that Joe Mulhoilond of

79



MImcmIi, BUI Espt^r of Wlnolpe^ PhU Powers wd (be
MacLeod brolbere of Ft SimpsoD, Martin Jorgensoo,
Yidum Flfcber, AnnJe Ijt Ftrtty one CBrion, Edwin
Hall. Andy Hays, an unldentiiird projector nod Emcit
Suvard have periled in Ibe straase valley dnce 1910.
In 1945 ibe body of Sa?ard was found In Us deeping
bag. bead nearly eevered from bb ebouldeta, SavMd bid
preriouaty broogfaf rich ore samples out of Ibe NalmjioL
fa 1944 ProepectOT John Patterson disappeared In the
vaBey. Hb partner. Frank HeRdenon, was to bare met
Um there, but never foond him.

The "head'buntiflg aioualam-meii*' are aHcged locally,
and for a great distance around* stretching ID The limits of
ibe tnotmtarn forest toward Alaska.* east to noribeni Man-
itoba. end south all the way to the lower Fraser and
beyond, to be ABSMs of the Sasqtia/ch type and with
all its cbaxBcterisdcs, such as winter-mthdrawal, occa*
slonti burns of caruvorousoeei. and so forth. I also have
reports in tbe form of private letters of similar creatures
from aD across tbe Northwest Territorks just south of tbe
ixeo-lifie, and again in northern Quebec Previace.

This is a somewhat Irksome matter as 1 have been no^le
to obtain any casts of footprints or other physical evidence
from these regions nor even sworn ttateme^ ai yet The
reports are categoric and specl/ic. Those from riorthem
Maohe^a are second band only, and from Amerindian
informants vit white men who have bunted there for many
years id succession. Those from Quebec have puuled me
for years. I have constantly heard ^>out them but have
only three pieces of paper to show for my e^austive and
prolonged [n^uirles and appeals. These are all letters from
American summer visitors on serioos hunting and camp*
ing trips by canoe, guided by professloBal Amerindian
trappna and busters. All three are subtiaatialty Identical
and all give somewhat siinDar accounu of events in widely
separated places. Ooe is from a lone mao, a buuneu c.tccu*
tive from Chicago; oce Is from a party of four men of

*Tbe dividing line between two maior types of vegetatiOD
forrna a greai curve to the north dote to this area, aod then
beads down to the south, and even southeast for a stfeteb. aloog
the Pacific coast The soutbemmost of these is a rype of forest
that grows far up mountaioiide: the Donhern type grows only
in valteya, leeving (he upper slopes bare. ABSMs are reported
from all over she fonner In tbe mounialns bm not from the
latter.


eo



assorted professions who have hunted for y«ars on their
annual vacations togetiien the third is from the father of
a family of four^threc grown sons and a (then) teenage
daughter.

In each ease, a tall, very heavily bu!U. maD^shaped crea*
lure with bQUet>head and bull-oeck. and clothed all over in
shiny black bair. with very long arms, short legs and
big hands, is said suddenly to have appeared on the bank of
t river in which the party was quietJy fishing. On one oc*
casion. the creature is said to have carried off some fish
kfi OQ a rock on the bank; on another it chased the Aner-
tndlan guide out of the woods and into bis cacoe and then
waded some distance out into the water after him. The
farndy party seem to have become fairly familiar with
two of Ibe creatures over a period of several days. They
»y they constantly prowled around iheir evnp, and
sbo«^ themselves among the trees whenever they went
out in the canoes. One seems to have shown signs of chas¬
ing the giri on one occasion but. the father told me. they
gained the impraaslon that this seemed to be more through
etzrlooty than menace. Two of ihc Amerinds are said to
have asserted that they and their people knew the crea¬
tures quite well and that there were quite a lot of them in
those forests. The other guide, who was chased, appeared
to be scared almost witless and swore that the big thing
was some form of spirit or devil. However, it smashed
branches and burled stones, it b reported.

I an frankly stymied over these reports. Two of the
writers asked that 1 snthhold their names In perpetuo as
they did not want the reports to become known to their
business associates. The third man I never traced. It was
many months before 1 could get to the places from where
these people wrote and although I traced two of them, they
^ stopped answering my letten and J am left with notfa-
iog to foiiow up. This Is an almost chronic condition of
laborers in the vineyards of ABSMery, People almost all
just dry up io time. Of course, many probably write in the
first place by way of a )^e or just to see how gullible
tbe enquirer is; but not all are of this ilk. Many people a}»,

I believe, take fright ai the possibility of ridicule, or even
become alarmed about their own sanity, after they have
once gotten soraeiblng so unusual off their chests. Otheie
again, either consider (be maner explained or just doo*c
want it expUined. It takes years of work to get at Ibe
facts and this is rendered almost futile when one is dealing

81



with a new tocala tbai it only just bdng penetrnte^ by
civOtifid people-

Tbe ABSM iradilion exienda aU across Canada but is
concentrated in southern British Columbia; probably ^
cause that was the first area ^woed up and is aiill being
probed from all around.


62



3. Further Sasquatchery

MORE REPORTS FROM CANADA
(1920.1940)

Just because 1 bftve skjpp«d over some 4iO years by (he
recoiuitiog of ooly 8 stories, b not to be taken to meaa
that Hiesc were (he only reports curreot during that per*
k>d. Quite (o the controryf almost every year somebody or
some group of people in southern British Columbia statpd
chat they had either ruo loio a S<is<juatch. been chased by
one. shot at ooe. or scco iu foot-tracks. Many of these
accounts arc from our friends, the Amerinds, and many of
them are not specifically dated. They begin ‘‘Some yean
ago . . .• or "Early last year . . .” but fail to state which
year, or how many years ago. A lot oi these have become
garbled because of loose reponbg or because they were
cnado to specialists in local ianguagci, each of which has a
different name for its local ABSMs. The vxry name, Sas^
<pi(nch, now so widely disseminated and known in CaoadA
is actually of partially ailiSctai construction and was first,
1 understand, coined by Mr. Bums in an effort to obviate
some of this muddle and to draw attention to the fact ihal
throughout a very wide area—from the Yukon to Call*
fomia—all the names refer to the same creature. This
name is derived from the Salish Amerindian word for
"hvildmen of the woods" which may be translfierated as
Te Smai’Etl Stxfwala'fH. also written as Sami 'Soq* wia’m,
the font) used by the Chehalis tribal group. Farther south
among the Pugets. the name was fio<juiam, now the nanii>
of a ftourishlog small town on the Cbeballs River south of
the Olympic Mountains In Washington State. However,
many of the locals had a habit of prefixing almost every¬
thing with a sibilant so that this name also came as
S’cq'wlam. In the Cascades (he name was See^’iik but
down around Ml. SbasU it was Saeok^mdi. In the Kla-

63



msUis vre note tb&t it is still Oh-Miifi among the Huppa,
while the Yurol^ call them Toki-mussi. On Vaccouver
Island, and north up the inlets of the mamland. the sound
changes to something mote liXe "Sokqueatl" os "Soss-
q'oH" and jt was from this that Mr. Burns derived the
anglicized "SasquaicK'" os “Susquotch** as Americana
have usually written It.

[ mentioned above that all these names refer to a single
kind of creature. This is so, as far as the Amerinds are
coocemed; but, you may well ask as you read oa, bow
coroe tbsse creatures are stated to vary so much in appear*
ance. On analysis, it will be noted that this variation is
almost exclusively In two features—length and quality of
hair and its disposal about the body, and color of skin and
fur. Further ODalysie will qIaq show that these differences
seem to be due to age and sex. The young ones, like Jacko
and the orre shot by a local hunter and to be described !o a
momenl, are said to have had light faces and yet black,
shiny, straight, and apparently orderly hair all over (one
Imagines like that of a chimpanzee), but the adults are
invariably said to have black faces and skin, and reddish*
blown fur, often shaggy, and somciinics washed with
white Of sUveT'tipped. The matter of long hcad*bair is
variable but most of the dose*up sightings speak of very
short head'haii, no beoxd, but a curiously forward, inward,
and finally backward curl of longer hair all across the brow
11^ that seen on certain Spider Monkeys (genus AteUs).

The growth and rearrangement of body hair with is
absolutely consistent with what is known among other
mamnals and notably primates and particularly apes, Fur¬
ther, the changes In color are exactly whai we would ex-
poet Md ftTo voty suuUckf to tho^o to bo Aotod
gorillas and Etxne gibbons. Baby chimpanzees oits) start
off with faces and bands the color of those of while men
but end up with complexions as dark as Dravidians or
Wolofs. Some gorillas develop a disiiact gingery tinge—the
“black” of mammalian hair being oriy melanin, and really
a very dark red—and almost all o! them go silvery gray
with age, Some gorilla families have bright red topknots
just like some human beings. Some ^bbons vary in a most
bewildering way in coat colors. They may be black, gray,
chocolate, while, or beige to slurl with and ibrougboul
life, or they may change from one color to another with
age. Different races of the different species do all manner
of different things in this rcspecL II is therefore quite
consistent that these large ABSMs should start off with jet

64


black bair and light skins, and end up boary old black-
Caccd creatures with silver-tipped reddish (ur. The femala
night lack the gray and might be lass shaggy. There nay
also be family likeoess to start with.

Let us assume (hat we arc now chronologically at the
turn of the year 1920 and 1921 but still in Briii&h Cohim-
bia. As 1 said in the brief historical re^ev of world-wide
AfiSMery, this was a most important date in that it
saw the birth of the term “Abominable Snowman*' and
really kicked off the whole thing. T have often wondered
what would have happened if the Squamish word for these
creatures in their country, instead, had happened to have
been mistranslated as somethiog equally fetching. I sup¬
pose we would then, m rime, have witnessed a New York
/oiirnal American Expedition to Harrison Lakes, and Ad¬
miral Byrd flyiof skin-trophies to Chicago from the ham-
kts of the Alaskan panhartdle. Jt is nothing more ihaA a
quirk of history and a series of harmless mistakes that has
put Nepal instead of Vancouver Island oo (be map in tins
respect; iboogb it has to be admitted that Ml. Everest has
played ia part

It was about this time, moreover, that an incident is
alleged to have occurred in this area that is in many ways
perhaps one o( the most fantastic AI^M stories ever told.
It only came to light in 1957 but coikcems bappeainga
alleged to have taken place in 1924 iu the mountaios be¬
hind Toba Inlet, which is oo the coast of British Columbia
(see Map VI). It came Co light through a letter (written to
John Green, owner of The Advance, published in Agassiz,
a small town near Harrison, some 70 miles from Van¬
couver) by a retired prospector and lumberman of Swed¬
ish origin named Mr. Albert Ostman. Thia letter was a
result of the publication by Mr. Green of an affidavit
sworn to by a Mr. William Roe (then of Edmonton, Al¬
berta) concerning certain experiences he bad in the year
1955 on Mica Mountain oo the Alberta border. (This latter
statcmcnc is reproduced in full in the oeu chapter and
concerns Mr. Roe's meeting with a female Scr^ucrcA.)
Reading this. Mr. Ostmao apparently decided to break
more than a quarter century of silence and relate wbat
bad happened to him, Mr. Ostnian sow lives at Port Lang¬
ley outside Quillwack, and Jobs Green, »bo for years haa
gathered iofonnaiion on the Sasquaieheg, sought him out
and persuaded him to write hN full story. Thia Mr. Ostmao
did—paiaitakangly. and io two large ootebooka. Mr. Great

85



published this in his newspaper along with a photostat of a
mm affidavit tesbfTingtoits cruth by Mr. Osimao.

I bad the pleasure of meeting both geotJcmen in corrn
pany with a partner of mine. Robert Chilstie, who was
traveling vitb me at the time, and a Mr. and Mrs. Ren^
Dahinden. He is Swiss; bis wife. Swedish, as is Mr. Oslman.
As 1 already had Mr. Osusan’s story both on paper and on
tape from en interview between him and a reporter from a
local radio station. 1 coniined my questions to trying to
recall his memory about cenaio zoological or anthropo¬
logical delails. t fully admit to ha%^g loaded these ques¬
tions with snares and abstruse technical catches, and lo
having been rather rough in my approach. ] Know that I
thereby incensed John Green and the Dahindens. who cot
ooly have a very great a/Tection and respect for Mr. Oat-
cum but feel that, with his still slight language difficulty,
outsiders such QS I tend to rattle him. i do ooi agree, in
that Mr. Ostman has the wisdom of age as well as long
eitpcrience. and a sense of humor that cannot be downed;
and 1 don’t think that he was annoyed with me ihen, or
wil! be hoa if be reads this, in fact, 2 felt that be was
twinkling at me all the lime; and 1 fancy that, if he ever
thought of me after I left, it was simply as a “vciy funny
fellow,** a» he might say- This ia more the ease since I went
away a very puzzled reponer.

This story, when read cold, sounds utteily preposterous.
If one has read a great deal on ABSMs in general and on
the Sosquaich in particular it also, at first, appears highly
suspicious because it seems to knit together }ust about
everything else that baa ever been published on the matter.
Id fact, given some firsthand experience of the country, X
could have wrineu just that story myself. The world U full
of good weavers of yams and sorue of ihem. who are not
professional writers of fiction, can be so damnably con-
vineifig that they have fooled not only the press but gov-
emments and even peoples, if not the whole world,
Fiffirications, if well enough done, consisuntly sdhervd to.
and big enough lies. can. as has so often been pointed out
(e.g. the case of Hitler) be utterly convincing. However, in
technicol matters, and most notably in the biological sei-
eacee. Ibere are subjects that just cannot be icnaiined or
tbougbl up by anybody, unless they have learned of there
specifically in advance and. what is much more important,
their exact significance tdative lo a wbde bon of other
teebolcahiies is appreciated. Anybody cao rend anything
that has been published on Sas^ofehes aod yet still attri-

66



bat© to them »oine (itvial biologicd chiracler that really it
Impossible. In th© ease of ABSMs there ere a large
Dumber of very abstruse matten of this &arure that may be
ilipptd b eesuaUy. Only one answer to tbete c«a be right,
while ea endkss string of other answers will be wrong and
conduaively ao. 1 put about two dozen of such, directly
and unexpectedly, to Mr Osiman and. of an (hose for
whkh he had a reply, he did not miss once—not one
impossible aoswer; not a single uncaJIed-for elaboration*
and oot one unrequested fact that did not have a possible'
and (phte k^al place in the general pkeure. What is
mere, when we got off on the sketching of the creature’s
head, there emerged several points that were aoi then is
published SasquereM literature, nor la that of aoy ABSM,
nor even in textbooks of physical aathropology. Yet, eubse'
queot to that ipterview, some of these points <soeh as the
odd head*«hape) have appeared Id the lau type of pubU-
cation.

TWi to retUy rather alamiing and has given me many
sleepless ughN. Some things I Just cannot bring myself to
take at their face evaluation; and, fraakTv. Mr. Oslman’s
«ory was « first one of these. Besides, he even included
some gross trades such as that he became poisooed
through eating a broody grouse—an old wives* tale, if ever
there was one. But then. 1 have to admit to myself now
that this (aa js su71 believed In parts of his home country
-;*namely, that one docs get poisoned by eating birds taken
siiang on eggs—and that he probably believed this* while
be was in poor enough condition at the time of his adven¬
ture (o be made tick by almost anything, AJao, I a^ my.
self, why tell (his story? Mr. Ostmao Is not an uneducated
wuniiy bumpkin. He is well «od. speaks two laflguBgea.
bas traveled qujte a lot, lives very much in tbe wortd, and
^ows quite ^1 what ridicule U, and all about its (Jeadly
efficacy. He is retired, owns his own property, has many
and does oa need publicity: nor does be welcome
It, ^ougb be K extremely long-suffering and ntost gracious
in discussiiig his experiences with newsmen and others who
call upon bim. He never told his story in his youth for fear
of ridiciiJe. knowing what effects ft might have. He doesn't
care now; be b still sincerely puttied; and be is eager to
do tnythiog he can to help clear up tb© mystery. Mr. Oat-
man tt. b fact, sick and tired of skeptics.

After a strenuous year on a job, he deci<^ to take a
pan lotion with some prospecting on the aide. He chose
a wild area at the head of this Toba Inlet which b (he first

B7



subtUfltial :^fd norib of PoweU River. TbU is oc tbe
malniand opposite the middle of Vancouver Island. There
was allegedly a lost gold mine thereabouts and he decided
to tal» a crack at finding IL He hired ao old Amerind to
take him up the fjord and he says that he Srst heard from
him on that journey of the eustence of ihe giant hairy
Men of the Woods." He bad supplies for three weeks
plus nfie, sleeping bag, and other basic equlpmenL The
local man left him atone on shore and he proceeded inlaod
and found a good can^ite.

Tills be fixed up very comfortably, maksig e thick bed
of small branches on which to place bis sleeping bag. and
bung bis supply bags well off the ground on a pole. The
next morning be. nonetheless, found bis things distuned,
though nothing was missing. Bang a knowledgeable woods¬
man. he assumed that a porcupine was responsible, so the
follow^ night he loaded his rifie aod placed it under bis
bed flap. The next morning be &iiind, to his dbmay, that
his pecksack still hung from tbe pole well off the ground
but that its cootents had been emptied out and some items
of food taken. Strangely, hU salt bad not been touched.
This surprised him not a little, because porcupioes have an
insatiable craving for sdt and always go for it first At the
same lime, be did noi think ifiQi it was a bear because,
although he admits to havlug been a very heavy sleeper,
bears usually make a great rumpus and smash up eveiy-
thing. Albert Osiman did not like those eveota one bit, so
he stayed rather closely around camp in the hopes of
catchiog the marauder in the act. On the third night be
took special precautions; intending to stay awake all night,
he did not undress but merely removed his boos and left
them at tbe boitom of bis sleeping bag. pul his geological
pick ai hand, and took his loaded rifle into the bag with
him. But he did fall asleep.

The next thing he knew he was being picked up like a
puppy in a paper bag, and fell himself heaved, as be at
first thought, on to a horse's back. Bemused and half
awake, he tried to get at his knife to cut his way out of his
keeping bag, bul be was wedged down into the boftom Id a
sitting position and could ool reach it. Then he felt bis
packsack bumping against him with the hard cans wlUun
cleariy discernible by their sharp impact. As far as I was
able ro ascertain io my interview with him, he was com¬
pletely in (he bag. as one nitgbt say. and its opening was
being held shut above his head. Kow he managed to
breathe in such circumstances, and for over an hour, puz-

68


2 l«d mt until he explained that he wa» slung ever the back
of something walking on two legi and that iu band was not
big enough to go tU irouad (he bag^tpeniog. t never
iMird Mr. Ostmsa say that he was icared, but he admits
that be was terribly hot in Utere and (hot his cramped lap
were extremely painful. Don*! forget, moreover, (has he
hadn't a clue at that time as to what was going on or what
bid got him.

He says that he was carried up hill and down dale, then
be was dragged along (be ground, and that tats carrier
even |og*troJted over level places. This is some going for
anything carrying a man of Ostman's size plus a
hill of supplies and other equipment. But, ibis is no
means the strangest part of the proceeding; yet H b still at
least possible. Another aspect seems quite impossible;
namely, that OsUnan esdmaiea^and sticks to It—(hat this
(rip ia the bag took three hours. In an Interview with a
commentator from a radio station (a tape of which I
have), but made, of course, a quarter of a century later,
be says thirty miles. PetsonaJIy. I fail to see how be soT'
vived such ao ordeal, stuffed up in a bag. but (bat is not so
much the point: what is are the lime, the distances, and the
sp e ed of travel implied. These are not easy things to esti¬
mate at the best of times. an*t they are amoeg the first to
become exaggerated In the mied with the passage of time.

( wash that Mr. Ostman bad oot tried to give any cstamates
on such a late d^ since Its causes the eyebrows of all who
read or hear his story to go up sharply.

Anyhow, at the end of what must have been an ordeal,
however brief it really was. he was dumped uncenmo*
ftiously on the ground. He beard some voices gibbering
but not using true speech as far as be could ascenaio. He
apparently got his bead out of the bag for air aod theo
tried to crawl out. but hrs legs bad rather aatunlly gone
numb and it was some rime before he could emerge and
rescue his boots. It was still dart and starting to rain. He
then tells, in various cbaiactmslk ways, what happened
when it began to dawn and he could see the ouitu^ of
four Urge creatures oa two legs arouad him. I don't know
If his native Swedish wit got the better of him, but be says
that when he could stand up he asked the somewhai banal
queetton: "What do you chaps want with mer 1 find this
most refreshing.

He found that his capiors consisted of two big ones (a
pair), and two youngsters, also a male and a female. He
sUQses (hsi the two latter seemed thoroughly scared of

89



hUni and that tb« "Old Woman,** a$ he rather dell^tfuHy
called Cbe elder female, seemed very peeved with ber mate
for dragglag such as object hocoe; bu, he theo goes oa to
Bay —and this I find very iaterestiiig, if odd—that the "Old
Man** kept gesticulating, and tetling the others all about it.
la other words, their gibbering was speech. All of them
were hairy and without clothing; and Ostman estimates the
"Old Man" to have been between seven and eight feet tall.
When the sun was fully up, they all left him.

He says that he fouad himself in a ten-acre bowl high
in the mountains, its edges so steep as to be nnscalr^le,
and with only odb outlet— b V-sbap^ cut with walls about
twenty feet high and about eight feat wide at the botiom. It
is not quite dear why, at this point, he did not try to make
a break for this gap, bat this was possibly because of his
sdll wobbly legs. Later on, he made several attempts, both
frontally at speed and by subtlety, but the "Old Man" kept
a weather eya on him and iovarid^ly cut off his approach,
making ‘'pushing^ motions with his bands, and a sound
that Ostman invariably descnbcs as something like *^ooka-
sooka." However, when he first arrived, he moved over to
the oppofite side of the bowl and set up camp under two
small trees. I find the inveoiory that he says he took of his
possessions most interesiing. Prunes, macaroni, bis full box
of rifie cartridges, and his matches were missing; so was
his |»Qk. Otherwiee, all was intact. He had sn amer^ncy
waterproof box of matches in his pocket but says that
there was oo dry wood in the valley, which seems to have
been opea and grassy with a few scattered junipers. All bis
cooldag utensils had also been left, but be opened a coffee-
can and went to look for water.

I will Qow complete the story as best I can from the
various versions that 1 have beard, though I would stress
that Mr. Osiman is remarkably consistent however many
tiines he tella his story. Each interviewer, however, man¬
ages to ask a new question and elicit from him some scraps
of information that the teller had sot thought of or men¬
tioned before. As 1 don't know tbc sequence in which the
various versions were recorded, 1 have oo way of differ-
enliating between mcooiisieocies and mete additions. It
would seem chat Ostmaa made his Siit attempt to get out
on the secood day but was driven back by the "Old Mao "
The young male kept coming closer to him and he finally
rolled his empty snuff box to him. The Sasquaich grabbed
it, showed it to his sister, and then took it to his father.
Somehow, Ostman got it back, because be used ii later.

90


Donog the next five deys aoChing onieh seems to hive
ocftfrred except that ibe youog mate gave Ostmao some
grasi with sweet roots to eat and got tome snuff ia reran,
which he chewed. The **01d Mao ’ ibei) also developed t
likiog for snuff; and this floaily did the trick.

On the seventh day, as far as I cao make out, the boy
ukI the "Old Man” came right up to Ostmon and squaned
down watching him take a pinch of snuff. Ostman bdd oos
the box to him <ibe "Old Man") who. mstead of talung a
pinch in Imitatioa. grabbed the box and emptied the wl^e
coQCeots into his mouth and swallowed it. In a few minutes
his eyes began to roO, be let out a acreeeh. and grabbed a
can half full of cold coffee and eoffee>ground$* which he
drank. This made him worse; and. after rolling about some
more* he charged off to the spring. Ostman gathered up hli
possessions and aiade a dasb for the opening in the cliff.
Hie "Old Lady" tried to intercept him and was very close
on his heels, but be fired a shot at Ibe rock above ber bead
and she fled back again. Ostman found himself in a caDym
Tuanlog south, down which be made record time, as be put
h. Then, he climbed a ridge and saw Mount Baker way oS
to (he side, so that be knew which way to go to hit (be
coast. He was not followed.

He rested for two hours on the ridge, then started down
again. That night be camped near heavy timber and shot a
grouse sitting on eggs; he roasted and ate the bird. Tbe
next morning he was very groggy and stomachicany upeeC.
wdiich he attr^uted to eabag the grouse, since it was ha
belief that a broody bird was p<MSonous. Finally, he beard a
motor running and made for it. eomuig out at an advwce
logging operation. The foreman, aeeiog that he was just
about at the end of his tether, took him in and fed him and
let him rest up for a couple of days. Ostmu then made lus
way down to a camp o& the Salmon Arm Branch of tbe
Sechelt Inlet, where be got a boat back (o Vancouver.

This la Mr. Ostinafi's story and you may make what you
will of iL As I have said, ibere are some curious diacrepn^
cies in it but not even these are impossibilities, with tbe
exception of the times and tbe distances as mendmied
above. Tbe groisse. broody or not. ccHild quite well have
upset his stomach. Mr. Ostman seems to he a stiaigbtfor-
ward and honest nun. But, it is tbe facts that be gave me
about the ABSMs themseives that go farther than any*
(hiog else to eoovioce me of the validity of the wbofe
(biog—unless, of course, as I have abo said above, be
read all of these eUewbere.

91



His descriptloDS of the creatures are considerably de*
tailed. What is more, the sexual and age diilereoces ha
describes are very reasonable, aod do not in any way
insult such variadoas as found among men or other prU
aiates. Of tbe adult malei he says that he was about eight
feet tall, bairel-ehested, with powerful shoulders and a
very pronounced and large “bump" on bis bach, causing
bis head to be carried somewhat forward. This U exactly in
accord with the posture of some sub-bomioids as deduced
from the angle at which tbe condyles are set to the back of
the skuD. Tbe biceps were said to be enormous but to taper
Co the inside of elbow; tbe forearm to be dispropor¬
tionately (to a buman) long but well proportioned. The
bands were wide but the palm long and curved pernia-
neotly into ‘'a kind of a scoop"; the f ngers short, and the
nails fiat, broad, and “shaped like chisels." Mr. Ostman
mentioned to me quite casually that they were copper-
colored. This is most significant, as wc shall see later
(C h apter 14). He estimated the neck to be about thirty
inches around. Tbe whole body was covered la hair, some¬
what longer on the head; shorter but thicker in other parts.
It covered his ears. Only the palms of the bands and the
soles of tbe feet, which had pronounced pads, were naked
and a dirty dark gray in color. Tbe "top" Ci.e. bridge) of
the nose and eyelids alone were naked. The big male's
canine teeth were longer than the others but not sufficiently
so to be called tusks.

The adult female he described as being over seven feet
tall and weighing between 500 and dOO pounds. He said
that she could have been anywhere between forty and
seventy years old, using humans as a criterion; but, she was
apparently very ugly, with an enormously wide pelvic that
caused her to wa^ like a goose. She bad long, largo, and
pendent breasts.

Tbe young male spent the most time near Ostman and
was thus most closely observed. Ostman says that he could
have been anywhere from eleven to eighteen years of age,
but was already seven feet tall and weighed about 300
pounds. His chest would have measured between fifty and
fifty-five inches around and bis waist was some twenty-sbc
to thirty-eight inches; and don't forget that Mr. Ostman
was a lumberman and better at estimating tbe girth of
things (like trees) than the average person. He bad wide
jaws and a narrow, sloping forehead. The back of bia head,
as in all of them, apparently rose some four or five inches
above the brow-line, and was pointed. Mr. Ostman went

92



to gnat pai&s to explain tbit* eiM) to get (be shape just
right. The hetd-hair was about six inches long; that on (be
body shorter but much thicker >o some areas.

The young female was very shy; she did oot opproach
Ostinan ctosely hut kept peeking at him from bebiud the
bushes, He could not estim.iie her age, bw remarks that
she was without any visible breast development and wai,
Ib fact, quite flat-chested. Like her mother, sbe bad a very
pronounced upcurled bang across her brow-ridges. This
was continuous from temple to temple. Curiously, no
amount of questioning would prompt Mr. Ostmu to
eJaborate aov fun her on this individual, which may is
part be psycbologica] since it seems to be )as convietkm
that be bad been kidn^Md as a potential suitor for her. and
I tbink be has a son of subconscious and rather touching
modesty about her shyness, Mr. Ostmnn maintains a de¬
lightful old-w'orld delicacy about the proprieties and seatly
turned aside some purely biological questions with such
noncomaiittai phrases as "I wouldn’t know about tbal.“
But he did tell us of a few more ioieresling observadons OQ
the behavior of the group.

First and foremost was this gibbering in which they In¬
dulged As bis story progresses, it becomes quite clear tbal
be assumed in the end that they were setuaBy communf-
catiog intelligenUy, since they made a variety of noises
befitting special situations and seemed to discuss the ob¬
jects they carried ^e to the other, There was also the
deli^tftd expression **ook*’ that the young male made no
OOB occasion. Then, almost equally sigaificaol, was the fact
that the old female aed the young mole went regularly to
gather vegetable foodr. (he fonner going out of the pp
and returning with armfuls of branches, including fresh
spruce and hemlock tips, grasses, and ferns, These, be told
me, she washed and stacked up. Sbe aho brought quanti¬
ties of a certain kind of "ground nut" of a kind that Mr.
Ostmtn hid often seen in ebundance on Vancouver Is¬
land, (Shades of Mike King!) Inquiry elicited the fact that
this is a root-nodule of a herbaceous plant related to the
Hemlock of Europe (oot the tree called by that name in
this continent), one form of which grows such nutlike
growths that are edible and. In facu delicious. The young
male used also to go every day and rcturo with bundles of
a kind of grass with a ‘'sweet root."

Mr, Ostinan stressed the inCTedible climbrng ability of
the male youngster and temcirked oo (he form of his and
hii father's feel as having an eoonnous big loe. At ooe

93



point h< sutM (h«i. \n order to get e purebose In dlniblni.
tJl be would need wouid be to find * resUn; pleec for this
(oe done.

Ooe of Mr. Ostman's observations is ve^ peculiar, and
IB one which eeo be taken either os evidence that the
whole thing l9 a wild fabricetioo or as glowing tnlimony
to the recorder's veracity and powers of observation, k
brings up some very fundWeiUal matters with regard to the
history of culture among earty hominids—if it proves to be
inie> that Is. This was that, according lo Mr. Osunan, the
four erealures slept and lived for the most part under a
rock'Icdge like the rock'Shelters known to have been fa¬
vored by many Stone Age men, lo this, which was some
ten feet deep and thirty feet wide, be says that they hod
regular beds of brtflches. moss, and dry grass, and that
they had coverkta of woven strips of bark, forming great
fiaiccoed bags, and efu^ed with dry graaes and moss. How¬
ever. I could not elicit from Mr. Ostman any facts as to
whether be visited the shelter and euminod these objects
or. if ooc bow be knew lO much aboot tbel/ construction
and composition. This worried, and stiO worries, me.

Should such items have existed, combined with the prim-
Irivc speech, the coDeetioo of food and its washing, we
are fa^ with a pretty problem. Are we to suppose that,
pi^r to Ibe uae of bone and boro tools (such as the little
very primitive Auscralopitbeeines of South Africa are now
thought to have used) and the discovery and control of
fire, boffiioids (man or oiberwise) went through a prior
period of food-galhcrlng but still knew weaving? This
would seem not to be unreasonoble of illogical, though
even crude weaving calls for consid^ble dexterity. Be it
noted at the same time that Orangs, Chimps, and Gorillas
on occaeioo. tie true keou when making their tlccplog
plutfonns while some Gorillas do so r^arly. Weaving ia
its most primitive form, moreover. Is Utllc further ad¬
vanced than excessive knot-eying; besides, some birds ^
the boet incredibly accurate jebs of weaving, even with
different colored wools, on a piece of imall-mesh wire.
Also, animals, and particularly the primates, definitely do
coounuoicate. (I may say that even 1 can speak fairly
good Rbesual)

Thus, there is nothing really outrageous about Mr, 0«-
man's statements about these creatures nor about the
whole COTcept of some ot the Sasquoidtes (Ne^Giants, as
ahaii eventually come to call them) being food^^
lectors, with a primitive speech but lacking fife, cloihea.

94



Mid tooU. And. it h even more interesting to note that Mr.
Ostman states clearly that he never saw them bring to Ihdr
camp, or eat, any animaJ food. The moet primitive sub*
bominida were ^obably, like their dose congeners <ibe
apes), fruit- and leaf-eaters. Only when some of them
were forced out ooio the savannahs, scrublands, end
serts did they have to take up animal-bumlng and become
partially or wholly carnivorous, as, apparent^, did the
Australopithccines of South Africa. If the Great Apes, stfll
liviog today, have continued to be pure vegeterians, there
Is eo reason why some of the most primitive Homiiude
could not alto have so continued to be. This gives us a
Mssewbat new coocepi of our own background and of tbe
possibilities for ABSMs,

This brings up several questions that, if it were posable,
ou^t to be discussed concurrently with any straight re¬
portage on the AfiSMs themselves. The details Of a report
on any such alleged creature cannot be evaluated property
without prior knowledge or exposition of certain aspecia.
00 tht one hand, of vegatology. and. on the otlw. of
pnleeanihropology, both physical and cultural (see Maps
II and irn. Our whole outlook on the last of these fiel^
baa undergone a complete revolution in tbe past two dec¬
ades. Tbe old idea was that sub'Hominids bad beat knees,
a stooped gait, ape-like faces and teeth and tiny brains, and
no **culture” at all, in that they had oo speech, no fir^ no
tools. Then, it was also previously bcUeved. sub-Meo came
along that stood more upright aod were biggar-bralned and
less epe-like about the muzzle. These creatures were
fumed to have invented tools by bashing st things whh
stones, which often cracked, giving Uiem cutting edges. The
usual idea was that they were hunters and lived in cavm,
and progressed steadily toward Man. though ukiog an
ioordioBtely loog time about it. Fioaily, some of them do-
veloped such big bnim and pushed-in faces that they
became true Men,

Meantime, ibclr tools got beiier and better, finer made,
and more dIversiSed. Also, the great growth in certain
parts of their brains made cogent speech possible. Thco,
ibe theory went, they somehow got oo tc &re and its usee
as apposed to its dangers, developed '‘sockry," developed
the an of pottery, and hoally realized that from tiny 5 ffd s
tall grasses grow, so that they gave up hunting and settled
down to agriculture. And. in rime, came the wheel, writing,
money, and all the other improvements ihat inevlubly
contributed to tbeir downfall. Be that as it may, the db-

95



^lopnoat of HonvDid mentar<ry, as opposed to mere
fciaio capacity aod siruchifc, was not much coosidewd,
beio^ assumed simply to have advanced aloag with his
gray matter, since, it was Ibea believed, you could not be
Rpected lo asMJs the psychology oX any extinct creature
and especially one with a brain no bigger than an ape’s.

The first real break through this massive theoretical
Slnieture was resliy made by a rather dubious aatiquariao
samed Mr. Dawson, who foisted upon science not only
the cow infaiijous Piltdown cranium, teeth, and mandible,
but aUo a fraudulent tool that he himself appears to have
made from a semi-fossilized boce of some depbantinc.
Piltdown Man never did look quite right but was fufly
accepted by physical anthropologists as a very early aad
primitive man-thing but with a very large brain. Thus, bis
grotesque tool was also accepted, Then, there was also
some suspicion that tools bad been found in the same strata
In which Dr. DuBois found his genuine "Apemas” in Java,
but the matter was rather hurrie^y suppressed. Acceptance
of toob ^OQg with sub*Human$ finally came with the dig¬
gings in north China that produced Pekia Man. This was
rather a rude shock, but did not grossly disturb the neat
bistOrica] sequence then believed in. It simply meant mov¬
ing Cool-tnakieg back some way. The real shocker earae
with Dr. Raymoad Dart's discovery of cnormons quanti¬
ties of bone and tooth tools most (^vioDsly and carefully
worked, which had to have been made by none other than
Ihe little Australopiihecines that were at first classed u
Apes, and only g^gingly accepted as most primitive sub-
Men after the discovery that they waked erect. Wone
SCUl, there was a strong pica mode for acceptance of
fact that they used fire as well. It then was decided (by
most, but not all. anthropologists) that the Hominids
vreni dirougb what Is called an odooiokeratJc, namely
"Tooth" and "Horn,” tod-making phase before they came
to use stones.

This picture has now been considerably muddied by Dr.
Leakey’s discoveries of early Cbellean Man In Bast Af¬
rica, and as appal ling-looking chap with positively im¬
mense brow ridges, but who made spleodid hand-axes of
Slone. Nevertheless, it is only now slowly dawning oo an¬
thropologists that the first tools were more probably sticks,
and otherwise wooden; for the earliest Hominids were
definitely vegetarians and forest dwellera The bom-iooih
toolmakers were carnivorous. The use of wood Implies
pulling twigs and branches from trees and the discovery of

96



the many oses of strips of bark. Pram this to primitiva
weaving is but a step. Thus. U i& quite probable (hat the
earliest Homlnids were vegetable gatherers, using sticks
and possibly the crudest weaving, and that th^ ao
equipped themselves loug before they get around to break*
ing nones, using fire, or even developing a inie language.
It is therefore most interesting to note, as our story coa*
tinues. that the only tools ever repotted in use by ABSMs
have been made of wood.


©7



4 The Appearance of Bigfeet


STILL MORE REPORTS PROM CANADA
(1940 TO 1960}

Mi. OsCmao's slor? was r^ted to Queen Eloa^th IT
when she vtsilcd British Columbia in \9S9. The siory Is
8 &id io have been submined (o Her Majesty by ao official
along with other Sasquatcbery, in a remote vacation cabin
at a lake near Kao^oops oo August 28. By coincideace. 1
was on that same day closeted in a imiU railroad shack
with a charming Amerindian couple oaixied Mr. aod Mrs.
George Chapman, al Jacko’s old retreat of Yale, some
ttiiles lowir dowo ihe Fraier River. I also wa$ facoriDg a
Story, hut firsthand, and in wbat nutted out later to have
been rather extraordln^ circumstances.

We had crossed the log>fiJ]ed Fraser in a small boot,
rowing first away upstream, tben very rapidly a long way
dowDslream broadside, and then fln^ a long way back
upstream again oo the other side in (be lee of a loll bank.
Scram bling to the Top of this we struck a railroad along
which an Amenndiao family were straggliog la from the
bills. By some strange quirk of fate, this turned out to be
the Chapman family for whom we were looking. They
hospitably Invited ue ia to the frci^t office, behind which
tbey had s small bouse.

Thai could have been a very tense or even profitless
interview for several reasons. Here we were, (wo palefaces
with locally odd accent^RtAbie Chnstto. ibough bom in
New Jersey, has rasched io Colorado, wears a fexac-type
hat. and has a vaguely British accent; while I talk a sort
of bastardized Anglo-Saxon with an .American intonation
and a British accent, neither of which are popular in Cbd-
eda—who had met up with a reticent Amerindian couple,
apparently quite by chance on a railroad track, and who
aow bad suddenly demanded to hear (ha facts of a earica


of incidents that bad bappeoed to these good people U
j^ears before. Somehow^ bovrevcr. and perhaps <lue mostly
lo a kind of miJd shock, we all tot oiT on the right foci and
within a surprislogly short ^ace of time Mrs. Cbapmao
was recounting those ferrule hours with complete clarity,
only every sow and thea being mildly corrected by her
husband, or having ber accouoc augmented by details
which she had not witnessed.

We had heard their story from several sources and bad
read it lO several prioted versioos. but I waated to get
ri firsthand and 1 wanted to be ^Ic lo ihotM my particular
glossary of awitward biological questions at ibe principals,
who were alleged eyewitnesses of a living Sasqueteh in day*
light. It is |usl as well (hat we crossed the Fnser River jut
when we did, and so met the Chapmans, because about a
ffloalh afterward they were drawaed crosring at tbc same
spot late ooe oigbt, Tbc ixooy and tragedy of this event
upset me greatly for, as I have said, I have a great
liking and respect for the Amerindlao peoples and I oot
only found tbs couple graciously natural and friendly but
they also impressed me. as very few other people have
ever dooc, with their sincerity and honesty. The Chapman
family at the tune of (he incident consisted of George and
Jeannie Chapman and three children. Mr. Chapman
worked on the railroad. They lived near a small place
called Ruby Creek. >0 miles up the Fraser River from
Agassiz, It was about 3 in the afternoon of a cloudiest
summer day when Jeannie Chapman’s eldest son. then
aged 9. carae ruooing to the house saying lhal there was a
cow coming down out of the woods at the foot of the
nearby mountain. The other kids, a boy aged 7, and a little
girl of 5, were stii) playmg in a field behind the hou»
bordering on the rail track.

Mrs. Chapman went out to look, since the hoy seemed
oddly disturbed, and tben saw what she at first thought was
a very Mg bear moving about among the bushes bordering
the field beyond the railroad tracks. She called the two
smaller children who came running immediately. Then the
creature moved out onto tbe tracks and sbe saw to ber
horror tbai h was a gigantic man covered with hair, not
fur. The hair seemed to be about 4 Inches long all over,
and of a pale yeUow>brown color. To pin down this color
Mrs. Chapman pointed out to me a shed of lightly var*
Dished plywood in the room where we were sitting. This
was of a brownish-ochre color.

This enature advanced direeOy toward the bouse aod

99



Mrs. Cbspmiio bad, as sh« put h. '^iicb loo much dme to
took at it” because she stood ber ground outside while the
eldest boy^in her insarucdons—got a blaoKei from die
hoQse and romdcd up the other cblldrcn. The kids were In
a oear panic, she told us, and rt took 2 or 3 minutes to get
the blanket, during which rime the creature bad reaci^
the near comer of the field only about 200 feet away fram
her. Mrs. Chapman then spre^ the blanket asd, holding
H aloft $0 that the children could act see the creature or it
them, she backed oS at the double to the old field and
down on to the river bcacbi out oi sight, and ran with the

kida downstream to iho village.

I aakcd her a leading question about the blanket. Had
her purpose in using it been to prevent the children seeing
the creature, in accord with an alleged AmeriudiaD belief
that to do so brings bad luck and often death? Her reply
wu both prompt and surpnslng. She said ihai. although
she had heard white men tell of that belief, she had sot
beard it from her parents or any other of ber people,
whose advice regarding the so'cafied Sas^uo<ch had been
simply not to go farther than certain points up certain vah
leys, to run if she saw one. but not to struggle if one
caught her, as it might squeeze her lo death by isbtake.

"No." she said, *'] used the blanket because I thought it
wu after one of the kids and so might go into the bouse to
look for them instead of following rib,” This seema lo
have been sound logic as the creature did go into the
house and also rummaged ihrou^ an outhouse preity
thoroughly, Bauliog from it a 55*gallon barrel of salt &b,
breaking this open, and scattering its contents about out¬
side. (The tragic irony Of it ia that aJI those original three
children did die within 3 years, while, as t have said, a
tnonth oiler we interriewed them. Che Cbapmans and
their new children drowned es well)

Mn. Chapman told me that Ihe creainra was about
feet tall. She could easily estimate the height by the various
fence and line posts standing about the field. It had a
rather small bead and a very short, thick neck; in fact
really no neck at aJI. a point emphasized by Williaai Roe
and by almost all others who claim to have seen one of
these creatures, lla body was entirely human bi shape ex¬
cept that it was immensely thick through its chest and Its
arms were exceptionally long, She did not see the feet
which were in ihc grass. Its shoulders were very wide and
it bad DO breasts, from which Mr. Chapman assumed it
was a male, though sbe also did not see any mala gcoliaiia

100


duo to tbo iooi hair coveruf its grolo. Sbo waa moot
definJto on ooe point: the naked pare of its face and ita
hands were much darker tbao its balr, and appeared to be
almost black.

George Chapman reruroed home from his work on the
railroad that day shortly before 6 In ibe evening and by a
route that bypassed the villafe. so that be saw no one lo
(ell him what had happened. When he reached his house
be Lmoiediately saw the woodshed door battered In. and
sported ecoRDous humanoid fooipriots all over Ibe place.
Greatly alanned^for. like all of bis people, be had beard
since ebildbood about the "big wild men of the moua*
taJzu/’ though be did net bear iha word Sasq$taich till after
this iocident—be called for his family and then dashed
through the house. Tben be spotted the foot-tracks of his
wife and Idds going off toward the river. He followed
these uniil be picked them up oa the sand beside tbe
river and saw them going off downstream M>lihoui tuty
gfnnr onts fcthwin$.

Somewhat relieved, be was retracing his steps when be
stumbled across the giant’s foot-uacks on (he river bank
farther upstream. These came down out of tbe potato
patch, which lay between the house and the river, milled
about by the river, and then went back through tbe oU
5eld toward the foot of the mouotaios where they diaajv
peered in tbe heavy growth.

Rerumiog to the house, relieved to know that the tracks
of all four of hts family had gone off downstream to tbe
village, Geor^ Chapman went to examine the woodshed.
In our interview, after lH yean, ho still expreued voluble
astooisbment ibai any living thing, even a 7-foot-6-uich
man with a barrel-chest could lift a 55-galkm lub of 6^
out of the narrow door of the shack and break it open
without using a tool. He coofinned the creature's height
after flnding a number of long brown hairs stuck In tbe
dab wood lintel of tbe doorway, above tbe level of bis bead.
George Chapman iben went off to the ritlage to look for
his family, and found thnu ia a state of calm coll^se.
He gathered them up and invited hia father-in-law and
two others to return with him. for protection of bis family
when he was away at work. The foot-traeks returned every
night for a week and on two occasions (be dogs that tbe
Chapmans bad taken with them set up the most awM
racket at exactly 2 o’clock in the morning. The Sasquatch
did not. however, molest them or. apparently, touch either
Ibe house or the woodshed. Bui the whole busineu was too

101



unnerving and the family finally moved oot They never
back.

After a long chat ofaout this and oiher matters, Mra.
Chapman suddenly told u$ something \ery 8igni6cant just
as we were leaving. She said: "It made an awful funny
ootse." I a^ked her if :ihe could Imllaic this ooise for me
but it was her husband who did so. saying tbai he had
heard it at night twice during the week after the first inci*
dent He then proceeded to utter cxactiy the same strange,
gurgliog whittle that the mea b California, who had told
IIS they had heard a a Oh-Moh (or ''Kgfoot*') call, had
grven. This Is a sound 1 cannot reproduce in print, but I
c&n assure you that it is imhke anything I have ever beard
given by man or bea&i anywhere to the world. To me, this
information is of the greatest significance. That an Afflerin>
dtan couple in British Columbia should give out with
axnctly the same strange sound in connecdon with a
SasquaicH that two highly educated white men did. over
600 miles eourh in connection with Calitomia’s Bgfoot. is
iocredibid. If this is all a hoax or a publicity stunt, or mass
haOuclnaticn, as some people have claimed, how does it
happen that this ooise—’Whieb defies description—always
sounds the santc qo matter who has tried to reproduce it
foe me?

A somewhat more colorful story was told by a welU
known old Amerindian "medione maa“ samed Frank Dan.
(This I reproduce by the kind permission of Mr. J. W.
Bums.) This, he says, occurred in July, 1936 along Morris
Creek, a small tributary of the Harrisoa River (see Map
VIJ. J. W. Bums writes of Frank’s story;

It was a lovely day. the dear wstere oF (he croeb
shiminered fa the bright sunehlno and reflected (be wild
BOiTOOiKUngs of cliff, trece, sad vagrant cloud. A languid
breeze wafted aerosa (he rocky gnllles. Frank’s craoe was
gjsdfag like a hsppy vision along ffae mountalo stream.
Tbe Intflan was busy hooking one fish after anotfaer;
hungry fidi that had been Ifcerated oaJy a few days be*
fore from some hatchery. But the Indian was happy ns he
polled tbem In and sang his medicine song. Then, witb-
ont wnnine. a roefc was horled from tbe shelving slope
above, faDfag with a fearfol ^ash witbbi a few feet
of his canoe, almost swamping the fraO crafL Startled
out ha shiiii Fnnh glanced opward, and to hk amaz^
meot beheld a weird looking creature, covered vHb balr.
leaping from rock to rock down tbe nUd declivity wHb

102


ibe agflliy of i BODDtiiB gML Fmlc recognii^d dM
bak7 oeatm tasturtly. II was a Sasqoateb. He knew It
was one of the gints—-he bad otet tben on aereral oc«
sloQs hi past yaan» once oo his owd doontep. But those
were ii tioiid sort and oot onnUy like the geot be was ziow
facing.

Frank cnDed upon hit nicdkfne powers, lula, and
dmilap spirits to protect him. There was an Immediate
respoBBe to hh appeal. The air throbbed and some huge
boulders dM down the rocky boodUId dde, ■—idw g a
oohe Uke the crack of doom. Tte was to frijditeo awa y
the Sasquatch. But the gianl was doI to be frt^tcned
felling rods, lostead be hurried down the dcciriity
car ryi ag a great stonei ptwbably weighing a loo or more
[del under Us great hairy am. which Frank guemed
Just a rourir guees—was al least 2 yards to length.
Reachfag a point of vantage—a |u(tlAg ledge that hong
tu oot over the water—be hurled II whb iD his might,
this lime mhdng the canoe by a oarrow marglD, filling
it with wat9 and dreocUng the poor frightened ocenpant
with a dood of spray.

Some Idea of Oie size of (he boulder may be gafawd
from (be fact th«t fts bnge hoik blocked the channel.
Later It was dredged out by lack Peony os the aulbority
of the departmeot of hinlerlaod navigation, ft may now
be seen oo the lOdi floor of (be Vancouver PnbUc Mo>
Kum In the deparimeot of **Carlous Rocks.” When
youVe In VancofTTCT drop in to the museum and T. P. 0.
Menziei, curator, erill gladly show It to you. The giant
DOW poMd upon the other ledge In an altitude of wild
majesty as if be woe monarch of these forbodfa^ baonta,
shaking i colossal fist at the "great medklM mao** who
sat awopstmek and shuddering in Ihe canoe, whkb be
was trying to ball out wHb his shoe. TW lodian saw the
Sasqvitch was In a towering nge, a pamlon chat caused
the great imd to exude a repugnaot odor, wbkb war
carried down to the canoe by a wisp of wind. The smell
made Frank diuy nod his eyes began to smari and pop.
Frank ucrer smelt anything in bis whole medidne
career like It. It was more repriUng than (he stench of
moccasin oB gone rotten. Indeed, it was so nmly that (he
firii quitted the poote and nooks and beaded in schools
for the Harrison RKer. The Indiao, believing the giant
was about to dive Into the water and attads Maft, cmi off
his firidng Uses and paddled away as fast as be was ride.

103



I inc)ui!e this story not so much for aoything it might
sdd to the general picture of ABSMs lo the area—there is
ample evidence of that in any ease—but to exemplify the
type of laic told by the Amerind (bat causes the white man
to doubt hU veracity. Frank Can was an old and respected
jnedIciDC mao living by the precepts and beliefs of his
ancestors, Thui, his ititorpretation of events had to be in
accord with his posidoo in the comratmity. I believe that
facts colored by these precepts may be readily spotted ia
bis account and just as rusdily eliminated. If this Is done,
we are left with a pretty straightforward accouQl; namely,
that while fishing, a Si3s</uaich appeared, hurled some
rocke at the old gentleman, and stank like hell. The
induced landslide and the weight of the second rock
hurled, or perhaps merely dislodged into the river, as
woU as (be giant’s Implied cuise, are pure erabellishments.
Even the mass exodus of the trout might well be per>
fcclly true and due to a cascade of boulders rather tlaa to
a atink in (he eir (hat (hey couJd of course act smell in the
water. Besides. Frank Dan’s "medicloe” came off second
best and he had manifestly lied. He couldn’t explain this
fact away, bo bo just did >ho best he could so net to show
up in too poor a llgbi. As a matter of fact, Mr. Burns
records that he gave up being a medicine man from then
OA, saying that his powers bad been finally defeated.
That would seem to be the act of an honest man.

During iht$ decade the Amerinds of this orcti appear, by
nil acenunM. (o have suffered quite a spell with ibelr Sas-
^uatch»s. One by the name of Pauli, in company with
others returning from a lacrosse game, met one on the
main road near Attaissiz: another party only a few miles
A wav ran into one oo a moutsTaio. and one of the men
fired ai it in pure fright, wbcieupon it pursued them to
their canoe, in which they jnst managed to escape. An¬
other local man, when dressing after a swim ia a river on a
hot summer day was confronted by one near a rock, and
was just about to address it in his language w^en it rose to
its full height and nearly seared him out of his wits. StKl
another group told Mr, Bums that they bad watched one
fighting a large bear for a long time and flnafly killing It by
siraDgulatioo. In aoothcr place, an old maa said that a
party of Sasqrra/ches used to watch loggers at work and
then, a^r they had gone home for tbc evening, come out
and imitate their activities as If playbg a game. But, per¬
haps (he most curious is an incideoi told to the same Inde-
ialigatne iovestigator, Mr. Bums, by (be tame CQarley

104


Victor Of ChlZIiwtck already meotioced, and which f here-
wttf} reproduce with the former^ permisaioo. Charley
apeakit aod saya:

i waa IronttDg (n the EBoontaiiie new Hatzlc. 1 had my
dog with me. I came ool on a pKareaa whoe ihert were
•event big cedar inea. The dog etood before one of (he
trecr and begaa to growl and bark at it On Jo^dng op
to see what excited him, i noticed a Urge hole In the tree
7 feel from Ibe gronndL The dog pawed and leaped upon
the trank, and looked at me to nisa him op, which t did.
and he went iaCo the iMrfa. The next aomeot a mufDed
oy came from the hole. ] said to myself! **Tbe dog U
tewing IdIo a bear,** and with my rifle ready I urged tbe
dog to Mve Kim out, and oot came something I took fw
a bear. I shot mid it fell with a thud to the groood.
**MiirdeH Ob my!” I apoko to myself to surprise and
alarm, for Ihe thing I had sbol looked to me like a white
boy. He was node. He was about 12 w 14 yean of age.

[Id hU description of Ibe boy» the Indian said las bah
was Mack and woolly.]

Wounded and bleeding, the poor feOow spravtied
opoo the ground, bot when I drew close to exat^e the
extent of his lQ|wy, he let out a wild yeO. or, rather a
call as if be were appc^log for help. From across (he
moonlam a long way off rolled a booming vc4ec. Less
Chan half an hoar, oat from tbe depdis of the fonff
came the strangest and wildest u e aiuie one coold poa>
siUy see. I raised my rile, bot not to shoot, hot in case
I would have to defend myself. Tbe strange creatare
walked toward me wHbtml the riigbUst fear. Tbe wDd
person was a woman. Her face was almost negro Mack
and her long straight hair fell to her waist. In height she
would be about 4 foot b«t her cbest and shoulders were
well above tbe average breadth.

The old men remarked that he had met several *'Wild
Persons" in his lime but bad never seen anyone half so
savage in appearance as this woman. This Md brave con*
leased (hat be was really afraid of her and (bat he had
fled.

This story does add some significant facts to the over-all
picture because of tbe details given of the youngster's fur
cMor compared to (hat of the female, and the curious
statement about tbe length of her head-bair. Tbe former
agrees with the accounts of laeko and some other reputed

105



ABSM yoQcgsters: the l&tter !s, as fax as I koow, a con*
pkttly unique item. 1 wooder about (his latter b^ause I
have noted a disdact tendeae^, perhaps p&ycbotoglcai, for
people to assume that the head*har of wild people
would be of the Lady Oodiva type. A good friend of mine
a weU'known artist who has dlustrated many scieotific
works and natural history books, once sent me bis ''im*
pressiofi" of a Californian Oh-Mah which greatly surprised
me. Despiis this man's extensive knowledge of mammalian
aoatorey asd long experience in drawing animals to the
speciheatioos and approval of zoologists, be bad depicted
just a great big white>rype msn with long Sowing hair and
80 immense beard. This seems, Indeed, to be the popular
conception of an A8SM: yet, everybody who claims to
have seen one ciskes specisd mention of the small pointed
h«ads, small round eyes close together end directed straight¬
forward. extra long arms, aad ghort bead-hair, a naked
face M>iihoDi beard and prognathous jaws but oo lips (i.a,
no ever^on of the lips). Tbe picture given of all of them
by those who ciaJis lo have seen them, Is of creatures with
several distinctly ooabuman characters, c^ectally about
the head end fece. However, the same witneses every¬
where and all nalivs who say they knew of the existence
of ABSMs-^and this goes for the Central Asiatics, as
well as Malays, African, and North and South Americans
—insist just as vehemently that the creatures arc bumaa
rather iban animal. Quire where various people draw the
dividing line between the two prescots other pusles. but
the Kazakhs of the U.S.S.R. who caught one of their
Kfy-Giih, thought It was a mao wearing a disguise, while
the Soviet Army medical officer who examined a Kapiar,
pronounced it so humao that It should be released. Eveo
the Hill Batuks of Somatra. who are themselves just about
at the bottom rung of the cultaraJ ladder, call ibvir local
Orang Pendeks and Orang Gadong.t by a name that denotes
"wild men." The Malays of the same country, however,
call eveo the Aftos (ibeir great ape), the Orang-uian (l.e.
''butan" *). which simply mean wild (um;i) maa (orang).
The Ameribds of our Northwest insist that the Sasguotches
are very lowly forms of men. so lowly that they, Ajnet*
inds, do not want W associate with them in any way; pr>
ferring not to talk about them and tspecially about the

■ This is the correct spelling In Malay, and "or»ng" really
means "person," not “man."—Author.

106


possibility of mating with them. That would lead to con-
lamia atlon of their race. and. If the very idea got into the
white man’s head, it would lead to a further degradation of
tlieir status by ibe implicatioo that they might be partly
wild TbeiDseWes,

The basic “humanlfy’* of AUMs is perhaps understand¬
able as regards the pigmy and the giant types, for both
leave what at first sight look exactly tike cither very small
or very large human footprints, as most certainly do (he
Eurasian Atmesiy (see Chapter 13,) The man-si^ Meh~
Teh type, on the other band, leave a most unhuman type
ot footprint. Hncoualers with Sasquaches are really so
cofflfflOQ that they become boring in the telling. 1 could
give dozens more, all of which were allegedly witnessed by
more than two people and occurred between 1930 and
I960, but 1 shall refrain and confine cny concluding re¬
marks to three cases that for some reason created great
stirs and which appear to have finally convinced the gen¬
eral public chat something was going oo.

The first would not appear to have boen any more out*
standing than dozens of otberi, but the personditiea of the
couple concerned played a considerable part in the formu*
lotion of public Opinion. These were two young people
Q^med Adeline August and her boy friend William Point.
They happened to be particularly popular and attractive,
and were thee attending the local high school. They bad
been on a picnic and were walking home along (he Cana¬
dian Pacific Railroad track right by Agassiz when a large
Sasqueich stepped out of the woods ahead of them. Adeline
sensibly bolted, but young William stood his ground to
cover faer flight and grabbed ap two rocks with which to
defend himself. However the ABSM k^t steadily advene-
ing and when it was only 50 feet away William Point
decided to retreat. He said that it was about iwice the
size of an ordinary, large, well-built in an, covered with
hair, and had anna so long lhat they iimost reached ibe
ground. Witliam Point also said, 'Tt seemed to me tbal his
eye.s were very large, and the lower part of his oose wag
wide, and spread over the greaier part of his face.'' Locally,
the accouHT of this foung couple wag fully believed, and
despite the fact that (hey were Amerinds.

This was in 1954. The following year the most outstand¬
ing of all Canadian cases occurred. This was related by
ooe Wiliiani Roe, mentioned above, ami is succlocily and
amply covered in the following affidavit:

107



l>KPO$mON BY MR. WILIJAM MV.

Pram (he Ci(y of Edmootoa, Alberta. Ai ftfEdavit bf
WlJIlaia Roe. To the Agasste, Harrison Advsnce, Praiters
& Pubtfebcrs, Drawer O. Agaaiz. B.C.: AttenHoo Mr.
John W. Green. From (be legal Dc^artmeiU of AUeo F.
MacDonald, B.A., X.L.B.f City Solkhor., H. P. WJsou*
B.A. As^ City Solicitor and R. N. Saacders, Claims
Ageot.

Dear Sin

Re Affidavit of Mr. WIlfaiD Roe» od Aagort 26fb,
1957. Mr. Wm. Roe approached ibe writer requeeting
the swearing out of An Affidavit in regard to a strange
animal be had seen In British ColumUa.

Hie affidavit was drawn ap by a ineiaber of our legal
department and sworn to In the usual nunocr bf the
writer.

I eonoot fdate as to the mditability of (be story.

We (met the foregoing iaforraation will be of assist¬
ance.

Yom hndv.

(signed) W. H. Clerk

Assl. Claims Agent

WUC:ek.


AFFIDAVIT

X Roe, of the City of Edmootoa, in the province of
Alberta make oath and say,

(1> That the exhbit A attached to IhJs, my affidavit,
Is absohitely true aad correct In all details.

Sworn before me In (be City of Edmontoo, Province
of Alberta, this 26ih day of August, A.D. 1957,

(signed) Wo. Roe and then
signed by Claric onder a
numberins D.D. 2812

EXHIBIT A

Ercr since I was a small boy beck In tbc forces of
Mlchigao, 1 here stndied (be Iivca nod biblta of wild
anlmala. Eater when 1 sopported my family In northern
Alberta by bunting and (rapping, I spent many boors
Jofit otKerriag (he wQd tbinga. They fascinated me. The
most IncredBde experience t ever had with a wild crea-
tnre occurred near a Uttfe place called Tete f aone Caebe,
B.C.. about 50 miles west of ^sper, Alberta.

108


t biMl been woHdng oa the k^wa; aeax Ifab plftce»
Tete iaune Cache, for abool 2 >ear9. Id October I95S,
I decWed to climb five np IVlka Moooiaia to an
old deserted mine, just for something to do. 1 cnme fai
9^t of the mine abost 3 o'clock !a Ibe afternoon after
ao easy clJnib. I bad just cone oM of a patch of low
l«D6h into a clearing. frbCD I saw what I thought was a
griuly bear In (he brush on the other sde. I had ibot
ft grlzzJy oeir tw spot (he year before. Thk ooc was
only about 7S yards away, bnt I didat want (o shoot R,
for I had no way of getthig R out So 1 eat down on a
snaO rock and watched. wM my rMc b my band.

I could hiA sec part of (be anlmars bead aad the top
of one sbouldcf. A arameal bier l( raised np aod
stepped eat into the opeobg. Then I saw It wan’l a
bear.

This (o the best of my recollection b what the crea*
tiire looked like aod bow R acted as h cane acrom tba
rleariag dhtetiv (awards ne. My firal Impression was of
a huge mao aboot d feel tall, almob 3 feel wide, and
probably weighing near 300 pounds. Il was covered
from bead (o fool wlib dark browit tilvcr*tlpped hair.
But as h came closer I aaw by fts breasts thm It was
female.

And yet. Its torso ww not curved IBtc a female's. Its
broad frame was strai^i from shoulder to hip. Its anas
were much thicker ibaa a nan's anw aod longer, reach*
ing almost to Its knees, its feet were btwader proportion*
ately than a man's, aboat 5 Inches wide la the fronl aad
lapering io much iblaner heels. Wbea H walked U placed
(he heel of its fool down firat. aad I coold tee the gny*
browa or hide on the soles of Hs feeL

ft came Io the edge of the bosh I was bJdlug In. within
20 feel of me. and squatted down on Hs haoncbca.
Reaching oot its hands It pulled the branches of bushes
towards il and stripped the leares wlib Ms teeth. Its Ups
curled flcslbly around tbe leave as M are. 1 was close
enough to see (hat Hs teeth were whhe aod even. Tbe
bead was blgber al (be back (ban ■( the front The nose
was brood and flat The Dps and cbla protruded farther
than bs ooee. But (be hair that covered It. lesvlog bare
only (be parts of Its face aroiuid ibe mouth, oose and
ears, made il resemble ao as msefa as a boman.
None of this hair, even on tbe its bead, was
longer (hao an Inch, aito lhaS on its face nneb tfaorter.

109



1(9 ean wer« shajitd b*ke a fammui's car«. Bid Its fja
wn smuU aod block Ukc a bear’s. Add Its occk tdso
yias unhuniaii. thkker and sborter than an> miin’s 1
have cv«r seen.

As I watched thb creaiure I woodo^d if some oiosie
company was mukUg a film ai this ploce and (list what I
saw was an actor made op to look partly faumiD. port!)
aium«t. But as I observed it more I deciiled it noiJd be
imposdble to fuke mch a specimen, .iny'way. I Icamed
liticr there was no such company near that area. Nor, io
fact, did anyooo li*u up Mica Moonloin, occordiog to
tke people who lived In Icle Jauoe Cache.

Finally, the wild thing must have got my scent, for »l
looked directly at me (hrnufih an opening in the hruth,
A look of ama/emcot crosed its face. It looked M
comirid at tha( moreent I had to grin. Still in a crouched
position, ii backed irp three or four Uiort steps, Iben
stratgbtened op to its foil keigbl aod started to walk
rapidly back Ihe way it bad come. For a oioment it
waicbrd me over its shoulder as It tveoC. not exactly
afraid, hut as IhougQ U wanled no cootacl wttb anything
straoRe.

The thought canie to me that If I shot M I woold pos*
ribiy haw a speclmeu of ip'eat lofvrrd fu scieniLnia iLc
world over. 1 hail hrord stones about the Sasqtiatch, (he
goat hair} ^Indlaor’’ that l[\« lo the legend cf the In*
dlaos of BrilJbh Columkbi and olso. many ctoin ore still,

io foct. alive today. Mayhe this was a Snsqiiaubt I told
myself.

I levelled my rMc. The ereatore wns still walking
rapidly away, a^n turning 1(9 beod to look in my dlrec*
lion. I lowered tbc riile. Althoogh I have called (be crea*
Idiw it.” I fell now that U was a human heiig. and I
hflew I would never forgive my^tf If I killed il.

lust 89 it came to tbc other patcb of brush H (brew
Its head back and made a peculiar oobc that seemed (o
be half lough and h&lf longnege. and whleb 1 cuuld only
dMCribe as a kind of a whinny. Then 1( walked from
the small hru&h Into a stand of lodge*aole pines.

I stepped out into ilie opening aod looked across a
snail ridge jud beyond (he pine Io aee U I could xee U
again. It came out on the ridge a couple of huudred
yards away from me. tipped its bead back again, and
again crailied the ooly sound I had keard It make, but
who( this half (augb, half language was meant to convey

1 10


I do Ml kAOWi It dbuppMftd tfeM« Aod I Mv«r nw tt
again.

1 waoted to find ooi it Uved on TeKvtation endr^ or
«(« oMflt *9 well, 00 1 w«Qt down and looked for
I found it* in fire differeol places, and nlthoogb C a-
amlned It tborau 2 bly, codM find oo hair or sbeUs or iMfi
or IttMcts. So I believe b wae strktl^ n vegetartaa.

I found oaf place wbere i1 bad dept for a couple of
ol^ts Dnder a tree. Now, the Bights were cool up ibe
oiouotain, at this iteie of year especially, and yet It bad
not oaed a fire. I found do sle&s that 11 posaeased even
i]ae simplest of tools. Nor cQd 1 find uay stgos (lul il had
a single companion while la this place.

Whether this cteature irns a Sasquatch I do not know.
It wiB always remain a myTtery to me unless another
one la found.

I bcarby declare the above statenunt to be In every
part true, to the be «1 of my powers of obtervatfoo and
recottecUon.

Slgoed Willian Roe

WltnesKd

This priceless document was also unearlhed by the endO'
faiisAhie John Green of ibe Agassit-Honison Ad'vanct,
upon whom the aunile of Sasquaich research, oobly worn
by Mr. J. W. Burns for »o many years, seems to have
fallen. He published It in his paper and the results were
electric. Not only did it bring Mr. Ostman’s story to light;
it got the whole neifbborhood on its toes, including even
the Chamber of Commerce of the resort town of Harmon
which made moves to advertise a Sasquatch hunt a& a come-
OA for iu centenary celebratioos! Fortunately, and decently,
this idea was dropped but S5000 U sold to have been
offered for the capture of a Sasquoich. This was not, of
course, collected but it brought forth another rash of
encounter storks. Notable among these—and most noted
LQ the world press—was a story reported by a Mr. Stanley
Hunt of Vernon. B.C.. a respected and widely knows
auctioneer, wbo. when driving at night along (be Trans*
Canada Highway near a place called Flood on ibe lower
Fraser River south of Yale, oo May 17. 1956, had to slow
down to permit one of them to cross the road. Il was

* fl add here the following note (hot I presume he Is referring
there to dreppings or faeces of this animal of which be says be
fouad evidenee io five differeot places-I

111



immense and covered with “gray hair." and, waiting for
it on (he other side of (be mad. there was, Mr. Hunt
relates, another ooe “gangiy, not stocky like a bear."

According to C S. Lambert, writing in 1954, &e silua-
ticQ changed coaslderably tn 1955 when.

After a serks of aJarmli^ reports tbot these (tlants
were prowling around Harrison Mills, SO miles east of
Vancouver, disriirHog (lie rrsideots by their wdrd wolf*

lOco ho«vh at nlgbt, and deBtroying property, a band of

rigilantes wa.<i organizeil to track the inaraiiders down.
However, no speelmen of Ihc primifive tribe was cap*
tored, and many white people bccaow op«dy sceptical
oC (he ealsceace of tbc

According to Allen Roy Evans, In (be Montreal Stand¬
ard (“B.C’s Hairy Giants^'k (he Indians are tow very
sensitrre (o any inpalatlons east upon (hdr veracity in
l&is osatier. Dvriog tbe (9di century they were ready (o
teQ enquirers all they knew alMut tbe Sosqiiatch men;
bat today they have become more re.^serr^, and (alk
only to Covemmeat agents shout Hie oiaHer. They main-
tain that ihe *^(ld Indlaiis'’ are divided iotu two tribes,
whose rivalry with each other keeps ibeir nuiober down
and so i^events them beeaming a serions menace to
others.

Ezpedrrions have been organized to track down tbe
Susqoatch raea to (heir lair in the mountains: bet the
Indians employed to goide tbese eipedidons invariably
desert before they reach (he danger zone. However, cer*
fain large eaves have been discovered, with aiaii'iDade
walk of stone loside then, and specially-shaped stones
fitted to their modths, like doors. The difficulty in the
way of penetraHog to the heart of the Morris Moantoms
district is very great. The terrain Is cut up by deep
gorges and almost ImpaMuble ravines: it b easy to get
lost, and hard to make substantial progress in any one
dlrectioB Cor long.

In the fall of ihc following year large human-like foot*
peiflls turned up overnight all over the place in (bis area.
Throughout a hundred years of Sosquaichery, footprints
are often mentioned casually, but nobody sccras to have
been particularly impressed by them or (o have done
anything about ibeia. Suddeoly they \ook over the front
pages.


112



5. Footprints on the Sands of . . .

ABOMINABLE AFFAIRS IN THE U.S.

U you look out of >‘Oiir window one mominf to find that
It bas snowed during the jij|bt. you may be happy or you
may be sad. If then, while contemplating ihU quite natural
pbCQOmeoon, you perceive upon its pristine surface a oum*
her of marks of regular shape, forming a set of tracks, the
sundry relays, feedbacks, and synapses in your brain may
snap open or shut m ordered patterns, causing you to
register almost subconsciously such concrete items as man,
dog. car, aoowplow, or suchlike. You may even go so far
as actually to think, saying to yourself ’That’s funny,
Mary went out already.” Foot*iracks are commonplace,
and quite logical, and we consider them as objects. Yet
they are not even quasi-objects; they are entirely negati\e
physically: are purely subjective concepts; and in almost
ail cases are ephemeral things. Nevertheless, they are
tpjite acceptable, provided we have a ready-made answer
for them, ranging from vague terms such as ”dog.” all the
way 10 "Mary wearing a parucular pair of shoes.” When,
however, a set of foot-trucks turns up on snow, or any
other surface for that matter, to which people cannot im¬
mediately put a label, they become quite hysterical, and
in their frantic efforts to explain this appalling l^g, they
will indulge in the most ter^yiogly illogical actions. They
also say the sillieu things.

Simple logic demands that a foot or any other print
must have been made by socnethiog. and something which
must have been at the pc^nt where (he imprint was made.
Bui sometimes, unfortunately for humanity, matters don't
always work wt that way. in either one or both of these
respects. The second class of problems is tbe less awful.
For instance. ”Kow on earth dkl Mary gel up on the bam
roof?" may jolt you but can have all sm of logical expla-

113



naiioos. If one b sufficiently concerned about Maiy’s wel¬
fare, U is the common piactice to inv&stigste these In order
of likelhood. slaning by asking Maryi if sbe is around;
and ending by caJling in the loag-aufTeifng police if she
has disappeared. Even in this class, howerer, there can be
oasty ones. We once found a set of what looked like our
tame porcuplne’t tracks, inside an empty cage, which was
eoasCructed of heavy wire in the form of a cube on all
six sides, nnd had a firmly locked door. That took some
investigation and it reduced a number Of normally sane
CtUrens to gibbering Uiiols in the meantime.

(Said porcupine bad once beeo boused in that cage for
an hour or so. white Us own cage was cleaned and repaired,
by an assistant who w^is not present when the bizarre
discovery was made. The earth floor Inside (he cage had
bacn wet at the time and the animal bod left deep tracks
Tii the claylike mud. This dried solid. The as&isctni bad
then, in accord with his roudne duties, put a 2 -inch cover¬
ing of fresh earth over this. The night before the uproar
there had been about IS minutes cf torrential raio, which
had washed all (his top layer exactly off ibe old hardened
one and the trseks had appeared looking just as if they
were fresh and, of course, once again in damp earth.)

The mote abominable claa^ is that of individual pnnta
or sets of tracks—and the two items ate quite different
and should be at all times most catefolly defined by the
tise of the appropriate tenrt—for which there U not a
ready-made explanation. A pr/nf (or imprint) is an indl-
^*dual ttem such as that of one foot. A set of frach (or a
crack) is, on the other hand, a series of prinU. cither
Inierropied a« in Rnimals. or continuous as made by
wheeled machines, left by some moving object. There are
quite a lot of reports of single prints being found both in
such positions as may be explained—as In a small patch of
roud on a rocky path—but on occasion lo places that can¬
not be explained. These last arc, of course, very unnerving.

Sasifuarc/i imprints aod tracks, along with those of ibeir
relatives or congeners, by whatever name they were known,
were perfectly all right by the Amerinds because they had
ju.it such a ready-made answer, all of them, as they readily
tell one, knowing perfectly welt that (hey were made by the
big, wad, hairy men of the woods; or by their wves and
children. As ih« Amerinds gave up beiof Americans and
started to become, or were forced to become sort of bogus
Europeans, they forgot to tell (heir own children about
penonagei. The i«ull was that in lime we even have

114



Amerind; becoming for s Hme lightly disturbed.
tAmericdfi never under any conditions beewne '‘hysteri'
col.’*] Wben. however, white mea first saw these large
AB5M Cracks they invariably went into a fairly advanced
trauma. This habit was appareotiy unKersal among Euro*
peons and people of European origin, right up imtil the
time when a ready-made answer become disseminated—
namely, Sasquektehei. Oh’Maht, etc.—whereupon a happy
reaction set in. This was simi^y to say: *'Oh, those!
Don't worry, they’re made by runaway Indians: they have
huge feet, you kriow. and sometime; grow hair to keep out
the cold.** (Amerinds. 1 should point out here, are either
wholly or substantially of MoogoliMd ancestry, the group
of the human race that is defined as being the most glB'
broue [almost without body haJrk. and having particularly
small, neat feet.)

It Is rather interesting to note in passing that persons of
African ancestry have behaved quite otherwise ihrough'
out. They possess ancestor; who have always recognised a
noo'material world juw as widespread and as real a; the
material one. This is probaNy why they are such great
pngmaiists. Wbai is more, according to them, entities in
hoih workla custocnarUy muck about in the other, so that
men's souls can range around ’’elsewhere*’ and chumhis
whet we in our innocence call ghosts, poltergeists,
and spinis-^an, in their esfimadon. quite well leave im*
prints and foot<tracks. Africans of the Negroid branch of
humanity and their deacendanTs arc. therefore, the greatest
skeptics throughout our siory. they have never really been
interested in or even much surprised about the matter,
for they have a sim of built-in answer: and while they
have always thought Europeans to be stupid for not carry*
ing on with disembodied eniittcs, they usually think (he
Amerinds quite batty for needing an embodied entity to
explain these tracks. The few peofdc of African origin
whom I have met in Use course of this business in North
America, a; w'elJ as b Africa appear, furthermore, to have
accepted the pbysfcaj appeaxaoce of ABSMs ihat they
themselves have witness^ ndth (he utmost equanimity
and simply as lucky or dangerous happenstances.

1 bring all this up now because U has lo be aired In any
case sooner or later, and becawte from now on we are
going to have all three major branches of the human race
iovolved in the matter. Thdr reaciioos are indeed differ*
ent. whatever anybody may say about gcoeralizalioos. AH
three ’’races'* ore present in the United States, where our

IIS



story now takes is. am) siDce we sue goiAg to foUow the
loot'tracks o/ tbe ABSMs. ctear tbrougb this counlry to
tropical America, we are gmng to have to be prepared
for some real surprises—both ways. You will see what 1
mean by this io a miooie.

At this point I would ask yoo to glance at Maps II and
TV before ptoceeding, because, without some idea of the
facts of vegctatiooal dislribuiioo. very little of what I
have to ssy in ihH and the next chapter will make much
sense. I know by experieoce that it is quite all right for me
or anybody else to say almost anylbiog about foreign
lands, and the farther away and thus foreign they are, the
more outrageous the elal^ may be. This is the reason
why such a high pereenuge of “ttphrors'' are found, oa
proper lnve$2igatk>o (U that Is possible, whieb it seldom
is), to be phooies, even if only mildly aad Innocuously so.
When, on the other hand, anybody makes even slightly
unusual remarks about the country jh which be Is speak¬
ing and to clUaeos of ihai country, be b almost certain to
be disbelieved, probably riJIcuM, aod ofiimes harassed
for his pains. This allies lo siatemeaia as ionocent as
^You know, the hillbillies down there don't wear shoos."
Try it sometifne, down riiere. but don't wait to see what
happens, for youll have the local State Department on
your back If you have publidwd your statement, snd ynul!
find yourself excluded from private swimming pools If you
have merely said it in family circles.

Since I has'e a private swimming (duck) p^d of my
own, and ^Idom wear shoes indoors in winter or either lo*
or out'ofsloors ihroughout the whde summer and early
fall as well as. for oih^ reasons that I will not go Into, I
have made a professioo of sayiog (hinp about tbe country
I am in. I am. io fact and as I said at the ouUet, a re¬
porter and as I don't five a damn whether anybody wears
shoes or not. nor what their opituoos arc oa tbal or aoy
oiber subject, and am iiHerastcd only in facts, 1 am con*
atanily saving ihiogs that anooy pet^le. What I have lo
say now Is going to annoy some types very much. More¬
over, if you haven’t as yet ^oced al these maps, you may
be so annoyed that you will just stop readiog. I don't want
you to do this, but for purely afiniistic reasons—namely
that these facts are such fuo. To keep you readiog, Ibere*
fore, let me juu tell you that, if you do so, you are goiog
to get a reaih’ good laugh, speciftcally at llw expense of
just those people whom you have alway's thought were
kUots in any case. [Attehiedly. this includes almost every-

lie



body other iban yourself, which makes ii jJI ihe more
pleuut.)

Animals (sod ABSMj) lake oo accotuii of poUticaJ
bouQdanes even when they are physically erected by peo¬
ple Id the form of barb^>wire fences or iron curuins
They do. od (he other heod, not only take io(o account
but conform absolutely lo cenoio boundaries and dividica
lines set up by Nature. No animal ever, it seems, trans¬
gresses such a boundary and these boundaries may often be
so precise that you can stand with one foot in ooe ireat
nafural province and the other foot in another. There arc
animals that range over more than one and sometunes over
half a dozen provinces. These are called cathoiic ^ies'
but most ammaJs stay within the con Ones of just ooe prov-
mce, Wiihin Uk provinces, moreover, there are a number
of natural mches or envirornneou. Nature abhors a vacuum
(u wc have been repealed]y told) and she filU all her
niches With en appropriate animal species. U any one diet
Mt or IS exterminated, some other animal wifi come in to
mbabit its niebc. As an example, the South American
^tiaiic porcuptoe called the Coypu (Wyopofamiif coypv)
the fur of which U called nuiria. was introduced into
North America 50 years ago and immediately started to
nil up (he okbe previously occupied by the Beaver which
bad. at that time, been largely exterminated in ibis country
by fur tnppen. ^

Sometimes a species of anlmsl will introduce itself loro
an area and do battle with the established oecupaou of the
particular niche that it likes. Then again, men have intro-
oueed animals from one cousiry to anoiber and stariad
virtual animal wars, usually with fatal consequences to ooe
or the Mbcr party, in Australia Introduced European ani¬
mals. like the dog, cat, fox, and rabbit, have committed
mass mayhem oo the indigenous fauna: on the other band
attempts to introduce the pheasant in certain parts of
America have repeatedly failed The why% aod the
wberefores of these results have proved very puzzling in
uMt there seemed Co be no rhyme or reason for them.
There is, nonethelest, a law governing the muter, ud a
very precise one. This is a botanical matter.

The whole earth is portioned out into different typei of
ptani growth—different In ihe way rhe vegeruion grows
an berghi, deosity, and so forth) rather than in what par-
dCTilv types of plants it contains—and these form greai
oeJu around the earib regardless of oceans, seas, and
mountains. These bells, which meander about ami broaden

117



out or withCT dowa somoimes almost to nothing, are also
subdividsd into blocks or provinces golag from easl lo
west, like the cross-stripes on a banded snake. Each ooe
of these provinces has its owa history, climate, weathw,
s^U flora, and launs. What is more, It has now been dia*
covwed that all faunas are wholly dependent upon vegeta-
Kon but not so much upon (he consillulioo of that
vegetation as Upon ih« way fn which U pn>ws. Human
beings are animals and they conform to these general
principles loo. even down to lutiooal types. So it seems, do
ABSMs (see Map II).

Man, however, is what is called an ada^able animal. He
is oIsQ incr^diblT tough, and can survive in more types of
vegetadem and in a wider variety of enviroomeais than
most animals, being surpassed in ibis ability by only a tew
other animals, such as the spiders and their allies, which
live in water and in air, and range from icecaps to still hot
lava flows, and » the tops of moumains where eveo plants
give up. Nevenheless. when man comes to settle down
and try to earn i living and breed, even he conforms to the

old pehern. Hollandcfs gyrate lo coastal flats, and Nor¬
wegians to worm, wet fiords. However, man can survive
ao omling from his natural environment and he has often
dooe to. The Neanderthalers appe^u' to have beeo driven
back into the hills by the folk of Crcniagroo-culture; aod
the Hebrews of the desert were blasted ail over tbe lot. and
have survived,

ABSMs, it seems, have also been driven back into cer^
tain environments. By ihe lime my story is told, you will
see why I say this and why it happened. There is nothing
mysterious about it. It is simply that ABSMs are Homi-
nids or, just as every benighted oalive has always asserted,
human rather than animal, and thus are endowed in cme
degree or another with human attributes, and most notably
their powers of survival, iheir adaptability, Ihcif lough-
nesa. tmd their acuteness. The Pongids. or apes, on the
other hand, iboogh looking so like huraaos, are the lousiest
adapters, are completely stuck with ihcir special environ¬
ments aod in their purtcular provinces. They can hardly
breed outside them, even with the very best and most
(podcro human medical assUtaacc—as witness the tiny
number of gorillas bom in captivity. In other words, about
50 million yean ago, NaUrre sianed an expenmcai with a
couple of Primate types now called ihe Homiold and the
Pongid. The flnt made Ihe grade, and mostly through the

1 la



efforts and diacovenes of ABSMs: tbe tetter faffed, tod are
doomed.

If there are ABSMs ia North AnMrica, as well as Ceo.*
traJ and South America (as would ^peax from what fol¬
lows), and they are Hominids, they must have come here
from Bomswbere elae, for we can say with almost absolute
certaioty that neither Man &or the Hominids was evolved in
tbe New World. What is more, not so much as a single
booe or other bdication bas ever been discovered sug-
geslmg that either tbe Pongids or any of the true Monkeys
ever even got here. On tbe cMber band, men got bere» and
as a rather early date. Bones of tbe animab be brought
back from hunting forays have been dated certainly back
to before the last ice-advaace; some are cUimed to be
more than 40-000 years old. We have not yet obtained
the bones of the earliest of these men themselves, but, if
some antbr^loguis are right there are some extremely
old and quite primitive stooe implements at the lowest
lev^, and we now know that a creature (sucb as East
Africa's Zinfonthroptis) was a toolmaker but most certainly
would be called an ABSM if he were found running
around today. Failure to find tbe boaes of ABSMs is no
cause for stating that they never existed. Tools of the
types known as Chellean and AcheuUan have been known
from all over southern Europe and Africa since men
started collecting such items, but it was not until the
last decade that we fouod a single bone of tbe men who
made them—if we have yet done so. as a matter of feci.

However. ABSMs seem once to have roamed ouch of
North America. Why, then, should those alleged sQll lo do
to, although really very horoiooid in form, appear (o he
without toob. fire, or speech? We have to look at it this
way. They were probably here in tbe purely “ammaj" stage
of tbeir development, and they kept coming in waves [over
tbe Bering Straits, if you like] at ever inereasmgly efficient
laveb of toolmaklog and development, until they were re¬
placed by tbeir cousins who were so '‘someihing'Cr^other'*
that we, upon dig^ng up their remains, call them Meo.
[Lots of these came too. making ever better toots, until tbe
misguided Amerinds made tbe mistake of tagging along.
At this point we enter history and the domain of other
spedahiies.] As brigfater and better ABSMs turned up,
bovrever, tbe previous occupants bad to move out icto
less desirable environments—nasty places like deserts and
mountains—and by the time proper Men arrived, these

119



places were gettbg quite crowded At diet point uotber
ieoor became operative.

ABSMt, both here aod aO over the worlds had been gei-
Hns *1>eiier*’—which la anoUier way of saying more com-
^icated or nixed up—and, thus> lo certain waya leu
effloeni again. The more complex their culture bacajne
—and don't think that they didn't have a culture for Nut¬
cracker-Man (Zinfsnthtvpus) of 600,000 years ago is
East Africa made splendid toob but had a brain eome-
whai mote pahry than the avenge chimp—the more de¬
pendent I bey were upon an easy envirooment, wfaicb means
one where it wait easy to obtain a living. Chased out into
a rough one by still more cultured chaps, they began to find
tbe going very bard. In fact, the more ''cultured” (hey were,
the worse they fared when pushed up into the mountams;
and (he more advanced they were, the more easily and
ra^Mty they gave up and b^ame extinct. Thus, we have
the extraordinary spectacle of tbe more primitive surv^og
and the more advanced wilting away. Today, only tbe
iDosi primitive have apparently lurvived. and ia the re¬
motest and ruggedest places where any other AfiSM less
rugged could not get along: where Man, however tough,
faiM: end where even Modern Man, who has really got
somewhere with his culture. fljiHjs it hard going. And just
where is this?

Tbe answer Is very simple and absolutely definitive. It b
what is called by botanisu The hfoniane Fortst. Thb is
why I suggested that you a look at tbe maps and see
where such forests arc. especially today, on our coDtinent.
From these you will note that their distribution comodea
exactly with chat of the reports of our ABSMs: as it does
00 all the other condoeots with their ABSMs. There u
only one cxceptioo. from the botanical point of 'riew, and
(his I would like to dispose of f<mhwi(b.

The last retreat on land of anything b a forest. la North
America between those latitudes occupied by the United
Slates, most lowland forests are woodlands, ojid anything
unwaaicJ in ihecn has toog ago beeo eliminated. [One
can*i speak of (oral dogs bemuse we introduced them.] In
Canada, of course, such forests are still virtually impeoa-
tr^le. There remain then tbe montane forests [which are
not quite the same thing as mere forests on mountains]
and orK other type of vegetational growth. This b what
are called icchiucolly the BottemUands. By this is meant
swamps at low level but mosdy in river valleys and deltas,
that are covered with a cloaed-caaopy forest of sftxte kind

120



however short in stftCure, and which are either Hooded aU
the time* eeesooally, or from time to tone* to that they ere
unpleaeanC for mao to live in and a lo«a caviee to iiy and
clear, drain, aod farm. It so happens that we have a vesy
great acreage of just such cououy b the Umted States
that is tacitly ignored hy everybody and frankly unkoown
to most This is ooncentraied along the Mississippi Valley
and up the vaikys of the tributaries of that great river.

The best road maps of the slates that straddle these
Bottomlands look perfectly OK at first sight being cov¬
ered with roads of various grades, having namee of
counties, townships, and so forth scattered all over them
and seeming, whm viewed iodividualfy, to be qultt cooais-
(ent with all other road maps of our country. If, however,
yoo lo<^ more carefully at them, take a pair of dividers,
consult the scale at the foot of the map. and then Mleet
your areas carefully you can isointe almost endless parti of
the map that look like this:


ren.d>

0 a srrti«ments wttU viaaHe»



1050 square miles In northern Louisiana.


Tiai yoo will not. of course, believe. It will also prohabty
make you very annoyed. You might therefore assuage your

iai


fury by going out and buying, or writing to one of Use oU
companice to obtain, maps of stich states as Missouri,
liiinols, Kentucky. Tennessee. Arkansas, Alabama, Missis*
appi. and Louisiana, aad spend a momeni or two with a
rectan^e of the dimensions and tie scale of tbe above. It
will probably make you even more angry, but I said that I
would name names, cveo if 1 am ‘‘down there."

The reason 1 bring this obnoxious snb}ect up at Ibis time
is that, before we can get back to the main road of our
travelogue, there is something that is really unpleasant that
bw to be takeo care of. This is Ibe '^l.lttle Men of the
Trees.” How aggravating can I get; and how far out on
whai limb can I wriggle? Yon would be surprised indeed;
but I warn you in the most friendly fashion, please don't
forget ihsi I am a reporter and, as of now, nothing else. It
is therefore ray duty to report to yoo; so here goes:

Dear Sh,

My Dane Is James Meacbam, I read (he article that
you wrote for True Magazine.* f have been platmtog on
going to CalifoRUB in the same area that your article
was abouL 1 was a liftie surprised to read abont socb a
creatDPe as an abomhublc Snowman living so close to
where I Intended to I bavc ahveys IlSced to explore
places that other peeple care Uttie about. I would Uke
(0 know lit you can tell me about this creature If yon
can teQ aoylhlflg more than yoo did in the article. 1 sm
rare a man of your rtanding loust have more informa*
lion about this subject than was fu those few pages. I
wUf gladly pay the postage on ihe inforautlon you can
send. I caonot offer more becaiee I am not working at
the preeeaL

I have met a ftw strange thbogs io ray life; as I am
young, there are many more I will probably see.
t would Ifte to know If yon can teD me aoytiung about
a creature that looks like a smaJ ape or a large uvookey
(hat has hah the color oi tar a reddish orange color, I
saw sucb a creature when I was 15. A friend was with
me bat did not see it Whatever U was did not have a
tall like a monkey bet it did swing like one by its arms.
This may souud Ukc something thac I thought I saw but
really dMo'i wbkb I would believe except for a few
details.

• TAe Sirsnre Story of Ainrrlca's Abomlnatle SnO'^man,”
True, The Mvi'e Vol. 40, December, J959,

122



1 hjtf M ^2 csUbre Mml'airtomstK wMi ne. 1 wolelwd
this thing for about 5 minutes no 1 have to befieve H. 1
put fooneea .22 long^rMe shelti Into wbatever Jt was.
From where I was irtunding I couldn't have misBed. We
foQod 1 bullet in the tree trunk m 13 of them hU Jt
The pan that sounds more impuaaibte k that whuevec
H was, did not even move while 13 bulleiB weal into h.
If I bad taissed aO 14 hullets would have gone Into the
Dee tnnlc

I have told many people abool thb but nobody be>
Beves it We found a few haire where I bad sbot, but
notbhif eke eieept (he huUet There w» not a trace of
blood. My partner thinks It was a squirrel bat ao aqniiTd
grows that big. If It bad been ooe, 2 tif th os e bullets
would base stopped it dead. Whatever it wm dM not
even raose till I beaded for the tree. It Inseled through
those trees tike an express train. I conSd hem the leaves
rank but eoald not see it,

I searched for i( for a long tiinc after that but never
saw U again. No one b that area knovrs aaylhii^ about
H or has ever seen ll. It had a cry that was eooagb to
drive a person crazy. Tliot was almost 3 >ean ago 11957]
and I still wake up in my deep loaieiliBcs when that
eoaod comes buck to me. If you can give me any advke
as lo what it could have been f wfll greatly apprccialc
It. If I had BOt shot It myself I would not believe k, not
being able lo find aoy blood. I know you mast receive
• lot of letters abonl this sort of Ihlog. bat aD I want to
know k what animal En a narsb near facksoo. Teno.
coedd bold 13 loDg'rifle shells without even movk^ (ID
yoo start to come after it? That is what started me kKdc-
big foe ihii^ most people think camot po^bly

Yours truly.

James M. Meacbam

In 1954 a young Orang-utan escaped from a shi^nenl of
apes to a well-known Rorlda organization, co^ off Into
the woods, and fans never bee a seen again, I refrain from
giring further dciai!) because the valuable ape was paid for.
but reported as DOA. a trade term for "dead on arrival,*'
and somcooe still might get In trouble. The Incident k falrty
wi^ly known in certain circles, and has been a perfect
nuUascc because when anything like the above k reported,
even as far away as Tennessee, it is immediately dredged up
by way of explanation, I suppose it is just possible that a

123



hcal^ ycRiDg Mia (a better oame for whai we c&JI the
Oraos'Utan] could survive a suocessioQ of mild Southern
wialers and it could travel an cnomious distance by trees
alooe. but wbat it would ©at during ftiosi of the year [ don’t
know. Much more important is th^ a lost ape that has
once been in captivity for even a short period would he al¬
most certain to head tor the nearest human babitation the
momeol it got hungry or saw anything novel that fright¬
ened it. la ail the years that I had a zoo, I never kacw an
escaped animal (apart from local fauna, and even many of
those] noi to return voluntarily to its own cage during the
flight. Of course this '“ape" might have escaped from some
zoo much nearer the place where this correspoadem said he
saw It, but the loss of a S5D00 specimen from a zoo would
cot go unnoticedt though, it must be admitted, it ought
veil |o utireported—to the Directors, that is. There is as
much hanky-panky in the animal business as in aoy other.
An escaped Mia Is, however, I rather think, iiaelf merely an
escape mechanism as it Is called, especially when we come
to cootempiate the fallowing.

From fiooiitr folklore, Vol. 5, p. 19, March 1946:

Aootber type of story that is of moch more coacens
1o DB here in Souttacm Dliao(s nowadays Is the “strange
beast” legend- . . . Every few years some community
reports the presence of a mysterious boost over Id the
local creek bottoin.

Although It b difficult to detennioe fust where a story
of this sort has Its be^ning, this one seems to have
origtnated lo the Gum Creek bottom near Mt, Vernon.
Ehiriog the sumioer of 1941, a preacher was bunting
squirrels in (he woods along the creek when a Urge
ajvmn! that looked something like a baboon jumped out
^ a tree near The preacher struck at the beast with
his gun barrel when it walked toward him in an upright
position. He fioally fri^tened It away by Bring a couple
of shots bto the sir.

LotcT the boast began to atonn rural ponpir by utter¬
ing terrorizing screams mostly at ni^t cd tbe wooded
bottom lands aJoag the creeks. School children in the
rural districts sometimes beard It too, sod boolrtt saw
its tracks. ... By early spring of 1942, tbe anUaal bad
local people arous^ to a ^hdng pitch. About that time,
a farmer near Bonoie reported that ibe heart had killed
bk dog. A can went out for voliintccre to join a mass
bant to round op the aoimaJ.

124



The beast nrast have got news of the haat for n*
ports sCaricd comiig In of Its appearance in otb«r creek
bofloms. some ns macb as 40 or $0 mfleA froia the
origiiinl site. A man driving oenr tbc Kg Mnddy River,
ia fichwn 0011017, one nJgbtsiiw (be beast bound across
the road. Some h waters saw evidence of its presence
way over in Okaw. Its rapid changing from place to
place must bove been aided coodderaMy by its eblllty
to jboip, for, by Uns time, reports hod It jumping along
at from 20 to 40 feet per leap.

II U impossible to say how many hiinleis and parlies
of biiDlers, anaed with everything from shotguns to
ropes and nets, went out to look for tbe strange beast b
the Tarioiis creek bottums where |j had been seen, or its
tracks had bees sei^o, or Its piercing screams had been
heard. Thnc^ taking beta and ropes were ioteat na bring*
iag be creatote back olive.

tisiuUy* Ibis strange beast can't be found, und btci>
cat fei it dies as mysteiiousty' ns It arose b tbe bc^n-
fling. . . . A boot 25 years ago. a 'coon bnntcr trom
Hecker one oigbl heard u stnuige beast screaming op
ubuad oil Fnirie dn Long Creek. Hunters chased Ibis
phaolom from time to lime oil one winter. Their dogs
would gel tbe trail, then lose it, aod they wooJd hear it
screaming down tbe creek In tbe opposite dlrecUoii. It
was that kind of creature: you'd bear it up creek, but
when you set out ia that direction you*d hear b a mile
down oeek.

And again:

Dear Mr. Sandenon,

I Uuened to you on Long John Nebel’s progrem Imd
Thursday and was very much surprised that yon talked
about such things as Abominable Snowmen in ^Vmerlca.
I aiD 8 housewife bet I majored In biology, attended our
state oniversity and have an M.A. in plain zoology. My
husband b an espoinientaJ chemist employed by . . .
Icosvany name wiibheM for obrions reasons: Author.]
and my eldest son is a lechnlcJaa In the Air Force. 1
came from MbsbdppI but we have resided here 0ii
Kentucky) for ten yean now.

I woQdcr if yoB have ever heard of the Lltde Red

* This is a funny word. Does it imply tQot sometimu ii eoji
be found?


125



MeB of tbe D«l(a? Nolfody (hoagbt aoydiljiB nvch of
them wb«rc I >v&s rofeed except that ouc had better be
careful of sbuotmg one beennse cl might bo murder, or
so Ibe sberlff lutghi ebiok if anytblog cumo of it, but I
WBs surprised to find that (he folks hereabout loiow it
loo (lioagb they took sttme years (o talk alKHit It to me.
My husband b a New Englander and these folks don’t
(aih moeb. They ore [the I.Hclc Sed Men of the DeltaJ
said to b« about tho size of a ceti your wid kid nod aMc
to idinib like monkeys and to live back from the bayous.
They Udk a lot hut keep out of gnosbot mnfte nnd
mostly go Into (he wafer. They are people nnd the musk*
rat trappera say they often wear scraps of discarded Itnes

fUneos?] old ^'sns and sncli.

If you have beard about them wDI yon l&Bc aboot
tliem on the air as it pu/.zfes me that nobody has ever
talked about them but everybody In some places seems
to know about them. Thera was sore ootUinc In my

biology course about them but (lere*« a lot folks don't

know or don’t talk about . . .

Yours^ etc.»

Mrw. V. K.

At\d you can say ihoi again t Plaio ordinary citizens just
don't talk; they are bora with too much sense. Ridicule Is
the most dastardly thing and caa ruin one’s whole life id
one sqibII jump. It takes real guLs to come right out and
say you’ve seen ihe Loch Ness Moostcr: and you'd better
have private means, if you do. Otherwise, humanity at large
will round on you nnd jump in unisoa, and they have a
cofleciivc memory that can last for a century. Doo’i do it,
brethren and sisircnl [That's why I always ask specifically
whether 1 may public a namc.l
I could go on quoting tidbits like the above for quite a
long time and give iraoscripts of some tape recordings ibai
1 have but what, frankly, is the use? No one will believe
uiher the stories or me. None the) es. I would be failing in
my doty—which, incidentally, f take very seriously; and
please make no mistake about that—if I did ool put this
outrageous matter be lore ibe public. Like many other
things 'Teponed” it needs, and con stand, a good airing. I
ani not saying that there is even so much as a word of truth
in any of U but there it b, and it Is no good just ignoring it.
If people “down there” will persist 5 d penning such tripe, we
had bsrier get on with the Job of showing it up for what it
really is. But just wbat is it? You tell me: I am merely re-

126



poniof. azid 1 have om yet bad the time, mooey. nor op-
poftuAiiy to |0 to tbott particular places to iovesijgate Lhc
iDBltM. Since others a^areatly have oot either, perhaps il
would be better that everyone shut up. MeaawhUe, how¬
ever, J refuse to just discount everything anybody from the
states listed above says. That would be lantamomi to call-
log them aJl liars and idiots; and 1 know for a fact that they
are usually oeiiber. What is mote, that is ebeir country, and
I am prepared to accept (he fact that they know more about
It than all of us. however whacky wbat they say may
sound. And then there is the matter of the road maps. /us(
what is aayooe prepared to swear under oath he knows
about the Efottomlarvds? I have been a little way into some
for brief periods and I must say that t am not prepared to
give out much about tbeni at all-^ey are far too vast,
complex, aod incomprehensible to any '’foreigner.'* The
geodeticists have surveyed tbem; let then tell us. Their
maps are excelleot—they are made from polata 60 miles
^a/1 and from the air. They show every thing!

As a son of parting abol. 1 quote a newspaper clipping of
recent date:

MONSTER AROUND

REFORM, ALAr—A mysterioos creatore is roam-
iDg the woods arocusd nearby Claatan. It eaU peachee,
makes eouods like an elephant, end leaves foolprfola
ttke an ape.

This whole bit is really becoming very difficult because
littk squibs like this should not include ao many splendid
poulbllities. Of course it would eat peaches, who wouldn't?
And I must admit that a herd of elephants to a forest can
sound exactly like a troop of ehixnpanzees having a ball.
But who ia Reform. Alabama [I like that namef a that
good 00 Ihe Ichoology of I he Amhrepnideaf There is a sort
of chatty approach about this story, giving the [mpresaion
ibal among the dtizens of Reform and Clantoo lime is a
coosiderable understanding about ibis beast, and there b
deftnite Indieation thai its presence is noi a new eveoL In
fact tbeo, are the Bottomlands full of runaway apes or do
we have an indigenous and most particolar abomlnatioa
ihere&bouts? 1 could give an oplnioo but I sball refrain, for
it would be even mere loathesome.

Now. and with a certain seose of relief I may say. we can
get back on the straight aod narrow path, and pick up our
foot'Cracke again. These we first stumbled upon in southern

127



British ColumbJi at the end of the Sasquafch trail. TlsecM,
the/ went south over the border aod, wil]y-nilly we have
bad (o follow. This is going to get us into s most unpleasant
Ubytioth. li is. actually, a maze witli several alternate
correct tuuies, ail of which cross each other and land us up
in seemingly impossible prcdicanscots. I follow ihe foot>
Iracks firsL

In progressing lo space we have fira to retrace our
tracks In time lo even earlier than before—to the *'49er8,”
in fact. It was about that date (1849) that Aaglo^Saxon
type Americans hrst descended upon the West in any sub¬
stantial masses. It was, of course, ibe gold that did it. Ac¬
tually, this area was the first to be penefraied and colonized
by Europeans on this conllDcni; the Spaniards having made
some really astonishing advances north through iC from
Meaco. Few people realize that these intrepid savages lO
thetr clankiog armor carrying little more than their lovely
and holy crosses, actually got into what is now Canada
through the mountainous third of our country. This area
is still giving our bulldozer operators trouble in crossing
from east to west. But. here again, is another story. The
point is that the Spaniards later, and very sensibly, con¬
tracted into the more fertile and pleasant areas ^d just left
the rest to the buolgbted Amcruids.

During this long period of some 300 years oo less, things
went along much as they had done since the last ice-ad¬
vance in this area—outside the Spanish Missions. There
were, however, some most agile-minded priests who in¬
terested ihcmstivcs enormously in the land and look the
Amerinds quite seriously. They left records of some of the
legends of ibeirfiocks that make most imerestiog reading. I
have to mcniioa the fact of tbe existence of these now be¬
cause they constitute the earliest sight of our trails leading,
as always, from the Northlands on coward tbe salubrious
climes of tropical America. They [the records] speak of
great wild mco of the dry upland arroy'os and massed
piSon forests, that tramped lugubriously about at night
scaring adolescent Amerinds and leavlog mooslrous foot¬
prints on the sands of that time all over tbe region. But,
after these ecclesiastical iodiscteiions. there is a complete
blank as far as 1 know unill the 1^49 Gold Rush. Then
things began to happen in typically Yankee fashion.

This particular facet or phase of ABSMery has, like the
overall picture, to be tackled In retrospect and in the order
of its rediscovery. The alleged incidents in some cases oc¬
curred over a century ago but the records came to light

128



onfy Ihe last faw years. They had been Jyinf buried in
newspaper morgues. Wbat actually happened—and this Is
quile apart from the reports on individual incideols-^
lhai a whole mass of Easterners, uoacquainied with ihe
Far West, suddenly appeared on ibc scene and went barg¬
ing off ioto the oudands kxdiiai for gold. Prior to their
arrival there had been pleoiy of people along ihe coast aod
idly doited about the inocr belt of (be West, but they had
stayed literally around the water holes in the latter, while
they bad not gone back inJaDd Ibe coast to the more
nmnhern aod better watered areas—that Is from the north
end of the Sacramento Valley to Puget Sound, it was when
the Eastenwrs tried to peoeirafe ih^ laods of mighty
forests and seemingly everlasiing mountain ranges, one be¬
hind the other, that things begoo to happen. Sometimes,
they got a bit out of band.

Wc are now back in the montane forests of which we
have spoken $o firmly, and wc arc going to stay in them for
• very long time. Before we go any fanher into them,
though. I should uate a few basic facts. Such types of
forest—and there are actually about a couple of dozen of
them betweco Alaska and Tierra del Fuego—are well-nigh
impeaelrablB. 1'bat b why not only just substantial parts,
but the greater part of ibem. even in our own country, are
not yet "opened up." This is a loose term; so, to be more
precise, let me give one example of (be stale of current
affairs in wbal Is just about the most acce^iblc of all of
them today. This is the 17,000 square-mile block of terri¬
tory centered around the Klamoth River urea In northern
California.

The exieoc. position, and boundaries of this area may be
seen on Maps V and VII. You muy calculate its dimensions
for yourself. This I beg of you to do. rather than writing to
me about it.* Please note also that it starts at I he bc4loni
a^t Clear Lake which is just 70 miles north of Sap Fran-
ctsco, and it continues on north Into Oregon. Actually it is
confluent wjih a much vaster block in the Cascades, and la
nowhere completely cut off (by farmland or nonforested
land) from other lesser blocks in Oregon and thence on to

• In (be article mentioDed above In True Mofot/ne, an extra
zero unfortunaicly became attached to the area given, a mkiake
t^ ^rted with my typing but went clean through to the pob-
I resolteil in a deluge of «veral ihomand

letiert. Bu^ when it had been corrected, just as many people
wrote scoffing at the true Bgure. Many of tbese were Cill-
forDiam; aod some even from the counties conceniadi

129



Washington. I should explain that in deiineating these wH-
deraess blocks 1 do not consider o road, even a mab
blacktop, 10 be a boundary, for it does not deter any living
ibing that I know of frorq passing from one side to the
other, provided there is cover on both sides right up 1 o its
edges. This groat area has boon surveyed and there ere
naps of it down to very large scale in conformiry with the
best series published by the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
National Forests, and other official agencies. There are
neat county maps covered wtib names and a grid on a scale
of 4/10 of an Inch to the mile, that look perfectly splendid
at first sight. However, I ran into a Federal agency survey¬
ing party when 1 was deep In the middle of this block io
1959, and spent several evenings with the Chief Surveying
Ofiicer wbo told me things and demonstrated certain facts
that, metaphorically speaking, caused myself arid my two
traveling partners to lose our eyebrows—upward.

It transpired that tlus area had only once been ‘'surveyed*
and that was by usofGcia! surveyors under contract to the
U.S. Govmtraent. in iheyear 18591 Further, the survey was
ostensibly made on a 1 •mije grid; mat is lo say the surveyor
was supposed to walk a mile north, south, east, or wesi,
take a fix and drive a stake, and continue doing this till he
reached some previously selected line at the other end that
linked up with the oext survey. The original notebooks car¬
ried by these surveyors of 1859, and in which they recorded
the facts and figures of their surveys in the field, a page to a
mile, oco on file ia (he Lands Office Id Son Francisco. They
arc a revelation. The surveyor whom we met told ns that ia
one notebook be had found no less (ban 23 pages absolutely
blank and without so much as a chumbmnrk on them, and
ha told us that all the books covering ibis area were like
that He stressed that Ihb is no deprecation ot the early
surveyort as, be said, they actually did a remarkable job on
ibe whole, managing to joto up the surveys lo the 60 -mjie
triangulalioD made from mountainiops (and now corrected
from aerial photography), but he pointed out that the
greeter pan of the resultant maps arc pure coniecture end
most of them made by wbat surveyore call “camp-purvey¬
ing.” What, of course, happened was that the couctry was
so rugged and impassable that the surveyors just west in as
far as they could, then came back out, went around to the
next possible entrance, and tried again, When they had
enough fixes around the edges, they just ruled iiocs connect¬
ing wbai they had, adjusted a bit for error and then ruled
in iba rest of the grid. And this, eombioed with names given

130



to vwble mounttiiu, nnfa. Amerin^ida settlements b
accessible valleys, and loggia^ operatioos. filled (he wbole
thing out oicely, so ibat oo paper it looks almost like the
outskirts of Sea Fraodsco.

Actually, ibis great block of territory in quite uaknown.
Nobody goes into It touch esecept a short way from its edges,
and practically aobody has goac through it. I interviewed
one expeheoced locally bred woodsman who took a 3-week
summer vacation to attempt this. He did cut across ibe
southwest eoraer of the square but was a week late getting
back to work. A friend of auoe working in there at the time
of writiag did come upon a lone and unkaown prospector
Of the old school some disuace in, and he had a mule b
there. One "scientist** from a "unlvereiiy" b California
wrote a furious letter after I had published my report on
the ABSMety of this area, staling tbat he bad "collected
animals all over every bit of the area during several sea*
sons" and adding gfatuitouaiy tbat *'i(s entire fauna has for
decades been well known." This is a point at which I find ii
ve/y hard to remain civil.

The whole of tbia country is clothed in a particiilar kind
Cl montane, closed*eanopy. mixed deeiJuous^oniferout
forest, of magnificent proportions aad containing some of
the finest timber in the world. It grows in three tkrs with
an undergrowth- The tallest trees such as Sitka Spruce, and
Douglas FIf, run up to 150 to 200 feel and suod pretty
close together. Under them cn the upper reaches there is
a closed-canopy of smaller conifers, in Ibe valleys of decidu¬
ous trees such as maples, madrofies, etc., and beneatlt both
of these there is usually another closed-canopy of large
saplings and smaUer trees of mixed constitution. Benealli
this again is another layer lb« Is almost impcoctrable, be¬
ing composed of bushes and the dead branches of the
epruces and firs which are as strong as spring steel even
when leafless, and which persist right down to the ground
hke a barbed-wire entanglement. It look mo half an hour
wjth a sharp machete to get far enough from the one road
B the country not to be able to talk to my companiooa
left 00 ^t road. I am a fair busbwacker. having been at it
all my fife, and I am penciMhin and tbue highly suitable for
going through and under things.

But this is not by any means all. The whi^e of this coun¬
try is constructed like a fresWy plowed field on a monstrous
scale. While its moumaiDs and peaks are not high by West¬
ern standards they are immensely steep, and cloaety packed

131



so that there h praclicatty no hon^ontal ground throughout
the Vphole country. The whole thing is s oightmare even to
eicperienced woodsmen, end something much worse to road
butiders.

This is the real slate of affairs ihroughoui a huge block
of territory within a hundred miies oi one of our greatest
cities, although aimos! everybody in that city would deny it
positi\'eIy, anj even the majonty of cjiiaens of Eureka, a
large and prosperous communfty right on its edge, have no
idea of its true nature. Conations are even more difficult in
other moniaoe sreas but from now on 1 shalJ simply be say^
inj of thern, ?8 we approtch fheTn, that they are either
better or wor^e than the Klamath. This is going to relieve
me of the nec&sity for a loi of verbiage. Readers may also
find this useful io aigumecta; while it will give some sort of
kef to assess other forests in other lands. Actually, though,
thh Klamath forest is just about as difficult as 1 have ever run
into, and that goes for the tropics too, but it, of course,
pales before the British Columbian vegeraiion on the grounds
of topography for. whereas we have here to deal only with
little mountains, there they have enormous ones.

It was such topography, moreover, that was tackled by
the greenhorns from the East looking for gold. They didn't
gel very far, but they did, according to the older Amerinds
sciU living, and who got it from dicir lathers and graod-
fa&ers. e&use the ABSMs to make a sudden mass with¬
drawal into the inner recesses of each of the blocks, Bt that
time. Thb interesting information was first given to me by
ft Mr. Oscftr Mack, doyco of the Yorok clans of the upper
Hoopa Valley. The same statement has cropped up Again
and again during my Investigations all over the I^get
Sound (o California area, if, moreover, you look at Map V.
you will note an extremely odd fact. This k that early re-
ports (and of various types) came also from wbat is cow
Idaho in what Is called more technically tbe North Montane
Province. Some very funoy (hiogs happened there In early
days and they seem silll to be happening. Most of them
Center round the real wilderness area about the upper
Salmon River which Gows bio the SrxtUte River as ^owa
on that map, It was in idAho obo that the first fooMiack
scare took place.

This is an interesting story la several ways, and has oat-
uraJly been received with whoops of joy by the skeptics.
The story U from ihe Humboliil Tim^s of January 5, 1959,
and reads:


132



Sl'ORY OF CENTURY OI.I) BIGFOCn- IN lOAHO
ADDS COLOR TO LF.GRND: by Betty Atitn, Txmos
Corre$|H»n<fenl: Willow Creek—M k. Altlii Bodies,
Boise, Idaho. dIscD&sed u accoyot of o “Big Foot^ who
lived prior to 1868 in the wilderness of Idaho.

The mother of Kenneth Rortler, vke principal of the
Hoops valley high school, Mrs. Borlles said that mys¬
terious tracks of a tremendoas sire and human shape
stirred the residents of Idaho In the early days, insf as
with the “Brg Foot** tracks of Northern Californians Bluff
Creek area, some believed fbey were genuine, others
saw in them a clever hoax.

The ‘^If Foot" Uved in the remote wfldeme« of
Rcy7M>ld% Canyon now known ae Reynold's Creek. A
thonsand dtdlars was offered for him. dead nr alive.
Here (he IlheDcss to the local "Big Fool" ended for the
'gigantic MoDSter." as be was called b Idaho, was a
killer. The full extent of the depredations of thb Big
Foot were never known, for many roUeries and mur-
ders were attributed to him which he probably did not
commit. The sometimes waoton killlogi that were Ihe
work of almost superhuman strength both with stock
■nd humans, brougbl about hH dnwirfall. A IhotuniMl
dollars was offered for B% Fool dead or alive.

John Wheeler, a former army man. set out to coOect
the reward. In the year 1868. he came upon Big Foot
and stool him 16 times. Both legs and one arm were
broken before he fell to the ground. As he by there he
asked for a drink of water and, becaose oF his great fear,
Wheeler shot him, breaking his other arm before gfving
the water to the creature. Before be died, he told
Wheeler that bb real oane was Suur WUkerson and be
had been boro In the Cherokee oatlon of u while father.
His molbcr was part Chmkee and part Negro. Even as
a very smaB boy everyone had called him Fool"
ud made fun of him. At the age of 19 the white giri he
loved jilted him for another. Gathering a soiaU band nf
men about him he killed Ihen. for the sheer love of kllU
mg. Later be killed the giri that be bad loved.

The foot length of Ihb great ginnt of a mao was 17V^
Inches ojid 18 Inches aronod the ball of Ibe fool. His
height was 6 feet, 8 inches, witii a chest measurement of
59 inches, and his weight was estimated iit 300 ponoda.
He was alt bone and sinew, no surplus desk. He was

133



ViHPwn to Irave baveltd as far as 61 or 75 miles In a
24>hout pcHnd.

Adelaide Howes ^vas ao account of Starr WHkerson
or “His Foot" In her book, I'be Vailry of the TaJI Grass,
wridcD 1 a 1950.

T have ocher old stories from Idaho, mostly of sheep be«
iiig tom apart and moosuous humarv-like foorprinta by
water hoiei, but noth In a ever came of them. There Is one
story, however, that has always impressed me. This h told
by Qone other than Theodore Roosevelt In a book he
pubibbed in 1892 entitled WHdemess Uumer. Teddy was
not a boy to be taken in by anybody much, and he wag a
great skeptic and debunkcr. especially in the field of wild¬
life. being the orlgioator of that most excellent expression
of opprobrium, “Nature-Faker," This story seems to have
impressed liim ool a little and mostly because of the still
Doriceabic icrror of the tcllcf, half a lifetime laicr. He was
an old man when h; talked to Roosevelt and the incident
bad happened when he was young. His name was Baumno
and he was bom in the area on ibe then frontier, and bad
apent dU bis Ufc as a hunter and irapper, Roosevelt’s ac¬
count goe» as follows:

It was told [to uiel by a fiiizilcd, weather-baafeo old
mountain hunter, named Bauman, who was bom and
had posed nil hb life on tke frontiec. He niua have be¬
lieved what he said, for he could hurdly repress a
abuddcj Qt certain poiPts of the Ud«.

Wbco Ibe event occurred Baumoa was still a young
man, aad was temping with a partner amoag die moun¬
tains dividing Ibe forks of the .Solmoa from the head of
Wisdom river, Not having bad much luck, be and hb
partner determined to go m) into a particularly wild and
looelv pass throiigli which ran a smaO stream said to
contain ninny beaver. The pass hud ud evU reputation
becaiuv the year before a solitary hooter who had
wandered bito It was Hi ere staio, seemingly hy a wild
beast, the hatf-calen remains {being afterwards found by
some irining proii>ectors who had ps&>ed his ramp only
the night before.

The memory of tbb eveat. however, weighed very
lightly with the two trappers, who were as adveuturous
and hardy a§ othres of (heb kind. . . . They then struck
out on foot through the vast, gloomy forest, and to

124



ftboal 4 boun nacbed a UMe open glad? where the?
concluded to camp, as sJfins of same were pleity.

Time was stUJ ao hour or (wo of dayliuM left* ond
after building a brosb lcaa*1o and (browing dowo and
opcnlne their packs, they started up stream. . . .

At desk (hey again rcacheil camp. . . .

They were surprised to fiud (bat dorlng their abseoco
soaclhkig. apparently a bear, had visited camp« and had
rummaged about nmonp Ibdr lldogs, scattering (he cor*

tents of (bcir packs, and ia sheer wautooness dcstroytng
(bcir lean*lo. The footprints of the beast were quite
plabi. but at firri they paid no partknlar heed (o ibem.
hosying thcmsultes with rebuilding (he lejuylOi laying
out (heir beds and stores, ond Hsbling (he Are.

While Bauman uas makiug ready supper. It being
olrcady dork, bis companion began (i> cKaraioc (be traeha
more closely, sod soon look a brand From the fire to
Follow (hem up. where the lotnider hnd walked along a
came tndi after leavine ^e camp. . . • Cmung back
to the fire, be stood by it a ramule or two, peeriog out
ioto the darkness, and saddcply remarked: “Bauman,
tbni bear has been walklRg on two legs." Raommi
laugbcd at tbb, but hfs pormcr in^sled (hat he was right,
aod upon again esamitiliig the tracks with a lorch, they
certainly did scetn to be made by but (wo paws, or Fact.
However. H was loo dark (o sure. After dtecitcring

whether the footprints could posdhiy be ibose of a
humnn bcihg, and conimg to the cuncli»slon (hat they
could rot be. the two men rolled op m iheir blankets,
and went to sleep under (he lean-to.

A( midnight Bauman was nwukroed by some noise,
and sat up in his hlanhcis. As he did so his nosiriLe wete
struck by u stroag. wild*l*casi odor, aud be caught tlie
loom of a great body in the dnrkrKss at thr mouth of
(he teaa-(o. Cneipiug bis rifle, he fired at ihe >ague,
threaleoing shadow, hui nusl have missed, for imoedl-
aid) afterwards he heard the smashing of the underwood
as tiic thing, whatever U was, ru'^bed ufF ioto the lm«
penetrable blackocss nf the forest an<l Ihe nieht.

After this the I wo men slept but liitie. dttiog up by
Ihe rekindled fire, but they heard nothing more. In (be
mombifi they started ont (o look al the Few (raps they
had set the previous evening and put out new ones, by
an luupokun Hi^ement they kept logethvr dJ day, aid
Klumed lo camp towards evening.

135



On D«aHns 1< th«y saw, hardly (o Ihdr astofiishincnl.
(hal th« lean*to had b«en again (ort down. The Tisilur
of the preceding day had rctomed, aad io wan(oa malice
bad tossed about thecr camp kh aod bedding, aod de*
stroyed the shanty. The {pound w» marked up by its
tracks, end on ieeving the cacup it bad Z006 along (he
soft eanh by (he brook, where (he footprints were aa
plain os if oo &now, and, rfter a careful servtiny of the
trail, It certamly did seem as If, whatever Ibe thing was,
I( had walked off on bnt two legs.

The non tboruughly oneasy, gulbered a grent heap
of dead logs, aad kept up a roaring lire throughout
tbc night, une or the other sitting on goard most of the
time. Aboot midnight (he thing came down (lirough the
forest opposite, across Ihe Inook. and stayed there oe
the hill«^e for oearly an bonr. They coold bear tbe
branches crackle as it moved abont, and several drees h
uflered a barsb, firodag, long-drawn snoao. a peculiarly
idnblef sound. Yet It did net venture near the fire.

In tbe morning the two trappers, after dbeussing tbe
strange events of Ibe last 36 hours, decided that they
would shoulder then packs aad Iuto (ho valley lhal
aftersioon. . . .

All Lbc morning they kept together, picklog up trap
after trap, each one empty, Od first leaving camp they
bad the disagreeable aensaiion of bccog followed. In the
dense spruce thickets (hey occasiosslly beard a toraoch
Binp after they had passed; aod now and Iheu there were
slight nistling noises among tht small pines to one side
ofiheub

At noon they were bad whhla a couple of miles of
camp. In (he high, brighl sunlight iheir fears seemed
absurd (o Ihe two armed men, accnslomed as they were,
through long ycais of lonely wanderiog In (he wUdernes
to face every i«inH of danger from man, brute, or ele¬
ment There were stiH Hiree beaver traps to colled from
a little pond in a wide ravine near by. Bauman voIueh
( cered to gather these and bring then io, while hJs conw
panlon went ahead to camp and made ready the packs.

On reaching tbe pood Baumao foond 3 beavers in (he
traps, one of which had been pulled loose aod carried
into a beover bouse. He took several boors in securing
and prqtaring tbe beover, and wheo be started borot-
wards Iv marked, with some uaeasioess bow low (he 6ua
WAS gcHing. . , .


136



At (ast ht came to tb« of die Utde gfade whare
tile camp by, and shouted as he approacbed k, but eot
ao answer. The campfire had gone out, dwugb the dun
blue smoke waa still carUng upwards. Near It lay the
packs wra(9ed and airaoged. At first Bauman could see
Bobody; oor did be recnve as answer to his call. Ste(H
ping forward be again shouted, and as be did so his eye
fell 00 the body of his &iend, stretched beside the tn^
ef a great fallen spruce. Roshbg towards It the bornSed
trapper fotmd that tbe body was still wanr, bat that the
Beck was broken, while there were four great fang msks
fa the throat.

The footprints of tbe unknown beast*creatnre, printed
deep in the soft soil, (old the whole story.

The (infortnoate man, baeing Gnlsbed his packing, bad
at down oa the spruce Ic^ with his face to the fire, end
hb back to tbe dense woods, to wait for his compan*
lOR. ... It had not eaten the body, but apparently bod
romped and garaboUtd ronnd h in uncouth, ferocious
glee, occa^onaDy rolling over and over it; and had tlen
Hed back iato tbe soandless depAs of Ou woods.

Ran man, otlerly unoerved, and bellevlogthat the crea-
nre with which be had to deal was somctfung ehber half
boman or half devil, some great goblln-beart, abandoned
cvcrylhlog but bis rifle and struck off at speed down tbe
pass, Dot baltiiu! until he ronebed the beaver laeadewa
where the boMded ponies were s(UI gr&ziog. Mounting,
he rode onwards throegh tbe nJgbt, until fir beyond (be
reach of pamoit.

Judged by tht time of publication of Ibis story and what
(he old mao said, this mavl have taken place in Che early
1800's. Conditions changed redlcafly about those parts in
the 1850*s, but then, strangely, they lapsed oace reorc Luo
a form of oblivlos and, despite ihe incredible advance of
civilization and (he complete opening up of tbe whole We$t,
until it stands today as sccood to no oiiter area In tbe
Union, parts of j( are lealJy le&s known now Lhaji they
were a hundred years ago. I have observed this straage
progress of progress in action in other lands, ootably in tbe
Republic of Haiti. Tbe population of that small Caribbean
coiutry is so eaorroous (hat Ibe whole of it, ood right up
its lowering mountains, is virtually one great garden-city.
You can siand anywhere and spit In three directions and be
sure to hii somebody's compound. Wbca Ihe (roubles took
place la the 1920's aad (be AmerJeao Marines took over,

137



thev huITt motoiahle roads in a ottwork sll over lh« coun¬
try. (hey lofc: but at th« same timr there c?me ihe

commercial airplane. By 1940 you just couldn’t find any of
the toads made by the Marines, while a new network was
being built that wem roaring straight through the country
from one Irnponaiu cen(er co another. AU In bciween h&U
gone right back to conditions pertaining before tbe advent
of tbe Marines, and in some large areas apparently to those
pertainiog before Columbus. So also with great pieces oi
our ovm country.

It is during this initial period of lapse, or collapse, (hat
wc ODce again pick up our tracks. Ths strangest story' is
that nf Capt. Joteph Walker, an aecouni of which Bcs in the
files oi a paper called ibe Eureka Daily Leader, dated
February 14, 1S79. This recoontg that the gentleoian, who
was then a most renowned mountaineer, trapper, aad guide,
due to hts many e;^plulu iq (he Rockies, bad recently re¬
turned from Inwsligafini a newly opened territory near the
mouth of New York Caayou and had brought to the office
of the Leader a slab of sandstone about 20 Inches long and
41 iocbee wide and some 3 inches thick. "On the surface of
this slab of sandstone was Imprinted the clear form of a
gigantic footprlat (! am quoting here), perfect e:(cep( for
the tip of the great toe. The footprint measured 141^ inches
from the cod of tbe bed to the tip of the toe and was 6
inches wide across the ball of ihe foot. Captain Walker
related bow he had found the slab of sands tone formation
under about 2 feel of sand."

This story has sundry rather odd features. First, a foot
inches by 6 Inches across the ball is hardly a gigantic
foot compared lo what is coming in a moment, but it has
a plantit index of 2.42 wbicb is much wider than a human
foot and would give an impression of great size. Tbe fact
that it was impressed in a slab of sandstone might at first
sound more than just auspicious because you can't Impress
anything into solid lock^you have to chip it out. How¬
ever, aed this should be borne in cnind, saadsione can form
in a matter of days under certain conditions. A surface of
argillaceous siinii may dry out uoder a hot suo and remain
baked to the consistency of pottery for months. If then a
flood brings do^m a layer o£ sand or other material nod
deposits l^s on top of it and also immediately dries out,
you may get conditions similar lo those that pertained in
our Porcupine cage at my zoo. More drying, compression
and the solution and percolation of. say, lime from tbe
covering layer may then, in only a few yean, solidify the

138



bottom layer and turn it to a aandstone. I have seen ear
tire tracks is saodstcuM so soJkl you needed a cold chisel (o
chip It

Capuin Walker was not a man to be fooled either and he
retained n high reputation lo that Walker Rivet was named
alter taint tay Ok Federal OoveriuDeni. He vias» b Ucl,
solidly on the right track]


t3d



6. In Our Own Back Yard

happenings in northern CALIFORNIA


Now that wc arc squarely hack on the tracks, wo might as
well stay on them and skip, for the momeru. all chroaology.
There is a business about giant, bumanold^appearing fool-
tracks that haa been going on in (bis country for far loo
toog. it needs examiaation, and eiihei exposidoa or debunk¬
ing, Ii centers around ihe Great Basin, which is mostly
pow state of Nevada, bug it stops over in aJI directions
and, in the form of giants capable of making sucb tracks,
(I reaches from Canada to Mexico, from the Pacific coast to
Pennsylvonta, and right gn into ihc ponals of ihc Smithson*
inn Institution in Washington, D.C,

As will be teen from the discussion of what I euphemia-
ticaJly Call Myih, Legend. »nd FolLJorc such things ato
Imked up all over a wide area from New Mexico to Puget
Sound but center round the Sierra Nevada. They are linked
by bah tradilional. early, and even recent accounts of a
giaoi race of wild people, who iahabiied this area in by¬
gone days, and who not only were there before the Amer¬
inds arrived, but pcnisied for a very long time after they
Gone 80 and, i: is alleged, still linger on today. In tra¬
dition. these personages arc not overly cxa^eraied. They
are couslsiemly reported as having been on an average
ohouL 7 lo 8 feei lall tor its equivalent), but to have in¬
cluded outsi 2 ed individuals, to boot, that were especially
reverenced.

W« have seen a record of & slcelelua Biting lh«c dimen¬
sions allegedly found in British Columbia. There arc plenty
of others but we just don't talk about them. Unfortunately,
J hove not had rhe nppominiiy to follow up the qous given
to me some time ago on this subject, regarding Nevada, by
a good friend, a in«i with a genlua for bibliographical re-

fAO



searelk, a very wide and rea! knowledge of Americaa pre-
histOTy and folklore, of Acncrindian history, and of cofoaial
tradilion. Ii is a voluminous and very stanling file, coniain-
ing what seem lo me to be endless references lo whai are
classed as "giaol burials” from ail over ihe place. Many of
these are said lo be housed In small county and city mu-
KUfns dolled about the West, and most seem to have been
lodged therein during the IPth century. A few arc said to
have gone to the Smithsonian, yet all have been totally ig¬
nored ever since. The reason for this ig-rmr-anee. as well
as a notable ignorance of the suhject. is staled hy this
indefatigable literary groundhog to be the really abomina¬
ble siory of the fooi-iracits of Carson City >eil. a reou odd
affair. It goes as follows;

The Iraiinraa wm a cause calibre 80 yean ago. If
couM have passed almost unnoticed bul for two faefst
finf, that said tracks were found In sandstone al a depth
of some 2S feet below the surface in the jaS compouod
of Car^B City, Nevada. The sccood tUng that stiniD-
laled such wide Inieresi was not that some scientists said
that some of these trucks were made by gUot men of
over a million fsk] yean ago, bul that Mark Twain wrote
a pogthdy hilarions story wilb the discovery as its maoi
theme or raison d'etre. These facts have been qooie^
misqDoted. aod |ds1 mentiooed over xud over i^io. The
story represents one of the finest examples of 8ckl^•
tifie skalfdngserv^^^d vnguene a s on recc^

Finf. some of the tracks—there were others of cl«-
phantines, deer, rats, and **giaal birds'*—looked like
tbos* of a giant humanoid. 'I'hls fact was pubttsbed by
Dr. Harknem of San rmncbco through the Califoraia
Academy of Sciences, lo hU report, the avibor gave
Booie sketches of said rmeks bul staled Ihu be had
**filled out those areas not clearly shown in the origliuils.*'
These areas happen very eonvenlently lo go righi arouad
the front of Ihe Imprints and down ihelr inner sidca. Am
a rtwll they look eenerakly mucli more homan than Ibey
would olberwisc have done; it ihc same Ifaic jost such
areas wooJd have cul out any I m prims of toes (human
or otherwise). Dr. LeContc, of Califoraia. agreed In
iniol.

Tbe mult of ihcse eominunicatloas was ao immediate
respottse [as wv almost invariable In that decade} from
(Professors) O. K. Marsh anil E. D. Cope. Manh, of
Yale» blafled the idea in his own injnntable style: he did

141



no( »r«ii boftier (o ivfule (he mntfen tJmply 8(:ited
l]u( the (racks were those of a pr»iuid<5toth—either
Mylodoa or what be called Moroiberium (sic3. No aol*
mal has reeeired soeh a oame, boi there H« of course, the
really gUml GroDOd-Sloth (Megatherium); a detail of
SDch a trifling nature would of coiine not hinder this
paJaeootologjcal frec>boolet. The mofi interesting pnit
of tils poi pcintiUcaitoii Is (bat he appears to have nc*
cepted Barkness* qnhe tJlegidmatc touching op of (he
(racks, and (taeo to have stated (hat (bey were mnnifcsilv
Ihoso uf a ground-sivtb. Tbos, be wns. Ipsa facio. Mroim
in that, aa temebed up. they nut those of such an
animal. He seems to have complefciy mbised the further
point that before (on thing op (hey could well have boea
So. Rcmcvvri he pulled still another boner.

Ground •Sloths—which were acCiLaliy enormous kinds
of ahuBgy. $hoi 1 «tailed. neotropical anteaters more
closely related lo tbc Giant Antoatcr (Myrtnecophaga)
than to the living Tree-Sloths—roold apparontiy stand
on their hind legs but they ared their Kmnieiiacly thick
ebon taUs as a third prong of a tripod to do so. If they
waddled along on tbeir hind legs, their tails miiei have
gou&ad u deep chaaoel between the tracks of (heir feet
Tliere were no bucti chanoels la tbc Carson City tracks.
Marsli seems to have apprecinted this fact so he con*
jured op some '^siaaOcr (raprinis, obvlou^y those o(
fropt fcol 60 fDevflip( outSKfc tbc main tracka." No Mich
tracks were ever recorded, or sketched. fCopc. Marsh's
most implacable foe. simply implied that Marsh was
wmftg. nod (hat anyone else (f.eConte aod HArknesa]
was more reBable.] They probably oever existed! 1'bis b
(he way uwkw'ard ^'seleDtific'* discoveries are handled: If
they dirn't At Into (be already approved scheme, you
make them do so—aid by any lie yoor reputation cso
gel sway widi. For all Doe knows, the origioal tnicks
may hare been those of a good old OI>Mah.

There is an olficial wind-up to (his but it is almost as ex*
traordiaaiy and inexplicable as tbc facts themselves. For
(ome reason serious-minded seicniisu^.—by wbich I mean
those who still have open minds— Aovr codcI tided that
theec beastly things arc the tracks of one of the Giant
CrouQd'Sloths, We have radiocarbon dated hones of some
of these creatures killed and eaten fay men of a pretty ad*
vanced ctillurc in the Southwest—but I cannot underetand
bow any paleoniologist, let alooe zoologist, could ever con-

142



ccive of any form of such a crcahuc tof which we hav^ a
fool] havinf ever either walked on Its hind legs alone or
left a footprint anylhlni like those of Carson aty jail. This
identification, however, led to all the other targe hvnianoid
tracks being Oismlssed as "just those of foasil animals.”

Would that we might pursue the matter of giant skeletons
but at this juncture It would be inappropriate. It is (as of
now) really a separate subject, and until we obtain a fresb
aXcIcion of one of the large or giant AhSMs, or some
competent, trustworthy, and really informed physical an-
thcopologbt happens to srunible upon one In a muscuro. It
must be left dangling. So, again, wc Jump back onto the
tracks.

This would be in the year 1890 at a place on the Chetco
River about Ihe border between Califamia and Oregon. It
appears that about that date and ihereabouis, the citizenry
bad been bothered lor some time by really gigantic foot-
tmeks that looked, accordins to the contemporary records,
juat like those that would be left by enoraous naked hu¬
man feel, which passed back and forth from the forests to
the seashore. Then things began to happen at a mining
camp some SO miie,s inland. Large objects were moved at
night and there were unpleasant noises, all naturally attrib¬
uted to marauding bears, until one fine morning when, after
a pa/ticuiarlj rambuacilous oigbt, during which somebody
fired at somelhlng, two sets of large human-type ira^s
showed up all around the camp. A posse was organized and
tracked these for a tong way ioto die forest but eventually
gave up. A short time later, bowerer, a man was chased
into camp by sonietbing very large, the looks of which he
did rtol wait to Invesiignte. A watch was sen two men at a
lime, (or a few hours each. Then it happened

One couple going (o relieve a wntch found their two
compaotODs dead and really grossly muLiloled. They bad in
fact been literally smashed and apparently by being picked
up and slammed repeatedly onto the grouod so that they
looked as if they had fallen off a higb clifi onto rocks. The
eccouQi particularly specifics that there was nothiog any¬
where near off which they could have fallea The wretched
men bad emptied their rifle.^ and there was both spoor and
a large blood*trail Icsding off Into the b<L«ih. Tl^ls the whole
camp personnel followed with the aid of Amerlndiaa track¬
ers. It led into the Si.^klyou complex of mountains to a point
far beyond fhar which any avan of the Amarmdn had pre-
viouiJy penetrated. There, the men are said to have come
upon a fresh lava flow. This Is an astonishlni item- There is

143



VDlcanicity in the area and there had been nn account 14
years before of a |rear quake and tlK sound of a far distant
explosion, heard oo (he coast of Oregon, and of n dull glow
said 19 have been seen fo (be sky for two nights hut noth*
ing dehniic about a volcanic cnipiion was even suggested at
the lime. What is more, ihis reporl by a party of ABSM
hunters was also Ignored and it was not till after World War
II itiai lava beds, now re-vcgeiaied but nonetheless of very
recent vintage, were located in the area, although they
had shown up on aerial maps as irregular patches of some
unique form of ground-cover.

This ralher gruesome incident appears to have satisfied
even local curiosity for sonic time is oothing much >s re>
ported for quite a few years, though a very old Amerindian
patriot told me with a whimsical smile of one Chester
Johnnv of his tribal group who b the year 1905 spent a
happy hour watching a large papa Tok4-Mussi (as the local
giant ABSM or Sosqiiotch is called) trying to teach his two
youngsters to swim in a river, and to spike fish with sticks.

The records 1 have—-though they arc, of course, very,
very far from conjplc*c—are almost blank until J924 when
a buneb of hurdboilcd loggers came literally roaring into
the small town of Kdso, Wa*>bingtoa, from their advanced
canip in (he Cascades, and absolutely refased lo go back nor
any'wherc else in the region out of sight of a highway. They
said (bat their camp bad been attacked by a □timber of
enormous hairy wild men who had pelted them with stones
and other debris, !□ view of their tough characters asd
siubbcm attitude, a posse was formed and. well armed,
went 10 investigate. No ABSMs were seen but they bad left
their enormous tracks everywhere and the cabin oi the
loggen was not just a .shambles but b great part destroyed.
That year there had heeo terrible man-induced forest fires
in the region for the first lime. I have often wondered if the
AfiSMs decided to giN*c little “butnan*’ men a peremptory
lesson in couscrvaiiOD—the best and only really satisfactory
approach to which is the total eradication of said Hide mca
from the entire locoljiy.

Now, here we are hack again at the date 1924. Wherever
we go, it seum<i, and it will recur, there was a marked torn-
ing point in ABSM history in the dcmi-dccadc 1920 to 1925.

I think there must have been a gre« world-wide bistoricaJ
break M that lime which perhaps wifl not become apparent
10 historians lor many generations. What » was I can only
coojceiure but more and more I am coming to think that
this was ibc real time of change-over from all ibat went

144



b«fc»re 10 what we call modern limes, or the new world.
Most of the ihiogs (hot have really affected (he outlook of
humanity, like the invenlioci of the typewriter, eleciricat
power—and eapectally Ught and radical internal combus*
(Ion engines, flying m&cbines, and so forth, had taken place
before ibis, but ibeo came the social upheavals of the post*
war era. Not even ihe.<« things bad really taken hold before
the 1920’s, and they took a few years to do so even after
that. Mao's ouilook on life then changed radically every*
where, and he also took a completely new look at bU envi*
rooment. A great numbex of the shibboieiha he had
previously held most precious just collapsed, while a whole
lot that he had previously coasidered worthless or reduadant
suddenly acquired entirely new status. The change svas
tcchnofogicaDy induced but It did not greatly affect basic
science—funnily enough—but rather sociological attitudes.
It was act that oew things began to happen all at once so
much as that people began to treat the old ones in as en¬
tirely different light. On (be one hand, real exploration
began: on the o^er, just plain, go-bave-adook exploration
came to an end.

Things like sHommaSie foot-trAck« w(?nt into limbo. The
age of “the Curiosity'’ was over and people were no longer
curiou.s. They demanded the faces and in some rasped
they got them. In others they got falsehood or nothing at
ad. ABSMs became deflnltely de irop, and sUuneb souls Ukd
Prof. Kbakhlov, and others, no longer went barging about
Ibo world recording cunosities ami wriilng about ibem.This
initiated the age of skepticism par excedence.

During the 35-year period subsequent to this straoge his¬
torical turning point, a lot vent on Doncihekss, and this*
due perhaps to ils suppression, gradually built up a veritable
explosion nt tbcend of the I950’s. Ii is hard enough to sup¬
press anything, but suppressing truth ti.e. facts) entails its
own special hazards. People are more suspicious of truth
ihan they arc of falsehood aad they almost invariably down¬
grade it if it clashes wiiJi belief or faiths. Iltit "truth wlU
out * seems not to bo an altogether valueless cliche, Theo
again, both faj^ facts, and (ho supproccion of unpleasaat
fac« is apt (0 b« extremely costly; and. if you really want
to get at the truth of anything, reach first tor a pocketbook.

I seem to be full of cliches, but It Is also perfectly true that
If you hit anybody through his pocl^ibook you are more
likriy to looseo tiim up than fay hitting him anywhere else.
And. as I am Iq this rut. 1 might us well add Lhai. while (ovb
of money may be the root of ail evil, it is siiil by far ibc best

145



nTTenHcm yei for getting at the facts. The moment anything,
however curious (or unpiessani) h is eomidcm] generally,
develops a value, it automatically develops a potential, and
when it is fouoded oo fact, it cannot forever be suppressed,
Id out case, also, the facts have several special coimota-
tioos. They impinge direedy upon our oiesl basic precepts,
such as religion, ethics, politics, and science, A live ABSM
would be the greatest propaganda weapon possible; at one
fell swoop it would prove Darwinisoi. and set at nought a
great part of religious belief and dogma, while it would oko
confound a great deal of that which science has written into
Us dogma. Quite apart from all of these high and mlgbty
matters, plain ordinary pec^le have Snaily become fed up
with being celled fools, linrs, and idiots. The world is full
of crackpots but it is rapidly becoming manifest that most
of these make a speciality of pursuing beliefs, prejudices,
and faiths rather than the facia of everyday life. If you
walk ioio a truck end stoggcr borne bleeding to death,
It is ^uiic useless anybody telling you that you are bna^n'
ipg things, that there is no «uch ihlog as a track, or that
you ought to be confined. It doeai'l help your feelings (or
maUccs as a whole) If somebody suggeaLs that It vr^ un>
doubteijy a ba« and not a truck, or perhaps even a motor*
cycle. Either the damned thing was there or it waan’l,
skeptics notwithstanding; and the average citizen becomes
peeved when he told that he, wbo ^aw the thing, is lying,
especially by a persoo wbo was nor present. During the last
40 years, plain, solid citizens have beea geniag pretty peeved.

During this period, ABSMery in ihe United States con¬
tracted in upon itself and became coaceotrated In and
around this Klamath district jo northern California, which
I described as an example of a virgio montane forest area.
It now transpires that somebody has reported something
about die matter every year since 1938 io mis area while,
of course, the Amerinds thereabouts just went steadily eind
stoically on liviog with the business and keeping tbeir
mouths shut, I won't go into all of ibese items because they
are so exactly alike, and they are all just like the deseiipiions
given ol the Suiguauhes. Hereabouts they are called, as t
have said, Tak£~Mui,K},f by one Acnerindian group, the
Yorok or Yurock. and Oh-Mahs by the Huppas; there are
endless other names for the big ones in accordance with
the number of tribes, sub-uibes, and familial dialects of the
Amerinds. The name Oh^Ma/i, which is rapidly coming Into
uoivcrsal acceptance, actually means something very dose
to "Devil" as used by our ancestors—a sort of large chap

146



with oasry hAhits who !a dAnjeroui, be$Ua1. potentially
CDmivoroiu, and $n»clly but definitely mbcr human. Non-'
Amends in the area have come to call (bam "Bigfoot"
haviDg the usually mistaken idcA (bat there is just one
giant o/ some kind loose in the countryside—just as people
speak o( The Loch Ness Monster, as if it were a lone indi*
vidual that has been paddling about therein since Cretace>
ous limes, maialess and possibly even parentless. But there
is a complication here.

I would have bad to come to this sooner or later Ic aoy
case so I might as well introduce it now, even if it is not (be
place to go into it in full. To jump ahead, kt me say that
there are now some hundred separate and asofaied areas in
the world where or from which ABSMs have been reported
—and (his Is apart from Myth. Legend, and Folklore. The
creatures described vary considerably hut. with a few nota¬
ble eacepdons. they appear to fall very cleariy into four
main types—a targe (or giant, to US'), a medium or man-
sized. a small or pigmy, and an excessively bestial creature
known as the Meh-Teh, These lypes ore not set or pat¬
terned. and (here b considerable varieiy in (be actual sizes
of each as reported. However, they would each seem (o
form a fairly well defined animal form, having certain par¬
ticulars, characters, characierislics, and other perquisites
all their own.

The giant ones are iDhabitants of higher ckvaiions and
do actually go around In snow when needs be. Tltey seem
to be more carnivorous, at least in winter, like many Prs-
matte: they have very human-type feet: and they are
clothed in sbon. thick, hairy fur. The medium-sized are
ve^ maoUke but clothed ia longer, darker hair, have very
pointed heads, and very short, broad feet with large toea.
the first being extra large and widely separated. TItey are
vegetarian or omnivorous and live in upper montane forests
but seldom go up above the tree-line. The little pigmies are
also forest dwellers, but in the valleys and bottoms, or al
lower levels, and where it is much warmer. They have Ul-
(!e Riaslike feet but with very pointed heels, arc clothed in
fur but have much longer head-hair that forms • nw
down the midback- They arc excellent ircc'climbcrs and will
t^e 10 water. They go about in small family parties and
baN*e a sort of primitive laaguage and thev may even carrv
palm leaves or bits of anything lhat will aflord shade f/oni
sunlight. They arc just about as nocturnal as chimps which
move about and feed at night in flee moonlight weather.
The giants seem to be olmost wholly nocturnal: the me*

147



djuin jobs tnnre diurnal or crepuscular. The M^h-Tehs art
quite artother marter.

Again end again and again, these four types will crop op.
In Canada 1 have so far hcnrd oniy of the glnnti, and I
thought that the same went tor the I^gel Sound to CaJifor*
nia area, but J am afraid that I have now to bring up the
nojuly suggeiiion that some reports froco this area ecem
deflnitely to be. or try to be. speaking of both the marv
sized sod pigmy types. This, you Eoay well think, is gotoi
a bit too far, lo that It U bad enough to be tokod to stom¬
ach the possibility of a bunch of giant '‘ape'tacn" ruaning
around half a dozen of our most up-to^ate and worthy
states, without being asked to accept also Neanderihalers
aod "Little People.'* * 1 would have preferred, as I say, not
to have brought this up just yet but. as a reporter, what caa
1 do? The very definite fooiprinis left near Roseburg. Ore-
goo. dariag the i^ht of October 23, 1959. were deBaitcly
of the man-sized type, while literally thousaods of the little
pigmy type are alleged to have started tunung up along—
perhaps appropriately—the Mad River Valley, about 1950.
TlmB. as we go along, you must brace yourself fa- casual
asides to the effect Ibai such little ones were seen hither
and yoQ. The Roseburg case is happily so far unique, so
that we won't be bothered herein with others of its ilk and
so, when i speak of ABSMs hereabouts from now on, it
wiL be of the gianl Oh-McJis unless I clearly specify other¬
wise.

The outburst came in August, 1958.

There was. as usual, an unreported and steady build-up
before the 6v«a(. and there was die usual red herring al¬
most at the outset. This latter was such a bizarre report
and was given jtueb wide publicity that it has both diverted
public altcnlion uod caused many, who might othcrwiee
have investigated the mam stream of events with diligence
and an open uind. simply to throw up their bands in
horror ai anything so impertinent. Tbc case is very peculiar,
has DO precedent and no cooclusioik It occurred 3 months
after the outbre^ of true AflSMery In nonhem California
in August, and It took place 6U0 miles away from ibai area,
near Riverside in San Bernardino Valley of southern Califor-
gla. Nothing of a similar nature has ever been recorded
from anywhere near this place,^ while all the mountaina

'The genml concensus bow is thtt lhe« are merely the
tracks of lh«younesi«fi of a single gianC type.

• SubscquBDi discoveries render ibis siaiecnent invalid, as of
1968.


14a



from ihe Sierra Nevada south into fiafa Califoroia may
really bu said now to have been explored and combed. [At
the same time, we might aote the proximity cf Hollywood
and several large mental institutions.] The following Is an
accoudi from the Los Angtles Examiner which speaks for
itself, though very faceilously. and says everything that
there is to be said about the business.

MONSTROUS! Driver TeUs of ''Tbiog'^ that Gtwed

at His Car

RIVERSIDE* NOV. 9 (UP). Fonoy tbiog happeiKd to
Charlie Wetzel on the way home last night.

A Monster jumped duI at him, That's what he toU ao»
thnritics who plamied to continue an iovestigatjop of the
IncrediMe story today.

Wetzel. 24. a resident of ncarhy Bioomiogfnn,
ported soberly that he was drh big on a street near River¬
side when a frightening creature ju raped in front ef his
car.

*TI had a round, ware.K^rowbb bead**’ be said* ‘like
something oat of HaOoweeo.

“it wasn't human, h had a lunger uroi (hun aoylhli^
Pd ever seen. When h saw nic In the car ll reached all
the waybarik to the wndshicttl and began cUwing a me.

“It didn't have aoy coni. TOc face was all roond. Tbc
eyes were sbiniog like somcthinig IliioresrenI and It bad
■ protoberant icoutb. It was scaly, like leaves."

Wetzel said he became Nerified when the creature
reacbed over the hood of hb car and begao clawiog at
the windshield. He said be reached for a .22 plriel be
had in the cor.

**1 held that pistol and stomped on (he gas." he said.
Tbe thing fell back froni the car end it gargled.

The Dobc U made didn't sound human. I think I hit
It. I heard something hit (be pan under the cor."

SherilTs officers said Wend poiated at come Hdn,
sweeping marks he said the creature made on his wind¬
shield They went to the scene of the claimed apporillon
but said (hey could fiad nothliig to prove ur disprove
Wcttd’s story.

The sccDc U at a point where Nonli Main Street dips
and crosses (lie Santa Ana River tied, which Is usuaJiy
almost dry. Wetzel said be told the xtory to his wife aod
sfae induced hint to phone authorities.

“I kept suyiog ao one wouM believe a story like thh,”
be said.


149



Sheriff's S^. E. R Holmes said \c thonebr peHups a
Urge VDlhirc misbt have flopped on the bood of Wetzcfs
car~*^iDctimes cars hit them when they’re in the road
efttlDg rabbits cars have klDcd," he said.

So be searched the area htmseK loday. said

Holmes. 'I didn't even hnd a feather.”

The bi)jid*up to the really valid events may he Tefl till
later, for tt cooslsls once agsin of accounts of all the saine
old ihiogs, (hough, wilhal, highly conUrmatory, and shov*
ing that *hat happened at a place called Bluff Creek at
August of that year was neither an isolated case nor any¬
thing novri. 1 will mention these more fully when I come to
tell of tbeartermath of the Bluff Creek affair.

Before giving the facts of this busisess 1 must just hark
back for a minute to my description of this country. On
vn you will see the main roads marked by their route ourn-
hers. Apart from the four chat surround ihe area—Nos.
101. 299, 99, and the cast-west route over Grant’s Pass,
there is really only one road through this block of territory.
Tbb runs from Willow Creek, diagonally northeaat to joia
Route 99, via Happy Camp. Immediately north of Willow
Creek it follows the Koopa (HCppa) Valley and then forks,
one small road going back to 101 at the coast, the other
major route going into tbe lulls. AbO(R 10 miles along (hjs
route a new road is being pushed north up a light valley
named Bluff Creek, This road was begun In 1957. I visited
the road end in 1959 and it had only scKien in 23 miles, so
rough is tbe country. From this area, the following matters
came to light.

In August of 1958—on the morning of the 27ih to he
precise—a very sane and sober citizen by the onmo of Mr.
Jerald Crew, of Salyer township, Humboldt County, north¬
west California, an active member of the Baplht Church, a
teetotaler, and a msn with a rcpuiatiao in his community
that can only be described as heroic in face of certain aJ-
(Dost unique personal tragedy, went to his work with heavy-
duty equipment at the head of (his new lumber access road
being pushed into uninhabited and only roughly surveyed
territory near the borders of Humboldt aod De! Norte
CoudUcs. This huge block of letrltofy is crossed kitty-
corner from the south at Willow Creek to the northeast by
t winding htecktop load, and from cost to west by only four
Other roads of lower grade. Logging trails and some “jeefv
roads*' now finger into it froto these roads and from the
main arteries that enclose >l to north, west, south, and cast,

ISO



but the«e are of very limited extent and are hardly used at
ell. “Jerry” Crew’s crawler-tractor had been left overnight
at ibe head oi the new road, about 20 mites north of its
digression from the qojtow blacktop that ruos north
through the Hoopa fas ;t Is on mapa} Amertndias Reserva¬
tion from Willow Crack to a place with the delightful name
of Happy Camp op near the Oregon border.

Jerry was ao older member ol a crew bulldozing this new
road into vltlually unexplored territory for one Mr. Ray
Wallace, subcootractor to Messrs, Block and Company
who bad. in tura, contracted with the National Parks Ser¬
vice to carry out the work. He is a locil man. His fellow
workers were for the most pari also local men and included
a nephew, James Crew, a very level-headed young chap,
others whom I shall mention by name in a minute, and iwo
experienced loggers of Huppa Indian origin. The crew bad
considerable heavy equipment at the scene of operettons
and had started work in late May as voon as whnt little
snow there is in this area had melted and the much more
deadly mud had firmetl up. The road had been under coa-
sirucrlon for two seasons already. The country is tnouniaia*
ous; diougb this is Ihc andcr^tatement of the year, being to
tnosl intents and everywhere almost vertical so that you cao
only go up on all fours or down on your hoiiom. Unless you
make on cxaggcroied aod exhausting climb you cannot see
more than about four square miles of the country because
you are always oa the side of something gobg either
slrojght up or almost straight down and unless e tree has
fallen or been cut out, you can't see einyilun^ because bare
rock Q coofioed to the appermost summit; of the peaks and
ridges. The road crawls laboriously up the face of the
western woll that encloses a stream known as Bluff Creek.
It Is s^ll UDSurfaced and when I visited it in 1959 was ankle-
deep in ultra-fine dust that surpasses envthing the deserts
of Arizona can produce at their damnedest. All along this
mountainoxis trail there are the stumps of vast trees cut and
hauled oul, and great slides of friable shales, grav. brown,
blue, or even green that have been sliced out of the sheer
valley side. The great dozer* and ernwiers clank and roar In
the boi summer sunlight os they gnaw ihcir relentless way
into this timeless land. Iltc great trees seem to recoil a lit¬
tle from their mechanical jangling and screeching, but day
by day these bright yellow and red monsters munch away
ever deeper into ooa of the last of America's real wildo
nesses.

Those employed on this work lived during the work-

151



we«k in camp near ilus road'bcad' They had traHers or

tests or prefabricated houses and some of iherd had ibelr

families with them and suyed there aj} week. Others with

families resident in nearby communities normally went

home on Friday sight and returned on the foliowiog Mon*

day morning, l^e younger fellows isuoliy did likewise, for

the drive to WlUow Creek look only about 2 hours for those

who knew the road. Jerry Crew’s practice was to return to

bis family o\ct the week-end. Jeaviog his machine parked

at the scene of current operations. He bad been on this |ob

for 3 months that year before the eventful monuDg wbicb

blew up the storm that literally rocked Humboldt County,

California and made the pages of the world press but

which then sort of folded in epon Itself and was heard oi no

more for a vear.

•

Wlsat Jerry Crew discovered when he went to start up
bis ‘*cai” was that somebody b»d usspected it rather thor¬
oughly during the previous night, as could he plainly seen
by a series of footprints that formed a track to, all around,
and then away from the machine, Sucb tracks would not
have aroused bis curiosity under normal circumstances be¬
cause there were three dozen men at that road-besd and
the newly scraped roadbed wu covered with soft mud areas
alternating with patches of loose shale. What did startle
him was that these footprints were of a shcelass or naked
foot of dlstioctJy human shape and proportions but by ac¬
tual measurement just 17 inches long!

Of these. Jerry Crew look an extremely dim view. He
had heard tell of similar trucks having been seen by an¬
other road gang working 8 miles north of a place called
Korbel on the Mad River earlier that year and his nephew,
Jim Crew, had alvi mentioned having come across some¬
thing similar in this area. Being a pragmatic family maQ
he fell, he told me. son^e considerable annoyance that
some “outsider" should try to pull sucb a silty stunt on him.
He at first stressed an outsider because, although his fellow
workers liked a harmless joke as mueb as aoy man. be
Itcew they were f.ir loo ur^ to go clomplag around in tbe
dark after the sort of work log day ibey put in on that job,
making sifly fcoiprims around the equipment. Then, he
tells me, he ^t to thinking about this outsider and won¬
dered Just how he had got there without passing the camps
farther down the road nsd being spotted, and how he had
gotten out again, or where he had gone over these precipi¬
tous mountains clothed io tangled tmdergrowtli. He



followed rhe tracks tip. And that is when !i« got hia sccoad
sbocX.

Going backward he found that they came a)most straight
down an incbnc of aboui 75 degrf'«$ on to the road ahead
of the parked "cat." then pioceeded down the road oa one
side, circled ihe machine, aod then weat oa down (be road
toward the camp, Before getting there, however, they cut
across (he road and went straight down an even sleeper kh
dine and cootioued into the forest with measured stride
var^nog only when an ohstaclc had to be stepped over or
the bank w&s so steep, purchase coaid be obtained oniy by
diggiog in the heels. The stride was enormous and proved
on measurcmenl to be from 46 to 60 inches and to average
about SO inches or aJmost twice ibai of his own. Jerald
Crew was not only tnysilfied; he was considerably peeved
He went to fetch some of his colleagues. Then he received
his third shock that morning.

The majority of them, stout fellows and good friends
that they were, refused to even go and look at this prepce*
terous pbcDomenon that he told then be had found, and be
had a hard time penoading any of them eveo that the tracks
were there. Eveotufllly. some of the meoi who bad in any
case to go that way lo their work, agreed to go alcmg with
him and take a look. Then they got their shocks and, Jerry
told me, some of them 'looked at me real queer.” But there
were others who reacied differently, and it then ttanspited
that ail of them bad either seen something similai therea*
bouts OF elsewhere, or had beard of them from friends and
acquaintances whom they regarded as totally reliable. The
only Amerinds present said nothing at that time. Then they
ail went back to work.

Nothing further happwied for almost a month; then
Once again these monstrous Blgfcci appeared again over*
night around the equipment and farther down the road to
ward the valley, ootably around a spring. About that time,
Mr. Ray Wallace, the contractor, returned from a business
trip. He had heard rumors on his way in that cither his men
were pulilng tome kind of stunt up n the hills or that some
•'outsider” was pulliog one on them- He paid lilile alientioa
to these reports but he was, he told me. somewhat eppre>
bensive because the job was s tou^one, skilled and reliable
workers were not plentiful, aod the Jocatlon was not condu*
cive to the staying power of anyone. When be reached the
camp and heard the details of the Bigfeet be was more than
just skeptical He wu dowarsgbt angry. Moreover, all he
eocountsTcd was moie talk which he at that time sospected

193



was some sort of prank but just possibly one prompted by
more than mere high spiriti or boredom.

The roaiter was unitl then and for a further three weeks a
purely local affair known only to ihe meo working on (he
road, and their immediate families for they did not care to
speak about It to casual acquaintances; or c^cn friends.
Then in the middle of September a Mrs. Jess Bemls, wife of
OQC of tbc meo v.*orking on the road and one of the sk^tics
among The crew, wrote a Tetter to the leading local new«*
paper, the Humboldt Time^^ of Eureka, which said In part
“A rumor started among the men. at once, of the existence
of a Wild Man. NVe regarded it as a joke, !t was only yester¬
day that ruy husband become convinced that the existence
of such a person (?) is a fact, flave you heard of this wild
man?" Mr. Andrew GenzoH of that paper told roe that be
regarded this lener with a thoroughly jaundiced eye but that
the longer he ^aw st about bis desk the brighter grew the
clear blue light of his built-in news-sense, until be could re¬
strain hiroself no Icoger and ran the letter in a daily column
thnt he then wrote.

There was little response where he had expected a near
storm of derision; instead, a trickle of (cnfatively confirma¬
tory correspondence began to come in from the Willow
Creek area. Tins wa5 coadnuiog sub ru«ft when, os October
2. the maker of the tracks appeared again on his appareoily
rather regular round, leatdng tracks for 3 nights in succes-
sioa and then vanUhing again for about 5 days. This time
Jerry Crew had prepared te his advent with a supply of
plaster of Paris and made a sries of casts of both right and
left feet early one morning. Two days Ister he took a couple
of days off to drive to F.ureka on personal business and
carried the casts along with him to show to a friend, While
there, somebody mentioned to Andrew Geoaoli that a mao
was in town who had made casts of tbe prints aud he was
persuaded to go anJ fetch Jerry. Andrew Genzoli i$ oo old
newshand but of tbe new school; he can sense a good story
as fast as any mao but he is property averse to too good a
story. When be m« Jerry Crew and saw hfs trophies he
realized he had some real Live news, not )ust a "story.*' oa
his hands, and he ran a front-pager on it with photographs
the next day. Then the balloon went up.

Ttio wire services picked it Up 8rtd almo^ every paper m
the country printed it while cables of inquiry flooded in
from abroad. The first 1 heard of It was a cable from a
friend in London: be seemed to be slightly hysterical. I get
• lot of esoteric cables during ihc year about sea monstors,

1S4



(wo-heacfed caWes, reincarnaUd Tndiav girTi. end so forth,
the majority ot which ] aoi eonsfrunod lo do somethiog
^)OUt because the world is, after all, o large pUc« aod we
don't know much about a lot of it as yet, but thU oqb I
frankly refused to accept mostly because I rather naturally
Bssumod that the location as given (Calitomis) must be a
complete error or a misquote. I wracked roy bralas for any
place name in Eurasia or Africa That might have nine let¬
ters, begin with "K" and end in “ja,” The best we could
come up with was Corimbia bui this w as cveo more uo-
likely. Then somebody suggested Corpathia, the countiy
of Draeula and other humanoid unpleasantnesses, and we
actually spent 6 dollars oo a foUow>up. There are few
people interested enough in such abstruse natters as to
spend ll>at sum in pursuit of truth but ! fancy there were
many o& the morning of October $, 1958 who doubted
what they read Id tbeir mommg pitpers just as ferveotly as
1 did tbit cable.

The point 1 want to make b tiat this whole bit did
eoumJ quite absunl even to us, who became immune to
such shocks years ago. It is all very well for abominable
creatures to be pounding over snow-covered passes in
Nepal aad Tibet; after all, giant pandas and yalf^ aod an
antelope with a nose like Jimmy Durante, aod other uo*
likely things come from thereabouts; and it is even cod*
ccivable that there might be little hairy men in the vast
forests of Mozambique in view of the almost equally
onlikely more or les?t hairless pigmiej of the eastern Congo
which are there for all tourists to see, but a wild mea with
a IT-inch foot and a 50-jQeb sthde iromping around Cali¬
fornia was then a little too much to ask even us to stom¬
ach. especially as we had not yet got the news-$tortes. The
amazing thing in thb case was that the world press took it
seriously enough even to carry it as a news-item.

Nut so the rest of humanity. One and all, apart from a
few ardent mystics and professional crackpots, and includ¬
ing even the citizens of Humbofdi County Itself rose up in
one concerted howl of righteous iodignatioo. Everybody
connecteJ with the busioees, and notably poor Mr, Cen-
zoli, was immediately almost smothered in brickbats. In
the meaolime, however, a number of oihct things had
happened. Most notable among these was the reappearance
of ' Bigfooi" one lughi before Ray Wallace feiiiraed lo his
operations. Now li so happened that a brotber of the coo-
tractor. Wilbur Wallace, wss working on this job and he,
besides seeing the foot-tracks many limes, witnessed three

155



other anncyrng and to him startHng occarrencts
which he had reported to hii brother. 1 w^ill repent (be&o
roughly io hU own words which appeared to me ool only
straightforward but most convincing.

First, it was reported to him by one of his men that a
aearfy lul? SS-gslIon drum of diesd fuel which bad been
left standing beside ihc toad was missing and that Bigfoot
(rocks led down the road from a steep bank to this spot
where it had stood, then crossed the road, continued on
down (he hil) and finally went over the lower bank and
away into the iHJsh. Wilbur WaJface wont to inspect and
found (be tracks exactly as (he men had stated. He also
found the oil drum at the bottom of a steep bank about
175 feet from the road. It had rolled down this bank and
had apparently been ihrowu from the top. Whai is more,
it had been lifted from Us orlgtoal resting place and ap>
parently carried (o this point, for there were no marks io
the soft mud of its having been either rolled or dragged all
that disiance. Second, a length of IB-inch galvani 2 ed steel
culvert disappeared from a dump overnl^t and was
found at the bottom of another bank some distance away.
Third, he reported a wheel with tire for a "cajry'air’
earih-mover, weighing over 700 pound.s. had likewnse been
io part lifted and in pan rolled a quarter of a mile down
the road and burled Inlo a deep ravine. Ray Wallace,
however, still remained skeptical even after hearing this
from his own brother. However, on bis first tnofnlng at
the location he suspped for a drink at a spring on the way
dowo the hill and stepped right into a mass of the big
prints ia the $ofi mud around (he outflow. Then, 1 gather
from him, though he is a man with a wonderfully
bnmor, be got "good aad mad.'" There was for him no
longer any question about the existence of these monstrous
human-ltke irackft but there remained the question as to
who was perpetrating them, and why. Ray Wallace ap¬
peared to be a hard'bCNled and pragmatic man aad he
was already experiencing trouble keeping men on the job.
Handpicked as they were, not a few bnJ just had to leave
for one apparently good reason or another. Only later did
be lean] that almost aJi of them did so ooi because they
were scared by the Bigfoot, but cither because tbdf wives
were or because of the ribbing they bad to take when
they went back to dvilizatioo. even for the evening to
nearby Willow Creek.

Ray Wallace said he at first thought somebody was de-
l^craiely trying to wreck his o»tract and be was not

156



alone. However, the local Tcprcecnlaiive of Ihe Hvmholdt
Times. Mrs. Blizabetb (Betty) Allen, set about to mvestl*
gate the possibility oo her own, and discovered beyond a
doubt that oeiiher good oor bad publicity, nor any kind
of "scare'* actually made any difiereoce to Mr. Waliace’s
coniract. Pirn bo •.’as a sub-contractor; second, he wm
more than up to schedule; third there was no rime set
00 the job; and fourth, it was basically contracted by
Messrs. Block and Company, with the Forest Seirlce od a
performaoce, not a time, basis. Ray Wallace got so angry
he brought in a man named Ray Kerr, who bad read of
the matter in the press and asked for a job in order to be
able to spend his spare tixne trying to trsek tbo culpriL
Kerr brought with him a friend by the came of Bob
Breazete, who bad bunted professioaaiiy in Mexico, owned
four good dogs, and a Brilisb'msde guo of enormous
caliber which considerably impressed the locals. Kerr, an
experienced equipment operator, did a full daiiy job: Brea-
zcle did not lake a job but bunted.

Tracks were seen and folioweU by ihero. Then ooc night
to late October, these two were drivtog down the new road
after dark and state that they came upon a gigantic hu¬
manoid or human-shaped creature, covered with ^-tneh
brown fur. squatting by the road. They said it sprang up Id
their headlights and crossed the road in two strides to
vanish into the undergrowth. They went after It with a
flashlight but the underbrush was too thick to see any¬
thing. They measured the road and found it to be exactly
20 feet wide from the place where ihe creature bad squat¬
ted to the liitle ditch where it had landed after these two
slndes. Spurred by thU ercounter they redoubled their
bunhng forays but their dogs disappeared a few days later
when they were following Bigfooi’t tracks some distance
from the road-bead. They were never seen again though a
story was told—but later denied by Its teller^that iheir
skins and bones were found spaifeted about some trees.
Though this story was denied, there is as much reason to
believe that this was done to obviate ridicule as to clear a
conscience.

AH this was. of course, taken with hoots of derision by
everybody even in Willow Creek who had not seen any
tracks—but with One notable excqjtion. This was Andrew
Genzoii and he seal his newspaper's senior stai! photog¬
rapher to Bluff Creek- The party saw fre^h tracks at night
aod photographed ibem. They also fouod something else;
as did Ray Wallace laict. [T have this first hand from these

157



profess! oiial skepUcs.] At t?ie photographer told me.
be was more than list skeptical but wKeo he found the
tracks and inspected them be oot only was coovinced that
they were cot a hoax or a publicity sruni hui, as he put
it. “1 got the most awful Feeling that I can't really describe,
but it wos ncarar Fright than asytbiog 1 ever felt when In
service." But worse was in store lor the newsmen for, in
following the tracks down the road, they came across a
pile of faeces of typically hnman Jorni but, as they pul ti,
'*of absolutely oionumenial proportions." He then added.
"I can only describe it as a 2-ton bear with chronic con-
slipatloQ.'' TItey ccmtcmplated going to fetch a shovel and
soroc container and taking this hack to Eureka for analy'sis
but it was a very bol night and a S-hour drive over a
dangerous road and also, 9s they readily admitted, that
strange laziness that so oficn inicrvencs in offbeat and
rather aJorming cases of this nature, took over and cast the
die. ?re$t coverage bad $ooe far enough, and they were
not ecologists. Later, Ray Wafloec says be stumbled upon
a smilar enormous of human-shaped droppings. He
shoveled them into a can and Found that they occopied
exactly tbe same volume as a single evacuation of & 1200-
pound horse.

Further foot.tracfcs and other incidents continued all
that fall and throughout the winter until the spring of
1959 ending in Fcbraary. However, laier in Ihc spring,
two filers, a husband and wife in e private plane, were
flyiag over the Bluff Creek area. It was April and there
was still snow on ih« mountatotops some of which are
bare of trees. It is alleged that they spotted great tracks in
tbe snow and that on following them up they sighted the
creature ihal had made them. I( was enonnous, humanoid,
and covered with brown fur, according to secondhand ac¬
counts. I tried to locale this couple, with the co-operation
of local filers, several of them having heard of ibe report,
but despite the pratsewortby clannishness of fliers and their
willing offeni to help, 1 hove aot at the dae of writing been
able to identify this couple. The story may be a rumor or
wishful ihlnkini. So also may three other recent and a
whole host of past, old, and even ancient reporu of actual
meetings with one or more Bigfeet jn this area.

Among these are alleged statements by two docten oF
haring met one oo Route 299 earlier in 1958; and of a
lody of much probity who with her daughter saw two, one
smaller by far than the other, feeding on a hillside above
tbe Hoops Valley. This lady, to whom a parloer of mioe

1SB



talked hot who does not whh her name puhUeized. also
stated that when she was a young girl, people used to see
these creatures from lime lo time when they went fiabuig
up certain creeks, and she once saw one swimming Blufi
C^k when it was la flood. She also stated thut in the olden
days people did not go above certain points up the side
valleys, due to the presence o( these creatures.

More important was a positive flood of further allegod
discoveries of similar foot^iracks by hII moaner of local
citiMnry over a wide area and extending b.iek for many
years that came to light as soon as the local press began
to lake Ibis whole motter seriously. But as the^ came in,
public resentment and ridicule mounted so that tbe ce*
porters became ever more cagey. Finally, Betty Allen,
wbo as an old'time resident and with experience as an
Assistact U.S. Commissioner in Alaska, started talking to
the Huppa and Yurok Amerinds about the^e matters and.
tittle by little, an amazing i^iure emerged.


1S9



7. Late North Americans

HYPERBOLE FROM OUR NORTHWEST


You can take the title of this chapter any way you Itie.
Late 13 a useful word: it has two contpleiely opposite
oeaDings that imply novelty or e7:lmctjon. There is also a
cooQotalion of tardiness about a late-comur. This serves
my purpose well.

When Betty Alien started browsing around among her
Amerindian frieod& ahe brought lo light two sets of sur¬
prising facts. The fint was simply chat said friends, one
and all. had always known ohout the Tok^-Mussis aid
Oh-Mahs. completely accepted them as being quite real,
and regarded ibem as in no wise bizarre. They had, how¬
ever, and quite rlgfiQy, long since decided that they were
not a suitable topic for conversation with while men since
it seemed to annoy them, while tbelr evea mentloaing
their beliefs about the matter only augmented the general
contempt In which all their other Ideas were already held.
There w*ure those among the Amerinds, es^cit of the older
generation who just brushed the business aside or referred
to it as folklore. Surprisingly, though, there proved to be
not a few among the younger generation who met the
white man’s :\kepticism with a deep-rooted »corn of their
own. and who affirmed that there was absolutely no doubt
that these manlike creatures atill exi&l; and not in too few
numbers either, not only all over ibis lerrliory but over
other wide areas. 1 h^d the privilege of talking to some of
these young people myself and was much impressed—1
might almost say startled—-not only by theh sincerity but
also by the matter-of-fact way in which they discussed it,
end tl^ir reasons for cot previously discussing it with any
outsiders. Tliough 1 have the pemivslon of some of these
new friends to mention their aames, I will refrain from

160



doiDg because they would undoubtedly be subjected to
ridicule and an uomerciful ribbing, even in (heir own coti-

I will not report in full what they told me, nor all that
Betty Allen {earned because ii Is highly rcpetiiioua, Is little
different from ail the other accounts 1 have given of obser¬
vations of the creatttres, and does not really add any ocw
details. One and all of that categor>' of account of which T
speak were firsthand (I have some two dozen on die),
alleged encounters with the creatures In and about this
block of montane forest which I cad the Klamath, The
interest!r\g thing is that these reports go back to the 1930'8
bu( become Incfcaiingly mote frequent up ii!l 195ff. Since
Lheo they bav*© formed a podilve flood. My inicrprctatjon
of this is that, while the age of the tellers naturally showed
up statistically, another factor is much more important
This factor Is ihM It Is only comparatively rcccotly that
rottds have been started Into those large areas of national
forest. The jeep caused the first move In this activity,
being one better than a mule In tliis country', but needing
at least a clear path of a certain width that might loosely
bs called a road. Next, iho government decld*^ to open up
these nailonal forests to (jmber*crulsing, it having been
demonstrated that one of the best way's to conserve tint-
berlands is to cut out the oversized and overage trees
which retard new growth. The road*huilding program for
die first lime icok (urge niiinbets of people fnio areas not
previously pcneiraled, or into which people found It hard
to go even to hunt. These are ihe retreats of the OU'Muh.

Tbe other thing that Beit/ Allen brought to light weia
the much more surprising tact that this was not by any
means only an Amerindian folk-tale. She began to hear the
Dames of white men and others who. It was said, bad also
met or seen these creatures. She went after these persons
too, and found out In due course that It was so, and that
they, in lura, faiid not been saying anything for fear of
ridicule, 1 withhold their names too. as I do not have the
perratssion of any to publish them and I w ould no more
wish to embarrass thorn than 1 would niy Amerindian
friends. Most of ihese had also been employed on road
oonsrruction. boi there were others, indudmg two doc¬
tors of tncdicioe returning trcfn a mass emergency late
one night along Route 299 going cast from Willow Creek,
who said they had nearly run into one, ahhough they had
slowed down, thinking it to be somebody signaling fK a
lift. They said thnt it was at jca.vt 7 feci tdl when It s'tood

161



up* had straight leg^ but very long anrs. snd was ctolhed
in thick jighbsh brown fur: and who better than (even
tired) znedicai men ought to know? Some of tbese local
Stones went back 30 years.

Then, there was the extremely unsavory <to me) iiiter-
J6clioo of lh« business of "little people." It is a particularly
odd one In this neighborhood for several reasons. First, the
i^merinds will not, as far as I have been able to determine,
come right out and either asicrt or deny their existence.
Unlike the giant*, of which they speak quite factually, they
seem to regard these pigmies with a high degree of super-
sritioa, and their folk-tsies are rife with stories of such
little people playing ^ith their children on riverbanks; but,
while being visible to youngsters, being invisible to adults.
This is a very widespread myth that crops up all over the
world about fairies, pixies, and suchlike little folk. How.*
ever, some white people of higher education, and resident
on the outskirts of fully opened-up and settled areas, have
told the same story, and perfectly stralgbl. but have also.
>n several coses, implied lb«( they hud assumed, or had
definite grounds for supposing that these little boiry ones
were the young of the 0/i-Mahsf

Simultaneously, this dearth of direct claims that these
nidgets have been seen is in marked contrast to reports
tbat tbeir little fcot'dacks have actually been found both
in snow and mud much more often than those of tbe gi¬
ants. 1 have seen skefehes of these drown to scale* but so
far no photographs or plaster casts. M.ioy times they are
said to crowd around pools or depressions in snow and to
trail bto and out of the urtilergrowth in all directions.
They are very tunny little Impnacs. averaging only about
4 inches long and do, for the life of me, look very like
those of tiny men but with very pointed heels,

f ffankly don’t like this: I don’t tike if orie brt: and it
also Upsets me. All of us almost automatically become
annoyed with anyihirg new. and especially when li appears
to con Old with our logic and the orderly tenor of our
lives. Perhaps you will aay ibsl if t can accept the possi¬
bility of the presence of glanu I ought lo be able to take
Utile people in my stride So t should, but I am afraid that
I am 6 very pragmatic persen. and there ig something
unsubslAntial about these Utile footprints. Perhaps it is
that ] have not seen them io the fresh slate myself. In
fact, ] find myself performing all the men Lai gyrations of
tbe most advanced skeptics and debunkers in ttus case,

162



and I know full well that I am doing my damnedest to
explain them away.

The first thing one thinks of—just like the aoologuta
confrooted with Ibe Himalayan yelis —is any kind of local
onimal that might produce these tracks and, by Jove, there
certainly is nne. This is the large western porcupine. This
animal has an astonishingly human-looking hind foot when
seen from below, apart from large claws- It has a some¬
what pointed heel. But there it the problem of Its clawsi
and ibcD there is another objection. The porcupine can
waddle along on its hind feet ciulte well bui, like the
ground^sloihs, it has a thick, stubby tall that is directed
downward and which forms a thpod with ibe bind legs
when the animal is standing up. However, it can be raised
somewhat and could possibly be carried off the ground. At
Iho same time, the clows on the back Net of really large
porcupines are actually raised well off the ground so that
the swollen pads under the feet coo sink into soft sub¬
stances quite a way before the claws leave imprints. Yet
these tracks clearly show 5 toes—not sharply incised claw
morks—oll of about the same size and arranged aln^oat
straight across the front of the fccL In an endeavor to
overcome this fact, an bigenioos naturalist friend of mloe
has suggested that the claws of animals sometimes acquire
globular encrustations of ice in winter when they are
tramping about in wci snow aod when a frost U coming on.
and (hat these might produce the impressioo of toes. But
what il»en of the tracks In mud. all over, nnd hy thou¬
sands? As I say, I don't Lke this budness: bui. 1 also don't
like leaving It up in the air; yet. 1 have nothing to add to it
as of DOW. UotJ and unless I can go aad find some of the
tracks ia mud myAelf, ood carry oui my own particular
kiod of iove^iigation thereupon, I shall refrain from further
commcoL Then there has been another most peculiar
business in this area. It traorpired that nearby, certain
persons who are free, white, family folk, live in rather
expensive houses some limes of (he spliNevcI ranch type, on
blacktop roads around which school buses parade daily to
lake ihair ofFspriog to be etiucaied. In many cases they own
houses which stand iu several acres of land backed up against
solid forest that has nek been touched eiccpt for logging of
large timber a century ago. They had somcihini most uo«
pleasant to report. The^ people hvc not more than ^0 miles
from a large and bustling modem city. They stated, in
confidence and erfi the record, to certain locah: for whose
veracity I will vouch, that they had for loog experienced a

163



prablenv This wss simply that their kids—l.e. uodcr 7->year-
olds—had been found to be playing In U>e back flelds up by
the borders of lh« forest with certain fairly small hairy ones,
who« when alarmed by the approach of human adults, al¬
legedly look to the trees.

Said human kids, on reechiog the age of reason, turned
out nut to iiVant to talk about this abomination, while their
parent'^ most definitely did not nnd do not want It talked
about. Nonetheless, (hey have talked a bit, and 1 pass it on
to you for what it is worth. This is the kiod of (hiag that
gels people really nied: it also seems to me to slop over
into the realm of “Little People" that only kids can see.
Let us just suppose for a moment that Oh-Mah mothers
pennti their kids to play with ours Cup to about the age of
7) but tell Ibem to cul out the moment ooe of our adult
appears over the fence! Naturally it would be only the kids
who see the little hairy ones. Them is no better pUymaie
for a child than a 2-year*old chimpanzee.

There are other items connected with ABSMcry gener¬
ally in this area and to Ihe north of it, which 1 also do not
like but which thould be preseoteU oad also without com>
ment. This comes front, of all places, Albany io Oregon,
which B tn ihc Wlllamelte Valley at the foot of Mt.
Jeffer^n. and concerns a certain Lake Conser. A brief
notice of this was pubii&bed in Faie Magazine’s Issue for
January, 1961 and read:

ALBANY, ORE.—The monster of Cotiser Lake is
stiEI Oil llie loose. The creature reportedly stands on two
webbed (itaJics mine] feet, is 7 to 8 feet high [IbB], and
with Its shaggy white liaJr somewhat rceemiries a gorULa.
It has kept pace with a truck going 35 m.pJi. Never
harmed anyone thoogfi.

This B B nasty one. but let me give you flome further de¬
tails. These were confined in a letter to a friend of mine,
dated October 27, 1960.

Creatures (severai) last report, being sighted on
fanner's farm. An atlempt is taeiag made to contact
farmer whom to date wants his name aod address held
secret. Hove made S Inv'estigatioo (rips and have for
evidence a Hager print lifted oH a hoose window includ¬
ing a plnsler cast of a fool priat irl^l). Have ptrwoal
taped accoujiu of this creature plus many Lolerviews,
this Bidudes photographs. He B all of 7' (aU, 400 IbSj

ie4



Cfflji move jit tremeodoos speeds, jump Iremeddoufi ds»>
No ittffDS cooc^roiog tlii& ImJo^ hflv^ tMeo
prlfitod In tbe Ponlnnd Papers. He displays estreme
cuoaliig, walks and runs erect, appears frustrated, acts
as if would LUce to commiinicale. He makes extremely
high pitched sounds. His hair or fur has a slight ^w in
the dark and U 3 to 4 ioebes long. He walks with feet
19 Bcbes long lha( ouike a sqee^y sound. Has been
seen in daylight and at night and sees to disappear once
ioto the lake. Will send you complete report as soon as
I coo.

Cfcarnre first sighted seieniJ mites north of Abany,
Oregon in o dense land area npprtniraatel? 3 sq. mOes.
Open land extends all aronnd this area & dotted with
farms. Have any Ideas bow be got there?

Sorry for the delay for (here has been oew deretafv
mcots. A tamer wbo wishes to remain anonymons h^
flighted severaf oo his fano. He Is actempiiiig to mabo
friends with them. One b brown and one b white. At
(Iffles they Imitate his voice when lie talks to them. Mr.
fanner is ao ajumal tnuner and at the Inst report steady
pro^ss b being mtde. Hoi St^ was contacted by tbb
fanner and has prombed that the location and that bes
name not be revealed. I wostd like to investigate farther
but un banlicapped. They are up to T bel^t covered
wiOi tong hair which haogs over their face. They walk
erect and with all fonn. They have taken s shine to the
horses but the horses were frightened of iQem. Lais of
fool prints aronnd sad are clovco.

Two weeks ago a sheriff of Salem told mo that he
beard on Ibe radio KBZY that a penoo had called Ln
saying that he had seen a creature near Hwy. 99. I
talked to Ibe aonouocer in Salem and verihtd thb event.
I oil) bosy wrillug yon a complete report. Hope tbte wUl

suflice for a while.

I am afraid this did oof "bold me” even for a little while
hecau» it is alTOgether one of the inosi shocking reports
that has yei come info rny hands. 1 have been pursuiog ibe
matter diligently with, bowever, no result whatsoever,

This remark about going into water on the pan of on
ABSM Is fairly common and causes me to think furiously oc
two coonts. First, It b really a very bizarre thing fox any¬
body wbo b making a good siory out of a scrica of lies, to
think up. Into a cave, or even into a swamp, yes: but into
water, per se. just as if It were an aquatic or at least

16S



semi •aquatic creature, is very weird. At the same lime, one
jmi has (0 ttUcc into account the T>erfecll7 astonishing
theory pul forward by Profeisor, Sir Alistair Hardy of
Oxford early in 1960 and which, utterly bizarre zs il at
first sounds, has been niosi seriously considered by scientists
and fully accepted as at least possible by nsany.

This sug?c.sL< that one branch of the general Anthropoid
elocb—and. although Sir AJistoir enlls thein '^apes.'* T think
we should surdy name them Hominids. or at least as aJ<
ready being on the Mon branch of that stock raiber than
on the Pongid or ape branch—’Sbout a million yenrs ago
took to sc mi-aquatic life and especially along seacoasts.
But lei this bold savant state ht< case In bis own words: *

'^any apes wore driven le huot in tbe sca by fierce
competition tor food in the forests. At first they waded
and groped In the water, hut gradually learned how le
swim. Over a period of several bondred tbonsand years,
the species Io«d Its baJr as It carried nn Its marine life.
The only hair left was on Che very lop of tbc bead to
help protect the creaairc from the suo.

‘The sea ape learned to stand upright becaase water
helped stippoh the body. II developed longer legs than
Its biiid'liasvd brother a|>c for swiaiiminp. Its band* be*
carac senddvely shaped to allow it to feel along the sca
bed for shellfish and open crabs. It learned to use toob
by piling up stones to crack 0 |i«o sca urchins. It would
be only a step for run to discover that Hints chipped
into sharper and more useful tools, kalvea* and arrown
Tb«n, armed with vurh equipment and his erect postore,
he was all set for the chase. He could now reconquer
the contHients. running and hunting tlio animab of tbs
plokui. 1 eUbnatc ibai opes wsre driven info shallaw eev
waters a milbon yeais ago. They emerged as men about
years c^o."

He said hu had dkcueced hie theory with many other
scientists and they bad bceo unable to find a flaw in it
<A.P.)

Footnote: The story behind this vlory Is even more
fiiSCioaLing than the theory itself, and will be told in a
lofthcoming sequel to this book. *4uihor,

•Quoted from a story in the New York Htrald Tribnne, of
Msreh 7. I960, from & March 6. verbaliir, A.P. report on a
confermce of ~Mar>ae Scieoiisis" at Bngbton, En^and.

166



ir in set. why not ilso. or even previously in rivere.
\iktn. nod pood^, more especially «s swamps and manhes
were much more prevalent to the past tbaa they are now,
partteuUirly in the pluvial periods followinfi the ice^ad*
Vances and retreats of the past mUlion yean. Then again,
there b another most convincing aspect of thb idea, as
follows. If at the beginning of the Pleistocene there were a
variety of primitive anthropoids of the HominJd branch
scattered about the earUi, and if all of these were hairy,
but did not all become extinct, as we have until now sup*
posed, wc have some ready*made characters for our
AB5M&.

I.et US su^oae that several of these started | 0 *ng into
water after food, and that one (or perhaps several) types
did very well at it; lost their b<^ hair; karned to crack
stones and all the rest: and then came back to conquer the
land as Men. just as Profe&wr Hardy suggests. This still
need not presuppo« that ali of then did so. Smne of the
types that started the praedea may never have gotten
farther than ducklog into inland lakes and. while they did
not keep at It ferveoUy enough to lose their body hair, they
did dmtop very long toes with an almost complete web
between them. Do not forget that we still have two half*
webbed toes ourselves—our third and fourth—and please
don't fail to lake a look at the California "Blgfeet." in
which the second ** 6011 “ appears to be an enlarged basal
big'toe joint, (see Page 333) All the toes of this
type must then be wry long and be webbed because the
mud or snow does not squt^ up between them but forms
(and always foms) a angular ridge running at right
angles lo the direction of travel, jmt where It would be
bunched up if the foot were webbW. Wc might therefore
legi timatcly conceive of the Sastfuaich-’~Oh-Mah type of
ABSMs at least being relics of early hominlds with semi-
aquatic habits.

However, to interject at this point. 1 recently received a
report from a neighboring area which would seem to indl*
cate something of the same nature. This came to me from
a young man in our Air Force whose wife is port Amerind.
He lived imilk recently on the Makah Indian Reservation
at Neah Bay. Washington. This young mao got In touch
with me through a magazine publisher, stating that be
bad some information that might interest me. 1 wrote him.
and in reply received some very charming and highly in*
formative letten. the contents of which J see no reason to
questiocL Among these be wrote:

167



In my letter to yoo 1 raentSoiied th« 181^ (nch Foot
prints Ikat woe found oa( oo (be beocb. I know tbese
wcreo'i made by any niun going arouAt with a fool cul
out of i piece of wood, tiiis beach is aboot 8 mOes io

(te back fvoodM and ie a very hard spot to get to.

On 3oa(hcroccn«jnn last summer one of the hshcrmen
out bore was going to bed and heard a b( of splashlog
fioiog on in a swamp in his back yard. Froo what be
fold mci he got a flashlieht and went out there to take a
lo<»h around sud »ecn this huge creahiio leailnc back
into the woods ofter Ibe light bit him. Up to this dute
there has been nothlog more seen of it. 4Uho many peo>
pie are waiting for it to cone back. The day ibis person
told me of wkat happened I took a gun and went ioto
tie swamp to look around. 1 actually Foond huge hanks
of hair that must have been poOed loose wbeo he ran
bach ioto the woods lhat night.

I hate bunted and killed quite a Few bears around
here Nti that hair thet I found that day was definitely not
hnir from a bear. For one things there was a cou|de of
hairs that I measured to b« close to 14 incUes long and
liesc hunks had a very strong odor uobke any bear that

I ha^c kiUed.

There is also one other eccoslon that mokes me think
Hat (he Abominable Snowman is up aroond Ibis nedt of
(be woods. This hapHted to me some (kue before I read
your articles in tbe True Mngaziae. One eveoiog I went
op this unused l<^LBg road Io bant bev. I was some 13
miles op this road and there b» oot one person Uvtng for
ohout 28 miles around. On this occasioo 1 happened to

hr aloo<. Well ooywsy I was idttlng on a stomp and was
sitting tbcrc for about an hour when I heard this high
pilcbcd scream like a baby but ibis weal on for almost
aji hour and tbe more I lislcscd to it tbc more I derided
that it wasn't n mountain Uon. Then after a while It
slopped and I never heard It again and I Itfi wlihouc
lookiag around. Tfaco after I read your article 1 (hoagbt
It mipht have been o Snownon op there. 1 went op there
quite a few (Imes after Ibat but oever beard or seen
anything.

Once aialn, I have received oolhbg more from ihls
souice!

ii has always been my Sttti belief, as a reporter, ihat
children don't lie. By Ihis. f mean that, while real kids (say.
under seven) live io a world of dielr owe. peopled by

168



masy tliinss that are not of otir world but which aie sttll
most real to tliem. and while young persoos from seven to
the age of puberty delight Iq pullbg the legs of their eldera
with tall tales, ad young persons arc much mure haaically
honest than grownups. More, important, ] do Dot bdlcve
that a young person can carry a lie forced upon him or her
by aa elder for any length of lime; and, especleHy, under
sympathetic questioning. 1 am therefore always interested
in what young people have to say, provided that they know
that I am sincerely Interested, have an open rnmd. and am
not critical of their age. Voung people are also extremely
keen observers, perhaps because tht^ take a more nearly
worm*s>eye view of life and because their senses are more
acute. Thus, when sotsebody telU me something that
bappcQed to them when they were youog, \ Uke to listen.
Tbis thrn from a young persoo about aa incident when
she was still younger:

Dear Mr. Sanderson:

I have jest finisbed reading yoor story concerning the
eboninabte [sic] otan of Norttaera California. Before I
write any farther 1 would like to say tbnt what I am
sbuut tv soy Is pe»id*ely true and 1 bare Det’cr told uiy>
one (his story before fer fear that they would think that
I wfw half cracked and out of niy mind.

! lave fites (his aaa>inonster and can (dve yov a de¬
tailed description of him. He is far from being pretty
and ] still wake up nigbts dreaming of him.

When: About 9 years ago, at about 10 o’clock io the
morning. Where: Nciir the Eel River above Eureka*
CalHomla. At the edge of a meadow near (he river’s
edge. (Indrr whst cimimstances: My Family and I were
fishiikg on the Eel Rhcr. Wc had been comped io (he
vccioity for about 2 weeks aad had bad poor luck when
it enme to l&shing. I osed to go for a short walk before
breakfast because (here was a very pretty meadow about

a mile or fwo from oor camp oad I us««l to love to see

the nisi rise off lbs grass. I nos only abiiut 16 years old
oi tbe time aod tbe world of nature was sometking which
boUk fascinated and enlhralled me. I entered the meadow
and proceeded to cross it lo order to reach a soall hsoO
a] the other side. When I approuebed (he fool ei the
knoll { heard o sound. U was the sound of someone walk*
tag und I thvugbe pvthops ny brother had foQowad
me and was gong to jump out aad try to stare oie, I
boUertd. *'AJI rishl. stkikcr. I kno* you’re (here.’' Mecd-

169



less lo say il was doI ny brother (hot appeared. Tiutead
It was a creature Ihol 1 will never forget as long as X
Uve. He stepped out of the bushes aod I froze like a
statue. Ue or ^it** was about 7Vi to 8 feet tall. He was
covered wltb brown stuff tbst looked more blie a soft
down than fur. He had small eyes set close together and
had a red look about tfaeiu. His aose was very large and
flat against his face. He had a large mouth with the
strangest looking fangs that I have ever seen. . . . His
form was that of a human and be had honds and feet of
enormous sire, but very human kwkfog. However, there
was one thlig that I buve uot meotioDed. (he strangest
and most frightening thing of all. He bad on clothes!
Yes, thalV right. They were fariered and torn and barely
covered him btit they were stUI there. He made a hor-
rfbJe growlJog sound (bat I don't Chink could be imitated
by any Living thing. Believe ne I turned and ran as fast
as I could. I reached camp winded and stayed scared aQ
while we were there.

I have often thought that perhaps it was a mutation of
some kind. I tbink ttis thing b highly dangerous and
eomethiag should definitely he done about It.

I would be willing to testify lo anything I have stated
in this letter. I am not a crackpot and am completely
sound of mind and body. I just thought yon might be
iMercstcd to know wbat your oaU'inoncter really looks
like. Believe me If you saw him be would scare the «Lts
ool of you. 1 know!

Yours truly,

(signed) (MU.<i)B.C.*

It >5 not perhaps quite proper lo interject the following
comments at this point, but. 1 contend, a reporter has the
right to Indulge some speculation upoo matters that he
has investigated firsthand. This may be an infringetnent
upon editorial rights but can be fobbed off as background
infoTtnation. It seems to me that there is something to ibis
whole bii in California. Oregon, and Washington, and that
it is pretty fatuous to try and pul it all down to any of the
standard explanations such as the boax. the puWjcliy sWni,
the Indian folk-tale, mass hypnotizallon, mass cases of
mistaken Identity (of known animals), or other sugges-
tiooa of that nature. We ore all pretty odd, but we are
not all liars or crackpots. Further, J do not feel it to be

• Name and address on 5le. but for release in special ciicum*

ooly^^AiJlbOfv


170



eithef right or joslsSed to dub all Wasbmgtoniaos, Ore-
goniaos, and North Caiifomlaos as either just beca.u8e
they aay lomcibing W6 doo’t like, or whieb does ool St
into our orderly pattern of what is or ia not supposed to be.
At the same lime, I doa’l give a hang what any “e^tpert”
actually says. There are enormous areas ia ibose three
stales about which nobody—nol even the majuray of Ihctc
InhabllBUt^itnows anything. 1 really cannot see why some
oew tbiags should not lura up in those stales.

If you could read all the reports that I has’e; and. much
more; If you could listen tv my recordings or heive been
with me when t faterviewed and got to know the good
people who had the guts to tell these stories, I ihiok every¬
one interested would be not just e mazed hut somewhat
shamed. It s so easy lo sii back !□ one's owa home, sur¬
rounded by .*UJ the normal, known things of modero life,
and say 'Thuj*': but, get out in the woods and get hungry.
A person will begin lo see a lot of things he never saw
before, and would never have seen if he had DUl got lost
Bad run cut of food. Thus, when a teen*ager writes to me
from the delightfully Darned Happy Camp at the edge of
the KJaraaih area and says: "Reading your story of Amer¬
ica's abominable snowman, I llnd vecy interesting. Bui 1
think they’ve only found the baby. Here, in Happy C^p,
our cars are turned over and rolled into tbc river, 6‘foot
Bees uprooted, slides b the mouotains, and when It snows
lU feet deep, I'inch power lines are snapped in two. The
daddy must cause this." I do not yell for Paul Buoy an
and go into gales of laughter. Maybe there wtrr no Hood
that shifted the can, sod the trees were 6 feel tell, not
thick.

If things as bizarre can happen, or be alleged lo happen,
right in our own back vard, we should be doubly careful of
criticizing things that are reported to happen beyond our
borders. And when these form a logical concomiuxu lo
happenings in our own bailiwick, we ought to ii.sica loost
carefully. Of course, there is the damnable, added frurtra-
boo in dealing with foreign matters inherent in their very
foreignness—one can’t often go and look loio them first-
band, and if OQC docs, one has language and other
difQcullics, Moreover, If wc doubt our owe citizens, how
much more so may we not those of other coun tries? This
is ail a pity but nonetheless tbc way things ure. From now
on. therefore. 1 won’t expect anyone to believe what 1
report at all. We go first over the border south to our
ester republic of Mexico.


171



8. On the Tracks of . .


AFFAIRS IN CENTRAL AND
SOUTH AMERICA


The Iflle of this chapter p an acknowledgement of a good
friend nnd fellow zoologht. He, Dr. Bernard Heuvclmans,
CoflsuUani to Lhe Mua6c Royal D’Histoirc Naturelle de
Belgique, but re«ideni io Paris, is iho author of the only
book that covers ibc ABSM problem world*wide. It covers
also many other Items oJ a crypto-zoological niktufe, and
is entitled In itx English version, On ihe Twk oj Unknown
Animals.'* \ shall he leaning very beavcly upon this v^ork
from now on, with its author's more than generous per*
mission. Bernard and I have been on these tracks sepa*
rately for many years now but, as wc have constantly
exchanged information And k1i»<covcrles. o consIderaNe
antouni of what we have to say has simiUr origins. How¬
ever, there Is ntuch that both of us have unearthed (either
firsthand or by burrowing assiduously through published
material], thoi the other has misted. Frankly, neither of
US knows any longer. In many cases, exactly just which
ilem.e came from which la the first place: and, as conslaril
acknowledgments in the text would be Irksome. Bernard
has given me permission )us( to barge ahead and gobble up
anything that may seem to me ic be pertinent. However,
while we were both once professional zoologists, we spe¬
cialized in different uspccls of the .'science. I started out as
and always really remained a field ecologisi but have
specialized In the major distribution of animals in accord¬
ance with that of vegeiationol types, and therefore ap*
proacb most, if not all. mattcrit from that angle. Thus,
there may be times when I disagiee with my good friend
Bernard and, since I haxs never then foiled to say so to

• PubIt&hccI m £n eland by Ruoen Hart*DQvis. 1958; pub*
lished in the United Slates by Hill & Wang, im.

172



him. f shnti Uto he meniioninB (he fact in this text as I go
aloAg. if occaskifl ariiev It was oq a framework of vage-
laJogy Hint I Ucklod ABSMer>' in North America. From
now on. and cspcciftlly in ihc xtopict, it becomes the maiQ
(heme of my story.

Ai ihii poiD( I have (p revert to type and refer to rnapa,
noiahly No. IV at this point. 1 has'c also to ask the reader
to plunge once again into botanical geography. In addition
to being all of the other uopleasant things that we have
accused them of, people are vcr>’ chauvinistic and, from a
national point of view, frankly bucolic. This shows up in
various ways, like wars and toriSs. but most noticeably on
maps. It is almost impossible to buy a map of any country,
In that country, that shows anything stoning immediately
beyomJ the borders of that country. Thus, not only rood
mapK but even our school atlases have a hahit of going
along spiendidlv to the Rio Grofide and to some arbimry,
somewhat jiggly. and quite nonexistent line from a point
about El Paso, Texa*. we« and iu« north of the upper end
of the Bay of fia)a California and thence to the Pacific
coasi a few miles flouth of San Olet'O. California. Beyond
that, southward, there h a great while blank. While the
United Staters of North America are outstandingly obtuse
in (his respect, we cannot really exonerate the otl^r United
Staters of this same continent—the United Slates of Mex>
ico—from indulgence in the same idiocy. Their maps
cuitomanly run up to that same ridiculous line; above
which a ghostly 'Tais d« los Gringos” may be seen—in
strong light.*

The American Geographical Society of New York has
pubibhed some must excellent maps (hat ^ow (be whole
Of North Amenca aod especially the overlap between our
country and Mexico. These ore very revealing In that one
learns from ihcnt—a$ one docs if one actually travels
through that saip of iwrilory—that practically everything

• Somct'cnes things get much worse, as when GuQlemala pub¬
lished • map of ber country which Included the whole of
RritKh Honduras, because ihey “claim” it: aod then (he Mexi¬
cans couolered with a qup of their southern states from (be
(srbmus of Tehuantepec that showed the nonhem half of that
hapl^s independeoi colony as being a pan of their Ter¬
ritory of Quintana Hoo. Happily, the Kcpublica de Honduraa.
betf^ beiwecn governmcRn, only issued a pamphlet which
claimed all the cays aod islands off British Honduras. (There
are fin United States in all America—ours, Mexico, Veneauela,
Brtu^, and ibe Argentine.


173



goes 00 just the same right across the border. The Tula-
rosa Basin just flows on south into the great Bolsoa (basin)
of Mapimi: the Rockies pass on through the Sacramento
end Guadalupe MountBins, via the Gtisos, straight into the
Sierra Madre Oriental; sad the endless seothparallel
ranges that bestrew southern Arizona go right on to be¬
come the ^eria Madre Occidental, while the mountains
of iOiUhcrn California wsreb on stolidly to become those
of Baja California. Nothing much else changes either: even
a parrot (a CoQurc) and the jaguar gel on to the north
side, and millions of tourist? on to the ^cajth. The only
things that change abruptly are the brands cf beer and the
length of the women’s skins^lbcre is s strong European
influence even just over the border. (Money Is Intercbange-
eble for a time but the gasoline docs. I must admit, seem to
be of quite a di^ercnl substance on the two sides of this
Otherwise aititrary border.]

The really funny thing Is that practically nobody knows
anything about the first great beh just south of emr border.
There are four major roads and three major railroads to
gel south and that is all; and all of ihcoi tear aeross a
variably unpleasant and dreary desert for a long way
before they come to anything iraponanl. Mexico lies on Its
side, so that who I v.e call 5t« west coesl ie really iu south
coast. It consists of a cenlral core of enormous volcaotc
mountains from which I wo great lines of mountain raoges
extend toward the United States, like a pair of giant scUaors.
Behind, or to the southeast of ihe core, there is a narrow
nock of lowlands, the Tehuantepec Isthmus, and then what
» really quite another coujitry named Chiapas ibat stands
up like a large flat salad bowl on a footstool, or actually
more like a flamioao's oest.

To the oortheaal of this Is still another Mexican country
celled Yucatan, which is a low p)ate\u rormed of limestone
mari, riddled with caves, and separated from Chiapas by a
great swath of swamps more or Jess ai sea Icv^ and
clothed in on awful, low, laagled, spiny growth called
Yucatan, which Includes ibe stale of that name,
as well as ibe Territory of Quintana Roo, and the states
of Cempeehe, and Tabasco, Is the land of the Mayas. Be¬
hind Chiapas, on the south side, lies Guatemala; an arbi¬
trary hunk of volcanos and aggressive mwntains that
reaTly forms part of a much laigcf mountain blodc that
extends to the great lakes district of Nlcaragoa,

The ^etra Madre Oriental, along with her many asso¬
ciated ranges, are still not much known, though they are

174



—asd have been for countless centuries—-well inhabited
Amon| them are some valleys filled with a truly tropical
type of vegetation. The Sierra Madre Occidental, on the
other hand, is almost eatirely uoknowo. There are people
living m it but they don't have anything to do wlib any*
body and, least of all and If possible, with MexJcaos, whom
their inhabitants call "guaches*’ [which is a slang expres¬
sion for a very old bus more ot icas held logctbcr with bits
of siriag). Among these people are the Yaqub who played
a great part b modem Mexican history: who still write b
hieroglyphc; who were* slloged (o have been scalping
on the mab Pacific Highway lo Ibe early days of World
War U. They are very splencfid people—everything aa
Ameriod should be, both m fact and in fancy. This south¬
ern (i.e. to as, western) block of mountains runs for 300
miles southeast fill it hits the comparative lowland break
of Guadalajara. It is crossed by oniy one road, from Du*
rango to Ma2atlaa: it bas a caoyoo in it that bas bees
csdmaied to be two hundred limes ibc sixe of the Grand
Canyon when all its measurements are taken Into consld*
eratioo, though you may console yourself about this, be¬
cause nobody haa ever explored It. 1 have seen one end of
it and very impressive it is. Meet of its bottom is choked
with foresi and there are said to be “peaple" k
there—at least my Yaqiii Indian friends told me so. These
are said never lo come out, to be very big, and lo be hairy
All overl

The rest of Mexico down lo the northern escarpment of
Chiapas is charming and much more civilized than any of
us nonheraers realize or like to think. They had universi¬
ties down there 200 years before our country was
founded, and some of ihccr medern ones are carrying oa
studies that are so far ahead of anything being pcosecuied
in ours that it makes us look a iitUe aiuy. [That may be
why we don’t hear about them.] The best work that 1 have
seen on vegetalionaJ disiribuiioo, not excluding Soviet Ru»<
sia, has been done at. and published recently by, the
University of San Luis Potosi. The Indigenes—for we can
hardly cal] theoi natives—of ibis main, central area are too
busy even lo turn up aoy folklore about ABSMs. but they
have dug up some awfuily funny-lookiag siauietics. But,
^is is another subject that 1 cannot get involved in here.

Nov. while the plateau of Chiapas is rotber an unpleas*
ant. dusty, cactus-strewn place, and looks not unlike one
of our leaser doserts (due to Its altitude), 11 is ringed by
well forested mountains with gorges ibal are filled with

175



rea] 'jungle.” ATsd, if Rows back into the uplands of the
roalft Centra! American block; and it really part of ibat
block. Were it nearer sea lev?!, it would be properly tropi¬
cal, fmd It is in any ease only Ju«l "North*' American. The
true dividing line ^iween ibe two continenis of Erica and
Columbia (see Map I) is a very complicaied line that
meandera abom all over the place on its way from the
PucUic to the Caribbean. Plants and animaJs respect this
Vmfi mightily. In fact, you are hard pul to It to catch one
of the party io (be first part In the territory of the second
part; and vice versa. Possibly certain ABSMs show the
same respect for Nature bore. too.

There is nothing like the wealth of material on the sub¬
ject of ABSMs in the tropics, and ootably io South Amer¬
ica. that there is in TSorth America. In the Himalayas, and
m central Eurasia. What is mote, what there is, looks
enremely spotty and lacks any paiiere unless it be
mapped: and mapped on vegeraloglca) grounds at that.
When this is done, however, it begins to make a great deal
of seme. Despite an enormous volume of literature on ibe
geography and tbe distribution of plants and animals in
South America, there arc still many widely held miscon¬
ceptions abota the cen.siitutioo and history of that conti¬
nent—held by profound students of the cutler as well as
by the general (and BOl technically interested) public. The
general impression of the continent is ibst it is a vast
tropical jungle si I over but, while a lot of it is covered with
closed<canopy forests—whether you should call Ibeiu jun¬
gles or not is a mafier of much coniroveray in any case
—the major part of it is not: and. a large portioD down at
the bottorn has a temperate climate tailing off to a sub¬
polar one. Then, there are the great Andean uplands and
mountaio ranges that occupy its whole wesiern side. Least
understood of alt. hewever. is the area which b occupied
by Brazil.

Locking at Map TX, you will perceive that, In addirion
to the two mountain blocks in Central America, and the
three arbitrary divisions of the Andean ridge, there arc
three other upland massifs on this continent. These are the
Guiaocse, the Mano Grosso, and the enormous Caaiinga.
The last Is the roost puzzling to foreigners, because ooc's
impression ot Brazil has been gained from the periphery
of this grim sloping plateau, and this periphery U almost
everywhere a lush lowland belt of furesis and oihei massed
vegetation. The appalling aridity of this stiU so-called
“Terra Incogoiia'* which reaches its climax in the north-

17a



eastern bulge o£ ihe eoncloent. is not generally known. If
you want to gci a clear picture of it, you should read a
book entitled Tukani by Helmut Sick, a scicniisi who
accompanied (he first official expedition to cut right ncross
this icrnble territory to the Amazon Basin. Jn this, you
will very soon see the complete difference between theae
uplands, their vejjeintion, climate and fauna, and that of
the equatorial forests of the Amaion, The two are
abmptly different worlds and. as one approaches the Ut¬
ter from the former, one come« up against an actual waH
formed by tail evergreen vegetation.

If one raises the subject of animal life in South Anierice,
o'eiyhody invari^iy yeUs “Green Hell," a ad thinks of
tbe Amozon Basin. It is a funny tblog. but there U nothing
bcllish about any jungle and ratber especially about that of
the Amazon. It is. like nJI equalorial forests, never too bot
or too cold, singularly free of noxious insects, completely
free from dUease (provided you keep away from human
beings and don't carry any pestilence In with you wbea you
enter], is well supplied with food that is easy to obtain,
bus plenty of good water, and is not too badly infested
with indigenous people who resent one's presence. There
are poisonous snakes and jaguars hut you really have to
look for theiD, and they are absolutely barmless as long
QS you look where vou are goiag and don't molest them.
[1 once persuaded a jaguar to leave the ridgepole of our
busb*home in which my wife was sleeping, one night, sim-
pjv by saying “Boo" at it.] Then there is this Amazon bit

It so happens that the basin of this name, which cod lams
the greatest river, and river system. In the world, was,
unlil not long ago geologically speaking, an arm of the
Souih Atlantic—a great inland sea. Further, there is evi¬
dence that long tlncc li became land it may have been
complejcly fiooded again for briefer periods off and on,
and some Brazilian scientists claim that They have evi¬
dence that the last time this happened was only ^out the
year 1200 b.c, It b Indeed today' a son of enormous bo¬
tanical cum zoological garden but, acTuaiiy, Its floia and
fsuaa in no way compares In diversity with that of all the
surrounding areas combined. In fact, it has manifestly beeo
repopulated quite recently by several streams of animals
and plants from tho&e areas, which must have remained
above sea level other as great islands or massive penin¬
sulas attached to the test of tbe coniineiu, Moieoveri
there were jungles and other wet forests on those blocks
as well as the vegeiatioo and appropriate wildlife of tbeir

177



dn«r itpfanch Man^ af arav are aUo ex^remeTy

ardent; mean In g. that they have lemnlncd d?ove sea level
for a particularly long time. The treat isolated and pcrba|>a
ihe oldest is the Giuana Vfasstf, hut seniority may he
claimed for the Colombian Massif. This was certainly there
before the Andes were pushed up. The Andes themselves
are really comparatively reteai. and they might be very
new. This Is not of our story but It is germane to it, in
that Ihe age of (he montane forests of the Andes has a
very Importani bearing on the recently past history of
A&SMs and ihefr possible dhtribuiion there.

The point I ant trying lo make here is that If I were
asked to go hod an ABSM. or any other as yet uncaught
kiod of animaJ. in South America, the last place that I would
go would be the Amazon Basis Itself. I would t.'ickie the
Guianese Massif hrst. next the Colombian Massif, and
then move on to the uplands surrounding the Matto Grosso.
After that I would do whu I could sboul the CaStlnga,
and then Patagonia, and then the Andes, but would leave
the Antazon till last. As a matter of fact, ] would do a
thorough iob oa the northern Cettral American Block
before even going lo South America at all. and this is just
what I now propose to do.

The limits of this last block are very clear on Map IX,
and are cooHned between the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on
the west and the gutter filled hy the greal lakes of Nica¬
ragua on the eari. Tho smaller soutbem block, running
from the latter line lo the valley of the Attato River, that
cuts ihc Padamaniari islhnsu!; off from the Colombian Mas¬
sif. will not concern us. There arc some exceedingly strange
small animals In that Mock, and there is some odd folklore
but 1 have nothing concrete upon our subtect from It. The
maio or western block is enormously mountainous, and
eoBsbtulcs «ftc of the major areas of volcanIcily rn the
world. The number of volcanos you can count from a
point above CuatemaJa City is vFirlously estimated and
often grossly exaggerated but it is aortetheiess quite re¬
markable, The soutlierD edge of Ihis block drops abruptly
to a narrow, catcus-covcr^, dry, coastal plain; bul the
Dorthem face steps down through cvcr-d«creaslAg banks
of mounlaios and hilJs to a wide focesKOvered coastal
frmie. Its real border is the valley of the River Usumacinta

in Campeche, bul rerth of this there ore seme ancient low

hills in the Pcien, and these mount up to the eiKt into
what is probably the most fcrourkable little mountain mas-

I7e



slf in the wfiole of Central America, This U called the
Maya Moimtslns and lies in southern Brituh Honduras

I have been C3rT>iag on a very long-dlsiance corre¬
spondence with an American lady for loot resident In wbal
is realty the outer periphery of the Mexicao stale of ChU-
pas. She was introduce to me by a man in the publishing
field with the very highest reputation and whom I raost
greatly respect. Were it not for (his. I simply could not
bring myself to record the following even In a purely
reponorial vray. As of going to press I have oot received a
reply to my writ tea request—and letters have io be pad-
died up a river to her. taking several day^^o enter this
ioformatlon over her name.

However, 1 beard from ber that a form of ABSM is not
^uife but very weli-koown in the forests nearby where abe
lives. [Ihis, incidcDtoJIy, Is a coniinuarian of those mon¬
tane forests about which my friend Cal Brown wrilaa (see
below).] Thl.*! she tells me is known locally by various
names such as Snlvaic, Cox-vinic. or simply tajitfurna hu-
mono. She tlttn goes on. deadpan, to write: '‘1 have seen
this creature on various occasions and heard it frequently
—’the la^ time was about a year ago howev'er. Some of
the things 1 know about fitj coincide with your Infoma*
tion [from other areas) but I can’t reconcile the cry
described with mine. I dont think 1 have ever heard any¬
thing 10 disturbing-—not frightening but more dreadful
and haunt!Qg. and full of threat I couldn't imagine. I
suspeci that from this cry alone men living In this jQogIc
could a^^sume it to be a 'lantasma humaao.’ ” A% a friend
of mioc remarked on reading this, ’’Aad L suppose she
rides OQc of the mastodons that tbe locils u.\e for plow¬
ing."

This almost casual letter is soroehow quite shocking to
me, though knowing what I do of this matter in other
much more settled areas, and m view of the fact that rl Is
hard by Cal Brown's pinpointed area for something very
similar-sounding, there is reidly no need to be upset.

As I remarked In a previous passage, Chiapas of Mexico
is shaped like a salad bowl held on high. Its eastern rim
abuts on to the mountains of Guatemala and these tumble
down Into (he Peien In a ircmenUous Junible of uU. tight
peaks and rldgcit with deep narrow valleys and gorges in
between. The whole Is ch<Ae<J with wet tropica) forest, >8
uomupped, unexplored, anJ (uat plain not know'o. I had
a group of youQg associates under ihe leadership of this
Kenneth (Ck) Brown, who worked for some years la

179



this area, collecting sdeotific specfmens for botanical,
zoological, and peirological studies, and 1 once lived
for icveral years in rhut area myself, flew over almost
aJI of it rcpcaledly during the war and have walked all
about It, Comparing notes (after 20 years of this) Ca) and
1 have come (o the conchtsion (hit this a one of ibe oOdcit
areas on earth, made the more strange, almost ceric io
fact.hy the presence of many ancient Mayan ruins therein,
wblcft one stumbles across everywhere. There Is some¬
thing uncasny about these gigantic artUlci&l hills, with
their endle^. writhing carvings, courts, passages, mighty
flat-roofed halls, now filled only with the chiticrings of
bats: utterly abandoned in vast uninhabited junglea that
jufit hreaihc slt(»nily in tbe noonday tropical sun. There
are many srrangc things i& these jungles and some of these
periaifi to our quc^i (see M»p VUl).

Cal Drown licis pinpointed for me a valley to which his
party once artalned and where some of (hose odd Incidents
occorred (bat so often crop up when actually exploring.
You can’t really pot your finger on them, and often one
misses even recording them. Ii may be plants freshly
broken In a way that Is just not right; or very strange calls;
or a certain reluctance by any native people around to go
any farther or even to talk much. So powerful was this
atmosphere at cbi«; place thar on» of Cal's partners'^Wen¬
dell Skousea, a geologist, and one of the most pragmatic
men I have ever met—corralled the tocils almost by force
and demanded to know what wos going on. Then it came
out. The locals explained:

There (ire in the mountain forest very big. wild men,
Complclciy clothed in sboxt, thick, brown, huby* fur, with
no necks, small eyes, long amts and huge tiands. They
leave footprints (wke the Icngtb of a man's.

The area in question was in Bnja Vempaz, around (he
(own of Cubulco. Ciibulco Is ih« Last vestige of civiliza¬
tion, the toad ends there, and tor all intents and pur¬
poses so does everything. The range of mountaiss io
qiesdoo is the bierru de Cbuacus. whose pu'eatest penk ts
M(. (Cerro) Sanche, 851)0 fc«l elevation. Depending on
which direction you're coming from, (here arc between
S and 7 ridges from (he floor of the Cubulco 'Galley fRIo
C'ubulco, which evenbioly josis the Rio Nej^o (o the
north roBghly 20 kilotmCers] to C. Saneho. rurther than
tills, t would not want (o spcnibte as to range oP this
alleged iTCUture, I have coloured hi a patch on the eo-

160



closed nup wUcIi depicts (he approrimate ranRe accord*
Ibs (o what the mlives told me. whkh meaai H would
raoRc Into tbr dcpartoeiito of £1 Qukh^ (see Map
VDI).

CubuJco Hscir* at about 4200 feet, b really “Ikm
te&iplada," aod (be area in queslk»o ranges ap to *^erra
frio.” Tbe ve^efalkm b opeo pioe and oab forests on tbe
^pes, and maay high plateau areas arc covered with
paa>» ns b the Cubolco eoviroo. AIobr the iDargtns of
the lughhiodH where rainfall Is srvaiesi. the oak and pine
forest merges whb (he rain forc«<, Temperature raa|tM
from 30* F to 90 and while I have no good figures on
rainfall, U Is considerably leu (haa. say. Cobao.

Now, as to 'Vbat the native said.** liwy referred to a
large, huiry oeatiae, which sometxmes walked on (wo
legs, and apparendy ran on oU fours. 1 considered betf
first of all, and queried ibeio regarding si/c, shape. ap>
pcaraoce, etc. The answer was that it looked like a bear,
but It wasn't from the descriptloa they itave^no coik
spicuous cm, ao '*snoul**«lt wai aoaewhnt toller ihaa
a man. and considerably broader, covered with darkbb
hair, and the locals live in mortal dread of disturbing H.
Occasionally, ooe or two of the natives wbo got tbuok
nc particulsiiy boastful would go haiS way up tbe ri^e
and make a big show of “hunting^ il, but no ooe ever
killed one that I learned. Several persons reported they
were chiised by H down Iho mountain, aiihnugh with the
fear they have of whatever H K they probably |«K
caught a glimpse of il and ran aO the way down Ibe
mountain at top speed. No one seemed very anxiniB to
guide us to tbe spol. or spots, hut one of the braver souls
agreed to do so finally. Uofortonately. we never go( to
b, for which yon will curse, no doubt I hove no way of
determining from their de&criptiaikS whether It was a bear
or a Sisemiie or someihlog else, but U would seem
nasonable that something 1% back there. You wlU be
somewhat Intcmied in the fact that nartvc« reported to
me that this thing ''calls*' every so often, and they heoa H
from time to line when they art travelliog about tbe
ridges.

One cannot lay any store by “cans." for the (lay Dou>
rouccnili. or Nlght'Monkey of &>uth America eao

almost blast you out of bed when it really gets going, and
(te Howler donkey {Ahiwrta). can individunity make a
series of noises (hat sound just like a Ooiea jaguors fighting

iei



in a thunderstorm. My pomt here i$ that I know Cal
Brown and Wendell Skouscn and the others very well
indeed and have done so for many years. They are the
hardest-hoiled collection of skeptics I have ever met; they
were more than just Impressed—they were astonished.

What they have told me. moreover, acquires a certaid
added interest when ooc reads in The Museum Journof
<Vo). VI, No. September, 1915). published quarterly
by ihc University Museum of the Uoiversity o£ PennsyU
Vania in Philadelphia, tbe following excerpts on what are
therein described as GuaicmallccaD myibelogy [aiejj

TIterr Is a monster lhat Uves in the fares!. He b tnllcr
than the tallcil moo and hi appearance he is between a
man nnd a monkey. His body is so wcU protected by a
mass of matted hair that a bullet canoot harm bim. His
vacks have been seen no tbe mountains, but it is Itn-
posciMc to foOow bis IraM because be can reverse his
feet and thus baffle the most successful huatcr. His
ambition, which hii hse never been able to achieve. U to
make fire. When the hunters have left thoir camp Gres
he comes and sits b; tbe embers until (hey ore cold,
whea he greedfly devours Ibo charcosd and asbes. OC'
caslooally tbe hunten sue to (be forest Utile piles of
twigs which have been brought louether by Q Sisemitc
[also called Slsimicil in an uitsucccssful effort to make
ftre in Iniiiatioa of men. His strength is so greai that he
can break down Ihc bigsest Irces io Uic forest. If a
woman sees a Slsemlte, her Iffc b InAoitely prolonged,
but a DiAJi never Jives more tbao a cnentb after he lias
loi^icd inlu die eyes vf (he inons<er. If a Sbemice cap.
biros n man be rends Ihc body and crushes the bones be*
tw'CCfl his (cc(h io great enjoyment of (he flesh aod blood.
If b« captures a woman, sbe b carried to his cave, where
she is kept a prisoner,

Besides bis wbb to make fire the 5Msemi(« has another
amfitlon. He 5K>ntedmes steals childreo In the belief that
from these Iw muy uctjuirc Ike ul humoa speech.
When a perKin U captured by a Slsenlte tbe fact bc«
comvs knowa to bis near relations and friends, who at
(he moment arc seized with a of shivering. Numerous
(ales arc (old of peo(^e who have been captured by (he
Slsemite. The following incident is rchtod by a woman
who hod it from her grandmolhen

A yuubg couple, recently oiaerkdf went to live In a

162



h tHc wood* on (he ed^e of (beir mflpo (eornMd) Id
order that they miiUK barvest (be ouilze. On (be road
Rosalia aiep^xd on a thorn and oert ommini* her foot
waa M sore that she was unable to help Fdlpe wHb the
barrertbis. so he went oul alone. Icovine one of Ibeir two
dofs wi(b her. He had sot been working loog when (he
dreaded feellne. wUvb he rceogniicd on Shemite shlventi
took hoM of him and be hastily returned to the hut to
fiod his wife gose and the dog In a great frl^ He
immediately set out for the village, but met on the road
the girfs parents, who eielalmed. "Yoo hove let the
Slnmite steal oor child, oor feelings have told us so.”
He answered, “It is as yon say.”

Tho c»c was taken op by Ibe authorltiev sod In-
ve^tigated, Tbc boy was cross-examined, but always
answered, **The Sbemite took her. no more than that I
know.” He was, hi spite of the idrl*t parents* protests,
s«5<pected of having murdered hb young wife, and was
thrown into jail, where he remaioed many years.

At last a party of hunters reported baring wen nn
Mount Kacliarul a curious being wlib hairy body and
flowing locks that fled at tbc s^t of them. A party was
organised which went oul with the object of tryisig to
capture (his creatore at any cost. Some days Inter Ihb
party retnrned with what seemed to be a wild woman,
of whom the leader reported as follows. ‘*Oa IMooirt
Kacharui we hid In the butihe*. For 2 days we saw
nothing, but on tbc third day about noon (his creature
came to the brook to drink and we captured her. though
she struggled vlokmly. A* we were trnsstog the brook
with her. a SL^enlle uppeored oo the liilhMe. waving hls
arm* aod veUing. On hi* back was a cbDd or monkey
child whictr he took in hls hands and held aloft as If to
show it to the woman, who renewed her struggle to h«
free. Tbe SUemite came far down (he hill almost to (ha
brook: be dropped (he child and tore off cr^ot branches
from b% trees which he Ibruw at ui."

Tbc young man was brought from hls cell Into Ibe
presence of this wild creature and asked be recognized
her. He replied. ”My wife was young and bcauilfoh the
woman I see is old and ugly.” Tbe woman never spoke
a word and from that tine on made no sound. She re¬
fused to eat and a few days after her capture sbe died.

Felipe lived to be an ^d nun, and tbe grandmother
of the wonuu] who (old this story remembered him as

163



Ih« man Kfiose had b«»D swa^ fay the

Slsem!l«.


This account would have been relegated to ‘'Myth. Le¬
gend, and Folklore/’ bad ooi an aJmasl tdenlical story, io
the form of a coaiplaiot or a pollce-bloHer, aimed up In
Cohan. In the *amc regron in ihe early I9a0's. This was
made by one Miguc) Huzul and was lo the effect that his
son-In law was dclioqueat in hating permlHed his daughter
lo be seized by a creature of Ihc mountains tn which be
gave a name that was apparently loo much for the re¬
cording officer tind which be therefore put down as “a
sort of gorilla or man" as far as It could he deciphered
and transliterated. ( had a copy of this document onc&>
with a tracing of this passage, made for me by a Puerto
Rican American who Vi'a;^ baffled by the local Spanish and
did not know any Mayan. Llnfcrrunaiely my ori|iiial weot
up under a wartime bomb, but we are searching for the
records from which ft came. Alt 1 can add 1$ from memory,
but this is pretty vivid in (his case as you can imagine, for
it was "in my district" at the lime, 1 then being engaged
in eolleciiog in the area. It rcialed, in subsiaoce, that tbc
5're/>uVc had entered the young man's house aod In the
presence of other witnesses gathered up his young wife and
carried her off while he. the husband, jusi sat there shiver¬
ing. No action was taken because the father was disbe¬
lieved, while it was rather nicely pointed out that if all
that is said about the 5f;w)u'rr is true, the young man could
not be accused of cowardice and/or delinquency, t pre¬
sume there is no precise Iavv covering The matter!

Even then, 1 would still reic^atc both stories to M,
and/or F were it not for my own personal observations,
very close by in British Honduras, While there, my wife
and I penetrated some distance Into these Maya Mouo-
UfnSi not an easy task in (he absence of any paths or
people, their almost straight up and down topography, and
the virtual nonexistence of people williag lo carry things
IQ ad surrounding areas. While camped up there, the Sec*
lor Fores!ry Officer of the colony—one, Mr. Neil Sicver.-
Bon—visited us, and we took a day’s exploratory and
collecting trip up (0 (he top of the next ridge into the
magnificent montane palm forest which is sufficiently
"opco’’ to be able to permit a view. On the ridge beyond
that, then and still now totally onexplorcd and never even
yet atimned. there were rectangular areas of forest of
disiioctly different color, showing (hat diey had once bees

184



cleared for cultivaiioo. Laier. we saw smoke rising from
those forais. and Mr. Sievensoo heard cocks crowing
therein in the dear mountain air at dawn. When the Shed
Oil Company taier made a detailed survey of that whole
mountain block by aortal, sicreosccpic. photography, ihey
brought to light further cvideoce Ibal (here were people
living there. Yet, this mountaiQ block stands up like an
island (Q a sea of lowlands whkfa have been crisscrossed
for geoeraiioDK by mahogany workers and chicle collet
tors. Not one single huroao bdog has ever been knowo to
cofflc out of it.

Who are these people? Some Mayas left over snee pre-
cotomaJ days; pre>Mayan people: or whom? Whoever ih^
may be. they mirst be getting a strange education, for their
hoiM lies under one of the main commerciol alrlisw routes
tfroffl Florida. New Orleans, and Merida. Yucatan, to
Guatemala CityJ. while we ourselves once sat up oo the
lower slopes and watched the Queen Mary glide majesUc-
ally by below, down the Gulf of Honduras on her way to
Puerto Barrios, on a cruise! This is only a couple of faoun
flight from Miami, and yet there are apparently peopte
living there who have never coal acted other people sioce
the lime of Columbus.

Now. I am not suggesting that these tree*c1caHng.
ehkkcD'raislng chaps, whoever they may be. arc ABSMs;
but, what 1 am suggesting, is ibat if such people can coo^
dnue to live in magniflceni Isolation for 4S0 ycarv to a
tury country such a.<i this, not oM>ie than 50 miles from a
munher of settled commuiiities fin all directions, as a crew
b aJIeged to fly], there could perfectly well be all sorts
of other types living nearby too. And this is just wbac ibe
pe^le who live around the area affirm.

These people arc of two major types'^Amerinds. and
sundry sealers of mixed Amerindian stock in Punu Gorda
on the south, and related kinds of people to the north.
T^us what are called the Caeibs. along the coasL These
latter are not in any way the AmennUiao Caribs who gave
their name to the Caribbean, but arc a group of West
Afrkaos of Sudanese Negro stock, who obtained their
freedom on the Lesser Antilles in early days, and tbeo
sailed Lbcir own ships to the mainland coast. They axe
very strange people with their own language, customs, and
religion: great boating people: fearless, and rather fearful.
They d^'i intsi anybody and they don't seem to like any¬
body, aad whatever they say they should not be trusi^

les



—'fiot because tHey arc untruatwortfay a( all hut because
they learned long ago never again to trust aoy wbfte.

^ih these peoples—the regular British Hoodurans or
Belizians, and the Coast Caribs—assert that there dwell
in the tall, wet forests of the «outbvm half of their coun-
try certain small semi-human creatures which they call
Dwemlis. B form of Duciiiie. Spanish for goblin. To the
very well-educated BcUzIans. these are regarded more as
sve regard fairies than as real colidcs—«/jfcsr they have
lived or worked In the southern forested area, Then they,
like the Canbs, take quite another view of ihc mutter. I
lived in lhal couutry off aod on for years while wc traveled
Central America and the West Indies, and I talked to io-
numerable people (here uboui (hem. Dozens told me of
having seen them, and these were mostly men of substance
who had worked for responsible organizations like the
Forestry Department and who had, la several cases, been
schooled or trained either in Europe or (be United SUtt-s.
One. B junior forestry officer boro locally, described Ui
gredt detail two of these little creatures ihai be bad sud*
denly noticed quietly waiching him on several occasions
at ibc edge of ihc forestry reserve near the fool of the
Maya Mountains when he was “cruising'* and markiog
young mahogany trees. His dcscKption of them coincided
with that of all the others who were serious.

These little folk were described as being between three
foot and four fool six. well proporiioocd but with very
heavy shoulders and rather long aimsi clothed in thick,
tight, dose. browQ hair looking like that of a short-coated
dog; having very flat yellowish faces but bead*hair no
longer than the body hair except down the back of the
neck and midback. Everybody said that these Dwendis
have very pronounced calves but that the most outsUinding
thing of all about them js that they almost always held
either a piece of dried palm leaf cr something looking like
a Mexicao'type hat over their beads. This at first sounds
like the silliest thing, but when one has heard It from
highly educated men as well as from simple peasants, and
of half a dozen national)lies and in three languages, and
ail over an area as great as that from the Peten to Nica¬
ragua. one begins to wonder. Then, one day, 1 came across
a lone chimpanzee in West Africa in an open patch of
forest and od ihe ground: and. by lingo. It was solemnly
bolding a large section of dead palm frond over its head,
just like an untbrella and looking exactly like a large
Mexican straw bad


186



Dwendls btv aid to appeal suddenly m the forest both
by day am) ni^t and to waieh you from a discreet dis>
(ance. They are silent but seem to be very curious, 1 heard
of no case of tbeir ever making any ihreatesuig move, but
I was time and tune again told of them chasing, sometimes
catching, and carrying o9 dogs. They are said to leave
very deep h'lUc footprints, ihai have pointed

One does not reaJly know quite what to make of all this.
If you go to Betucc—and a more delightful spot there
can hardly H on earth for a vacation or just to live—arKi
ask around about these things you wUl be met with gay
uniles and probably a healthy quote from some classic
such as The Water Babies but if you persist you will quite
soon Cod Some man who has timbcr-crubed. or been in
the bush famiog. and he will surely come out with some
details about these mysterious little Imps of the forests.

Perspective is a hard thing to evaluate on ancient carv¬
ings since captives bearing ^fts to an important potentate
may be made very small, compared to the monarch. Nc-
vcnhcless. there are many Mayao bas-reliefs that show paliB
of tiny liitk men with big hats but no clothes, standing
among trees and amid the vast tegs of demi-gods, priests,
and werhoR. They are nlso much smaller than the peas¬
ants bearing gifts to the temples!

As we have gotten on to the Pigmies again we might as
well follow them. I have a letter from a wdl-koown animal
dealer of Guayaquil. Ecuador—Herr Claus U. Ohelm—
who knows his zoology, and who has a very loog and
intimate experience of the forests of his country and
those of Colombia on the PaciSc slopes ol the Andes. In
this he says:

The so-c^ed Shiru. t have bcurd of from the Indians
and a few white hunters on both sides of the Andes, but
decidedly more so on tbe eastern dopes, where vast
moimiainous arca.s arc stiD quite unexplored, and rarely
if ever vished. All reporu describe the Shire as a amaQ
[4-5 feet) creature, decidedly hominfd, but fully corned
with short, dark brown fur. All agreed that the Shiru
was very shy, with the excepHon of one Indian, who
claimed having been charged after haviag missed wltb
bL one and only shot from a muzzle (oading shotgun, a
weapon stS used by the maiorlly of Indiaiis. along with
tbe blowguB. These reports were rather sober nod ob¬
jective. and in no way tbiged with the colorful inm^oa-
iJou, bto which Luiin-ABierieans are prone to lapse.

187



This business of tbe ‘‘eastern slepcs" is going to get us
[n(o unwarranted dUUculiIes unless wc once again resort to
a oiAp. I think the best way to contemplate Souih Amei*
ica Is as if it were made up of a number of large islands
comprising those blocks of territory today enclosed within
the 500-metcr contours. This gives us a picture like that
shown on Map IX. on which both the 20(>-metcr and 500-
meter [1500-fooil contours are shown, and from which It
may be seen that the upiiinds consist of the continuous line
of the Andes; (he Guiana Massif; and the Brazilian Up¬
lands (composed of those surrounding the Maito Grosso,
and the great Caitinga). The 2C0-m€tBr contour shows
how these would be connected tf there was any slight
lowering of the land or an uprise of the sea. The Cadtinga
would still be joined to the Mado Grosso, and then both
by a narrow land-bridge to the Andean chain. The Guiana
Massif, which Is the mckst isolated, would b lum be jobed
to the Colombian Mai».sif by a lowland bridge.

The "spine*' of the Andes runs just about down (be mid¬
dle of ibni colossal range. The inpoct&jit foci to grasp is
that this forms a complete break between the forests of the
Amazon and the eastern part of the continent on the one
side, and the small patch to the west, on (he Pacific slopes
on the other. This latier small area, has a noticeably differ¬
ent fauna and flora from that of the east and the Ama-
zoa. It is (ernibaied to the south on the Pacific coa^t by
the southern deserts. A6SM« In South America arc re¬
ported from both sides of the Colombian Massif, from the
Guiana Massif, and from the Marie Grosso. [The Patagon¬
ian affair is. 1 believe, something quite else.] t hare some
exifcmcly funny reports from ihe Pacific side of the Co¬
lombian block but, while the strangest things have recenUy
been found there * and monstrous fool*iiacks have been
reported b the same area, there has not been any sug¬
gestion that any of the iat(cr were humanoid. Colombian
scientists have taken the matter of whai they call "an
ape" fttiriy serioasly but all the talk has concentrated on
the forcsu of the eastern slope*:. It was once thought that

• I have for somj ycar^ been Interested In the repened ex¬
istence of giant Earthworms In this area, based upon some
cofTcspondcnce ftnd some extraordinary baS-rcUefs on ancient
pottery from that country. In 1956 and again in 1957, Mrs.
William (Mnni) haibam made trips to the Pacific slopes of ihe
Andes and obtained numbers of these—5 feet long when con¬
tracted, and over 2 Inches In diameter. Preserved maieriaU of
thru ia lodged with the Smithsonian Institute.

168



Pigmies, or ABSMs of tha Jitlla Orang Pimdek type had
cropped up again in the Motilone territory la that area
hut. as Heuvelmans points out. a perfectly good Amerin*
dian tribal grouping named the Marakxhiios. averaging
only about 5 feet in stature (like the ceoiral Mayas. bcU
dentally), have been CoJIy studied by the Marquis de
Wavrin, while surrounding peoples admit that these are
ibe “crcalures*' that they call Guayazis and which they
regard as bestial. In the Colombian block, a man-sized
kind has been rumored. This has been very greatly mud¬
dled and muddied by a most preposterous business about a
photograph of a Spidct-Mookcy (A teles sp.) for which the
most extravagant claims have been made, nnd for which a
number of sorious-mlndod aaJ otherwise highly eritiea!
people seem to have fallen.

As this matter has played such a prominent and. in my
opinion, harmful and nusicading part in ABSMery, 1 would
like to try and dispose of it once and for all—or. at least,
OQCc again; for this has really been done severe times
already.

First, this picture produced by one Dr, Francois de t.oys
is obvjotisly that of a Spider-Monkey which Is a very dis¬
tinct lype of South American primate that may be seen in
any zoo. It displays all the characteristics of ibal genus—
narrow shoulders and pinched chest; comparative lengths
of upper and lower arms and legs: the hands end feet In
detail; and the enlarged clitoris of a female. In fact, it is a
pretty clear picture of one of these animals—dead. How¬
ever, of much mote importance is the box on which it is
perched. Anybody who has ever been outside a tourist
hotel in the tropics will have run into the fuel problem.
Since the discovery of petroleum oils, they—including
gasoline and kerosene—have been shipped all over tbs
world in pairs of 5-gallon cans, or rather light tins, fitted
into cheap wooden cases, measuring exactly 20 V^ inebes
long, by ladies from Iroru to hack, and 1 5 Vi inches
high. The better grade boxes are hound with metal rape
around the two ends. The case shown in de hoys picture is
such an object, and stenciled lettering may be seen on It
under the monkey’s right leg. Such iciiering is also stan¬
dard and is usually stamped over two of the four 4-inch
bits of board of which the sides arc invariably constructed.
Thus the animal, with Its head poked up to ao unnatural
degree by a stick, measures about 27 inches [i( measuring
10x;dx as against the box]. This is a fair-sized Spider-
Monkey but not even a large one.

189



Tbe cpriguial photograph U oot ju«t e case of mistaken
identity; it ii an outright hoax, and an c^noxlous one at
tliat» being a deliberate deception. I would have thought
that anybody might have suspected tlus. even without
seeing the picture, from tbe originator's story. According
to this, be was threatened by this creature and its mate on
the ground when in company of one of his a.s5i8tants; shot
U; f^otographed it; counted its teeth; and then—despite
(he fact that he was a man of scicniif c training, and con¬
sidered his specimen so odd (though out of his held), as
to wairaoi all this trotible—solemnly gave the head to his
cook to boil, and permitted that worthy to employ the
cranium a salt container, which “dKed up and was lost
bit by bit.” Bui worse than even ihi$ is a lot of mumbo*
junil» about having other photographs that were lost in ft
river during a flood. This is the kind of nonsense that has
done more harm to the cause of any serious search for
ABSMs, and other creatures as yet unknown, than any-
diing I can oame, and it is to be most utterly deplored.

Quite apart from anything, the picture alone, if ana¬
lyzed, displays the creature sliown. to be a maximum of 48
inches from crown to heel. This is indeed large for a
femaJe Aisles but is really substandard for large females of
the Dorthem A. Beelzebub group. Then again, gigantism is
not uncommon among all the South American Cebidae^
Finally, I may add. de tx>ys* photograph shows an animal
that [ would say bad started to decompose and was well on
ibfl way to bcinp “blown,” a candirion common In the
tropics in daylimo in a few hours, in which oot just the
body cavities hut the whole body becomes pulTy and
bloated. Even if this should be a very large specimen of an
as yet unknown species of Spider-Monkey (and even if.
by some accident or deformity U happened noi to have
bad a tail, which I very much doubt), there Is no jusii&a*
lion whatsoever for giving it s tecbmcal name on llie
strength of a single photograph, and especially one so
grasdiose, so misleading, and unscientific as Ameranihro"
poides loysi (Moniandon) which mcass, literally “Mr.
Loys’ Ape-iike American,"

The harm done by this obnoxious effort has been wide¬
spread. Above all it has pul the whole of ABSMcry, in
this area, into eclipse. No scfious-mtndcd person, zoologist
or otherwise, seeing this ridiculous picture and having
heard the equally ridiculous claims made by some for It, can
be expected cither to lend any credence to or even listen
to tbe accounts of others who state that they have met

190



onkoiMra creanim of a Hominrd form la this couniry.
YeL there have been some vague accounts thereabouts

The eariiest is that of the Baron AJexaiukr voo Huid*
botdt, beiog a careful record of the local Amehodiani'
dOscripttOQS of a creature they called the Vaiitri which,
they said, comtructed primitive buis. was camivoroua.
and wosdd cat men but carried off women for breeding
purposes. There Is norhlcg outrageous about this, for many
ABSMs have now been rei>orted to be carnivorous
least a| times), and their carrying off of women for repre^
duettoo b almost standard. {Sometbing. inddentaJJy. that
ail Africans that I have met who know and live among
gorillas and chimps absolutely deny that those apes ever
do.) Several Mher early writers are said to have metuioDcd
the same creatures in ibis area.

Bernard Heuvelmans di.scuises an alleged encounter whh
an ABSM in (his oreo by a Mr. Roger Courtevtile but
shows that are cannot place any reliance upon it. The
ncooieur's descriplion does include some odd items that
are ooi otherwise to he noted in sccounts from South
America but which concur with, of all people. Nfr. Oat-
man’s descrip(io& from Briiish Columbia. These are; a tuft
of thick bair runniog across the forehead; a pow’erful neck
toweeiog from a V-shaped torso; and loag bc^-baii. How¬
ever, ibe rest of the descriplioo, osid particularly the
’'darting" bfue-giay eyc«. leave one in (be gravest doubts.
The only other definite informauon I have ewer seen
from this wb^ area is derived fourth hand from the
Motilone Indlacs who arc said to state that there Is an
'‘apelike" terrestrial creature In the Sierra <Je Perijai. the
scene of de Loys* exploit, and which is quite commoo.
Thus, apart from the little Uhlru amd the posubitily that
voo HufflboMi left us a record of somethiog real, (tere is
actually no evidence whatsoever for any ABSM in this
whde area. Apart from one locality—Hhc sooicwbal my»-
terious Guiana Masrif, there is not, as a matter of fact
much if any ABSMery in the whole of South America.

There % however, the strange matter of "giant foot>
prints" tn Patagonia but 1 do not know of any pr<^>er
investrgatioa of these, either firsthand in the 6eld or even
bibliographic, ever having been made, From what 1 have
been aMc to unearth it would scorn that (be imprints mostly
refer to those of ground-sloths and In some cases those of
the Giant Ground-Sloth (Megaihtnum) itself, which are
altogether bizarre, since it walked on the ouuidcs of its
eoormoua feel. There has been a terrific rumpus about

191



grouDd'Stolhs lo the Argeniine ihnt ha$ been going on fot
d$cadc<. A dried skin of one» found baogiog over a fence
on an estancia io 1898. led certain persons to prosecute
8 hunt for the anima!. believing it still to be alive. This
led to a cave in which strange stone corrals wore found
deeply piled within with the dung of these huge beasts,
while other evidence seemed clesrly to indicate that they
hbd been penned therein hy mea. After considerable ex-
cilcmertt promoted by the Qotion that some of the smaller
forms at least might stiU be found alive, and after the
discovery of cariy records by the Spanish colonizers to the
effect that the (oca) natives caught huge shaggy animals
in pits and killed them by building fires on top of the
hapless beasts [because their skins were so thick and filled
with little bones that they could not be pierced with their
pnmilivc stone-headed weaporis], the whole thing died
down.

However, mised up In all dils uproar ihere were reports
of giant footprints of a very' humanoid form being seen all
over Patagonia. There was a period during which there
was much speculation upon the possibility of a giant race
oC AnKriads living in that region but this later became a
somewhat debilitated notion—to wit, that some large in-
digeoous Patagonians had large feet. U is true that some
now almost extinct southern Amerinds were among the
tallest races of men ever an record, nod they seem to
have been large all over.

Today, most of Patagonia is sheep country. It was
cleared of its indigenous human populaiioo over wide ar*
eas by the simple and ingenious procedure of poisoning
all the available wells and Other available water supplies^
It is now a vacation land for the more rugged “sportsmen”
and it must be admitted ibal the best trout fishing in the
world Is there avnilabJc. However, there stiJJ are some
enormoua areas of a kind of desiccated tangle of large
bushes that somehow manage lo grow in endless hlajikets
op>n utterly dry ground for mile after mile. In these it Is
quite possible that some smaller types of ground-sloth,
such as that called by the aboripnes the EUensassen. might
still exist; but of ABSMs there is no trace—repcets of
giant humanoid footprints rotwiibstanding.

Almost the same may be said of the Caatinga. Herr
Sick, the author of the book mentioned above, makes
some casual remarks about unknown animaJs possibly sliil
xeoiaining lo be found In that desolation; but he also makes
some very duUous remarks, such as that "desiccated ffy*

192



ot'na dropping iruy ht found'* lher«, Not even the ebulli¬
ent Argentine Profe^ior Amcghino suggcsietl the presence
of ihaf group of animak in South America; so ooe must
talte an these statements with more than |ust the average
grain of salt. Bur, when we come to the Mano CrosBO.
matters are rather JifFerent,

Here we hit something much more peisbieni and much
more concrete. Not only are there endless accounts of
giant human'type footprints and tracks, usually given aa
bciog some 20 ioches in length, but there b the matter of
(he mass slaughter of catilc for months on end from time
to lime, by the e.\tniardinary device of ripping tbeir
tongue* out. These Inexplicahte excesses are reported to be
accompanied by roarings so terrible that even the {ocals
are profoundly Amerbdiao. be it noted—become
very nearly hysterical. The perpetrators of these daaurdjy
acts are, the locais assen, to be called Mcpinguarjn, and
to them the locals attribute all manner of appalling quali¬
ties. In fact, we have here for tSse fir&t time oo our trip to
contend with some real Imaginative and traditional frills
and furbelows. There is obviously a gross clash here be¬
tween the perfectly prosaic Braaillan eslonci^ros, with
their modem herdhooks and statistics, on the one hand,
and a local population of truly *^upcrstrtioua natives'* on
the other. Ttus clash has not been resolved to anybody's
satisfaction, least of all the herd owners who are pe*
riodkaUy rendered clean out of pocket by some hundreds
of head of good cattle. The ‘'natives'’ Kcm, every lime
that this has happened, to have adopted a sort of “We told
you so” attitude. This is not very helpful, but the Brazilian
Government apparently has had no belter ideas.

The only known sninal I hat can kill cattle in that part
of South America is the jaguar, but these large cats don't,
and cannot, go around tearing Ibe tongues out of steers.
They jump on their backs and break their necks hy pulling
tbeir noses around with a forepaw—when they attack cat¬
tle at all. Try pulling (be loogue out of. say. a dead rabbit
sometime, You wtU find that despite one's eaortnou* size
compared to the rabbit, plus inborn finger dexterity, you
will have one heck of a hard time. Pulling tongues out of
oxen calls for both extraordinary hand dexterity and posi¬
tively phenomenal strength. Wbai on earth may have such
strength? The locals say "Mtipinguary." and point to giant
bumanoid foot-tracks on sandbars. Cattle owners just fume
and say “rubbish." This » obviously not getUng the latter

193



tfivwhere since ihts sort of thing seems to crop up every
few years.

Nobody seems ever to have seen (his cn*tongue*puiler*
but (here is one story thai Bernard Heuvelmnns has
dredged up from what can only be described «s unim¬
peachable sources. With his permission I reproduce (his in
i(a eotiT^y fr(Mt bis book. On t/ie Traci: oi Unknown Ant-
maU. This account was given to Dr. Heuvcimans by a
correspondent. Sen bora Anna Isabel do SaJ Lcitao Texeira.
who Stained it from Dorn Paolo Saldanha Sobrino. a
much respected Brazilian wrher vHth a very wide know¬
ledge of his couotry. His Informant was in turn tbc princi¬
pal in (he account; one known simply as loocSncio.
Heuvcimans writes:

In 1930 he went on an expedldoa d 10 men led by
one .Saolaoaa. They went op the Uaruml towards tbe
sources of the Urabo. Wbeo (heir boat came to ao Im-
pnsAable walerfall they cat out acrota (he {unule to
reach tbe Unibu watershed. After 2 days they reached
a stream which tbe leader decided to fcdlow. Inoceoeio
was la tbe party going up^trcaai. but after 2 hours*
inarch he was led astray by a troop of black monkeya
which he followed in the hopes of shooting one. Wben
be realized (bat H would take him some time to reach
the stream agam. h was already too late. He shouted
and Arcd his gun, but there was no reply except the
chatter of munkeys and squawks of angry birds. So be
betsaa to walk almost bUadty, feeling he idusi do some-
tiling In Bucb a critical situation until nlghi fell, wben he
climbed into a large tree and settled Uioself In a f4wk
between tbe branches. As it grew dork the aighl was
Blled with jungle oolses, and Inoceoclo rested happily
enough untO suddenly tbere was a cry whlcb at first be
Ihougbi was a man calling, but be realized at once ihat
no one would look for him la (be middle of tbc nhsht.
Then he beard the cry nearer at hand and more clearly.
]( w» a wHd and dismal sound. Inovenclo, very Fright-
cBcd, settled himself more finnly inlo the tree and loaded
his gun. Then the ery rang oot a third time and now
(bat il was so close li sounded horrible, deafening and
iabomao.

Some 40 yards away waa a small ckarlDg where a

* Just such sub.boounids were described by Col. P. H. Pewceti
1a 1914. See fortb*coinia| sequel ro Uus book. Etiine.

194



tamjumeira bad fnlkn aod lls brunches had bmoeht
d<»w]i other RDancr Iroes. Jhh wps where I he b<t cry
bad coiae from. Immedblcly afterwards there was 9
lood nobe of footsteps, as if a large anlma] was coming
towards me at fop speed, mien it reached the fallen tree
It gave a grunt and stopped. . . . Finally a sOhouette
the size of a man of middic Jiclghf appeared in the
clearing.

The olgbf wu clear. There was no moon, hnf the
starry sky ga>e a pak light which somehow filtered
throogh the tangled vegetatioii. In ihtc half-Ught loO'
cenelo saw a thicket black figure **wluch stood uprigU
IBte a OMH."

If remained where It stood. li>oUn£ perhaps sun*
picIcHuly at the place where I was. Then ll rnored again
as before. I could wait no longer and fired wlfhout even
troubling to take proper aim. There was a savage roar
and then a noise of crashing bushes. 1 was olarmed to
■ec the animal rush growHng towards me and I fired a
second bttUei. The terrifying creature was hll end gave
an IncrcdiMy swift leap and bid near the old umaumeria.
From behind thi< barricade H gave threatening growls
so fiercely that the tree to wbkh I was clinglDg seemed
to shake. I had prevloosly been on iagnar-buots and
taken an nctfvc port in ibein, and 1 know bow savage
Ihk cat Is when It h> ran down and at bay. Bui the roan
of (he anima] that attacked me that night were oore
terrible and deafening Ihaa a jaguar’s.

I loaded my gun again and fearing another attack,
fired in the direction of ibe roaring. The black shape
roared agaitt more loudly, but retreated and disappeared
info the depths of the forest. From time to lime I could
still bear tta growl of pala until at but If erased. Dawn
was Just breakiog.

Not QBtil the sun w« well op did Inoc^nclo dare to
come from his pcrcb. In the clearing he found Uood,
broken boughs of bashes and smarted shrubs. Every*
where thcro was a sour penetrating smcD. Naturally he
did not dare to follow the troll of Mood for fear of
tneefiog a crealure which would be even more danger*
ons DOW tlmt It was wounded. Tnldag a bearing on the
son, be at last reached a stream and rejoined his conw
panions, who fired shots so that he should know where
they were.

I mainlalo I have seen the mapinguofy {Inoccncio cold

195



to Peulo Saldapha). li ia aot snooured as people «?oald
have yop beUeve. l hey say that lo wound It (atoOy yoo
must hH the ooc vulnerable spot: the tniddle of (he belly.
I con*( say where it was woinidcd by my huUet. but 1
know it MBS lilt, for (Iirrc blood everywhere.

I have heard many stories like this but like Bernard
Heuvelmans, 1 feel there is sometliing sincere about this
one. No; not ja?t sincere; but factual. 1 have lived through
some much lesser experiences myself io the tropical rain*
forests that I could never have reported so pragcnotically:
and there arc junctures in the telling of this one that are so
frighlfuJly **nght,” If tbc teller had wanted even to exag*
gecale he could so very easily have done sc but he did not.
And yet. of course, il is ridiculous. But is it? There are slill
those longuc-lwUters to be accounted for. and their hide
efforts arc on ihe hooks. Do we therefore have a rather
rough race of ihe otherwise bland and retiring

_ Oh-hiah type ABSM tucked away here in the soggy

wUderoess of iho Maito Grosso who somehow got cut off,
somelimc. by a mass floodiag of the coarineni that they
hnd strayed Into? If puny little Amerifldian came

over the Bering Straits and got right down lo Tietra del
Fuegp, millennia ago. there Is no conceivable reason why
some more lowly T>'pe of Horaimd may not also have done
80. Perhaps he got mere before the Hood" ad it were.

The Maiio Gros.so uplands ^eem to have been above
water for quite a long time but. according to ibeir flora
and fauna today, which is not particularly odd. they do not
seem to have been so privileged as another area. This is
the great Guianese Maasif. Here. If anywhere, is the place
where really ancicdl relics should have been able lo linger;
and llere are some real lulus that have done so there. It is
notable that the rcprejenialives of almost all the great
groups of mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and es¬
pecially of fishes and imects, found in South AraencD Him
up there in strange und sometimos fabulous guises. There
arc great numbers of living fossils in this area; creatures
like tbc Hoaizin or “Stinking Pheaiunt,” a bird that, when
young, has a clawed finger on lis wing, like ao Archaeop¬
teryx This block of ancient mouQTains seems, indeed, to
have been a refuge From flooding throughout geological
ages—a sort of last rcttcal for wave after wave of cren-
lurds through a at time, driven out of their prevloi^ habitats
by shifts or submergences of the earth's cru.5t. This is where
we would most expect to come across ABSMs If there are

196



tny. or hav« ever been eny» on (hia ecntineni. And u is in-
de^ from there that the most reports, end the most defi¬
nite ones, have come.

la the Guianas—Vencznelan. British. D^itch (Surinam).
French, and Brazilian—ihc name for ihese creatures is
everywhere something like Detdcf or Didi, with sundry
prefixes emd suffixes like "Dni^i-di" oc "Didi-aguirt.'’ most
of which mean something &im(de. such as ‘^nasty*’ or "of
the water." The whole concept h, however, as far as I
was able to find out, very muddled In the native mind. This
is probably because oiost of the current "natives” are not
indigCQous or in any way naiivr to the couni ry. It is only
when you go among the now rapidly disappearing Amer¬
inds—Csribs, Arawaks. and such-^ihat you get any clear
picture of this creature. Convenaiion with these folk Is
almost impossible as their languages ere not known and
are extremely dilUcuU to apprehend. Also. I hey are na¬
turally very cagey.

1 first stumbled across this business when on my constant
quest for animals wbicb entailed endless patience in asking
anybody and everybody about aU the kinds of animals they
had ever heard of. It was with the Primates—or monkey
kingdom—that I kept getting information about more aod
ever more kinds that 1 had aoi yet seen. This started ia
Briibh Guiona and went on tn Surinam [then Gulch CuU
aoa]. It soemod that there was no cad lo Ihc kiods avail¬
able and, to luy great surprise, the locals were as good as
their tales, for more oitd still num kinds were brought to
us—or we were taken io them. I miw monkeys alive—and
in capiiviiy—in tliat country to which 1 could not and still
cannot give even a familid name. And from quite early
on we kept being told about tbe&e Didis^ They lived way
hack in the hills, and they were pretry smart "Kwasl.”
whidt is the generalized name for all Primates in thul
area. Also, they had no tails, lived oo the ground, had
thumbs like men, and built crude bu^bouscs of palm
leaves. They usually ran away but if a large parry of
Q>en should penetrate Into tho^ completely uninhabited
owuntains th^ would come, a lot together, and throw
fiicks and mud at your canou. So went the stories.

I never saw a DIdi but then we never got really far into
tbe uninhabited territory hut I did come across some ex¬
tremely large humao footprints in the mud of a tiny si tie
ereefc off a main river right up by the firsl cataract and 40
Biles above the last known village. I put them down to
witiog Jukas upriver to hum. or to u band of roving

197



Afnennds^for Iberc wcre^ sliU some in ibe disirict though
nobody had seen them for over a dec&d^—but I was my>
liSed. I did not conneol them with the Oidis; but 1 have
since ofieo woodered. (i is sd to find plausible expla-
oalions of odd facts. Besides, some other dashed rum
things happened at that camp,

The 8 tor>' of the Dldls goes back to the first dap of
EuKpean exploration of the Guliinas. Sir Walter Kalcigh '8
chroniclers meniioaed them; the early Spaniards said that
the outives spoke of ihem; end in 1769 ^ward Bancroft'
wrolc of iheoi, »ayiijg ibat the Indiana said they were
about 5 feet tall, erect, and clothed in black hair. Once
again also, the redoubtable Bernard Hcuvelmans bas
brought to iighl some specldc slatemeots oo these elusive
creatures. These be gives u.s as follows:

Id 1868, a ceoftiry after Pr. Bancroft, Charles Bar*
rington Brown, who was Uieo GovcniiBent Surveyor bi
British Cnlana, heard new rumoura on the tipper Ma-
zarunl on the Venezuelan Crontier that a sort of hairy
men Ihcd there. Oddly eooogji, It was after hearing the
*'pifiiniive Dioan or howll* which Ciezo de Leon also
afleged those ape^meD made.

Tl>e hr^ idght after leaving Pealmah we beard a long,
and most mclanebuly whistle, proceeding from the tUrec*
tioo of the depths of the forest, at which some of the
men esclaimcd, tn an awed tone of voice, ‘'The Dldi.'*
Two or three times the whisde wns repeated, sounding
like that mode by a humao being, bC 0 OiUDg In a high
key and dying slowly and gradually away In a low
one. . . .

1 *bc ‘'Didr is said by the lodiaos (a be a short, thick¬
set, and powerfol wild mna. whose body Is covered with
hair, and who lives In the forest. A belief La the exist¬
ence of this fabulous creature is aniversol over the
wtioltf of Drithh, Vccw^uelan lusij Brazilian Goiaos. On
the Desoeran river, some years after this, 1 met a balf-
breed woodcotter. who rotated an eocoDOter that he bud
with two Dldl—a male and a female-^lo which he
sacccssFuOy resisted their attacks wHb his ane. la the
fray, be stated, he was a good deal scratched.

* Called himself Iseabus Van Zandl, spied on Benlaroin
Franklin la Paris, and almost krpi Fraoee from joiolag our War
of Indepeodence. He was a weU-know'o botanist and nataralist,
as well as a doctor)


198



Id 1931 Professor Nello Beecari, an Italum antbro-
po1o0sl. Dr. Renzo GigUoli aod Ugo Ignesd. made an
expedition to British Giilana, where one of their sec*
ondary objects was to atlsck the probtem of toys’ ape.
For in tbis area the fanna, flora, climate aod Indeed the
whole ecological pattern—wbat \s now called the 'i)io>
tope”—ore (he same as in tbe Sierra dc Perijad * and
Beccari had read In Kiis6c Rcclns’s geocrapbical eocycTo*
podia (hat according to Indian legend the forests in
Brillsb Guiana were bauntod by fabulous baUy men
rolled di*di. which all the lodiaos fear, althouc^ Ibcy
have never <1000 them. But It was not until he was jnst
about to rcRirn to Italy that he heard any definite in-
tormotioD about where this beast lived.

On his return from several months in Ihe interior, be
met the British Resident Magistrate. Mr. Haloes, who
was then liviog on the Rupunuol. liaincs told him that
he had come upon a couple of di-di many years before
when he was prospecting for gold. In 1910 he was go*
big ihrougb (he forosi along the Konawaruk, a tribotary
whkh joins tbe EsseqiUbo just atwve its junedoo witb
tbe Potaro, when he suddenly came upon two strange
creatures, which stood op on (heir biod-feet when they

saw him, 'They bad hiimui features hut were entirely

covered with reddish brown fur. Haines was unarmed
and did not know what be could do if tbe encounter
took a turn for tbe worse, but the two creaiures re¬
treated slowly and dhappearod into the forest without
once taking their eyes off him. When he bad recovered
from his surprise he realized dial they were unknown
apes and recalled the legend of the di-di which he bad
been told by tbe Indians wllh whom be had lived for
many years.

When Miegam, tbe guide of the Italian eTpcdllion,
heard this story he rcinenibered (hat he bad had a ^mb
lar adventure In I91S. Ke was going up the Bcrbice
with three men, Orelln. Gibbs and an American whose

• This itatemcot Is no! stricUy buc. There arc most marked
bolaaicoi and zcologtcal (lifFcrences between these two areas,
white their forests are completely separated by b wide bek of
orchard'bush and open suvannahs which form a barrier just as
complete as if ft sea. Tbe OuiaoB Massif, moreover. Is tbe mere
bolated In teclmicnl parlance, and has been so much longer and
more often In the past. Sub^omintds end submen would be pjst
about the only animais That could croas the open country but
even modern forest peoples prefer not to do so,

199



name he hotT forpAtfen. A little beyond Mambnca Ihcy
saw cn a saidy beacb on the river-bank two creatures
whkb from a di&lance they took for men, and hailed
them Co ask if ibe fisbiop mtm fiood. The unknown crea-
tuns did sot reply but merdy aloiilt away Into tbe forest.
The four ra«n were puzzled and landed on the Nach.
where they were ^ha^ered to ftnd that tbe footprints
were apes\ out men's. could nor say whether

Ihe crcBtiires bad a Call, bat It coaJd hardly have been
coftspleodiu. or he would not hare mUtnken them for
men. He did. however, »y that two other seniors called
Melville and Klawsiky bad similar adventures hi other
places.

Professor Beccari obtained further mformation about
the di-di from an old negro at Mackenzie, famed for
bis wisdom, lenminc and tTperieace. Everyone on tbe
banks of the Demerora caOed him ‘Oocle Bnj&’‘~pre-
sunubly be had come from French Galana or tbe
French West Indies^ut tbe few Indians that survived
in (be nclsbborbood respected him so nucb they oanted
him Tbe Governor.” ^'OdcIc Bnin” bad been told by
(he ladlans tbai the di-di lived in pairs aod ibal ll was
extremely daneerocB lo kiB one of tbcoi, for tbe other
would inevitably revenge Its mate by comiag at nlsbt aod
straining ler murderer in hb hfliSDocL Beccari did
no( trust tbe more Usciful part of this story» but felt
that H must have a kernel of trolb. Loys, like Haines
and Mlcgnni. bad also met a pair, utd so bad Barrington
Brown's woodcotler. Most South American inonkeys
lire in largish troops, and this habit alone suggests that
this b a very peculkir species.

The most sl^lflcani single fact about these reports from
Guiftna is Chat never once has any bcal persoft—nor any
person reponkg wbar a local person says—so much os
mdicaled that these creatures are jtist “mcokeys." In all
cases they have specified that they are (adless, erect, and
have human aUribuies, even Jo building huts and ihrowifi^
ft logs. This is an aliogciber different to Biter from dc Loya’
asinine “ape.” We are. in fact once again, confronted with
the strange fact ihal great numbers of people of all manner
of tribes, nationolitics, and even races, ins!si ihal ABSMa
are wild men, as opposed lo manlike animaU. This is Ihe
one thecne that ru ns consUtantly through ail ABSMery.


200



9. Africa—the “Darkest"


SOME RUMOURS AND SOME
FLAT STATEMENTS


Ifl socne rMpcctR the continent of Airies hu much tbo
same structure as that of South America, but hi reverse,
or roihcr, mirrored, the Con|o Bastn being equivaient co
the Amazon Basin; the great itplanJ chain of its east aide
being comparable to the Great Andean chain on South
America's west side: and there being a number of isolated
mountain blocks dotted about the rest of it. However, if
the sea flooded in to the 200>iTie(er contour. Africa though
looking a bit smaller would retain Its present shape. Much
more of it Is composed of uplands above 50O-tseier coo*
lour; and upon these are raised many mighty mountain
ranges. Yet. the Congo is like the Amazon in one essential
respect. It nl^ was once, aod until fairly recently, flooded,
but it appears to have formed either an enormous lake or a
completely landlocked sea. Fioaily, it broke out to the At¬
lantic by cutting a deep and narrow gorge Ihrougb the
Crystal Mountains that join the lower Guhun with the
Angolan uplands.

The Congo B.'isin today is the home of several very
unique and ancieoi forms of animals—a strange Water-
Civet {Osbomictis) found only once. In 1916. whlcb
seems since then to have vanished; the forest giraffe or
Okapi {Okapia)\ and the famous ^ngo Peacock {Afro*
pdvc)—but. like the Amazon, it ^ems nevertheless to
have been repopulatcd comporatlvcly recently from the
slopes of the surrounding mounuin blocks, and all the
funniest plants and animals in it tend still to be found
around its edges rather than In its middle.

Then, there is another very Importanl thing about Af¬
rica. This fact is that, actually, very little of It Is forested,
and especially by true lowland ^uaiorid Raia Forest

201



{or T-&F, as it is called). Apail from Ihe Coogo. Xhzit
arc really only two such the wea Guinea coast,

and ihe Nigena-Camcrun-Cabun coasts, That over on (he
east coast is oot typical T«E»F, and a lot of it Is not even
Glosed*canopy foicsr. Moreover, even on the west coast
(here are open areas within the main lowland forest blocks,
while (be center of Nigeria has now bcco almost entirely
cleared, and there are large orchard-bush and savannah
areas even in the Congo itself- This clothes the slopes of
the mountains to comparatively great heights up the ndcs
of aH those blocks in the equntorial belt, which face those
lowlands clothed in ralD^fotesi This is so of the south face
of the Guinea block; both sides of the Oabun-Cammin
block; the south face of the Ifhangi-'Shari'. and a swath
running south from the Bar-el-OhazaJ to Kasai. It is In
these forests ihui Ihe more ancient and retiring creatures
make their abode. They, also, ate the least known parts
of the continent (see Map X).

ABSMs have been reported from three areas in Africa
•—the southern face of the Guinea Massif: the east side of
the Congo Basin; and the ewtem escarpment of Tangan¬
yika This makes very clear scosc both from a Bc*>sr*ph-
ical and zoological point of view because each has an
adjacent mauntuinous area at a retreat in case of general
land subsidence or of flooding by the general sea level
rising. The Cabun-Camtrun west face might be expected
to be included in ABSM distribution hat it is not, so far as
I kaow. Before coming to the details of the ABSMery
hereabouts, I must point out a new factor in our bjstory
that now appears for the first lime and which will be with
us through (he Orient, and until we go to Eurasia.

St is that we now have interjected into the scheme of
things the Apes. There is a point here that puzzles every¬
body and which must be cleared up if possible. This is a
hang-over from the initial pronouncement of Darwis
theory of our origin and that of Men generally, While It is
pretty universally recognized that Darwin never did say
that we were d<scen<ied from apes, but that both we and
the apes bad a common aruescor, there ia still on almost
universaUy held belief that, nonetheless, "monkeys*’ came
fiRi, then “apes,” and Bnally "men.” Thh ia partially cor¬
rect in that the monkeys do seem to be of "older" stock
and they are certainly more primitive or lower down the
scale; but when it comes to apes and men, ever more
evidence is piling up lo indicate that we both siancd olT at
the same lime: but out of step. FoQo^ing this hne of

202



reasooiR''. the two lou of us were at one time very
but. Hi t*m€ went on, ond both our branches proliferated
into various kinds, we drifred evea farther apart, /ust
bec^u<« some **men" (or. heiter, Momtoide) rcuined a
hairy coat and small brains, does not actually msn that
they remained apelike. Conversely, fust because ihe living
apes still have a complete furry coal and small brains
does rot mean that they have eveihed any less far from
ihclr origins ihaa we have. They just have changed id
other direciions, AnJ. along our lines, there were just
such (probably) hairy chaps with very small brains—v/de;
Xjn/anfhroptts from East Africa, and the other Aiistralo*
piihecincs from South Africa.

Noncibcless. fu? of now—ond if we preclude the poasl^
biliiy of ABSMs—the Hominids have changed a great deal,
bur lost ail but one of iheir branches; while the apes have
sort of got stuck, but still exist In about twenty dis¬
tinct fomis.’ There is no reason, however, why there
should not still be other kinds of aprs still living today
that we have not yet found. The Pigmy Chimp iPan
pavirciis) was a loop rime bclnq accepted; there t; sup¬
posed to he a pigmy species of Gorilla of which we think
wc have skins and skulls, but which has uever been seen by
scientific eoliectors In ihc wild; and them is the extremely
odd Lesser Siamang of South Pagi Island, of the Mentawi
Group, off the west coast of Sumatra {BrachyfanUes
Uoist). that was not rccogni/£d till 1903. Then, In 1955, a
professional Amerion animaJ*col lector brought back
parts of a preserved ipecimcn of a small kind of ape from
the Gabun that is now lodgo^l in the museum in Zurich.
Swlizerland. He also had photographs of the animal when
alive, and it was ceruinly the oddesidooking creature; like
a liny orang-utao, with a high-domed forehead and quite
unchimplike face, clothed in black hafr, but havbig pio
thumbs! The collector Insisted that the local natives know
these animals well; that they tire not chimps: and unlike
chimps, they arc completely arboreal, travel In parties of
about 40, and never come to the ground. This specimen
boa been tentatively pul down ns ao extrem^y abnormal
baby chimp but it has a complete set of aduli leethi

There may bdeed still be not one but several Apes (lx.
Pongids) to be discovered, and more than one in Africa.

* The popular belief is that there are but four (ivlng apes—
the Gorilla, ChimpoDzee, Mias (Oroog), and Gibbon. T^ils is
not So. See 77ie Monkey Kin^t/oni by the author.

203



This tends to muddle the issue and more especially because
many Africans refiitrd the corillaa—though never the
chimp, it seems—as a fotm of degenerate race of men.
Thus> when they speak of any equivalent of an AB5M.
they often do not make any distinction between man and
apes in describing it. This, however, is particularly the
only wiih inon*sized or larger alleged creatures. One
and all arc iosislent that the pigmy types are little men,
nor animals. Therefore, we must be on guard from now cn
against intexprehng all reports as those of potential
ABSMs, and wc mu»l bear In mind ihat other opes—^cr*
heps even bipedal, terrestrial forms—could exist on this
oontineot and, though not so likely, in the Oticnl as well.
Some certainly seem to exist in Africa.

'Reports of whai appear to be pigmy types of ABSMs
turn up on the west and east sides of ibc continent—that is
00 the southern edge of the Guinea Massif and on the
eastern side of the main upland area about Tonzaota
and Mozambique. Tbosc from the former consist of a
single series of statements made to Bernard Keuvelmaus
by a scientific correspondent who iavesiigated some repons
in what used to be the Ivory Coast. As these are original
and unique. 1 have sought permission to reproduce (hem
here in Ihcir entirety. Apart from (hem, I have only vague
folk tales from the Nigeria area of the former existence of
pigmies in that country.

In llie Ivury Coast, almost at the oppoahe end ef
Africa, there is a lescntl of reddish hairy dwarfs idea-
ticaf in every respect with Out in Tanganyika, as t leom
from private Informadon kindly supplied by Professor
A. Ledouz uf (he I'acallj of Sdeocc of Touloose UnS*
renity. In 1947 he was the head of the Zoolopcal De¬
partment of the InsHtnte of Edocotion and Research at
Adlopodoam^, whlcb was then being formed 12 miles
from Airidjar.

One evening a young African who worked in his
laboratory came and saw him niter dinner and went
rather fiutivdy aboit asking lum the simple question
whether there were pygmies Ip Africa. The professor
told him that (hey were found io Central and Equatorial
Africa and lent him a book on the subject. All the some
he was pozrled at tbb conspiratorial manrer and asked
hJiD why U« waoted to know. Because, the African re¬
plied, one of has colleagciea in imoUicr scientific depart-

204



tncot of the tostttuto had seen ooe not far away on die
previoQs da^.

TlM professor hU eyebrows.

“A pygmy, berer’

**¥£5. about 500 yards from here.*'

Hie professor oeariy fell out of his chutr id surprise.
Tbe InstiTule was surrousded by forest, but thoujih ft
was ttuck m places it was very well known and notives
were coostsntly passing through iL The story seenod
Dost snspect.

"Why didn't your trieod come and tell me at once?*
he ashed suspiciously.

Tbe youog man explained that since tbe whites di»-
beUeved the rumours about pygmies is the neighbour'
bood bis friends had been loaib to be laughed at or
Ibougbt (D be nmJ. But he knew the man wcU enoagh
to know that he had not made it up^ so he decided to
nake Imiojres for himself.

Professor Ledotn was mare and more intrigued and

hutisted that the eyc'witncaB should cumt aod see bini.

Be promised Ihat he would ool make fuo of him and
would not tell anyone his story.

The neU day [ibe Professor tells mej I bad a visit
from Che boy rcapoodUe foe the observation, lie was
weO^ucated and bud a certificate for primary studies.
[ asked hhn about tbe chcnmstnnces io which he saw
the

It happened near ibe Meteorelogkai set *vhcn tbey
were taSdng their daily readings at 8 o'clock iri the
moraiog. Among the roots of a siOC'Cutton tree (Bombax)
(here suddenly appeared a little wilh long rvddisb

fur and ftrag hair on tus head— “same like white OUA**

—but also reddish. (The long balr on the hood, tike a
Europeao\ was reported by all the Africans Profeawr
LedoQx questioned. This feature could obviooely ool
apply to true pygmJcs.J

At once the UKJe red man and the la^ black one
took Co ibeir heels in opposite directions. For, accord*
Ing to tbe legends, Che little forcstmea brought bad liick.
Vou only aw (h«m «nc« in a Ufedmo and you had to
be alone.

1 went to the place with my two informants. It lay
Id tbe shadow of thick forest, hut was not too overgrown
fttiKe the silk'CotlOD tree grow aoar a polb. It was veiy

20 $



WMy that if (here had be«a aii>thfn8 Ihcre it woald have
been easy to see.

I asbed to be infonoed at ooce tf a simOar meeiiDS
occurred agaiu. but this never happened.

PtofewoT Ledoux admits that he wis then very In*
credulous. It seemed unthinkable tfaat within 12 miles
of a big town like Abidjan, aad 500 yards from huts
inhabited by 6 Europeans and some 30a ACricuos, three
could he unknown creatures in forest whieb (hout;b
thick was far from virgin, Mwcorer the African who
clulinci to ha'c srro 1 b« my^tciioua pygmy did not
come frum the Lower Ivory Coast but from the Middle
Coast, which is wooded savannah country. Perhaps Il\e

great foresf, whlcb Is most imprecHve, had over-excHcd

his bnagioatlon. And in his solitary wnihs in tbe forest
the professor kid often put up bosbbuck. If the African
seen the russet back of one of these antelopes
among tl» butbes it was not impossible that bis imagi*
nation sliould have led him to think that it was one of
the "little hairy men’* of the legends. At aQ eveats when
the professor showed bim a book containing pictures
of Central African pygmies be Insisted that his creature
was not like them.

Despite Ms scepticism Professor Ledoux decided to
make discreet inquiries about the nathe legends and
what tftey were based on. He quesUoied several Afri¬
cans who trus(od hlm« and he protended Out he tuUy
believed ibeer stories, Urns puttcog them at tbeir case
and gelling much more dclafled iDformaflon- In Ibb
way he enme lo vi^t most of iho oelghbonring vil1aee&

As a matter of fact I did not obtain any important
toforiDatioo, for while there were plenty of pen wbo
*<hod seen* <?) them, they were reticent On the subject,
always concluding that they were probably miataket
for all tbe encoonteru bad token place at nifihtfall. Thh
b likely enough.

Thvc was one relatively evict fact In Moicli 1946
a team of workmen under otic Djaco—who later be¬
came my lab-hoy and my infonnant aod wbo died of
poisoning in 1949—together with a European of wbora
1 cofl find no truce, were supposed to have seen one of
these little red men. at about 8 in the mewniog, b a
tail tree in a very wooded little valley about lidf a mile
from (he fnture site of tbe station. The European asked
what It was aod ibe Negroes explained what a rare thing

206



if was to 5«« aich a creature anO (be e«1l effects
doiRK so.

I was at nice deluded wj(h stories of dwarfs with
(heir feet back (o froofi peopJe wbo lived ludf In the
lagoon and h^F on land (I think thal cnanafees oiu^ be
respDa5dblc for this legeod). These tales were of no io-
tcresc to me, hot I meotioa them so fitat the record
should be complete.

He then questioned (he Europeans who had travelled
in the Ivory Coast

One of fbem told me the follovvioit:

Duriog one of bis expeditfoas in the course of 1947
iLe great elcpbant'hunter Puncke! killed a pevubar prk
mate unkoowa to him: it waf tnnall with rcddisb*b«>wn
half aod was shot in (he great forest between Gni^o
and Toul4pca. that Is. between (he Cassandra and Ca»
rally rivers. lu remains disappeared while It was being
cor^d home, no dooht having been disposed of by
.enjieratidons porlen. Duockel even ^ered to lake my
informant to ibe place nnif he in luro invHed me to go
witb them.

In 19 SI ihe prafc&sor\ new boy^ io reply to his tuoal
barrage of questions, (old hJm that when ha was young,
probably around 1941, he bad bimsoK seen a huolcr
at Segti^la bring back a Utile man with red hair In a
cage. The local official bad put cloffies on il for de>
ceitcy’s sake and sent it to Abijon by way of Ttooake.
The boy did not know wbat happened To Ibo little
prisoner afterwards.

This tolcseriDs to me to have been embroidered som^
whai. If (be creature was really human K would not have
been put In a cage, and if It was an ope (he official
would not bare worried whether it was decently dressed.
Either i( was a creature half way between man and an
ape, or more likely, K was an onknown primate which
had been dressed up as a JokCi os lame monkeys so
often are.

Pre^eser Ledoux remarks thal these (ales of an un¬
known rcddish'brown primate b the Ivory Coast are
overlaid with the very firmly held belief (bat (here are
pygmies m the forest between the Sa«andm and CavaSly
riven.

According to nn African techoicon of mme from
Toul^plea called M^od Taon, an bteUlgent boy keenly
Inierestcd in ibese questions, there was recently n system

207



of barter hc»^«cii tbs nefiroea and ihe«e f«csl creatUfCS
various manofachrted goods were left in Ihe forcri Ln
exchange for various fruits. ThU was supposed tt have
Eonr OD until 193$. Th« liHlo men who pracrtsed tWs
bartw ivere hardly known even w ihe ac^ea Ihem-
seivor. Tbe Guards called (hem Sebiii.

It is possible thftt rhei.e Sdhilds may be true pygmies
yke (hose In Central Africa.

Tbe professor's enquiries among (he Europeans
tnousht out a sigrofienn* fad. Those who bud never
spent any length of (ime between (be Sassaodrn uid (he
Cavallv denied ou( of band that (here could be any
little moQ in tbe fores!, whether they were (me pygrn>e«
or uDknown primates. On ihc other hand (how who hart
lived in this area were seriously prepared to cousder
that pyjrmioe mitOrt have lived there in (he past md al»
that there mighl be a red basts for tbe legend of the
red dwarfs. HU own impression was (hat (he legen^
tod nunoins b* (»«*’®5ed on (he fairly
recen( presence of pysmies and the proseot
of reddbb-halred primates whose exact oature was riiU

probtooiaHcaJ.

The reports from (he east ^de of ihe coniineni are more
aomcrou^ and varied, and come from
sources. Central to these is a

rcpestedly republished, by one Capl. W.lliam Hicheo m

^roym- for Deccoiber, 1937 lacluded

coiilled "African Mystery Beast. 1 bis goes as roHovs.

Some years ago I w« wot on an officbl Bon.lmn(
10 tius area fUssire and aim bill forests un the w««cf»
side of the Wemhare pfainv] aad, whle waiting in i
forest (dado for a man^ater, I aw two small, teow^
furry croarurw come fran dctoc forest on ooe side of
tbe glade and disappear m(o the thickets on (he o(h«.
Theywere like littic men, aboal 4 feet high.

UDriiht. but clad In russet balr. The native homier w.tb
me ewed In mingled fear and amaze me dL They were,
be ««iJd, agogwe, tbe little forty men wbom
not see dice in t Ufetlime. I made
fiai them, but without avail in Ibat wellnish impene-
irable forest. They may have been monkeys, but, tf »,
they were no ordinary monkeys, nor h-boo^, oor <oi«-
biLs nor Sykes, oor any other kind found u Tanganyika.
What were they?


209



Subsequent to the publication of this c^servatMui. 8
geDdeaun by the name of Mr. Cutbben Buxsoyne wrote
to (he puUioKkui Discovery, seconding Ceptaio Hkbcos'
story with the f^wing;

In 1927 I «ru wJih my wife coasting Portugocse Raft
Afrka In a Japanese cargo bnel. We were safickody
near lo laod to see objecU cleariy with a ^ssa of 12
magDUKadons. There wai a sloping beach with Ughl
bush above open which several doxen baboons wen
bunting for and piddog up shell flsJi or mbs. lo )ndge
by tbek movemenCs. Two pure white baboons wen
unoE^ tbem. These arc very rare but I had beard of
them pnviottsly. As we watched, two Uide brown men
wnfced together out of the bush and down among the
babooiB. They were certainly not any known monkey
and (hey most have been akin or they woold have di>
turtsed the baboons. They were too far away to see in
deiait. bid these smaO bumnndike animals wcr prob¬
ably between 4 and 5 feet tall, quite upright and gneo*
ful in ftgnrc. AC the lime I was (hrlUed as they were
quite erideatly no beast of which I had heard or read.
Later a friend and big game hunter (old me be was hi
Fortogooee Ead Africa with hh wife and three hunters,
and saw a mother, fsihcr. and child, of apparently a
simliar anlcnal specks, walk across (he further ride of
a bush demiog. Tbe aaiivea loudly forbade him to sboct.

Once again Bernard Heuvelmaca has brought to light
two further reports, albeit brief. The first appeared m
Tftc Journal of the East Africa and XJgrmth /Vafara/ History
Society in 1924, from tbe pen of one Mr. S. V. Cook.
This states (hat:

Fifteen mBes east of Embu Station (here rises From
(be Emberre plains (ho lofty hills of Dwa Ngombe»
nenriy ^000 feet high. They arc lahabHed. the £mbn
natives say, by Iniffolo und a race of Hide red nen who
are very Jeafoos uf (heir niountuin rights. OM Sallim
die tatrepretrr at Fmbu. telk me wUb great dramsilc
effect bow be and sorue natives once climbed to near
the when suddenly an ley cold wind Mew and they
were pelted whb showerv of small stones by some un¬
seen adverrariea. Happening to look op b a pavse in
their My rctrcali he ahsurcs me that be saw scores of
Bute red men buriiog pebbles and waving defiance frwn

209



(he cragjsy hdghfs. To (Us dny eren the most intrepid
boaey bnntcis will not vtoture into (be lulls.

The final scrap of confirmatioo comes secondhaod from
Roger Courtentty who tells In his The Greenhorn in Africa
A B»ry related lo him by hi$ gv^ide nametl—as is almoct
Invariable, all ^wn the ca<c side of Africa^-^l/i. Using
Coanenaj’s own words, Ihix goes:

hare you heard of (be little people wbr» Ihe bi the

Man_small men. who fttt less men Ihao ojoakeys? Less

ihnn shenri losihsome foreigners), these Iliilc muo.
ud RonkCTS in fiielr lives and mays." And be

went OQ 10 (id how hh> own falher, who was drivinj* his
sheep to pasture on the slopes of Mnaot Loncenoi. fell
Into die bands of Ihese saome? when he went ioto a
ftive, foBowiDg thf trail oP blood left by one of his
cattle that had been slolon. He was stucuicd from bcUbd,
aod when b« came nround b« found he was surrounded
by strange Utllc creatures. ‘T'he Moo meo were lower
even," he told his son, “than those little people nf Ibc
forest [the pygmirsl for. thtiugh ibcy had ao tails (hut
I could see, ibcy were as (he monkeys that swing In
th« foreat trees. Their «(<ki< were white, whh the white*
ness of (he belly of a lUsrd, and their faces and Itodies
were covered with long, black hair.” To hb groat siir-
pr'ise the sbcphenl noticed lliut Ids spear w»a sliU lying
at his sMe. 'Tlte Mau men who arc so nearly monkey
did nnt know what was the spear. It k possible they did
not know 1 could have foughl with it and kiUcd many
of them.”

The first reaction to reading these reports Is, perhaps
naturally, to suggest that all the reporters, both local and
foroien, had stumbled upon a group of true Pigmies, the
race of lilUe oten who ora so well-known in the uele
Ksiricl of Ihe Congo, and at son>e olher points about
central Africa. It is true ihac (be skies of these ^ple
a« not by any means lacking in a fine, yellowish, downy
hair, and that they also make a praciicc of painilng il^m-
seJves white or red for certain ceremonial purposes. Also,
they are tiny and primitive enough 10 fil the bill. Further,
Ibere is oo doubt that they were OQce very much more
widely distributed aimosi all over Ethiopian Africa. Then
aUo we must remember that there was ooce—and there
are some stiU living in ibe Kalahari area—also another

210



Minpletoty differont race of man that were all over

lha contioenl. and perhaps even iWo what U now Europe
in tbe middle Slone Age. These arc Ibe yeUowisb-red-
skinoed Bushmen. Some of IDem sue, and were, very smoU
but have qo body bair.

The Negroid peoples are apparently the most modem
or newest deveiopmeal among human beings, and have
very specialized characteristics. It seems lhal they did not
even appear on the scene iindJ just obout the beginiusg of
historical times, and their point of origin appears to have
been about the headwaters of the Nile. Thence they spread
outward in all Jtreciiooa possible but in two moin streams,
one to ihe west across the three Sudans; the other to the
east and then eouib vound the great bfces and down the
cftstcm uplands. As a matter of fact, the Mcgro peoples
only reached Souib Africa just about the same time as ibe
whfte men did from Europe by the sea in the I6dj century.
These casem tribes, by intert)reedinf with early Caucasoid
cype^. produced first the Bantu peoples, and later the
Hamiilc. The fermer vlieeleil west anti crossed the Congo,
reaching the Canierooos. The Irbcs that went diiectly
west through the Central and Into (he Westorn Sudan.
encoiiDtetcd a difTerenc state of affairs. North of ibe Congo
Basin, and all the way to the bulge of Africa to the west,
there were no Caucasoids lo intcrmiogle with but there
were apparently lots of peoples of the Bushman variety,
Uviog in the forests at a very low stage of culture. These,
the Negroes did not absorb to any subsianiial degree.
Instead, they either csicrminaled or completely enslaved
them. This is a most Important fact that b not customacUy
known about forest West Africa.

I was unce groaily aurpriacd when, upoo inviting a whole
large village of the Akunakuna tribe oo the Cross B.i\er hi
Nigeria to gather for an evening of music and other fcstlv-
ities, to see the community drawn up in four very clearly
separated groups; two in the foreground with the Para-
mount Chief and assented Chiefs and Sub-Chkfa in front,
and cwo other groups oo dlhcr side, fsr behind. If was
still daylight when they assembled and to our greatest
surprise we suddenly saw that wc were looldne at
two quite diflereQl peoples composed of: tall, dark-brown
skinned Negro men. and sturdy tall women of the same
cast of feature and skin color, and of very short, almost
pigmy men. with pale reddisb-brov^ skins, flat faces,
broad noses, hugely everted lips end UtUe bandy legs on

211



(hfi one side, snd q mass of tiny bur very fat women of the
same type and color on the other, ah of whom had tre^
mendous bottoms. Demanding to know from the local
Headman “What be ibose?" and why everybody was not
mixini it up in the truly democralic way, I was solcmidy
informed that, as 1 was not a government olTicial, I would
be pleased to know that those others were "slave-man."
Slavery being abaoluiely taboo in that ftben British] Pro*
tectoraie, 1 soujtht further in/ormaiion and learned that
there are whole enslaved peoples living within (he body of
mony tribes In the general area, who are bowers of
wood and drawers of water and wilh whom it U. and
always bas been, Absolutely verboicn to interbreed. These
people were as gocxl • Bushmen’' types as I have evet seen.

We must therefore bear in mind that really extremely
primitive peoples do still exist all over Ethiopian Africa,
and that these have marrjfesily been either ensitved, or
actually hunted by the Wll, proud Negro peoples for cen*
tunes hut still survive. Those not enslaved must be pretty
wary and adept at conccalmcct. Nooedieiesa, both the
Sudanese in the west and the Bantus in the east beam to
insist that such as the Sehites and Agogvea. though men
all rigbr, are oven more lowly and ancient than those Bush*
mcB*ilke priiuiilvea. J Jo uot think that we have lo go so
far as to dredge up the Ausiralopithecines to explain them
[thou^ that, of course. Is by no mean^ impossible] b>
cause there must have been inmimernbk races i^nd sutw
races of mco, subraen, and apelike-looking men (Of
Apemea. If you will) in the Intermediate 500,000 years.
Relics of goodness knows how many races could still be
lingering on in the mouuinc forests of Africa. Let us not
forget that it was not till 1910 that the second largest
land animal In the world was found in Africa (Colton's
Ceralothere, or Ceraioihen'iwi cc/foni )—a kind of Rhino
~on<l ihe fabulous Okapi (Okapia johnsoni) turned up.
The Congo Peacock had in wail lilJ I93S! To say Ih^
there is no place where creatures, even of the size of
pigmies, could still lurk unknown on ibis continent is
outright siupldliy. as evidence the arrival upon ihc zo
logical horizon this past year of the large Ufii This
ou^l Co be an object lesson to all skeptics.

This story broke in February, I960, with a news report
that sounded as wacky « any we have so far encountered.
ll read, in one version {The Sunt/a^ Maii, Zoraba, Nyasa-
Jand, February 14, 1960):

212



Nj^asaland pme naern. bivcsMBBtiBi npotU of ii
'‘blftok« ih—TV modsteir^ iteeD In the rofcal region of
Nkau Bay, Lah« Nynsu, ba«« dlscovmd mMt than
30 nysterioos acructom m ttw area. In an

offkial report, the Chief Ranger. Mr. Otiecr Caiy, aays
(hey are believed to be lain |sk] buDt by Iheae strange
crcmtom. Known loailly aa Ibe ghost of (be

supersatura^^vaiioos reports have described Ihe anJ*
mal as black with long hair, a colorteaa posterior, no
tail. broad*chcstcd, and about 5 ft. UO. One waa pboio*
graphed recently by a Ptibik Works DepartmeDt em¬
ployee, Mr. D. McLagen, In Ihe vklally of Qoipasa
Bridge whkb cro»c$ a stream near Nkata Bay on Lake
Nyasa in (he Nortbeni Province of (be territory.

This is a very good eJiample of (he sort of report with
which we have to deal as a normal course of eveau in
ABSMery. ft is oonetbele&s shot full of blather; so let us
jus( look at It criticany before we come to (he wiodup of
(bis siory.

First, as usual, anything not previously and definitely
known of (he aoimaJ kind is mvariably and imrnediately
called a '‘monster." This is totally irre^wasible and es^
pecially la a cose Itko this when, as ii turned out, (he objeei
involved was sometbiog that every foreigr>er should have
seen many times in any zoo. Next, (he designation of
certain objects as "mysterious tree-top structures'* is de-
liheraicly mfsleading. Why didn't the reporter state whot
sort of structures they were, and why they were myster¬
ious? Birdhouses made of plywood, or Amerindian-type
wigwams in Nyasaland would be mysterious, bnt these
crude nestiike (dal forms of twisted branches and twigs
were not—they were typical. Then, if the creatuns were
known locally by a perfectly good name, there was nothing
really mysterious about the platforms. To call ihetr makers'
“ghosts" is goiog a bit far. Since when have ghosts been
reported making treetop nests? But. when we cootcmplace
Ihe phrase "the ghost o/ the supernaiuraF’ one—at least
one whose native tongue b the English language—Mends
aghast. Aren't ghosts supernatural anyway? Or am 1 mls-
takeo? And what the beck is the ghost of (he supernatural?
What is more, the writer immediately goes on to call the
thing an "animal" with a "colorless posterior"! What is
"coloriess"? Was the damned thing’s fundament black,
while, or yellow, like peopdes' or was it just a great "nolb-
ing." '’Words.'* as a famous Briiisb parltameniariao once

RI3



tud. "should convey meaning.’* Why thb obvious axiom
tbouJd not apply also lo official reports and news-stories
I cannot tor the life of me see. Finally, »e are informed
that one was phoiograpbcd; but no reproduction is at¬
tached to the story. Was ihe picture ‘'clasaiAed'': was it
so bad you couldn't see what it was: or was it so hloc^y
obvious that nohody dared show it for fear of heini
called an asa. Or, aliematively. was U so dear but "out of
context*' that nobody wanted to admit it?

The whole story, ai It was subsequently uofoMed. b a
classic: and if may well serve as an example of the func-
Uontog of the m^cm world in face of anything unex¬
pected and frankiv unwanted, it had the usual red herrings;
some ridiculous, others most extremely inlciesiicif. The
first were handled about infinitely: the latter have been
totally ignored. Then everybody, at first, said that if was a
"oative myth*’; next, they got it as an animal; then they
affirmed that it had run away from a circus Iwbal areas
in a patch of forest not previously pctietmlcd in "datkcK"
Africa?!: and then the real ’‘wipe" began. The “experts,
having been confounded by the production of photos and
the insistence of •'authority" that the thing existed—they
having said that it couldn't—could not "explain it away,
Thb time, however, photographs «cm to Aow clearly
that Ihe creature seen was a representative of a race of
chbnpaAZces indigenous to this large patch of closed-
canopy for«i isolated from the nearest of their race, or
any such forest by no less than 700 miles. [ThU conclusion
has. nooetheless. been nicely covered by a firm order lh«.
in DO circumstances, is one of these ercatures to be caught
or killed for proper examination.]

This is all very well hut it has a number of riogularly un¬
pleasant aspects. First, the natives thereabouts seem to
have known the thing quite well and to have had a name
for ii; yet. the nearest whiles and even the game people
treated tbc thing as a "story.'' True, Ihis creature, like
ABSMs in many plaws. wus only brought lo light when
Ihe first road was pushed Into ibis forest—shades « Jerry

Crew_but then everybody Indulged the most ridiculous

folderol about "ghosts of the supernaiuml" • Then, me
alleged photos bad not been published. They arrived in

• I am wondering If by this expression lb< writer meaal tl»l
a dM o! somcihlag irivblble and probably ooncxistem might,
by infeitnce. be presumed to be something vkiblc tad wbttan-
tiaL i quite conceive of a ghost of a ghost

214



Salisbury, capiul of iht Fcilcratba, oa February 6 aod
were said mu day lo have “puzzted aDthn^jolo^sta aod
zoologGU.’* We dMO get "A spokesman for the Victoria
Memorial Museum in Salisbury" saying that ibe pieiutcs
were noi sufficiently clear for positive identificadon. He
pointed out. however, that ^'the picture (singular, (his
lime] and description tallied with a Bushman painting
found in the Ruwa region that had been thought to be a
*bear/ " (This is a near classic in that no bears now live In
nor have any fossils of any one of them ever been found
anywhere ia Africa south of Morocco aod Algeria] Be
(hat as it may, we then read ocH^-and 1 quote Uom The
Rhodesia Herald, of February 7, I960:

Ad emioenl Rhodesian zoologfat. Mr. R. R. N. SmHfa-
era, of (be Nadooal Museum, was able, even from the
poM pktBres available, to point out several uousual
featores. He sard:

‘'From the sialemcnts I have heard frMin Nyasaiaod,
and from (he pieturee, the anirnai woold m appear
(o be a chimpanzee. There arc. howcv«, iwo facts Ibal
do not supp^ thU coacendon. The aoimBl has a dis*
doctly moule-Uke Pace, while (be chimpanzee bar a
flat ^poshed In' type oP Pace. Seeoitdly, the noimai b,
as far as 1 can recoiled, more Ihan a tbousand miles
from wbett ft should be if h was a cbiiapaiBce. Use
beast fe obviously not a baboon, even tboo^ it has ■
bftbooQ^e face, as baboons have raUy ead are not black
Id coloar. In addition, a baboon does aol have this anJ-
auTs posture and hearing. Tbea there is (he enormous
size at the animal, whkfa docs not ^;ree wHb cKber
(be chimpaozee or the baboon.” Mr. SnMbers said it
was most imtikely (hat tbe aniaul wus of a new specks,
aod added that, if better pbotograpbs could be oMaised
as wdl as plaster casts of Ibe feet, K would prolubly
be possible (o identify it.

Just what (he worthy zoologist meani by "a new ^eci«"
I eonooi determine.

This is all very splendid but (hen history begao to
change. I have a set of press releases on the subject, issued
with the complimenis of the Nyasaland Infonnation De^
partmeot. P.O. Box 22, Zomba. NyasaUnd. aod numbered
28/60. 38/60. 51/60, 69/60. 73/60, 81/60, 93/60, and
106/60. These constitute ten legal-sis^ mimeod
sheets of most fasemating readlog. 1 wish ooly that 1

215



could reproduce (hero for 70 U In full as they consti¬
tute a jnosi exemplary public rdatioos procedure and a
BQst typicaJ example of wh&t a pr^sa o£Rcor has to contend
»5lb when dealing with “ciperts.” Here Is the whole story,
tdd oHtcially, starting with a report from two pragmatic
Public WorLg Departmem o£ciaL§ on Dccetnher 16, 1959.
of unknown animal seen on a road" to a final pro
nouocemeot by two 'gaitie experts” from the Rhodes-
luvingstoae Museum on the following Maich 17, 1960,
This ia&l I berewiih reproduce.

PRESS RELEASE NO. 106/60.

(Issued 'Wire & Telephone services)

UFni STILL ELUSTVE

Zoraba, Thursday.

Nj-assland's rain-forest mansfer, Uhti, kas been iden¬
tified as a new Milvspecics of chimpaji 2 ee by two game
experts fcom the Rbodes-tivjngslone Moseum.

Mr. B. L. Mitchell and Mr. C. Holliday, who are
keeping the creature under almost dally observation,
have oot yvt been able to obCaui aoy pbotOfErepfas.*
Lfiti reinaijis as elaslvc as ever, vaolshiog as soon as
sbe is approached, und thick bush aod poor light add
to the dilEcuiricR of gcHinj: vicjr pictures,

UHti, who b believed <0 l>c in season, has returned
to her favourite obsrrvatlOD point at tbc Umpasa Bridge
after an absence of about a fortnight, The Oilcf Coih
servatikT nf Forests. Mr. R. G. M. Wilbin, who Iv lour*
ing (be area, was among several people who mw the
creature when It reappeared ocar the road on Tuesday.

The two game expefts, who are coUecting pbouv
graphs* and other forens of visible evidence, hope to
arrange a bigger expedition (a explore tbe whole rain*
forest area.

It is nnlikely, however, that any sekotifle expedition
wiO be allow’e<l to capture Ufiti for closer examination
onto it can be cstablistaed Uiat more of tbe creatures
exist in tbe rain-forest.


Issued by the Press Section,

Nyusaland InforroaUon Doparuueuti
P.O.Box 22,

Zotnba, Nynsaiand March 17, 1966


PleoAC notel (Author)


216



This woulJ «i first sight all appear to he more than
uiisfaeiory. Fof once, it would neem. the mystery ha*
been explained, the "motuter" identified, and zoological
knowledge enhanced. But unfonunalely and quite apart
from the fact that notbiog further has been done atout
anything, a number of most perdztent questions have eiibtf
been left hanging or oeaily buried. Let me dredge up
some of these from the official releases first. For instance,
in Release No. we read ihe curious siaiemeoi

that Although reporta indicate that UfiU is likely to prove
a giant subspecies of Cbimpanzee. her pug [aic] marfci
are said to be more bumao than animal. She is un¬
usually large for a chimpanzee and her mouth is much
smalJer-" Then, in Release No. 8J/60 we find "He ap*
pears to be almost 6 feet tall with short legs and powerful
arms, and most observers estimate his weight in the regioo
of 150 lbs." In the same issue it goes on to say "Plaaief
oasis of its hind footprints reveal three [italics mi Del toes
and a large ibumb." I bad better cut in here to point oul a
few iicms.

Either fool[ffints were obtained or they were not; if
they were, ib^ were either more human, or more animal;
but no human ha« only three toes aud a large "thumb" on
iu foot, while gorillas and chimps have four toes and ■
widely separated and enormous hig toe. Then, no chimp
ever stood 6 feet tall, or even 5 feet; chimps of those
dimensions being unable to stand on their puny hind legs
alone. What is more. If this is a ebunp, and of
it would weigh more in the neighborhood of 300 pounds,
by the very construction of the beast. These are official
conundrums. Other* come from nonoffieial source*. The
first is 1 0 the form of a letter to the Rhtjdesian Herald, of
February 24.1960. from a Mr*. Ida P. Wood. This reads:

Sir,-further to yoor article un tbe onkisowii aoloty
photographed by ‘*Lofty” .McLareo, perhaps Ibe foDow-
bg would be of use (o you and to Ihe auiborldea. who
seemed douMful of ihr Meotity nf (he beast. Uurtng ■■
explanation to my boneboy on Ihe pktvre of a tiger os
a ccitab breakfast ccreni packet, I lold hin that this ao^
mal did sot Live In Africa, and the aoiiDai be calls tiger
was oot iu fact a tiger at all and that (be one on the bos
was very strong. Tbe word strong secased to strike a
bell becanse, catting tbe sImj as short as possible, be
asked me (ben, did I know the ‘‘Strong Man." After
iDucb haod-waving tedlcatiag belghi and breaillb, and

317



after being told Hat H vns like a baboon only mneh,
inoch bigger, 1 came lu ibe cootlualo* he meant a

gorilla.

I Slid. y«, I did know ll, but bad Dol seen ooe
bare. He, kC seems, had jcen llieni in Nyasaload. H*
weal on to describe them, said there were two kinds,
a grev and a black one. the Mack being rfighlly nnaUvr
(baa the grey, about Ws own hci^Ul to be enact, 5 ft.
8 ii»-5 ft. 9 In. The boy comes from Nyasaland and
ssys be saw die ir^ blatk one in tbe forests near a
v ih^a a by the name oC Naaombea in 1952. The other
be saw La P. E. A. in 1953 by the village of Korrlwc.

Both these names are the CWnyanja prooucciatioo
and the anlmaVi In Cbinyun^ arc eaHed Flreh. I Oue«*
liooed him closdy about ihc possibility of the black
one bclog a different kind but “do," he mid, “they are
die some, ouly oae black, one grsy, and only e*er ono

ttt 8 rime.” - -.

II makes a bed « a gorilla" does, large wa uoridy,
usually sleeps lo it only obc*. I suppose to oLmlnnle the
posUMlity of discovery.

I should be inleresied (o know what die antraopolo-
gists imcreslcd In the previous artiele think of this
marion if you would be good enough to pus H oa. Have

the photographs been prlnlod yet?

(billed) Mrs. Idu P. Wood


This clearly indicaies that these cteoturei ore known in
the area, and I have no doubt that a ilu!c ingenious and
nalienl inquiry amoog Ihe ‘bcnightc.'d local natives ww cl
disclose the fnci ibai they hove always been very widely
known. I should c^tplain that this husiness of ‘there is a
black one and a while cae” is almost UDivereal tn Al-
Tica and uaially denotes marked sexual dimorphism,
which is displayed by so many animals. (iQcideotaJly lo
many parts of Africa only three colors are tccognized—
black, white. and red. The Ust U all the earth colors from
deep orange, through all the browns to deep red. E^ry.
IbiDg including blues and greens are either white or biACK
accor^ina to whether they ore in oirong light or la shade,
All shades o( color ate "so-so" red. black, or white. This
African’s insistence that, although there are two kinds,

• How did Mrs. Wood (or her houseboy) know oi this?—

Authef.


218



they are the Mine bees, would indicate that the dilTerences
ere cither aaxual or due to age.

The other concurrent oddity was Trooi quite another
part of Africa. 1400 miles distant, and in ao area frosi
which WB had not previously had any reports. This is
actually a very astonidilng report and one rhai should be
taken most aerioosly in view of ihe almost coflsuni sur*
prises that are coming out of Southwest Africa and Angola.
This part of Africa is rapidly assuming the guise of truly
*'*n>e Darkest." for Ng game never even known to exist
There is turning up. and among it axe many record speci¬
mens. while it \% the home of the otherwise nonexistent.
Oiant Sable Antelope, and so forth. This apparent ABSM
wax origtnally reported in the Evening .‘iiondard of Sahs>
bury for November IS, 1959 but did ool become fully
recognized until oiler cbe Ufiri ox Fireil alTair broke. It
reads as follows:

ntSDHOTK. HXn.—The mitborltlex In South'Wcit

Africa and Farmcn in the vktoily of Outjo are wonder¬
ing whether a hirse shambliag ape or moirtcey which
has beeo seen on farms near O 0 t|o is not a gorilla. Pet^
pic who have sccq the animal state cmphaikaJly that It
U not a large baboea. Accordlna to lUcir deacripllom,
the animal closely resembles a gorilla. Its footprinta are
also Uke lbo«e of a gorilla. A farmer. IVtr. Than Moritz,
wbo*s Ovambo berdboy reported (hnl Ihc animal had
stolen Us bUtnbett and food, tried to track i3k animal
down but lost the trail over rocliy The npocr

clearly ritowed that the animal walks on Iwo legs.
Occasloaalfy. prfols resembling kmjckle impresslotis
were found next to (he spoor. The footprints are about
5Vk in. wide and resemble mmks made by a human
hand. The five fingent nr toes are ekarly defined. Tlw
aulborilks hiive appealed to farmers nut to ehnol (he
animal but to try lo capture tt alhe. The nearest place
where gorillas are known to Ure is in the Belpan Congo,
oouty 1000 miles from South-West Africa.

Disregarding thit report, and reverting to the Vfii/ for
a moment, ii should be pointed out that there is something
very wrong with the whole thing. 1 canooi bring myself to
believe that game wardens, forest officers, and such other
solid citizBiu ccuid all have been absolutely ignorant of
chimpanzees at specific animals. Had none of tbem ever
been to a zoo where one was housed, or seen so ouch u a

219



piciure 0 / one in a book? Even a fleeting sight of such an
sofTDfrt ougbi lo have been enough for them to fccognae

5t_jf it was a chbnpanzBB, Zoologists and anthropologists

ought. aJmosl to the same degree, to have been abSe to
spot 3uch euj animid from any photograph that displayed
anything even approaching an cut line. That wjy could be
in doubt about the ideoliiy of a picture which was clear
eoouell to ascertaiu ihol the animal depicted was not
baboon. Is frankly amazing. There is DOihiog impossible
in S sub-species of chimpanzee turning up In this forest
and having been there all along though m sevofal respects
it might be considered unlikely, but there is absolutely do
doubt about the footprint of an ape. It la utterly different
from that of any Horoinjd. Tbcrc can be no doubu here.
The matter of the Ufi\i is a most damning indiclmcnl of
"the experts’' for, from the published record on file, they
would obviously then be shown not to know the first dung
about their claimed spcdnlties. I n<w have copies of tbe
photographs mcniioned together with some other most
clear close-ups taken later. All. and even the foggiest,
cleariy shows a robust, and typical chimpanzee in very
fine coRl, el I her peering Inientlv down from a tree to
typical Pongul fashion, or standing stolidly on all fours in
the preferred Great Ape stance. [No walking about on
hsr back legs, murk you,] The photographs of two foot¬
prints. pan of a track in soft earth, arc >t first rather
startling as they look almost human but have only four
toes. However, ii ie tbo photo not the prints that is
slanling for, viewed from other angles the ‘missing toe,”
namely the great one that is very widely—and properly
for s chimp—separated u quite plain, This is a talc of wk
but most Important to our search, because it goes far lo
show just what appalling mistakes can be made, miscon¬
ceptions bulU up, and fantasies coaccived io a metier
such as this.

When we come to the last great area for alleged “uo*
knowns” ifl Africa we do not, ihant goodness, have to
deal with experts. However, we have to rely on iravriers,
big-game huntcra, aod other aonexpsris who are some¬
times almost as bad. [Oi, for the good old days ol bull¬
dozer-operators, and limber-eruisers!) However, ihcre Is
One Very bright ^eam ahead aid this—and ulmoat for the
first and only time—is a real, hontsi-to-goodne«, fully
trmned. truly expert, and aUo successful profcsaional "ani¬
mal collector"; note other than Charles Cordlcr. tbe Swiss,
wbo baa persisieatly brought back to museums and zoos

2SiC



what (h«y r«aUy wm: prop«rly houted and fed. or prop*
erty preicrved. Here ai last is i man whocn we can not
only re(y on for common seose reporting, but who really
knows bb aoimab aod b» zoology, as well as a great part
of the world. You may place more reliance oo wbat he
says thaa upon almost all of the rest of the lovoluoury
and evto the voiuoiary ABSM hunters combined.

This loformstion comes lo me once again from Bernard
Heuvelmaos who had just [at the time of writiog] received
it from Cc^ier who (iaoiiary. 1961} was somewhere to
the Congo. Charges Cordiet wrote Bernard: “We met three
tracks of hind fcei^Hio knuckle marks-^in soft mud near
water. Tlie tracks were mmt unusual.*' he says. Also, they
were not those of a gonlla; and. Cordier goes on: “I ought
to know. 1 have a sclverback. These 12“ tracks were do
gorillas." fThe gorilla imprint should be compared with
the photograph of one made in plaster see Appendix
“A."j This find was made, as far as we know of now,
somen^re in the Bakavu area. The iraek>maker Is ob*
viously some new form of large Pong Id.

This brings up a whole new string of stories from less
reliable sourcea. These begin with something that has been
named the Tano Giani. and was first described by one.
i.ouis Bowler, half a century ago. It bus some funny fea*
tures, aod some HJojpcalilics. It slates:

Far away Jn the primeva] forests of Ibe Cppcr Tono*
In the Cold Coast Colony, a smuigc talc fa (old by the
natives of a wild man of the woods, which would a^
pear from ihc description given to be a while ape of
eztnordiiuiry stature and humafi Insllocl. The ofillves
who five ED tbe village near (o the haunts of this freak
of aamre are terrified oul of their wi(!9. They barricade
(heir doors al lUgbl. and place broiled pbataJu and
casaava oo (he Jongk ptilhs kadlng Jnlo (he vlllnge lo
propitsate him and appease his hunger. They declare
he comes to the village at oigbL aod only tors when
fire is thrown at hiiiL The wobco ecpeclaJly ore almosS
scared to death, and go In a body to their plantain fanus.
It Appears ihaf two women while gathering planlalris
were confronted by ihh creature. One he seized aod
flung over bb shoulder carrying ber olf; the other ran
Bcreamlog wfih fright back lo Ae village. No trace of
Ihe oibcf woman has been FooiuL Several children have
been talten by (bis emture. (beir mutlluied bodies being
found with (he whole of (heir bowels devoured.

22t



The hunter and women who have seen thw animal
de«cribe bim ns '‘past bU fflan" rn ^Jic: his arms tbCf
(kscribc as thick as a mira's body; his skin ^‘all (be
same as a while man/ with Hack haSrs frowlng thereon.
The hands have four iuigers but no ttoiuh, the head is
Hat. and. as they describe M, ’left ?niall for big monkey
head." meauinR that it was very near or Ifkc a large
moDkev's head. They say the mouth ‘was all the some
as nonkey with big teeth sticking ott. nod he carries
a sklo of bush cow/ which the oafives say “be carries
for cloth wbeo small cold, calch him/ meaolag he
wraps himseX up in K when feeling eold. A hunter tried
(o shoot hin. bvt h« smashed (he sun and hrnbe both
the hunter^ arou. Many other Incidents are related of
this lerror of (he Upper Plabs.

The most oaesUndlog aspect of thb report is. to me. ihst
once again it U of something dcftnildy Homioid and that
came out of a roontane forest onto orchard-bush, as in the
SoLthwestem case from Windhoek. This is indeed unusual.
The other outsianding fact is the mention ol the absence
of a thumb, t undemapd (hut it is believed that the thumb
of Plesiauihropjf was eKceptionally small for the siitc of its
hand, «nd was placed wry high up on that hand. Is it pos¬
sible thnl It might have been carried pressed against the
side of the palni and so not be apparent? The fact that this
creature was alleged to have a light skin covered with black
bairs is alw novel. The whole aecouoi Is BClually more
than ]u5l aggravating in several respects because it suods
absolutely alone as far as I have been able to find out.
Natunlly, orw pfcsumes that it Is ba a traveler’s rale
picked Irom nmive imagination to give It a tone of au-
tbeoLcitv: yel, among such tales—and I have hundreds—it
w one of the few that seems in some way to have validity,
Perhnps I his is because I got to know the West Afrlcaiu
rather well myself once; and. while I fully appreciate their
great storvEcIliog abilities, I did find them essentially most
dowTt-Jo-carth people when It comes to the question of
tbeir Dative founa. West Africans told us some of the
wiJdesi-soundIng things about their local animals but, id
almost every case, they made good on their words by
producing the darned things, They are not the sort to
think up “thumblessness." a white skin, or a head "left
small for big monkey head.” If they said that—aod these
puipoct to be firsthand accounts, not iraditlond talcs—
they meaDi it. and precisely, The discmboweliDg of the

222



children aUo seems to smack of the ml thing. 1 know
just what the teller meant to imply: namely. "Dani cry
and tell me this w&s a leopard because 1 know, even if
you don't, that that is oot the way they sian to cat you.'*

The only other Afncan A£5Nf ih&t has been mentioned,
and This several limes, and hy several ditTerent travelers, is
the Kiuhalu, This is a muddled issue as may be seen £r^
the follow) ne estraci from the book Hunun^ Wc SVill Co
by Mrs. Alttllo Gaul. This reads as follows:

tlien there are nitnon about qlrange anthft»pnid5i.
One H a lai^e ape which is said to Uve in tbe Raby
Foresi, tbe pygmy tribes call it the Mubalu. Conuaunder
Attlllo Gattli the wcllditiowo A/ricaa explorer* has re¬
peatedly declared that he. for one. believes in the
esfetCDce of tbe Mubalu and wUflogfv accepts tbe de-
seriptioas of ibe pygmies who say that It b excepfiooaUy
large, walks erect habitunlly. aad U covered witb very
dark. jHJuibly l)bck. for, except for the face, where
the balrs are white.

Anutbee again, and the worst of all. b a big animal
wHh a coal of long hair, black on tbe back, white on
the other parts of the bod). Aod Jt la enough to be seen
by thb monster, for one to die in Use most atrocious
agoay.

He found awaiting us a man from Solfs to say that
tbe pygmies hud been on the tml I of a Dongo mother
aod young one. and that If tbe Bwuna would come they
were sure they would capture the little ooe.

So Tille decided to have one more fling. Ke also de¬
cided to Cake a group of our own ln>>» wJih him to act
as porters. Before they could start, however, an eveal
oeccuTcd which reduced all Kalume's men to panic.

Ever stDce wc bad been In tbe Iturl we bnd heard re»
peated tales and runior?^ of a greai aainal called hy the
Boudaode, *^uhalu.” Of all things that could arouse
terror, Ihis mubalu was Uie King Bee. TiUe had been
cxtremel) bilercsied la ibe natter and believed that tbe
creature really did exist and wu a hitherto uoknowa
fifth anthropoid or suMiiioian.

At this time, however, he bad done no more talk
about It now and Ibeo. Now, on Ihb morning, one of
our men niibed Into the clearing, hl« face gray with
frigbl, babbling about the dread mubalu. His storfet
were couUctijig. FIrxl he said it had koodeed bin down,
aod tlus seemed odd because tbe oativea firmly believed

223



that a muholu had 0 DI 7 to look at a man and that man
would instantly di«. Than the bv> sold he had saen the
mcihaJu Qnt aad ran away. No mutter what had actually
linppen^, the news (hat a cnuholu was in the vicioity
Kuly par^ilyxcd our utcus

Tille insisted on gidng to Inyestigate at Ibc point
where the bo) claimed to have seen (he beast. I don’t
knew how he eaceceded in dragglne tiul boy> halfnlead
with fright, 0 ? in OJcklng the pride of Lamese and two
of (he other oico until they agreed to accompaoy blm.

He did And enormous footprinlSi and several stiff
black hairs In tbc hollow of a tree where the evidence
showed dhe brute hod been sitting, Neither iaira no
orbit eoTTOspoaded to any ©the? known ape.

Bui the panic of ottr natives bad grown no faai ibart
TUIc could net stem ». Kven KaJume begged us, wrth
ail hb heart, to leave Tambcbe and come down to his
village. All of our natives, thouub they bad no wish (o
abandon us, were preparing to leave.


In Ihb area, namely »ho southern face of the t^angl-
Shari Massif. U would socm ihai we have to deal with iwo
nuiie seoaratc gjitiiies-one an unknown Pon^d. and an-
^dlcr n Hominid, or AfWM. Despite the rather obviom
exaggerations of the descriptions given by !;

ablv bv ihe Pigenies. wilb whom it is cxtiemciy difficult, if
rwllv'it all possible, lo caramunicatc—neither appear
really 10 be too outrageous. Perhaps one f
ape that leaves ihe odd prints iioiv recorded by Cordicr,
Xe the other is something ritin to ihe Tano C.tmt
There are a set of iraclts rccordea from B,ikuma which
S locals say were made by what ibey all ihe ApamamU.
which fficy iherc describe as a heavily buH^mall
dolbcd In black hair, but h.vins a light skin.
arc approKimeiely eight inches ong. vc^ short b^ai
and have the strange distinction of tavmg the ^ond
toe longer ihaa either ihc first cm third, ^ bang somc
wbal separated from tbc first or big toe.
of Ibis toe proporlion will become t^iparcnl when we
Zmo t© inv«tigale ihc Meh-M. or Soowman of ilie

^nc'afcounis of Ihme two [« is it but a
hires are v-cry vague, fragmentary, and rwc. ret* •( ^
™.i. .he nor.hwe«ern edge of the Iturl Fore., wJl
find that it (or they) are laJten qmte for ^

rare, but by no tneans excessively rare. uniB ol the local

224



fauna; living is (he upper montane forests to the north,
and from (ime to time coming down on to the lowlands.
I have talked to many people who have been into this,
pmviouiJy unadaunisiered, area but only those who were
ipeci^eUy interested in its fauna, or who speot time
iovesiigating the ideas and knowledge of the locals, had
ever heard of it. Those who did so. however, all seem to
he of the opinion lliat there is a race of gorilla in the area,
or that there is ai least some large lerrestrial ape there.
When I asked if. in (heir opinion, it could be a primitive
Hominid rather than an advanced ape, (be opinions have
been violently divided. Mos( returned my tjuery with a
pwfeetly blank stare; bur some said **Yes'* and Invariably
went on lo talk aboiK the posibiJjty of some larger form
of Ausiralopj(becinc having survived (hereabouts—and
they iisuaJty pick on PUzianihropus, probably because that
form has been so well publiriacd, along wilh reconstruc-
dotts of iL

Africa Is undoubtedly the land of Pigmies and of some
Great Apes, hut H does not seem to sport any ^oc HomU
aids. At least the Africans don't imply this, even if they do
refer to the Tano character and the Af«/ifl/ir (or one of
i^) as being very big. Our real Oh-Mah types would be
^e perfect target for African bogeyman stories, but they
just don't appear here, and we shall pot meet them agali)
until wc reach just (he place whets they ought to be.


229



10. The East—the “Mysterious"

REPORTS FROM SUMATRA AND THE
MALAY PENINSULA


We ere nw going to make a major hop acro« an
from Eay Africa to wbat is commonly called the Onent.
and specifically to southeast Asia. This may look iikt and
In poitil of fuel is. a lon^ bop spatially, and it muy seem
doubly exanficraied because we are going also lo skip over
alj that lies between the two points specified, such as
Arabia, India, and Ceylon, ihough they manifcsily fora
son of slcppingscones aJong this route. This is nevenhe-
less justified on more than one count.

First, there is iw currcoi ABSMery lo he d'Kua^ in
those imcrmediale areas, though ibcrc is quite a tot of
myth, legend, and folktom. especially m Ceylon. Second,
acoloflisis lell us ihal there was once a great land-conncc-
itx between the iwo extremes (Afnea and sooUwast
Asia), which they have named Gondwanaland. arw « is
obvious that lots of primitive animals still living loday art
represented b> dilTereni but either compambk or^vi-
owly reiaicd kinds on ihc two sides of the Indian Ocean.
Wbetber individual examples of these emigrated irom one
side to ihe other, or vice versa, is no concern of oun, but
it is cenain lhat ihere was from very early times such a
conneciloD between the two ades of this ocmo. A
example is the Lorisoid Lemurs of Afr^. ^ f
ion*; aivothcr is ihe (lighttess birds called Ran es,
tSKludmg the Ostriches {Sinnhio). on ihc ooe hand, the
Emu (DromicfiM) and the Cawowanes iCasuariu) on
the other. Then again, the Great Apes are found w both
sides, as arc different forms of the very spccialited Ual-
caiing Monkey* or Colobnids—ihc Oucrexas id Afnea;

•The Pottoi (rcrhdicsleus) and Bushbabio (Calngo) of
Afrka and the Lories ftom) of the OritsnV



the Langurs is OrienL TTiese each repicsenX dlffereot
ages at which this land connectiod existed.

Primiuve men and the Hominids generall7. seem also to
straddle this ocean. Whether the land-connection still re¬
mained above sea level when the most primitive of the
Utter were evolved—such as the Ausiralopllhccines of

South Africa, and the Pitbccanthiopines of IndonesU_is

not yet knowo. but it is almost certain that U did oot do so
wbeo the first races of True Man were spread all over both
sides (or, aJiemolively, passed from one to the other),
These most primitive peoples are today the Pigmies of
wltich there arc representatives In forest Africa, on some
Indian Ocejui islands, io the Massif on (he Malay Peoia-
sula, and in the Philippine!?, (It should be noted that the
pigmy people of the west end of New Guinea arc now
thought to be merely "pigmy" breeds of the otherwise
tall Papuans of that island.] These little people have much
id common on both sides of Ihc Indian Ocean, and they
are dcpw (bought to constitute a real sub-spcdcs of the
huoiBD nice.

These PlgouBs are indeed primitive, but even they say
that they were not the first people in the couotries they
now inhabit, and the Semang of Malaya state that there
ramajn some living representatives of these still earlier
people In their couatry. Malays call these "Devil Sakai ” •
(Hantu Sakai) and say that they live in and move about
through the trees; an astonishing statement since the Senca
to rcadjiy take to the trees. a/Kl arc highly agile ihereio.
Jhcre IS evidence that these prolo-Pigmies [which simply
means. Those-who-wercbefore-the-Pigmies] once were
^read very widely in East Africa, southern Arabia. India,
Ceylon especially, and throughout Malaya and Indonesia,
wc will find allusions to them cropping up ali the way
through our story for some time from now on and we
must watch out for them because in this area (Le. eastern
Onentto namely, the whole of that subcontinenl apart
^m India and Ceylon) there is really no clear line of
demarcaaon betweco fossil sub-hominids that ore known.

sre calling in this book

This is a point that I would like to stress forthwith On
account of that awful expression “the abominable snow¬
man and all the fuss that has been made over “if" In

• The term Sakai mcaas degenerate and is not ihc real name
Mafaw ^ ^ VeiWa-like ie/tof of


227



ihe KimalayaSi cot only (he popuJ«r concept of such
creature.'?, t>ul our whole thinking from a purely scieniific
poiot of view also h colored by a picture of some mythi¬
cal exaggeration poundiog about on a soovrfiekJ, lipping
apart yaks or hapless Sberpa?, AewaDy, if one comes to
examioe the matter more closely, and in Its entirety, as
We axe trying to do in this book, it should be apparent
that what VC ere dealing with b really the whole history,
past and present, of the Hominids, and the origins of
Man per se. Frankly, our term "ABSM" really means
kornnul. other ihau known kinds of modern man: no
more and no less: and it is my firm belief that tti due
course, the whole business will be lifted clean out of Ihe
“mystery class" and simply become a pnn of physical
anthropology. Even if no example of any of the fas it now
seems) doien or so ADSMs is ever caught, I further think
It will be found ihal all wbidi has been reported upon
them throughout the world may legitimaicly be taken into
consideration b irylng to reconstruct the past history of
mao, and fill In some of the vast gap in that history
dial at present lies betw^eo little Orgopiihi cnn of Ihe Mio.
cwie coal strata of Italy and, say, the Bushmen or the
Pigmies. Moreover. It it in ibiii Oriental Region lhai we
are going to come closest to die chain of stages that
linked, and that ftill links, those two exircojcs.

Our first port of call In this new region is perhaps one
ot the oddest, oldssr. and from a 200loglsi*8 poinc of view,
the most exciting in the world This b Ihe southwest por¬
tion of the great island of Sumatra and a string of islands
off its west coart called the Mentswis, The whole ot
Sunsatxa is odd la several respects and not entirely due to
its enormous size, dense forests, corrparail'ely small ha-
mao population, and virtual oeglcci Ui^ughoul history. IL
with the fool of the Malay Peninsula, Java. Borneo, and
some associoicd smaller islands (and possibly Palawan,
which b usually grouped with the Philippi ocs] forms a
to^eographical sub-area with most special a.^pect 5 (see
Msp XIH). Noc only doe< thisxuh-arca contain elephants,
rhinoceroses, tigers, .and other mainland Asiatic onimals,
It has come even odder asd more ancient animals—the
Mdayan Tapir, the Orang-utan (or Mia), the Shmange.
the Tarsiers, and the little, most primitive of nil living
Primates, the Pen- or Fcaihcr-tails iPidocirrcus). Actually,
the list eveu of mammals u extraordino/y, and there
are here unique birds, reptiles, amphibians, fishes, and
inveriebraiBs of all kinds. It is a son of leftover land to

228



whicJi ftJI me finer of creatures have at times of dimatic
cnaoge, crustal shift, or oceanic flooding, retreated. But
this limiiccJ area, there is an even more pecuJIai
sub-sub-arca. This is the Mentawi h)aod chain and (he
immediately opposite Barisati Mountains of southern
Sumatra (sec Map XIV).

Here there are absolutely unique and really very slraDge
Mimals. To exemplify, ] need mention only wbat is called
Ae Mentawi Islands Langur, and the South Paai Island
P.gmy Siamang. The tnt is not really a iangttr monkey at
aU bu a short-tailed Snub-nosed Monkey (named Siimas
concojot) that constitutes a genus all by itself and which is
completely unlike anything known anywhere else The
Pigmy Si^ang (Brachyiuftiies khssi) is a diminutive ape.
dassed With the Oibbons sod standing somewhere betwew

rlZ \ “cdvaDced” Siamaog

(Symphalangus) of mainland Sumarra and MaJava It

seems m fact that this bottom bit of Sumatra is a retreat
within a retreat, and the animals which retreated ihemo
are usually reJics. You will notice from the map ihat^e
Barisan Mountams. though conunuoa'? with the feekila
and the rest of those of west Sumatra right up into Achin

Mount Marapi, Dorih of Padaog. bevond which there is a
distinct break. The flora and fauna of the Barisana has
Snf Memawrs than with the aoun-

Thf (Eng-gano island is even more

On>maJ headquarters of a group

?he c 7 ^ k called locally

he Setfapa or. m kitchen-Malay, the Orang Pendek (LWe
Mm) or (,be Gibbering Man) '

r i-[?“ -r

Mm nfs telWor'® Cadang.^T Cr.«

229 ^



has remained very wild and /orms a special case, li too
has iu loologicnl oddUics (like the Proboscis Monk^l
but not apparently even any folk memories of ABSMs

_though a very strange story of one such having arrived

there not too long ago on a bo« as a captive of pimtes

was published! Sumaim and Malaya proper, on ihe other

hand are rife Mith not just hints but mi*l dedniie reports
Of at least (hree kinds of primitive homlnlds or ABSMs.

The Philippines consliruie another roological sub-area;
oad the Celebes and ihiilr associated IsIdDib, »ij|i another.
Both have uniqoc animals, and the latter, though lying oo
the AiKtrallan stele of Wallace's Une, the great divide
between ihnt continent and Asia, has a mixture of marsu-
maJ mammals and other typically Austrel fauna and
forms with obvious Asiatic affiliations. Among the« are
the small black baboon, known as the Black Ape fCy«o-
pftAfcirj). nnd two specie* of a MaeaAne Monkey (Mao-
rus). Of ABSMv there are none reported from either oI
these sub-area.s, but there ore genuine Negrito Pigmies lO
the Philippines, and there are constant references to mm
with tails'’ from there and especially from the iMnnd ot
Palawan. The whole question of tailed hominids is a sorry
subject and hK been going on throughout the ages. Many
peoples have attributed tails to Iheit neighbors or more
distant foreigners with Ihe sole Implication (hal they were a
lowly lot of rascals. Others mistook emde accounts and
picture? of monkeys for lowly forms 0 / humans in other
Iai3J». Plnally, people arc aemotimes horn wlih fainy de¬
cent (ails, n^ece was a very nice fci'ow at school with me
who had a 3-inch job clothed In resldlsh-brown. fine hair
about SB Inch long ] TTiis is said 10 he sn ”alavisra.'’ This
is hardy the rigrit word for it. as it would ihcn be a ihrow-
back to the ticoe before either ap« or men ffot started.

Let U3, then, reium to Sumatra aod Investigate Ike
fnattef of the Sedapa. The existence ol wild tren In lids
island has been rumored since ancient times. It was men¬
tioned by Maico Polo [though he also has taiU on the
brutes, nad naked ones at that], its existence was first

deftcit^y reported by an Engllvhman named Winian
Marxdan who was resident at Benkoelen on the west coast
of Sumatra In 1818, but it was not liH this century that
definite repons were made by Westerners. As everywhere
else, hoih the veracity of the leponer^ and the possibilny
of the existCDce of any such creatures '•as heatedly deoied

* A flood ot reports, hnwever. entanaled &om Borneo ia 1967.

230



by JuM ahoi« everybody who did not reside in Sumatra
and pefllculariy by those who had not ever beea tbore!
This jriilude to the matter was taken to great extremes by
the Dutch curator of the museum at Buitenzorg in Java,
Dr. K- W. Dammerman- Most, but not all sclenUsU fol¬
lowed his example until World War ii, Then, when Indo¬
nesia gamed her iDdcpcodeDCC, there was at first a very
notice^le change in opinion, especially as displayed in the
Indonesian press. However, the gcncrol altitude has re¬
verted to type more recently, so that the present profeiscff
of anthropology at ihe university ai Djakaru wrote lo my
fnend Prof. Corrado Gini of the fostitut loternatiooal de
^lologie ID Italy, slating Bally ihai the "Orang Pendek
18 only a variety of the Orang Kubu. a primitive pcode
qu{ie human in chftracier, of whom the IndoneaUn Gov.
emmeni takes special care."

While 1 am glad lo bear of the Indonesian Covemment’s
special concern for the Kuhu. something that must be
somewhat dilliculi to exercise in the political circum¬
stances. I would point out that while Sumatra is Indonesian
lerrilory, the Indoocsian Government is actually Javanese
Md really knows extremely little about Sumatra—rather
less, in fact, than the Hollanders once did. Also, I am not
Interested in the Kubu people who have been well known
for centufie* but rather in the Orang Gugu. The Kuhu are
j^ot hairy; the Gugu are said to be, whether they exist or
not As Marsden flrji dearly pointed out. the Kubu are
hnirle&s humans at a primitive stage of culture but great
hunters, and live In the Barisons. The Gugu are not ht>
man. were even then very much rarer, and lived in the
depths of the monlane forest, and had no language. The
Malayan peoples of Sumatra called them by various native
names such as Aiu. Sedabo. or Sedapa. They olieo ap.
I»oded ihcir word pendek or pendak to these to indicate
that they were refering la a small one, of two-^bc other
being gadang, which amply means large.

On the valldiiy of the Sedapa I cannot olTer anylhinf
but the aeeouDU as published. That such a creature could
exist IS not only quite possible but I think, almost probable
—and especially if the local native and mdigenous peo¬
ples »y tbai It does—and the Barisan Mountains area Is
just w p ace where the ancient forma of Honiinidf might
most likely have been able to survive. As we shall see.
there IS DO dearth of candidates for Ihe Sedapa along the
Hominid branch of the family tree; and then, we have the
near presence of the Pitbecanihropuics of Java. Also, the

231



existence nf the Malayan Topir (Topirus indleus), whose
sole remaining rclaUvea Uv« jn tropical America, shows
jost how safe a retreot this comer of ihe world really is.
Whai it conies lo 'available space" for any such crea¬
tures lo live more or less uiiseca, words almost fail me. I
spent many happy months wandering about Sumatra In
my youth accompanied by an Achinese (with the very
sensible name of Achi, as it happened) and all I oan say
is that its /orcsis pul most others in the world lo shame,
and they seem just to go on and oo fore\cr. The Vnown
populstloiv is comparatively minute, and Ihe amount of
the country that is opened up is ^uiic minor. Apart from
the ri'ere, the great swamplands are not penetrated at all;
the lowland loresr^ are (all and dense, and the nontaoe
growth is intolerable.

The history of ibe Sedape, as far as the Wcsiem world
U eooeemed. is due mostly (o the reearches of Ort. W. C
Osman Hill of ibe Zoological Society of London, and.
once again, Dr. Bernard Heuvcimans of Paris. There were
certain HoIIanderi who somewhat earlier devoled tbern*
selves to The pursuit of this matter in Sumatra. Notable
among these was a Dr. Edward Jacobson, who first
brought the subject up :n De Tiopische Natuur (once
published in Weltcvreden. Javal in an issue of 1917,
However, Dr. Jacobson's investigations wont back to 1910
and ii was imdcr bis aegis that some facts collected by
Mr. L. C. Westenek, once Governor of Sumatra, came to
light The earliest of these is the report of an overseer of
an estate, who was stoking out a newly acquired and large
tract of virgin land In the Bmisans near a place caUed
Loobuk Salasik. This man left a carefully worded wnltcn
slHterrienl. This was That, at a distance of only 15 yards, he
saw "a large creature, low on in feet, which ran like a
man. and w« about to cross my path; it was very hairy
and it wa« not an orang-utan; but its face was noi Ukc an
ordinary man's. It sllcolly and gravely gave the men a
disagreeable stare and then ran calmly away. Tbe work-
era ran faster in the other direction.’' The overseer re¬
mained where he stood, quite dumfounded.

The significance of thb siatcmeDl ccnicrs around fbc
definite statement that the creature was ncr an orang-uian,
that it stood 00 its bind legs and ran on the ground, ana
that it was 'low op its feeu" This latter seems lo indi-
eate that it had short legs, which is reoUy another way of
say mg that k had overly bng nnns in proportion to its
•torso and legs; and aU this, in turn, emphasUes that it was

232



Dot tn orAng'Utao; an animal (bat. Mcept when young, caiK
oot even walk on its hind legs alone. Dr. Jacobson became
greatly incercsteJ lo ihii matter when can^ping on the
tioptt of Mount Kaba in the Boefchs in early July. 1916.
Two hunters came lo him (here one day and said that
(bey had scoa a Sedapa breaking open a fallen tree at a
distance of only some 20 yards from them. It was ap¬
parently looking for beetle larvae—a delicacy relished by
many peoples the worid over—but when it reaJized that k
was being observed, it ran otT oc ia hind legs. Otherwise,
this description agreed in every other respcci with the
traditional one ^ (he Sedapa. It was cloihed ulj over lit
short, black hair.

1 should point out here, and rather strongly, that the
larger Siamang, a really big and sturdy ape. Intermediate
ID many respects between the Gibtxms and the Great Apes,
though highly adapted for life in the ireciops. quite often
comes to the ground upon which it runs along on its bind
legs, swinging iu anna instcud of bolding them aloft as
(he gibbons do when runn/ng as opposed lo just walking.
Abo. I have myself come across ^amangs going meticu*
louily over fallen rotten logs collecting the Insects that
often crowd into their cracks. I owned a Wow-wow Gib-
boo (iiyhl^res tru^hch) during the wbi^e year that I was
10 Indonesia, ft had been raised In a human family and
It traveled all over the Indies with me. 1 happened to he
ctrflecting insects on that trip, ood the majority that I ob¬
tained were actually found, caught, and then hnnded caro-
tully to me by this smalt omhrop<Md companion, It used
rorun ahead on its hind legs in the forest, holding its long
Cham ^ the ground with one baud, aod upon locaiint a
rtWen log climb aboard and start prtAing mto all the cranks
with Its long forefineer (he was left-handed] and producing
manner of rare specimens that I sbnply never could Bnd
myself (t was uncanny, as was the manner in which be
used to offer me the first and all subsequent ones of the iusm
kind urnd J mdicaied (hai I had enou^ specimens: then he
ate the rest Gibbons may be Pongids but they certainly are
^mobt human in many respects. The related Siamane is
*J^l more so; and, lo fact, the Malays often treat them as

Uter. Dr. Jacobsoo was showu tracks of the alleged
Seda^OA Mt. Kenntji. Tb«e were definitely not tbo«S

J^ly opposed and very large great toe: It was exactly
but any. very broad and ibort Quite a number of

233



alleged Sedapa footprinia >iave been recordea. These vary
rather bewilderingly. In 1958 iOnic piaster casts of some
priols were obtaioed about halfway tetween the Siak and
Kampar Rivers by Harry GilTaore. These, however, en
aloiosl undoubtedly those of the nrtall, Malayan Sun-Bear
(Heiarcios). Tbia animal stands erect and even walks along,
though it never runs, on its hind legs mort frequently than
any of the other bears. It Is ahoot 4 to 5 feet raU, is covered
m short black hair, and has surprisingly broad sboulders.'
It may even swing its arms when walking. Also, it has a
pale face which, wheo seen head-on in ihc pcor lighl of the
high forest floor, may give U a xlarilingly bomao look—I
know, I was nearly scared out of my wits by these aoimals,
standing silently watching rae, on more than one occasion.
The hind footprints left by this ommal are nonetheless
fairly disri active and arc not like the drawings, iracmgs,
and cast taken of alleged Sedape: like ull bears, Iheir to«
incmasc, albeit in this case only slightly, in length from
both sides to the middle toe; they arc pocked logeiher, not
splayed; and claw marks are olmos* invariably jnettriL
The Siak River, moreover, is sooicwbat oul of ihs range
of the Sedapo proper, though there is plenty of rradidon
about it In those parts.

1b 1917, according to Westenek, a Mr. Ooslingh. whtU
111 the Boekils and near the same mountain where Dr. Jacob¬
son bad been when Ibc hunters suid they saw a Sedapa. be¬
came “bushed.” He wandered around in circles for several
hours, as one mvari(*bly does if one get* lost In high forest.
Suddenly, as bis account goes, he came upon what he
thought was a local moD silting on a log with his back to¬
ward hifil, Over|oycd to see any human bring, as one d»o
mvariably is when so exhausted, he went forward hut then
got a profound shock. I let him luU about it in his own
words, as taken from Weslenek’s account in De Tropische
Naiuur. and iran^ated by Richard Ganicu. This reads:

1 saw that he had short hair, cut short, I thoagbt;
and I sDddeol} i^allsed Ihal his ne«k was oddly leathciy
and extremely filthy. ‘T’hat chap's got a VMy dirty and
wrinkled oeckr* I said to myself.

Hb body wis m i«ge as a mcdhim-tized natlrc^ and
be had thick square sbotilderSi net sloplag al all, The
colotar was not brown, hut looked like black earthi a
sort of dusty black, more grey ihao black.

He clearly noticed uy presence, fie did not ao much

234



•a film hk bead« but 8fo«d op on Ms be ecccoed
to be tfoUt as tall u I <abou( 5 reel 9 iaeben).

Then I MW (hoi II wm oof a man, and I stiirlcd hnck.
for I was ool itrmed. The crealnre admJ> took sereral
pares, wiibool the least hade, and ^kd, with his hidt.
crottsly long arm, crasped a sapling, whkb threatened
to break onder Us weight, aad quietly sprang Inlo a
tree, swinging io great leaps altcrnalelv to richt and
to left

My chief Impfenlon was and Ntlll is: an enor¬

mously large l^astl'* II was not ui oraog*iitan; t had
wen ooc of these huge apes a short dme before at Artb
lihe Aauterdam ZooV

It was more like a oonstrously large sfajoang. bM a
siaraaoK has long hair, and there was no doubt that it
bad short hsk. I did not see lu face, for, indeed, it
sever once looked of me.

Here again, the mo^t envious suggcslkwi is, )usi as Mr.
Oosiingh himself says, that the creature was an enormous
Siamang, perhaps i lone old one somewhat short on hair.
That il was more likely an ape than a Hocnlnid is alao per¬
haps further impressed upon m by ihe remark that it had
“ludicrously long arm[»).•' I do not know what to make of
this report but I certainly wish that the creature had left
some footprints.

Meanttme, there was a Mr. Van Hcerwqrdcn timber-
cruising from the other side (the northeast) of ihe Bartsans
m Palcrnbang province, but down in the swamp forests by
ibe coast near the Banjoe-Asin River. Io 1918 he spoiled
two series of tracks on iV. haqks of a small creek Io the
Musi River district; one larger than the other, as If of a
mol her and child, as he remarks. These were perfectly
human hut exceedingly small. Later be discovered that a
Mr. Bririkcrs had also found such tracks m ibe same area.
He then started making serious inquiries among—and this
IS of considerable significance to view of the Indonesiaa
Oovcmmeni*i statement given above—the Kubus* and
he found three who bad all. but unknown to the otben,
seen Guf^uf (j.e. SetJapay. or Oraiiff Pendeks) in that
region. Their descripilons agreed perfectly in that they
TOC about 5 feet tall, walked erect, were clothed in
Wacx hair that foiraed a mane, and had pr«iijneni teeth.
Van Heerwarden later beard that a hunter had found a
0^ one and tried lo carry it back to bis village but its
body was much decomposed and the hunter himself died

235



fihordy aflerwarii- Another, he learned, was said to have
been spotted ia b river and surrounded by locals in canoes
but it dived adroitly and escaped.

By this time Mr. van Heerwarden was convinced that
there rcaJly was some small hairy Homrnid iq these forests
and he devoted much time to inquiries among iho loenl
burners as to where they were most frequently seen. In
time he was directed to a particular spot and decided to
do exactly the hgbi thing—camcly, go there, sit down,
shut up. and wait And, he appears to have been well
rewarded for, unless he b not only a complete but most
adept liar, ho got an extremely good look at one of the
elusive creatures He tells lis that he was wild-pig bunting
in an area of forest surrouaded by rivers named Puiu-
Rimau, in October, 1^23, and. having failed to come up
wltli the »andef {herd) decided to do this quiet siltiDg,
and so went into hiding- For an hour or so itoLhing bap-
penetl and then somcihing in a tree caught his attenhOQ.
Hfi says:

Thco I happened by chance to look roond to the left
and spotted 8 slight movcDcnt in a small tree that stood
alone. By now It was time for me to be goli^ bomCt
for It Mas not advbrtle to journey throogb such coonliy
after ssodowa. But all tlK same 1 was tempted oul of
rurlotliy to go aod see wliat had caused the nsavement
I bad noticed. What sort of animal could be io that
tree? My fir4 quick loob revealed nothing, Bui after
walking round (he tree again. I discovered a dark and
hairy crcaCtin: on a branch, the front of Its body pressed
dghtly against the Uec. Il (oukcci aa if it were li^og to
make itself inconspicuous and felt tb^ n was ubout
In he dheovered.

It mart be a sedapa. Hioters wifi onderstaad the ex-
ritement (hat possessed me. At first ( merely watched
tod examined the beast which sUll clung muclonless to
(he (ree. Whie I kept my gun ready to Are, I tried to
stimet lha s«dapa*« atteudon. by calling to It, bat H
would not budge, ^lut was I lo do? I codd not get
help to capture (be bead. And as time was runnnig shMt
1 was obliged to Uckie k myself. I Died Uchiog ibe
trunk of (be tree, without (bo least result. I laid my
guB on tbo ^ound and Cried to get nearer (he animal,
I bed bordiy climbed 3 or 4 feet Into the tree when the
body idwve rae began to move. The crealore lifted Ksetf
a Utlie from the branch and tonal over (he side su tlsal

233



I (ooM Iben sec to hair, to forehead and a pair of tyn
wUch stared at me. Its iDoveinnit<< bad at firM bccA sJoh
sod caotloin, hut h soon « the scdapo saw mt the
whole dlunrlon ehaii$ed. It beeame nervous and trem*
bled all over its body. Is order lo see Jl better 1 sUd
down OB (0 the ground again.

The sodapa was also hairy on the front of its body;
the colour there was a Hide lighter Chan oa Ibe bodu
The eery dark hair oo to head fHI to hist beh»w (be
sbotilder-blude« nr even almoei to (lie waist. It
fairly thick and very shaggy'. The lower port of Its face
seemed to end In more of a point di.m m mon's this
brovni Face was almo^ hairless, whilst its forehead
seemed to be high ratber Ihan low. |tv eybrows
the same colour as its hah and were very iKBhy. The
eyes were frankly moving: they wore of the darkest
coloer, very Uvely. and like homan eyes. The BO!»e was
broad with fairly Large ao s t r ib, but In oo way clumsy;
It remlodcd me a little of a Kaffir's, lu lips were quHe
ordinary, hui (ho width of its mouth wns strikingly wide
wbea open, Its cnnlim showed clearly from (I'rne to
lime as Its mouth (wllcbed nervously, They seemed
fairly largo to me, at all ereols they wore more devek
oped tlian a man’s. The mcisocs were regular. The coloor
of (he leetb was yelluwisb wbi(e. Its chin was somewbal
recedlag. I'or a moment, during a quick mnvemeal, ]
WM able (0 see to right ear which was esuedy like a
litUc h man car. (is hands were biighUy hairy oa Ibe
back, f fid It been standing, to arms would have reached
lo a little above Its knees: they were Ihcrcfore long, bol
to legs seemed to me ratber Aort. J did not see to feel,
bat I did sec some toes which were shaped ru a very
Ronnal manner. This speciaea was of the female sex
and about S Feet high.

Tbcre wm nuthlng repoldve or ugly about to face,
nor WM ll at all ape-Ukc. although the quick ntrrom
movemcats uf to eyes aod mouth were very like (boae
of a monkey In dblms. I began to walk In a cola and
Mcndly way (o the sedapa, as if I were soothing a
frigblCDod dog or hone; bol Ii did not make much dff*
fereoce. ^’hen I raised my gun to ibc little female I
beard a plaintive ’'bu^hu.” which was at once answeced
by similar echoes in Ibe forcsl nearhy.

I laid down my gun aad climbed Into the tree ffg afn ,

I bad almost reached (be fool of the hough when Ibe

237



sedapa ran very fast out along the brancli, which btnl
bcavUv, hunc on to the end and ih«n dropped a &>o6
10 feet 10 the ground. 1 aUd ba^ity back to the gpound.
bat before I could reach my gaa again, ihe beast wos
almost 30 vards away. It went on running ?
sort of wliisUe. Many people may think me cblldisb if
1 rtv tbnt -hDD I saw ila flying hair in the yghb 1 did not
pua tl« trifiger. I suddenly felt that 1 was going to com-
ipii murder. I lifted my gun to my shoulder agai^ but
once more my courage failed me, As far QS I could see,
it» feel were broad and short, but that the sepaOa runs
with its heels foremost b quite untrue.


This has always seeracd to me to be a most straightfor¬
ward report so it is ioteresting lo note the rcceptiw it
received when poor Mr. van Heerwarden finaJly told of it.
Etcn the equable Hcdvelmans cannot restrain mmscJt
from quoting certain of these expressions by people who
were neither there nor, in some cases had Aen ever wen
4 flywhere near Sumatra, and most notably those Ol tne
same Dr, K, W. Dammermon of Buiieniwg. This is so
delightful that I herewith re-reproducc it for your edifica¬
tion and guidance as a glorious example of the sort ol
rubbish spouted hy experts and for which )ou have to be
coDsmntly on the loolcout. This savant, after sapng that
no white man except Mr. Van Heerwarden had ever so
much as said that he had seen a Sedrtpu. goes on to say:
“But this writer is almost too exact in his dcscriptioo oi
the animal, so it does not seem impossible that the inci¬
dent was either based on bis i magi nation li e. that he was
a Uar—.^Mt^iorl. or. iliat ho has written il slroDgly im¬
pressed by the stories about (he Orang PfiM. But, even
while admitting the general ixuth of the siory li.e. not
dariag to say rhat he was a liar— Aitihor\ would it not
be more Ukcly that the animal io question was ao Orang
utan?” No it would not. 1 am wondering if Dr. Dammer-
pan knew aoology: 1 can hardly credit it.

Hiis is by far the most complete account of the Seaopa
but it was by no means the last. The maiter has been
loing on ever since, and plenty of people, both native^d
toreign. have said they have seen ihe creatures. There
were also other events. In 1927 one was said lo have been
caught In a tiger (rap, and once again ihe irrepressible Dc.
DftfliDierman gets inlo (be act; this time as serological
fblood) and trichologlcal (bair) expert but wiiboui any
belter xesuJts. In feet, he becomes quite Naiherms, tor,

238


1



of »mc blood snd hsir found in ihit trap, he siaied that
*'it wds impossible lo obtain any results with rugard (o
the heir (this is indeed plausible, as idcntUicerion of hairs
IS not wy^Aisihorl but the blood pointed faintly to
hunuii: origin fjlalics. mine]. However, we may not accept
for A fact that the blood found come from the escaped
animoJ: it is quite possible that rt came from some native
who hod injured hinueJf while handling ihc irap.’^ J m.iy
just polni out licpc ihrti if yog have a liifgc enough speci*
men for any analysis there h no question as to whether it It
human or oot. so that h cannot ‘'point faintly'^ w my-
thing. Secondly, the ••r>3(ivcs" of that area are Malays, of
the monioloid branch of humanItv. who have nc hody
hair but most distinctive hend-hair. Thirdly, who sold that
an “animar* had t^un caught in the trap? At this point
words do fail me.

Our principal trouble with the Sedapa is that, tof only
baa thCTC been a deal of doublc>talk of this nature
on the cne hand, but that, on the other, there heve been
not B few obvious and dclibcrafe hoaxes. The worst oc¬
curred in 1932 when local newsmen in Sumatra atirlbuied
the shooting of a mcitbcr Sninpa and the taking of ju
infant to the much respected local dignitary, the Rajah of
Rokftn, The world press went a bit mad about this, but
only a litde local enquiry elucidated the fact that the Rajah
had bad nothing to do with the Incident—though he had
for some time been interested in the moiter. and bad of.
fered ccnaio mducemems ic anybody- who could produce

definite evidence of the existence of these beings_but

that two burners had produced a "Imby Sedapa.” Dam-
nrerman said it was a mutilated young SocriJi (Semno-
pnheats)^ although he gave the name of the Javanete
species? More reliable sources indicate it to have been a
Uitong (Traehypiihtcus sp.). This wm said lo be dead;
about 17 inches long; wift a skin the color of an Orang
hltinda (or While Man); and. naked, but for a thick top-
knot. Said “bahy" was obtained hy purchase and sent lo
the same Dr. Dammcrmafl who was able aclunllv to dem¬
onstrate, for once, iis complete lack of authenticity. It
lum^ out to be a young nvonkey of the genus known as
Fresbyris (or the Leaf-Monkeys) that bad been shaved;
bad Its long tail cut off; and its skull crushed and face
fOTodeled with birs of wood inserted under the skin of
the nose to make it look more human.

This making of '‘Ineubi*’ is an age-old pracilcc In Siime-
ira, having been menlioned hy Marco Polo, and being one

239


6t Ihe priDCjp»l sources of Ihese horrible Hide bomuoculi
that were exhibited at museums sod di^leys of curioi m
Europe from ihe Hth to the I9lb ccatnries. These were
mookeys' dried bodies lo which were sewn ail manner ot
UDPleasani heads and appcndicularia. and which were sold
to sailors. It is possible therefore, that the very strange
affair of the “&ndai’* of 1957 may have had a similar

began wiib oo intcfoational wire-service riory that
some form of subhumao had been -capiurcd’' Id southern
Sumatra. This was said lo be a young fwnale (alwil 17
years old) “Sindai.*' which, it was implied, was a rare
“lomeihing” well-known lo ibe aailves and which was
considered very imporiani by them. It was turned, or
rather queried, lhat this might be ibc first real example of
a *0118110 g-l ink” yci raughl. This report came out of Pa-
lembang just when a local rcvololion was ia full swing in
that area, News from those pans, ihereafwr. icnded to be
somewhat unreliable aod garbled.

I have definite stotements rf>oul ihis •‘SindaT teen¬
ager. staling lhat It was clothed io short, fine, pure white
half, and had no lell, walked on its (her) hind legs, and
ifl every other way behaved like a liny human being, but
apparently bad no speech and ate only raw foods. It was
then stated that It bad been shipped lo Java for ‘'exaraiaa*
tion by leading scientists." ihat, frankly, it the Iasi
that was ever heard of it. It was also sakJ to have been
taken to Pakasbang. en route- The only ilung 1 can add to
this bizarre ncws-siory is ihat there is a form of CdoboU!
Monkey named ihc Simpai. or Banded Leaf-Monkey
iPwbyfis to zoologists).* As far as I am coocerned,
therefore, and in the meantime, I preserve not a liiile
restraint in trying to assess the matter, 1 feel ihat there
are sufflcleni reports that look genuine enough to warrant
a lively iniercsi in the affair; but, there is the presence of
the lilOe, soroetiines bipedal, Malayan Sun*Bear. and of
the Slamangs. Both certainly muddle the issue. Yci, the
thing has been going od loo long, and I only wish that I
had bad the opportunity to talk at length to the local
people—as I have bad the privilege of doing in SO many

* It should be earefoHy nol«4 that modera aocnenclaiure bis
now adopted the name TrachypUhf<us for the Lutoags,
nopith fcus tor tbs true Langurs, Kasl for the Purple-faced
Monkeys, aod lor ^ Doucs. One of (be Prtshyiis

does somefimes display ao almost pure while form. Pfadologisls
UU me Ihat a conversioii d slmpoi to sindoi a a lmos t aaiurah

240



other eovotries—even in a debased forre of Utchen-
Malay, so that 1 couJd have assessed for ayself the depth
of thdr nncerity: the position that they aasifn to it in the
general scheme of "things*’; and could have learned some
more detaib about their notion of it from a btologist’s
point of view. (Biologists can ask the daomedcst oues-
Uonat)

Traveling on to tbe tnainland of Malaya we encounter
quite a differeot and. in many ways, exactly contrary slate
of affairs. Here, the acrual reports are extremely Um*
ited: tbe local native koowlcdge la very extensive; and the
creatures concerned could not possibly be mistaken for any
of the local fauna. This is wbat has so stimulated even the
natural skeptics—and has been tbe cause of the Bndsh
Army bong called out on two occaaoos to try and do
soffi^iAg about it Here, however, we are going to run
bead-OQ into the problem of men versus sub-men
meniksned above aa becoming troublesome in this area.

There is a most remarkable book entitled The Pagan
Races cf the Malay Peninsula by Messrs. W. W. Skeet and
C. D. Blagden. published in Loo don in 1906. that H a real
eye-opeoer. This U a solemn, pooderous. and somewhat
pompous, sdentidc account of the peoples inhabiting thb
somewhat lunitcd area, dooe in tba paifisiaking and sligbliy
Oatmaaic style prevalent at the turn of the century. Thera
is oothlRg excitable about It It is aim^y a son of official
staiameol of the facts, as ibeo known, about the people of
tbe art^ It makes most astonishing reading.

In this book, not only arc the Malayan peoples now set¬
tled in tbe country fully discussed, but the Sakai (It. the
5 eAof>. those strvige retiring mountain peopln axe fully
exambed, and then the Semang. a really primitive Negrito
group. Tbe way of life of the last, as bereb described is
reaBy hardly human. It should be read in the ori^aL
Then, the Santu Sakai (or Devil Sakai) are brought up,
and are stated (though admittedly second band from tbe
Sakai; tbe Semang being almost uncommuaicabk-with) to
be bairy. and deflaliely not humao. The authors then go
into ibc “myths, legends, and folklore" of the various pec
pie. including the little Sanoi; and they dredge up from
these, tailed men. with racor«boncs on ibe outer back
sides of their forearms, and a larger type that stinU These
w said to be “men** all right, but to be wdder than any of
Inc rest ol the line-up. There is a curious tradition about
this last type that needs airing.

It is reported that they Uve (and only) in the upper

241



montane mis foresU ol the higher mountain h^

thai lime, they m highly cannvorous.

wKflt is commonly, bui perhaps laaccuralely. called can

m^aSistic-t meaning that they «tcb.

Also and sole this, ii is absolutely affirmed that these
^eois occur only after unusually prolonged
SSdy weXr or a sueceision of very rainy ^d overost
^aMM that. (hen. said creatures attack onjy

p^le This inay at first sound absolutely absurd bnt

’TJ&rpe^f^^Tfi^'-wotewolves" sre on med,^
Jo^^’a?riS;Urs-and usually

lecih. They are aothing more ^7the uroer

almost pe^rually »uqIc« ra.ny

mountain valleys of Ihe western !;5 ’tone

fr^rA ihp dUcoverv of the exisleoce of viiaraios, bad gone

duo >0 0 >^='' »' f “ S' S

the "simstae vitamins- <E, and m

poor wretches, cast out ot m

^ay due to their abnormalities, sometimes ,

maintain life by hand-hunting and ^

all seem to have an Insadable d.s.re Jf,

same time they show a very “ “"u^^cld^d

fats of any kind- What they wanted and apparenuy nceo

ma““'ow ?eSn^dcr me stems, -diticn and the
soretiS^'plight of a race of Uiot

^dT^hLt ry coiT-?-

rinued in such a matioet that some ^ „o-

ffieir old

SaT-iS* Uke tbt’lo i" cud, let ^ say that.

242



fats nauseiting them, they picked the leio—and what
easier than thin people?

This is one of tbe most abtiuse niches tn oU AftSMeiy
but it boa intrigued me for years. Anybody can make up
any kind of story hue why anything which aouods to us so
utterly bizarre? There ought to be a reason. There may be
oibers, and many of them, but. in the meantime, this one
could make sense.

Yet, these uiira-primiiive humans or sub-humans, or
other even more lowly fonns of Honunids. do not seem
to be the only conundrums in this small but extremely
esoteric area. Maybe they are the "Stinking Ones": maybe
they are something else. Nevertheless, the former turned
up in a very definite manner in 1953. and so concretely so,
and so many iJmea in rapid succession, that not ozUy the
benighted oaiivei, but the European overseen, the local
millLia, the museum authorities, and even the "Govern-
meni'’ itself becarue apprised of the matter and lent i
hand. This H really a rather unusual tumour in ABSMcrv.
It now transpires that just the same sort of thing had been
soing OD throughout petuosuler Malaya a few miles back
^m the few main roads since way back. These iacidenis
had been ejther not reported, reported but not listened to
disbelieved, ridiculed, or actually suppressed, and. perhaps,
latterly because of Communist guerrilla activities, How*
ftver, tbu one got out—and, as the colloquialism goes, “but
good." Looking over wbai published accounu of this
incident there are, a really extraordinary aumber of quite
baffling things come tq ligbL I would say that this too is a
cl Basie example of what happens when a good case of
ABSMcxy^r nny other mailer that is not ai present
accepted—occurs. But. first let me give the facts, as re¬
ported, chronologically.

It appears that on Christmas Day, 1953, a young Chi-
peso girt by the name of Wong Yee Moi was engaged
tapping rubber trees on an estate run by a Scot named Mr.
O. M. Browne, in the Reserve that is called variously the
Trolak, Tnrflak, or Trolck, in south Perak State, northera
Malaya. According in ber account she felt a hand placed
lightly 00 her shoulder and, ruroing around, v.'as con-
froored by a most revolting female. This poor character
wore, according to Moi. only an abbreviated loincloth of
bark, woa covered with hair, had a white (i.e. Caucasmd-
type) skin, long black hcad-bajr and a mustache; and she
Slink as if "of on animal." Half hysterical. Moi fled
the compound, but not before spotting two somewhat

243



similar types which she said were males [oo Joincleths?]
sianding in ihc shade of some irccs by a nearby riv^.
These, she said, bad mustaches hanging down to ibeir
waists, tp all this point, the account is fairly rational, even
including Mol's addendum to the effect that the female
grlttfled and showed long oasiy fangs in what she (Moi)
s«ins to have considered, despite her panic, to have been
a friendly gesture. After this report, everybody became
slightly bssne.

Analyzing all the publisbed reports that I can lay my
hands on, it seems that this Mr, Browoe immediately
called up Security Forces' local headquarters—there being
a continuing Communist emergency in the whole area—
aod, IQ response, a posse of the Malay an Security Ouanl
was dispatched immediately under the leadership of one
Corporal Talib, who seems to have becu an extremely
inielllgcot and also sensible mao. He immediately deployed
his force* and made search of the estate, in due course
coming to the river meaiioncd by Moi and spotting three
Just such hairy lypcs on Its banka- However, upon hnnging
hU platoon's arms to the ready, said creatures dived into
the river, swam under water, emerged on the far bank,
and forthwith vanished into the jungle. Subsequent to
the only concrete facts in Ae case are that a Hindu Indian
worker, named Appaisamy. on the same estate, the next
day, also while squatting to shave the bark to bring on a
flow of rubber latex, was Mid»lenly encircled by a pair o£
hairy anns. He became completely panic-stricken: broke
loose; beaded for the compound, but fell do*n in a dead
faint on the way. A* he revived, the same trio were oe^by
and laughing at his discomfiture. He admitted this. That
same day, a patrol of Corporal Talib's Guard again spot*
led the trio on the same riverbank.

This is all we hnve, apart from a few further anatomical
details of ihc creatures given in tctrospccl by the vanous
wittie$«8. Then, however, the experts, and other noopr^
sent commentators got into the act- And they providco
the intcrnaijonaJ v,-ire servicBs with some praty mtereetmg
material. All kinds ef previously UDheard*of officj^ depart-
ments come to light such as that of “The Abongines at,
Kuala Lumpur; the “Federation's Department of Museums
and Aboriginal Research" and even “Radio Malaya m
the person of Its Assistant Director, one Mr Tony
ish. These people made various suggestions. They ridiculed
an idei put forward some years before, when an almost
exactly similar incident had occurred, that the creatures

244



^ V? soldicR iirtd of (he war, mj

^ H'!i^ "imaged lo survive life id tbe jungle; ibough

*“ 'he jungles so

ad caviroDmeniJ

But some poo^e came up with some reaJly siajtlint ideas
M^ prevaleoi were hints that these things couli be
or njighi have been “primiuve humans toing to get away

IhiS bomblDg, or nooding of ihcU^jungle

again. Ibat they might be descendadts *^Ja
face of hairy abongides who, according to o)cJ legends

Sr« nonhern Malaya." ^t |

would hke 10 Mk I*, what had the Depafimcni of Abo¬
riginal Aff^ h«n up to prj'oT to this aMOoishia* sug-

had they not turned up some oided«
Jother than that of Messra, Skeai and Bltgdcnl of ihe
^ewiy for protecting them? Abo. aa that excclleot ra^o

^ could

for atubropologlcal discoveries

L //1 r 1 ‘^ceo r//e greatest of

ail t m«.) It Is ready rather remarkabfe that nothing was

“? 'l'*' “ «»'«"'«'«- Sttlcmcnis an

alway, good; and ihay are o(,e„ good for a laugh, n.i,
one was a near clawic. It stated: *

flr.1 creatures apparently had seen rifles because they
fh^-7 k security force corporal raised his rifle. Some of
the tbin^ jumped la the river and swam away. Another
ran into the jun^.

for indicates they have lived

unl^rJii ^ overgrown Malayan jungles where
sunlight rarely penemtea. *

fni ^cogoired a crop of tapioca oo one estate as
foc^. puDiui up roots and munebiog.

or ® language ihai was cicariy not Chineso

or Maiayao, but more oi a series of guttural gronis.

«c;pm?.r P«f««5 who v^re not only

Kiemias and experts but officials. We stand amazed; biU
we make cenam notes and reservations.

i^^Ped Into the river hu

hftvn .IJn/fl ‘•‘♦y now alleged lo

l»Pwa roots and eaten them: they had alan-

^ ^ original repon

of the Chnsimas, 15*53 case but they do indeed appeaTin

245



earlier cases, oxid in olher pam of Malaya. In fact, it
appears quite obvious from these latter that there had been
quite a lot more information on this unpleesani subject in
the files of the Department of Museums, etc., long before

this lime. . , .

The most outstanding aspect of this case is perhaps inc
alleged ' stink'* of the creatures, as recorded by all v.ii-
Dcsses who were near enough to them, and included in
similar statements that emerged later about others, re¬
ported to have raided crops io different parts of Malaya.
This ^Dgle tact h exactly in accord with the age-oid
sJaiemeois of the locals about such creatures. It is also in
accord with some of the siatemenls of the Amennds
about their large ABSMs in Canada and the north¬
western United Sutca. It accords too. with remarks passed
about them, almost casually, by Kurds, Smkiangese, Mon¬
golians, and others. Apart from this, the fangs, hairings
of body, but ultra-long-hairedness of face and head, the
suggestion of primiiive cle thing, and the general *'conie-
hiihcrnew" of these crcanires speaks a great deal.

It is interesting to note, ancDi this matter of a po^'trful
stench exuded by ABSMs, that when the last of the Mau-
Mau leaders—Dedan Kimathi—was finally tracked down
and captured along with some of bia men. m Kenya, not
only the white men present but the local natives—the same
people as Klmalhi—agreed that to smell the band was so
sickening as almost to prevent handling of the captives.
This Is the more odd because any real ‘“bush men
opoo^ to Buihman) never washes. Ibougb of course be
may bathe, when in Ihc forest simply because by so doing,
and especially with soap, he removes all the natural m)s
from his skin and these oils arc among ihe most powartui
insect i^ellcnts and anti-fungus spore deterrents known-
TAnd tbLs goes for white men who really know the forest
and have to work therein for penods.] It is the sweat
iuelf that causes the smell, and this by going puind in
clothing, so that a real bushwhacker changes his at

least three times during the twenty-four hours.
oaoB wore uniaiined animal skins. So did the rausuchioed
EMiilike ABSMs that invaded the Malayan rubber estates.

Another fascinating fact appeared from the prolonged
Kimaibi hum. This was that Kunalhi himself developed a
sensitivity, not only of his five major and some twenty
(cow recognized) other senses, but some other unknown
attribute so inctcdlbly acute that he became almW un-
^proacbable. It is said that he would awake from sleep on

246



lh« (unauiborizcd) cracking of $0 much as a single iwig
at great distances and immediately vaaish. Sometimes even
his own men just found him gone. If meo-^nd many of
Kimaihi'a, and even he himself, had not previously been
true bush men^<an develop such acute settses In so short
a time, bow much more may not ABSMs that have for
hundreds of milleiuija bees as mueb of the wild as non-
domesticated animals. This is one of my stroagesl argu¬
ments against trying to bunt them: 1 personally thiol: the
idaa worthless oa this account. It is also one of the reasons
why 1 think that ibe employment of dogs Is the worst idea
of aP. Dogs are purety ^'artificial" animab, as as be*
ing domesticated, and they have ao odor which is instantly
spotted by any truly wild creature. Then again, there Is
still acother point.

It has been observed that animab. such as antelopes,
whkb are boro to aod used to being hunted, do ooi even
bother to move aside when for instance a cheetah rushes a
group. Only one aoimal fakes off aod the cheetah goes
straight for it. {It is often old or sick.] Also lioai may be
seen lying almost back to back with their natural food-
animals in the daytime. But animals that are not used to
being food for other animab are excessively wary. So are
the predaton themselves. Just try hunting a marten or any
other weasel for that matter. ABSMs are neither bom to.
used to, or prepared to be buoiecl, any more than men are:
ond, they have both soma intelligence and the senses of
tbe wild predator to boot. In order to "collect" one there¬
fore, methods quite ocher than bunting must be employed.
Personally, J suggest an appeal to their inquUiiiveDess—it
almost never fails.

By Che accounts, these are no hairy, gibbering monsters,
or even pigmies, but man-soed and. at least partly, man-
thinking enticks who seemed above at) to want to "make
friends." Could it really be that Communist-hunting,
bombing, and general mo^m military maneuvering since
the Japanese invasion, bad caused some otherwise amiable
primicives to move, and come looking for handouts?


247



11. The Great Mix-Up

THINGS IN THE INDOCHINESE PENINSULA


We now lum nonhward and start cl.mbing, « ««
Jng to ne«l maps as we never needed them before.^
IMU of itoe world which we ere now approaching u ^rhaps
moJ. pt^ing and. to ua. seemingly the
in the worid- The political situation is bad enough (SM

Map XI) but the lopt^aphy is Ira^y LnlLs on

even a physical map is utterly confusing. This

moreover, it worse confounded by our

measuring altitude. In Utis artii they

and maps showing Ihe usual contour changes of color ^

600, ISOO. JOOO, 12.000. and 18d)M fool Icveb ^ “P “

one ^rious mishmash in which *e mam and basic to

hires of Ihc laud are obscured. If. ^ _,,.h

measuring (and coloTm|) in nteiers. matters

clearer I have therelore conitrticied ibe map Rowing

ttirprovincT<Map XIH) on the SOO and 5 «» me er c^-

tours, with a special shading for one

(Tibet) tor reasons that will be es|Jaincd ^

XII and XV). This device brings out at » ”

less all that we want lo know, and miikBS it

tempt a more detailed explanation of Ihe mw diffl^t

parts. We are now approaching the

and we will have to lake our cue from the mouriMeeis
and initiate what tl«y succinctly refer f

upon the problem. In order to do this we ‘o

wd sweep away a whole handful of nusconccpilon*.

^ ^ ana most basic of these b to
of Ibe notion that the Orienl

celledl b just a part of Asia- To »he ^7'

we CD» Europe—the boundaries of which have been in
diipute ihnn^b^ hbiory. and itiJJ are—is net a separate

248



eoalinent but mmly ooe Urge peniasuUr of a much
larger Und<ma$s called Eurasia, so, conversely is OrkntalU
not a part of that land'inass but a quite separate C4MitiMOL
lu dimaie. pm history, geology, aocl, above all, its vege*
utioo are quite different from that of Eurasia. Abo. It is
almoM absolutely separated from Eurasia by a continuoua
physiol feature that Is every hit as divisive as an ocean,
Thb it a tremendous mountain barrier that runs from
Baiuchistaa in the west to the plains of Kian*Su In north
China in the east. However, here comes the second and
most iraportant point of all.

The mightiest mountain range in the world, the Huna-
layaa, lies well south of this line and is io Oriental ia and
not io Eurasia. Further, the massif which mounts to the
highest peak oo land io the vorld. Mt. Everest, straddles
this division. Using the SOOO'ineter contour, we see that
between ibe southern barrier of Tibet proper and what is
DOW called the '^Lesser Himalayan Range" there 'a really
a great gutter at comparatively much lower level. It a lo
this gutter That the small siaie of Nepal lies. Thus, wboi
we come to the Himalaya province, we must bear in mind
that we will siUI be In Orienialia. and ihai we shall con¬
tinue to be as we approach Mt. Everest from Ihe south
aide uoiil we top this Tibetan barrier. This ii frightfully
important because the flora and fauna of the Himalayas
^and there ia s great deal of vegeiailvc growth forming
massed forests thol run up almost to the snow line all
over (hem—is quite unlike that of Tibet but has relation¬
ships with that of the Indo-Chinese Massif. And this brinp
us to our third problem.

It will be seen from Maps Xil and Xflf that this Indo-
ChiDcse block terminates abruptly to the north against a
monumental barrier of towering mountain ranges «ha» axe
confluent with Tibet. These actually form b small “peoiD-
sula** of Eurasia that sticks down into this pan of
Orienialia as shown. On an ordinary physical map it will be
seen that the Indo-Chinese block is formed of endless
sub-parallel mountuin ranges and strings of ranges, with
very narrow deep valleys between them, running roughly
from Donh to south. These form fingers gomg south into
Ibe Aonami. down central Thailand, and down the Tenav
scrim peninsula. There also depeoth from them ihc parallel
sub-massif composed of the Naga Hills and the Arakan.
In (be northwest, ibis block is very clearly and widely
fflaHted off from the east end of Ihe Himalayas by a bora
of true lowland equatorial forests. This, contrary to eapcc-

249



UtiOB, instead of eeparatiog the two upland maues ao^y
ctmeou them flimly logether, from Ibe pUoi and uimal
pdnt of view, for the aame forarta cover both facing
alopes to form a perfect bridge for both the migraM.
emigranta, and immigraoti from ooc side to the other. To
dK DOrtheast, afiaan are quite differeot.

Here, there is first, to the north, a smalt eodave ot
comparatively modest uplands nmniiig down frwi the
Tibet plateau to tbe Red Basin of Szechwan (see Map XV).
HMsa have a Ctdnese flora and fouoa. Then, south of
these, the Indo-Chincec Massif abuu oo to the more modest
wland mass of Soulbera China, from the south of whi^ a
loa« ihio chain ^ mouaiaiiie—^ Si'Kiaop—runs eatu Tto
funny little promootory li rather imporuni because a Im
of inyih, legend, and folklore pertaioiiig to ABSMs eaieodi
that way. The south China uplands are of course dense^
notated and have been for a very Img time bo that Ibw
vegetative cover is now quite different from that of the
iDdo-Cbinese hUsdf. If the two were ever alike is qoes-
lionable. for Ibe south China uplands really form ^ite a
leparete biotope, or florofaunal area. The Indo-Chine^
province is therefore really rather isolated and da^et It
ii also quite unique In many other ways. Armed with
f t^ we may now enter this lndo«Cbinaee country fr^
the south aad immediately run into difficulties. This is the
country In which the second largest form of the bovroe Of
oi-cow tribe turoed op in 193 b—the Kouprey (Bor

_to the greet consternation of established ztHMo^cai

thinMng- It looks like « large editiwi of ^ now exnna
Aurochs {Bos primigeTiius} of Europe, with wides^w-
inc home, but the bulls have large tassels, the stranto ot
which go upward, im short of the lips of their ho^
wu an aitonlshlng discovery in • land Iphabiied, and
thickly, since most ancient dmei. Of more interest to us,

however, are the Primates of the area. _

These include a lot of strange types. Pint. Jt is the beat
ouarters of the Utile apes called gibbons, one spec« «
which, the Hootock {Hyhbases hooloch) «ach« o<^
and into the Himalayas. Then, there are also ^re me
Doucs (Fys^ikrix nemaeus aod mgrfpes) which b one
of the most briebily and viriegatedJy ceJored of ah mam.
male; and, the Snub-nosed Monkeys. There are two
distinct genera of these, one found ia Tonkin (Preshyfirw
uvuncuius ); the other being the Urge aod very axtrao^
naiy RMnoplsk<cus. Of the latter ibere are ihiw ipeci«:
Biet'i Monkey (R. hieit) from Yimnan which forms a

250



pin of the lDdo<aiine*e Musif; Brelkh'i Monkey (R.
treKehi) a really owfmoia fonn with a large wlufc cao
over Its sboulden which lives m the Van Gin Ssaa moun-
ttina in west ceainl China; and the Ooldes Monkey (R
rouOanat) of the upper cod of ibs Indo-Chinwe Mock
and cwending up that small eoclave facing (he Red Basin
mcnhoned before. This animal is a glowing metallic gold
ail om but baa a sky-blue face. Th«e monkeys lealJy are
gl^hc and look even bigger since they are clothed in Iona
thick fur that forms a cape. ^

This is not to say that there are nof other monkeys in
i , V?®*: wotwy. there are doeas of species

Of Leaf-Monkeys and Languie, white there are also I f sagr
Primates. It is. in fact a sort of hotbed of Primates, in
and around which most of the living apes reside, a large
proportion of known fossil Homioidt have been found*
•ftd quite a •'coterie*’ of different ABSMs are rumored.
Here, wh^ IS more, we have a state of affaire coroparable
to that which we encountered in Africa, but compounded,
tor. III oddiiton to having apas <of Poogids) to contend with
M as fo»U Hominids and alleged AfiSMs. we have
also lou of large teriestiul or semi-terrestrial monkeys as
the Macaques Cwhich include the Rhesus) and
th^ Snub-nosed }oh%. Nor is tbet all. for (he local folklore
IS ^ of aUusioos to ‘'men with tails," on the one band;
and 10 giant bipedal monkeys, on the other. This is all
v^ muddling to (be layman but seems also to have
thrown the special Ists-^ood even those few in the Held of
ABSMery^into confuaion. Then lately, the Chinese have
rtUl ftiriher muddled the pienue by coming up wtih an
ea^ingly ABSM-Uke nee of people in Yuanao; while
asthr^logists and ethnologisu getterally have unearthed
an kinds of primitive and most unexpected nations, tribes,
and groups in this province.

.5^. extraordinary of these is i group of

inbes in the central mountainous region of (his territory,
who have very pale brownish skins. Caucasoid featmts,
and wa^ hair. They krep strictly to ibenuelves and have
one ctifwus custom that may be of great sigoiflcaoce to
(hose inveetigating Malayan folklore where there is said
once to have lived a race of tailed men who had a cutting
edge of bone along the outer (bind) edges of their fore-
arnte. These tribesmea poarest practically nothing that is
Varied from outside but they always carry a latge sharp
uuie of a iwtain shape; and they always carry this point¬
ing backward up the arm tod with (he blade curned out-

251



ward Wilb this they make their way through thick
undergrowth at great speed by a curious dewn-siashjog
movement oj Lhu arin, sc avoidiog endless eotanglerocnts
wjih vines, by swiping at thccD.

Straight ABSMery jo this province j« not extensive Ufilil
we get to the extreme oonhern cod of it. In fad it
aiBOuoLs really to sonte legend and rumors, except in
Yunnan and in northern Burma, Of the firxl, a Russian
writing in Tekhnike Mdodyzht (Vols. 4 and 5, 1959) a
science magazine lot d>e YouJh Movement states:

In 1954, tbc Province of Yunium io China wns rlsilcd
bv a represcotative of the LSSF Society for Cultural
Relations »lib Forelgu CounUic* bj live luimc of Chsk*
aj»>. SjicAliif to Ma-Yao, the assistant chief of the
Nailonol ,Minor!ries Departmenl of the ILunnuag CHy
Coniinilicc of the Coninjualst Patiy of CNou, be learned
that at tb« beginniog of that same year, 1954, sonic
people had bven found in the ijounfams of Wesltro
YuDuao who Is Ma*Yuo’s oplnioo were only at the
pre*hUtork stage of Ibeir development. They led an
animal existence, wore uo clothes aud had no aiticalafe
speech, It seenvs tliat Ma«Yao had abus asentiooed that
thdr bodies had been covered with hsir. and thaf one
of them hid been captured and brought to Kubsiiog.

Chuo K«<Khol, head teacher of ihc Yunnan Nationol
Mlnwitics Institute also told Chehaaov that Ihc idoud*
taios where the people of the Khaoi nafionnUty lived
In lUe Hung IIo DUlticC were oJso inhabited by some
straiu'c people who belonged to no nation aUly whatever,
that they wore no clothes and hid from ordinary people.
Ooe of them was cripturtMl and brought to KunminR.
^Vlien he was dressed hi hnmao clothes be seemed quite

satlsAcd and smiled. ,, .

According to what he Iwd beard. Chekanov recaUed
Unit this copbve wild msm was hually sent to Pcido to
he studied by the seknHsts. All this evidence, however,
stems from pcopk "ho hod only hcojii about the wild
InhsbltaDts of themountmns from olbers.

OI the central area there is noi much to He lald and
actual reports are ocliher aumerods nor extensive. \\^at
there are, concern a very large form of ABSM called
locaDy the iCuo^-Lu or •'Mouib-M^.’* This was first. «
far as 1 can discover, mentioned by Hasoldl Davis, the
well'icnown Amcricao traveler and author, in his book

2S2



en(HI«d Land of tha Bye. which is ihe account of the
IXnis.Roosevelt AsimIc Expedition to Surma. China. In¬
dia, and the “lost kingdom’* oi Nepal. In this (be author

says:


Jack (John Kenny) the only one of os who could
he called a huaier. He had shot bear and moose to
Maine, and here Ic wu hU bea/t*s desire to (r> hb skill
'vith tiger or Bintnroog or the Bear Cal (Aniclrs) or the
peat rhinoceros which is now found only in fhb nOd
comer of Burma near ibe Siamese Border. And more
ezcMag even (has these ww the report of a creature,
ihe Kung-(u. (or Mouth-Man), which had lerrilled the
people for cenbiHes. The Kung-tu. accordhig to Thim.
derfaee,* was a Booster that resembled a gorflla. a
mioiatore King Kong, about 20 feet tall. It lived on the
hiebeat mouniaiDs, where its tnU of broken trees was
often seen, and descended toeo ibe village* only when
It wanted meat, huuun meat. We were told oi«u that
no one in Kcnsl t had been eaten by (be Kuitg-Lu foe
more years than the eldest cooM remcmlx^.

It is perhaps perniissiWe to speculate on the fact—eouW
K he coiiKidcnce—that Chief Thunder/ace described a
father typical Smqucich-Oh’.Moh creature? This was my
first reacboo; and It was a pretty strong one: but. then, the
same thing crops up much more exicosKxly hut with less
cxaggeraiion further north where there are not. hs far u
wc knou*. any Amerinds.

There, there Is cither a similar creature or a closely
related ooe named the Tok. which I am told also means
’mouth/* My account of this originally came in the fonn
of a pcroMal communication from a gentleman who hod
heard me discussing ABSMs on the uir. He gave me the
nanw and address of a young American, then in (be
wrvice of his countr)*, who had been born io the Shan
States and brought up there, his parents bavjng been mis-

out lo b« i North AiTWficaJi
Indian by the mime of Chief Michael Joseph ThundcrfBce, a
Brnauaie of the CBlI/oroia Mission College, of 19211 He had
gone lo tbe Orient tu pan owner of a small circus (hat had
disbanded, and he had «Ulcd down io this Bunuese viHace and
in time been elected chief.

I Tte village of Keasi is now called Kawmyo ar»d h near the
Tnw border, it h nosed for iis Nagu iilku King Cobra toake)
worahip aiiended only by priestesses,

253



slonvies. In turn. I g« In touch with thU young man,
wbote name 1 waa aaVed not to puhlbh. aou he tolo me ot
two personal eftcountere—in fact eaual physical contactt
—with Toks. while be gave me several other reports, and
pjiied me on lo others who also b luni wrote me tbcir
stories All were Americans with much experience o< ihe
coonlry. lo the end, H seemed to me that this ABSM may
be the same as the Kung-Lu reponed from so much far-
iber south, about which there is. ooce again, that most
curbus detail of aU in ABSM reports; namely, that it,
also attacks oniy thin people and Ignores fat ©ncs.

My young American correspondent stales that he ac¬
tually had a Tok in his arms twice and when It broke ]oos€
it kft handfuls of long, coarse, sbby black bain m bis
bands The occasions were when h broke into his family
b«ne which was deep m the bifl iuugles and some distance
from the neareet small, pcrmoncot seulemcni. On both
occasions it chose a bri^i moonllghl night and both times
h crashed about apparenUy lo^dog for food. Both times
the young man uckJed il thinking ii was a native thief or
marauder and. being a pMjwerfulIy built man and an ath¬
lete. and since his pairoU refused to possess any fiieanns.
be did so with fus bare hands. On each occasion it did not
auempi to attack him in return, but c»ly to flee, and bang
immensely strong and well over 6 feet tall It easdy broke
away, once ninning straight through a screen door. As it
eros^ 10 the forest b the moonlight, my rnformam tM
a very good look at lu He tells me that It had very wi*
shoulders, small bead, was covered with jct-black haif.
but had straight legs like a mao and very pale soles to Its
feet From this correspondent, aad some of those oroe^
be put me on lo. emerged various local names for this
creature ell of which must be translated aa ‘mouth maa
or ‘hhe man with the incredibly big mouth.’'

Hassoldi Davis' Kun$-Lu is from the southern end ot
the Indo-Chinese mountain area, ibc Tok from the
cm. where it would seem to merge with the Otu^Teh of
Eastern Tibet <the area that was once called Sikang) oo
tbe one band, and the Gin-Sung Of Bear-Men of centm
China on the other These areas arc all adjacent to ine
places where the teeth and bones of Oigoniopiihecus have
been uncarlheO, and if they are all the same creature, it
would bear out Bernard Houvelmans* theory that they^
indeed Gigantopithfeus. But we will come to the Dzu-Teh
and GIn-Sung later. We must now turn aside for a moment
to try and clear up something that is really very puziJmg.

254



In tfou)| this, I un fioini first to have lo jump backward a
little asd then leap forward right into the middle of the
Himalayas end into the middle of the chrooological
sequence of eveau there. This 1 have to do as we wiU
never make any sense out of the situation In this area
unless we get Uus son of "appeodage" out of the way.

It begins way down id the plateau of Konium, in what
used to be northern Indo^lna, There, the locals uy they
have a kind of enormous monkey that walks on its hind
legs aod which is actually vicious and is quite willing to
attack people. Tliey call h Um Kra-Dhon. In the neighbor-
mg territory of the Jdioog it is called the Bie-Boc (Bekk-
Bok). The mountain people of the south also Insist that it
IS a monkey, aod not a man or an ape. This is odd, for
there are virtually tailless monkeys thereabouts, the Sturof^
tailed Macaques (Lyarodes). At the same time, the locals
are equally insistent (hat these creatures arc not ghosts,
departed spirits, demigods, or anything nonmaterial; all of
which, chough (hey often speak of them, they most dearly
distinguish from real physical beings.

There Is a report that one of these creatnres either com«
mitted a murder, or was responsible for a murder near
KoQtum in 1943. UofortUDately the matter was tried by
the local native court, of which do records were sent to
the central French authority, white the French Resident of
That area at the time is no longer alive, and the oaifve
Commune has been dispersed since the retirement of the
French. This is o« by any means the only repon of these
Krt^Dftcn to be made to foreigners, and wc have beard of
similar entities la areas far to the west of Kontum. There
wouW be nothiog usetpeclcd in reports of an unknown
ape in this area, and I personally would oot be a bit
surprised if someone told me Of oa alleged ABSM there-
aboute; and for all the same old reasons—am^e, unex¬
plored montane forests; small and isolated buman com-
muoities; and appropriate geographical posiiioo. But, the
insistence on the “monkey" theme is novel.

Now. as we have said, there have been countless storiee
throughout the ages about tailed men. However, 1 know of
only one case of a possible ABSM ever having beep stated
to have one. Tim is one of the most peculiar of all repens.
and is unique in many respects. It tappeoed right smack
in the osiddle of whai has now become virtually traditional
ABSM icmiary—4iamely. on the main route to Kat¬
mandu Nepal from the oonh. It b alleged to have token
place b June, 195}. Those involved were two Amcricaoi,

255



Dr. George Moore <M.D.) ud Dr. George K. Brooks, sn
eatooiDlogist. Tbe fonoer was Chief of the Public Health
DivisioD of tbe VS- Operetfoos MbsioD, uoder the For¬
eign Operations AdnuassCretioa. aad was public health ad¬
viser to the Nepalese GovemmeuL Dr. Brooks was on his
staS. Dr. Moore bad been in tbe coaatry 2 years. They
were desceoding the Gosamkuod Fas (of some 17,000
feet) OQ their way back to Katmaodu, the capital, from
a trip to the north, aod bad entered tbe upper montane
forests, there mostly coniferous, kaving ihe^ pack-«>
rying porters far behind. There was a thick mist But it is
better that Dr. Moora tell the incident that then occurred
in his own words. It goes:

The forest was deathly stilL Fog banks, raw and cold,
drifted ttuougb the taO puus and Irft their bonghs
dripplAg and ahmy.

Roondl^ a sharp hmi b Bw (rail. Brooks stopped
abruptly. He leaned agaiiial a large rode to extract a
leech whkh was oo the poial of disappearing orer tbe
edge of he boot. I stood diere watching Brocdcs and
fumbling for aty pipe when an almost iraperceplible
nMveraeot la a cla^ of tall rbododeodron caoght my
eye. Something had inoved. I was sore. Then ft was
againl This tone, a few leaves msBed, more than mere
chaoce couM move. Brooks, sensing something was
wrong, quickly forgot abomi his leech. Almost dmol-
taneonslv wa both slipped osr revdvers oat of their
hobtefS.'On onr r^ the slope was dangerously steep.
Behind us llm slope climbed ipward. There was a large
boulder by the dde of tbe traO and we eased over (o ft,
0a4 for the proteettoa from the rear ft afforded. We
waited, tease and expectaai. Tbe stflhie&s was awesome.
The fog and mist seemed to fom weird shapes writhmg
and twistnig throng ^ dense foUage.

Suddenly, from in frool oi vs a raucous scream
pierced the ak. Anotlm followed from tbe right. The
ghostly qnaBty of the sdst and tbe unreality of the
situation bad a mghrmarbh dnga.

Brooks w^^ttd, *Sshat was that?’'

My spine was dn^og hi high gear now. I gripped
my J8 SAW more firmly. About 20 feel away, some-
wh« in front of our rock, was the clump of rbododen-
dran where the first scream bad come from. We fas¬
tened our gaze on tta leaves, trying to peer (hrongh

250



them. Another scree m broke the MiOaese. Tkig Him
it seemed ni tboa|h Jl was behind os.

‘brooks," I managed to whisper, “let’s gat oa Ihb
rock m a boiTyr

Brooks did not need a second invitalioa. In u Instaot,
we bad scrambled oa top oT the massive boulder. h>oa
our new perch, we cureloUy searched la ail direcHons
for the next moee. Oar movemems most have been
closely watched, for a lood chatter!^ iniDedulely as.
raUed OS from the bushes hi Croat The angry cbaiicr
filled ibe raw air H new cries joined in (he cbonis from
■U sides. We were definitely sarrounded.

Brooks DUltered, “Ob, ny God, bow huot them
are there? Aod wbal are they?’*

We got some idea of what wai there when • hldeoM
face thnisl apart the wUdfy ihrmblog leaves and aaped
at (L9. It was a face that I shaD not long forget Grayisb
skin, beetling black eyebrows, a moath that rrmud to
extend from ear to ear and long, ye&iwfsb teeth were
sbnllerteg enough. Bat thoee eyes . . . beady, yellow
eyes tbai stared at ns with obvloiu demoniacal cncDlna
and anger. That face! Weird ideas w«n beghutbg to
force their way mlo mfod. Perhaps ... but no . .

damn it ... h has to be? TTiis is the Abcmtinable
SnowuaB!

A chiD sent gCMHcflesb along ray back. The tbouabi
of Uwse creatures had often been in ray mind when wa
had trekked over the snows and high placea. No Euro,
peaa or American had ever proved the existence of the
snowttmi. although the natives certainly believed In
them. Our boys bad entertained us many an evening
around the camp fire with borror iaim of the snow beast,
or “yed* as they caOed them. Ihey told bow soUtary
travelers had been found ton lo bits in the vast reaches
of the Dountaina; bow huge footprints bad been found
leading away from Ibe mvrdera. A few Sherpas had even
met the monsters face to face and lived to tell Ibe tale.
We considered these accounts unlikely “hiO storira,” nl-
Ifaoogb I admit now they had left us somewhal uoensy.

No, I Insisted to myaetf, there b no such creaiwc ns
an Abominable Snowman. This face his to be an npe
. . . or a mao ... or a demon ... or the SNOW¬
MAN!

A hand pushH through the leaves. Then, a aulek
movereeai nd a shoulder. There, before us. appeared

267



the iemblaoce of a body. Sweat was yiubU on Bwto’
face BOW as we crouched lower, hugging the rock for
what If was worth. My hands looked white h» the scioh
dariuiess.

As the creature emerged through the dark lesTcs, we
siraiaed to make out hks form. I felf blind panic
through me. Then I stopped. “BalU of fi«," 1 thought,
"Pve got to get a on myself.”

Ihc cceatuie was about 5 feet uU. halfw:roocblDg
on two thin btdry legs, leering at os Id uodLsg^
fury. ClawB-^r hands—seemed dark, perhaps blac^
while bis bedraggled, hairy body was gray and thin. U
shamed along with a stoop the way a neolrthic cave
maa might hav-e walked. Well-buOt and stoewy, n coold
•rove to be the most fonoldable opponeot. Teeth bared.

It snarled Uke an animaJ. Two long fangs protruded
from its upper lip . . . Suddenly, a sharp fUckidg move¬
ment behhsd it caught our eyea.

‘KJeorge! A taU! Look there,'’ Brooks cried.

A Uiousand thoughts raced through roy mind at once.

^TVeU, Brooks,” 1 repUed, •‘this thing could be the
Abomfainble Snowman hut it abo could be an ape . . .

a langur ape, perhaps.** . . ^

Truthfully. I was more coflccrned with survival than

identificatioQ. The band of animals was certainly ag¬
gressive. giving every Indication that they mcaDt to ^
snoy U9. But I couldn’t he^ ihiftking about the creatures
tbe^lves. They didn’t look like the common langur
monkeys I’d seen in India. At the same tune
apelike characteristics- Scientific pos^bQiUes ctow^
iheir way into my mind even as I checked my rew
for the altack. Higher altitudes, less mmeraU in ^
water could produce lc« hair. Lack of h«n
in the high repons, which woitld make climbing ab^ty
relntively valueless, could produce an erect species. Mu-
tations—the methods by which new spedes w
-have occurred, and are constantly observable in la^-
ratorks. Variations witlun a dn^c species over a period
of time eaa produce animals greatly differeiil fram t^
parent siralo. I bad no time to share these
with Brooks. The best 1 could mumWe was an unsteady,

“Oct ready." . ,

Other figures were approaching now frooi wveral ^
fwfions. We could make out 6 or 7 of them through t^
mist. One appeared to be carrying a baby around Jls

25a



ne«k. They ccened to mean tastnco h tttey ktowM
at each other. The one that bad pushed through the
rollape flist wis ibr leader, 11>cre was hltle qucstioa
as to his auChoritT as be led (he attack.

“Brooks." I saM hurriedly, “let's try firing over the^
heada to see IT we cao scare thtm. Don’t bit them, fw
beaveo’s sake, or we nay have them Is a freiuy. A
woooded aoimal—V they are aaimab—won’t slop, And
if they sre demoos, the Sherpas will never forgtre us V
we k3l tbciD, The Sherpas. saperstilioos as they art,
would raiber be luUcd than otead their gods. cspecUfir
here.**

"Okay. Ceorjjt, yon say wben." he replied softly.

W« sighted carefully throtqrii the fog tad walled no-
tif the repulsive creatures were about 10 feel away, We
squeezed the triggers elmiMt together. The bUd swfried
(he fog In front of us. .Splinters of wood and tom leaves
feO through the foliage. The creariires stopped abniplly.

The original account, whfch appeared is the magazine
oporu May, 1957, concludes whh quite a long

passage rclaiing the purely humaD reactions on the pan of
author, his compaolon, and their Sherpa poricrs. It
IS mdicaied that the latter seem to have assamed that they
bad met some ye/ij^he general Nepalese term now used
by the Press—and they were greatly relieved that their
employen had not been harmed. However, they did ooi
fcson to any exaggerated expressions and, it seems to me
at least they were singularly lacking in observations of
any kii^ In fact, I have an impression that they were
somewhat mystified, and perhaps even uDbetieving, but too
polite to so comment. The Account and the locale do not
Jihe with aoyibing said by any natives of ABSMs on cllber
count.

This B we of the most (actual reporu we have of any
Ihiog (be it of ABSMs or noij to come out of Nepal as
wc sbair most obundaoily see in the next chapter. More¬
over. It was made by a highly trained medical mao, a
person of aU classes of educated men least likely to panic
U3 lace of bodily abnormality, and who must also have had
some troinmg in comparative anatomy If nothing else.
Also, it occurred ir less than 11.000 feet so that there
cannot be any acciwation of mental fatigue producing
Illusions that can be brought on by verv high aJlilude sod
rarefied air if one Is not acclimatized to them. Id addition,
the lelicr bad a witness of equally high mental caliber and

209



tniAiai. Moreover, if ibey had wanted to turn ibe erea>
Lures Ibey saw bio tbe iraditionaJ ''abocDinabIc snowman,"
[of (he giant or Dzu-Teh. ihe bestial or Mfh-Tfh. or even
Of (he Jitile foreil T«h-tma. virtciyj (hey could ^uite well
have done so. simply by oegleciing to nscatioo ihe (ails.
Tails (ust don’t fit onto ABSMs.

There are also some extremely pertioenc remarks in
(his account thai have not, as far as I know, been coni*
menied upon nor even perhaps noticed. The first, is the
very definite staiemeol that (heir eyes were bright yellow.
Not much is known or recorded about (be color of wild
animals* eyes, and QuUe a number of (be siuffed specimens
in our great museums have completely (be wrong colored
irises. Ooe of my duties when I was a collector was to
record the colors of tbe eyes of the animals. No ape has a
yellow eye: (hey all have dark brown eyes: ibough I have
seen an abnormal chimp with pale gray eyes. Many mon-
keyv GO the other hand, do have bright yellow eyes—In
fact, (his color is rather common among them and it Mems
to go with lighter coat color. Some of (he tangurs have
yellow eyes, as do also at least two of ibeir African rela¬
tives among ibe Maogabeys {Cercocebus).

Pertinem lo this story also, is (hat I was once ’'atucked'*
by a large band of Red-(opped Mangabeys (C torqua*
/w), in a mist, on the ground, in aa upper montane forest,
in West Africa. I say ••anacked" advisedly becaose they
ran at me ihrcaienlngly—and particularly the big males,
ooe of which 1 was forced to kill and which proved to be
the all-lime lacord in kngih for that species [its skin and
skuU are in tbe British MuscumJ. As I could not nm away
fwhicb \ admit is my natural inaiinct and invariable prao-
tice in face of any such dangerl. due lo (be density of the
tower-level forest growth under wbicb I had lo wriggle
along on my stomach, K was manifest that this ac^ was
not concerted or carried through. The one I shot d«d come
most alamingly close and was screaming and grimaciog
at me. and showing its very long yellow fang-like canine
teeth. When i( stood up on its hind legs. i( seemed almost
to bo looking at me eye for eyt. and I thought it was ac¬
tually going (o jump me When I shot it, the others just
reoewed their howling, and they kept thU up for about 10
minutes while rushing at me in simulated onslaught.
Evtotually I just went sway, backward on my stomach.

aod left them- , . . .

Another point that Dr. Moore makes is the thmness or
the animals’ legs. The U a monkey feature, as it also the

260



BUmnes of (heir bodies wbeo they Maod gp But most
sjgntficam of all is lhai he says ihai “One appeared to be
cyrryjni • baby arouad its oeck.- This is ao odd ooa.
Young baboons and macaques at flni hang under thcir
moiher’s bodies—ihey being quadr^jpcdal—but they laier
rtde utnde lh«r Tnoihen* hind backs, holding on lo ber
back fur. Almost alj other monkeys carry their young to
bcir croaked forearms or in one arm. bur some of ibe
Lutongs (rrffchx/wVAecw)—very near relauvcs of Uw

Ungurs or SCTmopithecines—wrap them around tbelr

n«ks like feather boas or mink scarfs, and esneciaily
when they dewenj to the ground.

whole adiiude of (be creatures in ibis story seems,
mtieed, to savor much more of a kind of monkey titan of
an ape or sub.bommi'd. As of now, I class them as such,
but wjto ^crvations. Yet. monkey or not, I feel ibat the
report is the iruih and (hat we have ihure/orc to be keenly
00 tlw lookout for the jnicnection of ‘evidecce" presented
for Ike eustence of some ABSMs in this area being the
result of the existence of pant monkeys. It is clearly

»cb as the Krc^Dhol
actuaUy have notlung to do with ABSMs. They, tike the
A another side iasoe. and a complkatioo.

And (his bnags up tbe next of our problems in this mlxed-
up area. This Is tbe known fauna. Ihe trouble here is
mat none of tbe people who have been to the Himalavaj
ever to have koowo anything of what £r known of
^ mammahan faimi of the region, white most of those
who really do know that fauna are few and far between-

or roos ia Europe or Aoieria. and
»Imo« cone have ever been near the Himalayas. There b

w ,!! appalling muddle as lo just what mammals Oo
live there and which don't,*

worst cemtusion is over the bears. There are repre^

eciuoUy known to live
IQ tbe Himalayas—the Himalayan or Moon Bear (SeUn-
^cw), Week With a white V-coilar; the Sloih«Bear
(Mflursuj), B strange aberrant type with a long newe.
whi^ eats mostly .asects and boney; and tbe Brown or
Dlsb-faced Bears {Vrsus). Of tbe last, three species, sub-
^ea« or rac« distinguished by color, Jiave been recorded,
have be^ calW the Red Bear, the Blue Bear, and
tJ« babelime Bear. There is an appalling muddle over
the scientific names of these, apan from the Red Bear,

' See appeodix fi.


261



wbtcb everybody agrees is oot red i$ amply a Io<^
7 jmety of Urna arttos. ibe Brown Bear of the rest of
Eurasfa. There h a painc. Vnus isahttUnut. which was
ooee bestowed upon an aimoa while specunen of Browo
Bear from ihe Karakoram, but which was jauntily and
popularly caUed the “Snow Bear." Uier. bluisb-gray pelted
appeared from other local.lies and
BO called, or named Vtm pmsnostis or Vrsus ardat pr«.
Tnofui. Some were creamy, olbera alnxwi white.
were gray. Nobody today is prepared or can say JUM
how many races of Brown Bears there art in the Hima-
lavan ranBes of mountains, nor what ibeir exact ranpCB
are* whether thev are full spedes, sub-speeies, or merely
c.«. -heitar they br«d .n*- In o.het v-ord.,
IbU ••IsabcUloc Bear" » a lovely bogey to be waved at
4ople who are not only not specialists m
S^larlv not specialists in mammals—and Ontnxti mam¬
mals a? ihail la my opinion the thing is * myth, 1^!'
our North Amerlcao «xa!kd “Onizly Ikar is

and can be any Dish-faced Bear opposed w one of our
Black Bears I that happens to have a gnalcd p^a^. One
altnosi white specimeo of a bear wu killed m Tib«. a^
imir^ lately called an Isahelline Bear but turned eui to be
an albino Himalayan Black {SfiencrcMs) not a Brown

®^BuMhTs“ii Srt'ldl. While most

their hind legs for brief periods and can wobble J

short distance oa two legs, they happen to have a ^a a

m«t peculiar feature. This has already

demoo^ated by Dr. Bernard Hjuvelmans and “that a I

boars arc pigeon-toed aisd thus leave trarts that l«»k «'t

ih^ ^ bi^l. but walked with ih«f ^i put

wart. The toes point a Utile inward, ihc^h

nwn. it Is ibc other way. except for the ^"jeMds and

some others who often walk absolutely siraight ahead.

Ap Jt fr^ this, nobody, and least of all a •;nal.ve.'' co^d

c^r miaiake a boar’s track, or print, for that of a mw,

and even more espeeiaUy that of a*?

num." Iti bean, the middle toe is the longest, the ouUr

OM the laiiesl* they leave claw marks in any matenal into

t!£ch thi?^k^r than the hairline oq th^ fee^^

Finally, itwy cannot go on ibeir hind kp on but

l«vBl, uacBOitnbcred ground, and even ihco,

distances. Bear iracks hav^c been misukco for ABSM


See Appendix A. page 327.

262



tracks tmt AfiSM tracks have oever been mislakeo for
bear tracks. Bears as an esplaDatton of ABSM tracks, have
also been brought up m North. Central, and South Amer*
ica. and in Malaya and Sumatra where species of bears do
exist. However, they have not. of course, been able to be
used is Ethio|Han Africa where this group of animals has
never been found or reported. When it comes to animals
that could possibly be the origin of Kimulayan A&SM
reports, the bears are not akme. However, all other kinds
of animals so far suggested as being the true origin of
ABSMs are absolutely ridiculous. Several have been sug¬
gested. such as Langur Monkeys of the species Semno-
piihicus entgUus. which happens to be a purely Indian
form, the Giant Panda, wolves, the snow-leopard, and
even large birds! But when it comes to candidates for
scalps and hairs, ihc list is very much greater.

In leaving the Indo-Chinese province we omitted to
stress one point; this was. simply, that its nonbem part is
a meeting place of three outstaadi&g ABSM areas. Each
of these appear to have different Uld^geaou^ kinds. These
are of the usual four main forms—namely, a giant a
Meh’Teh, a human type, aod a pigmy. There b evidence
of a very manlike, man-sited one in the south, as we have
seen {vide In Malaya); to the north in the eastern end of
*nbet aod the eastern Eurasian area generally there i$ a
very large one, the Diu-Tth. T^k. Kung^Lu. or bearlike
Girt^ung. Mountain Man of the Chinese; in the west,
that is to say in the Himalayas themselves, there are
two kinds; first there is the little 4-foot tall Teh-tma of the
lower montane forests; and secondly, the heavy-ect Meh-
Teh (the original Abominable Snowman) with a conical
bead, and very large and widely separated first and second
toes, which often treks over snow-covercd passes from one
valley to another. The giant, with almost human-type feet
is not found in the Himalayas nor along the Tibetan bar¬
rier but is confined to the mountaiiu between Tibet. Chino,
and Burma.


263



12. Anyone for Everest?

AeSMS IN THE HIMALAYAS AND
THE GREAT GUTTER


Hftviog DOW re«ch?d (he summit I wish to ask your loduU
geoce. Personally, I am so sick and Ured of "Abocnioable
Snowmeo** per se, and of foot'lracks lo (be snow of
[sich aod, most of sU, of poor, old, long-sufferiog
Mt Everest that I simply cannot bring myself to go over
the whole dreary busioeas again in det^. Yet for alJ that
has been published on the subject, which includes really
quite a number of books as well as a veritable cascade of
news^odes, one thing U most notably lacking u> date.
This is any real semblance of order upon which the whole
picture may be assessed On this occasion therefore, I ask
to be excused for compressing my purely reportorial duties
to the limit^n fact. Into a chrooologkal list as you will
find a few pages farther on—and thus reserving my eo«
ergy and what mileage is left for some background infer*
maiion and. I hope, some legHimate comment. Before wc
tackle (he issue, however, a few points should be sireeeed.

The flni ia a reiteration, and one that cannot be too
often repealed or too strongly stressed. This is that what are
most commonly called simply the Himalayas—which is to
say these now *1e$$er Himalayas"—are not a pari of Tibet,
or even io (be same continent. Further, the racial, fia«
liooaL political, cultural, and all other aspects of humsAiiy
pertaining in this arcs are extremely complex, most mud*
dling. and very little understood. For once, national
boundaries hereabouts serve some really useful purposes
(see Map XI): also, some of them even have some actual
^ysical validity and coincide with natural boundaries.

Perhaps (he single most interesting fact to emerge from
Om is that the block of extreme inoontains that is peaked
by Ml Everest really lies in Tibet, and is thus more than

264



half in Eurasia. From ail the hoopla as well as the very
real and legitimate iniercsl that has been engendered by
the '‘attack” on and “conquest" of Everest, a general im¬
pression has been gained that either this mountain is more
or less synonymous with all the Himalayas, or that it is at
least the only important one therein. Ii is only one of a
very great number of nionsicrs on both Sides Of ihc Great
[Brahmaputra] Gutter, and dominates several others by
only a rather modest height. Funher. a mountain was
seen, and fixed for altiuidc, by more than one American
military plane flying The Hump during the war, that was
staled to be very much taller than Everest- So vast is the
triangle of uplands between the Pamirs in the west, the
Nan-Shans in the nonhea.st. and the mountains of inner
Yunnan in the southeast that despite a healtbv exp«dliioii
led and financed by Mr. Reynolds [of bail-point pen
fame] tbs monstrous thing has never been found again.
This mountain has, however, recently been downgraded
considerably.

Turning now for a niomcDi to the human element in this
chapter of our story, it should be noted that the inhabi¬
tants of Tibet are quite distinct from most of the peoples
who inhabit the Himalayas, though Ihe famous Sher^
Ghurkhas, and Lepchas. of Nepal, were cnglnally Ti¬
betans, and are of that group of peoples. Hosvever, the
true Tibetans Inhabit quite a dilTcront land, having more
intimate coonections to the east with the Sikang region
[now incorporated into the Chinese Province of Szech¬
wan], They therefore lake quite a diJferenl view of things,
and this is most noticeable when they come to talk about
and describe ABSMs. Another point that is worth bearing
in mind is Ihai many of ihe inhahUauie of both areaa arc
most highly educated people, especially the monks of the
Lamaist Buddist faith, and the religious mystics and as¬
cetics of ihe Hindu. An impression has been disseminated
that, though the most excel Icm chaps for moucilaineering,
fighting, and other forms of eodurance, the Nepalese are a
poor bunch of uneducated hillsraen. and that all the Ti¬
betans do, apart from spinning prayer wheels, is tend
yaks. Some scholars in the nonasteries of these countries
speak, read, and write a doxeu languages, both dead and
livmg ones at that, and they possess vast treasure troves of
documents and whole libraries of records. Books pub¬
lished by them five centurius ago on such subjects as
Imtory, medicine, and zoology, are as precise and objcc-
Qve as any of OUT own, as we shall see Inter when we visit

26S



thp nonbem siJe of (heir country. Do not, therefore, eell
the locals short on either common sense or outn^bt know*
ledge. They can also be sharper than we are.

Finally, still another ooie of waniiDg. Sportsmen, in the
form of motuitainccrs. big-game hunters, and so forth, are
noi the only outsiders who have penetrated and wandered
itoui the Himalayas and the southern rim of (be Tibetan
Plateau. Sometimes they almost a^iear to he« because of
the Everest business, and the eaDrmeus volume of their
published works. In these, however, you dOB*i learn much
about the country as a whole, wherens you do get a
tremendous amount about the mountains (per se; and
usually above the snow line) aod about mountaineering.
As I remarked in the first chapter, if you really want to
get at what facts art known about the area, the best
place to go is to the reports of (he various British Gov¬
ernment Surveys—pc^itical, topographio. and biological-^
which cooiinu^ for years with the utmost pracision and
most painstaking peru&uncc and caie. Since tbe cooclu-
«on of (hose surveys, it is notable (bat the only people who
seem to speak boldly and rationally oo quite a number of
matters pertaining to these cou nines have beeo anthro-
pologista, ethnologists, and botanists, who have really
traveled tbe country at lower levels, and taken tbe trouble
to talk to (he local people, learn their customs, and under¬
stand their languages and outlook. Some of (heir eKpres-
aioQs have been quite delicious.

Now I shall tackle tbe facts so that wo to ay try to gain
some kind of muroal understanding as to what everybody
has been talking about. In my brief introductory history of
ABSMcry I had of necessity to mention not a few of the
items that appear in the following chronology because
until now (be whole history of thb subject has been mostly
in and of (he “Himalayan" area, and the general popular
coccepiion is that it is ewiusive to it. By now, however, it
should be plain that this is so far from actuality that tbe
Himalayas have really been reduced, if not to a secondary
Status, at least to only one of three in the major class^ihe
other two being the nonhwesiem North AmcTicao regioo,
and the eencral eastern Eurasian. Nonetheless, these facta
are important and must be rc-emphasized. for 1 am con¬
stantly having to remind myself that hardly anything has
been published on all the other areas, while iutelllgeot
people uill say to me almost daily: "Do you really think
there is on abominable snowman?^ with the same old im-
pUcatioD (bat there is just one individual hairy giant.

266



who has beea pounding about ihe upper HimoJayna soow-
fields for centuries. This irapressioa bas, of coune. beea
detiberarely fostered in the aund of the general public by
press and scieoce lUike. since oothfag U belter than a good
debunkiflg and a great number of people don't want any*
Uuag of this ns lure found.

It comes at ^uite a shock, therefore, when one preseoti
a proper list of those who have said not only that they
have found foot*tracks of HimaJayan ABSMs, or bits o(
their fur. or their excrement, but who have stated, aod ia
most categoric and detailed terms, that ibey have seen
them, have hunted or beeo buated by them, or who know
of people killed by tbeoL Actually, the numbers of persooa
in all these classes tuns into tlie teas of tbousands. aod bas
been going on for millennia. In fact. European and Aioeri*
can travelers are (be osly group who don't seem to see
ABSMs regularly when going through this area, and even
some of them do. Perhaps the following inventory may
make this a bit clearer. 1 take the famous year 1920 as my
real starting point,

S 3 .Sven by ForeHmen
N$ B Seen by Local Penone


1887- Mfljor l.awrcncc A. Waddclt, LL.D., C.B.,
C.l.E,, r.L.S., F.A.I.. cornea across la^ tracks
in Sekkim,

1906, Mr. H. J. Elwes, well-knowo botanht and ex¬
plorer, sees an AfiSM nin over a ridge.

19IS. J. R. O. Gent, British Forestry Officer in the
Darjeeling Division reports tracks m the Pbalut
area, India, and ABSMs seen by local inhabi¬
tants,

1920. Stanley Snaith slates in his book At Grips with
Everest that one Hugh Knight, a British ex¬
plorer. came face to face with an ABSM carry¬
ing a crude bow ia this year.*^

■The search for this Hugh Koigbi eomlnuei. It lor He) k
proving every bit as elusive as any ABSMs. Ihe latest cornea
from Prof, W. C. Osman Htll. since (hii was written, and nates:
‘1 find a book listed in the Royal Occgnphkal Society [ot
LoodooJ library catalogue by a Capinin Knight Ino ioUiala
givtol enliUed;—Diary of a Pedestrian in Cashmere and Thibet
aod dated 1863. It may weU be ^ one we are after and if so
antedates Waddell.**


S.

NS.

S.


267



S, 1921 i,t. Col. C K. Howard-Bary, on Rpproaching
Evcrcsl, wytc^icd a group of ABSMs od a Know-
field at 20,000 feet, through binoculars. Later
fotind their tracks on the spot.

1922. Tracks found oa the Birech Gnrga Glacser by

EdgUshroon who signpO hU report "FofftgJi
Sportsman.'’

S, 1923- Members of an Evercsi ExpedilloD saw '’^at
hairy, nalxd, man running across a snowDeid
below." ai n.OtK) fCCL

]924 —

s 19’5 A N, Tombazi. Member of the Royal Geo-
CTsphical Society and tender of a photographic
csoedition to Sikkim, saw cm AJ3SM grubWrg
for roou with a stick near the Zemu Gap at
foot of Mt. Kabu. Later found humanoid foot-
prints at spot

1926-30.- „ __

1931. Wene*Commandcr E. Bentley Boauroan, RAi*,

found tracks at beadwutcrs of the Ganges.

1932-35,-

1936, (1) Ronald Kaulbach, botaniR and geog¬
rapher, found tracks at l6,fM)0 fcct, on
pass bciween the Chu and Salween Rivers
near Bumlhang Gonipa, Nepal,

(2) Eric E. Shipton, famous mountaineer,
found tracks on way back to Katmandu
from Everest.

1937 (1) A Brirish traveler who signed himself
"Balu" found tracks on the Biafua Glacier
In the Karakorams.

(2) F. S. Smythe, reported tracks from the
Bhyundar Valley, in Garwbal, India,
fThese were said to have been made by a
hoar, but there was some reasonable
doubt.I

(3) Sir John Hunt found a set of tracks of
something apparently wearbg boots on
the Zemu Gap. also steps cut in the ice,
though nobody bad passed ihat gap ai that

time.

1938. (1) Cairn on top of sacred mountain, taboo
to locals, above RongbuX Monastery, and
placed there by climbers, found to buve
been destroyed and stones moved.

2ed



(2) H. W. TiUnan, famous mountaineer, finds
apparcoQy bootod tracks crossing tbe
Zemu Oap. near Menlung, on Darjeeling
side.

(3) First Americafi Karakorain Expedition,
reports calls, falling rocks, etc.

N.S. 1939. (Reported by Prince Peter of Greece.] Locals
got ABSM druok by leaving liquor at well'
bead; captured aod bound; but creature revived
and burst bonds.

194{M]. —

5. 2942. Slavomir Rawtee aoJ four companions on
Right from Siberian prison camp to India, re¬
ported meetioi two ABSMs.

1943_

S. 1944. A Mr W. W. Wood, in company with a Major
Kirkleod and Capt. John B. Maggs. ai Liddar*
Wat. near Srinagar, Kashmir, saw a creature
bounding down a hiFIside with zigzag motioiL
(See below for possible eapbnatioo.)

194S-46. _

NS. 1947. A Yak breeder named Dakbo, a resident of
Pangbocbc, saw one at dO yards distance, It
walked away.

S. 194$. A very strange stoiy q# an encounter and fight
with a pair of ABSMs near the Zemu Gap, by
two Norwegian uranium prospectors, named
Aage Thorberg and Jan Pro&tis. (Suspected fab¬
rication.!

A villager of Pangboche named Mlngma,
heard yells, uw ABSM, took refuge in
stone hut and observed.

In November an ABSM came out of (ho
forest and played about near the monas-
tery of Thyangboche until driven away
by the monks beating gongs and blowing
trumpets.

Sherpa Sen Tensing in company with oth¬
ers saw ABSM at 25 paces scar Thyang-
boche.

One Lakpa Tensing saw a small one silting
on a rock.

Tibetan Lama Tsaogi reports having seen
ooe.

Shipton COOKS across tracks on Uie Men-
269


NS. 1949. (I)
NS. (2)

NS. 1950. (1)

NS. (2)
NS. (3)
195i. Eric



luflg Tiu Glacier, iti the Gaiiri Sanka Range

OQ the way to Everest, Phoioirapbs.

1952. (1) Sherpa Pasang Nyima la company with
others went to look for on A6SM acen
near Naroche Bazar, and observed it at
200 yards.

(2) Sir Edmund Hillary wiib George Lowe
find hair on high pass,

(3) Swiss Expedition- Dr- Edouard Wyss-Oun-
aot, with Tensing Norgay, find tracks.

NS. <4) Villager Anseering and wife of Thamnu,

see ono by forest.

NS. 1953. (1) Tibcbm Lama namad Tsulrung 2angbU.

traveling in Assam, meets one carrying
two large rocks. It passed by,

(2) Edmund Hillary finds tracks In Barun
Khola ninge.

1954. (1) The Daily Mail Expedition. Sets of tracks

found in four widely separated locadons-
(See Ralph Izzaid's accouQt.l

(2) Two Britishers of Hillary’s outfit find
tracks In ths Choyang Valley.

(3> Swiss Expedtion; Dr, Norman G, Dyhren-
furtb photographs tracks in company with
others.

1955. (1) French Expedition on Makalu. find tracks,

photographed by die Abbe Bordet, geolo-

gist,

(2) Argentinian Mountaineering Expedition,
led by famed climber Huerta, reported
(hat one of their porters was killed by an
ABSM. No funhcf details available.

(3) RAF Moufltainccrng Club Expedition,
found tracks.

5 1956 John Keel, author of "Jadoo,” claims to have

foUOwed ABSM for 2 daya and flnaUy seen il

ifl a swamp. . ,

iVS 1957 (1) First Slick Expedition. Three sets of tracks,
excrement, and hairs found at three widely
separated locations,

(2) Two Sherpas told Tom Slick they had aeon
ABSM early that year.

S (3) Peter and Bryan Byrne, of the Slick Expe¬

dition saw ABSM in the Arun Valley.

NS. 1958. (1) Second SUck Expedidou. Two aerpas

270



with GenIJ RusmII fit low filtjtude meet
Teh-lma (Pigmy-type ABSM) by river;
oumerous tracks seen by Russell.

S. (2} One God^n Spani meets an ABSM.

1959. (I) Third Slick Expedition. Numerous tracks
found, and ABSMs followed.

<2) Japaoese Expedition under Prof. T. Ogawa,
finds tracks.

(3) Fukuoka Daigaku Xapancae Expedition
finds tracks.

19d0. Seven separate parties [hut no* the Hillary ex¬
pedition. which saw oothing but tried to de¬
bunk scalps) of forngners and numerous locals
reported finding tracks, and caves lobabiied by
ABSMs.

In addition to this somewhat impressive list 1 have
detailed records of rnany other sightings by both foreigziera
and natives, but for which no d^oite date is given or for
which I have been unable to obuin a definite date. Then,
J have also some delightful expressions by the ethno¬
logists. These scientists seem oot to be in the least inter¬
ested in the grumblings and muiierings of their confreres
in other scienees^noubly zoology—and seem to have
gooe merrily on thdr way and svith their work, adopting a
iilightly amused attitude, at the cfiscomfiture of others. As
a fine example of this calm common sense, one cannot do
belter than quote Prof. C. von Fdrer-Haimendorf of the
School of O^ntal and African Studies, who wrote: “By
coining the picturesque name The Abominable Snowman*
Westerners have surrounded the yeti with an air of mys¬
tery; but to the Sherpas there is nothing very mysterious
about yeU: and they speak of them Id much the same way
as Indian aboriginals speak of dgers. Most Sherpas have
seen yeti at some dme or other, and wall-pajoUngs io
monasteries and temples depict two types of them^^ne
resembling a bear and one resembling a large monkey. It is
geaerslly known ihot there are two such typti, and in hard
winters they come into the valleys and prey on the Sher¬
pas* potato stores, or even on catUe. The idea tbsc it is
unlucky to sec e yeii may be due to an association between
the hardships caused by an abnormally heavy inowfalJ and
the appearance of yeti near human habitations on such
occasions. No particular virtue « ascribed to the headdress
of yer/'bidfi in Paogboche; it is freely baodlcd and iresied

271



neither with reverence nor wiih any superstitious fcar”^
This is ooe of, if not Che most, refreshing statements
that I have come across in over a quarter of a cenrury of
investigation of the matter of ABSMs. It also stands out as
a statement by any scientist on any subject, and on its own
merits, quite apart from ABSMery, Would that a roologist
might just once have so pronounced; but then, none who
have made pronouncements have ever been to the Hima-
Jayas or considered the matter from the local point of
view, Almost equally pragmatic is a passage written by
Prof, Reo4 von Nebe^ky-Wojkovfltz, after a 3*year sojourn
in Tibet aad Sikkim devoted to ethnographic studies. This
reads:

n is 9 remarkable fact that the sotemeots of Tibetans,
gherpas, and Lepehas concemiag the Snowman's ap¬
pearance targely cotneide. According to ihecr description
a warrant for the arrest of Ibis most ‘'wanted” of aU the
jahabitants o( the Himalayas would read as foUowss
7 feet to 7 feet 6 Inches taD when erect on his hind legs.
Powerful body covered with dark brown hair. Long
arms. Oval bead running to a pohil at the top with
ape-like face. Face and bead are only sparaely covered
wl^ hair. He fears ihe light of a fire, and in ^ite of
hfa great strength is regarded by the les superstitions
iahnbitaats of the Hlmala}^ as a bannlcss creature (hat
woold attack a mao only if wounded.

From whal native hunters say, the t^m “snowman”
Is a miSBomer, soce firstiy il is not human and secondly
ft does not live in the zone of snow. Its hahilat is rather
(he impeactnible thickets of the highest tracts of Hima¬
layan forests. Daring the day It sleeps in its Ivr, which
It does not leave until algbtfalL Then Its approach may
be recognized by the cracking of branches and its pccn-
Uar whi5tllng call. In the forest the migo moves an all
fours or by si^ngiog from tree to tree. But hi the open
country U generally walks upright with ao unsteady,
redliog g^t Why does the creature nodertake what must
certainly be ertrcmely wearisome eipeditioas into the
inhospitable repons of mow? The natives have whal
sounds a very credible explanation; they say the Snow-
man Ukes a saline moss which h finds oo the rocks of

‘Torn Slick, sccooded by Peter Byrne, now tells me lhal the
Inhabitaota of Pangboebe never claimed that this was the s^p
of an ABSM, but ihai it was made * ImirtUion of one held w a
moaastery elsewbere, aad made from a goat akin.

272



lb« mttniot fields, WUIe seonUng f<ff thfa mom b
kmwm Its characteristic tracks on the snowfields. When
it hat saitsSed its hooget for Mh ft retnnks to the foitA.

"nitt Is not only folded oo good common sense and
•ome proper tnvestigttloo. it is also truly seieaUfic in that
u is *'tmagiQ stive” in iis mentiOD ot the search by the
cretturas for saline moss." Aetuilly, there are certain
lichens (not mosses) in this area, not saJiae, hut verit^e
vitamia factories, ootably of ViiamiD E. It is strange that
this rep<wt had to wait for an ethnologist's meation, since
a simiJar matter has been known to botanists and zookv
gists for almost half a century, having been the key to
Professor CoUetfs famous and definitive work cm the
causes of lenuning swarmings and etnigratioa. nns. that
researcher had shewn, was the cause of the suddai gnat
increases in virility and resulting swarms of these small
rodents due to the continuous excess of these vitamins m
their diet, which consist ©f these lichens for which they
oig under winter snow.

Nor are lemmings alone lo making a road dash to get at
tbb vitamin-rich food, The principal reason why buds
lake (ha trouble to fly snaualty for thousands of miles (o
the edge of the melting polar snows to breed is that the
vegeuuoo coming out from under that snow la the spfiog.
and the insects that feed oo it, are so rich in vitamins that
yo^ buds can be raised healthily on a very limited area.
The ABSMs of this very cloudy area periodic^ need
su« Vitamin and so go up to grti> under the rotting snow
wr It, 1^ by their age-edd knowledge, or what h smne-
taaes called instinct—just as some bumans have a mad
craving to eat certain earths and know exactly which ones
and where to dig for them*

But what you may still want to know, exactly did all
these people say they found or saw. I could quote you their
actual statements but am not going to do so for two rea-
sons. First, they are almost all already ia prim and
of them in readily acces^Ue books as listed in (he
wbUo^phy. As a guide to tbem, you should read Bernard
Hwvelmans’ On the Track of Unknown Animals, which
fully covers tlie issue. Second, J refrain from so doing
twause, frankly, even I find tbem somewhat boring, for
they all are so absolutely alike. ^

• Oeophigy is wid«pr<iid aag cropped vp in New York CStv
a few years ago. *


273



The great majority of the reports are CFf a roughly man-

_though of a very large and sturdy mao compared to

the wiry little Shtrpas—ABSM, with a conical head, bull-
Deck, prognathous jaw, aod very wide mouth but no lips,
clothed in reddish-brown, thick, short, hairy fur often
grizzled Id larger specimens and alroosl black in the
smaller, which goes naked but uses sticks on occasion. Its
excrement indicates that it is omnivorous, but feeds
mostly on small mammals, insects, young birds that it
can catch, snails, aod various softer vegetable substances.
It lives in the upper montane forests but comes out from
time to lime to grub under the old snow, and ia very
severe weather it may descend into Inhabited valleys and
maraud It has short, very broad feet, with a second toe
larger than its big toe while both of these are much wider
than the other three aod are separated from them, It is shy
and retiring unless provoked or imagines itself cornered,
when it will pat up a terrific display just like a great ape,
but seldom carries through its (kreats.

This is not just the pattern but the identity of the vast
body of the reports. However, it is not by any meaos the
only one. There appear to be at least four if not five quite
distinct creatures involved in this general area, only two of
which are ceitainlv indigenous to the Himalayan ranges
ihcroselves and to the “Great Brahmaputra Gutter" within
it These two ate the mao^ized ABSM described above
which is clearly distinguished by the local inhabitants as
the Meh’Teh, and the litfle, pigmy type, only from 4 to 5
feet tall, that inhabits the lower and warmer valleys, eau
frogs and insects and is generally omnivorous, and which
the natives call the Teh-lma. This is clothed in very thick
red fur with a slight mane, and leaves tiny, 5-inch-long
footprints, The third ABSM appears only iQ be sMen of
in the area, being ao inhabitant of eastern Tibet, Sikang,
and the nortbem Indo-Chinese Massif. This Is the Tok,
Kuns-Lu. Gin-Sung creature called by the Sherpas the
Dzu’Teh, or Utcrally "The Hulking Thing'*. This by all
accounts is immensely taller and bulkier than the Meh-
Teh. with a black to dark gray, shaggy and long coat, a
flat head, beetling brow with a sort of upcurled bang on
it, long powerful arms and huge hands, and very humao-
type feel that leave imprints like those of a giant man but
with /wo subdigiUl pads under the first toe just like the
Sasquaich and Oh-Mah. This U the creature that Bernard
Hcuvelmans long ago (1951) suggested might be a dc-
sceodant of, related to, or even actually a Cigoniopithecus,

274



which 01 ihat tine was thought to be a ponpd rather
thao a hofflioid.

The little Teh-lmas preseat a fine problem aD Iheir
owiL They are the least koowa and the moft neglected by
everybody. Ig fact, it was aot really until 1957 that eveo
^ most ardent ABSM hunters acknowledged tlieir ca-
isteoce, agd only one man has done anything about them
—W-M. Russell, commonly known to his countless friends
all over the world as GenJd. Yet, this b probably rbe
comnoaest of aU ABSMs with an enormous distribution
and is certainly ’the Yeti most likely to succeed," if only
somebody would do something aboat him.

Philoiogbu. such as one Sri Swami Pranavaoanda and
others, in attempting to debunk ihe whole of ABSMeo*
through ibeir specialized methodology, have created a pos¬
itive shambles of tbe NepaJe&e laogudges and dialects
thmof, and quite apart from calling them all "Tibetao*'
[»c]. They have tried to show that leh has rwn and
meanings; one being treh. t(r)e or dred which they sale
means a Brown Bear; the other, re. dey. or da. meuing a
ghost. It transpires that (bey are wrong on both counts
and in both cases. flTie cryplo-esowfic detaOs of all this
have beeo published elsewhere). Suffice it to be said
here that teh turns out to mean "maollke creature:' Tbe
ending Ima is actually a Buddhistic inveisioa of m/ / Zo.
which rnight ^ written for us phopetically as m’ghoola.
This, in turn ts a southern form of a phrw that sounds
something like mt^ulHr. meaning originally an 'Incarnate
vehicle.’' When used as a qualifying word attached to the
name of an animal or other living crearurc, it implies '*a
being" or ‘nhmg,'* Thus, tbe little Tch-lma. is actually
called—and rather simply, as it turns out in the end—'The
Manlike Being." Nothing could be more pragmatic and
appn^mate.

There is a wealth of mfonnatloo on the form and be*
havior of this creature to be gleaned from all tbe native
pcoj^s from the western border of Sikaag in the east to
the feet of the Pamirs on tbe west, throughout the Hrma-
layaa. Practically nothing of (his hu been recorded airaply
because nobody realized that there was more (ban one
"abomln^le snowman" and. even when they did tspin to
this obvious inlelligetice, (bey simply could boi stom¬
ach more than two types. As "Ibe other" place was pre¬
empted by the mighty CinSung or Dzu-Teh, the poor little
lowland TeA-Zme, got lost agdn. It was GcraJd Russell
who first spotted it as a quite seporaie species or type, and,

275



to hb long cxperieneo ia colleoiini animalCi prompted

him to concentrate aJI bis efforts oo it—and down la
the forests, I give the results lo you in the words of Peter
Byrne, D^uiy Loader of Ibe 1957 SUckJohnson Espe^-
tioa to search for ABSMs in Nepal. IThb n berewitb
reproduced In full by the kiod permisaion of Pelet Byice
and tbe North Amcricao Newspaper AUiancc.l

The first sightbg was made hy a Sherpa villager who
said he was bojidoi edible frogs by the river at light
with a torch buog oa a tamhoo pvlc. Movlog upstream
about 300 yards from Gerald's Mind the mao come
upon a wet footprint on a rock. As he swuDg bis torcb
low to ezaoiae il be saw a snowmai squattiog on a
boolder across the stream, 20 yards away, TTie Slierpa
was ternlicd, for tales of the Ye Li la these muuutaio
vjUages are foil of accouits of the creature's streogth
aad koklt of kBIlog end multflaling men. Re shouted
la frigbL The beast dowl; stood on two feet and lum¬
bered oahurriedly upstream Into tbe darkness.

The followbg night Gerald's Sberpa guMe Da Tempa,
a eeteran Himalayan tracker fr«n DarjediDg* went out
with the vJIUger ot nddiilsht. the oote rebtea. While
Gerald remarked It was ^^rtine” of tbe villagtr lo
venture out acalo. be ootked Ibe fellow was trcmbliog
with fesr and kept behind Da Tempa as they left tbe
camp. After more than an hour of scouring up and down
Uk Cheyai^ River banks, Da Tempo and his compan¬
ion were makiog their way back to RusscD’s camp when
Da Tempa saw movemeot ahead on tbe trail. He Ihougnt
H was probatfy leaves of fl busb rostlmg, bot shoue his
BasbUght at the spot.

There, not more than 10 ymd* away, stood a emoJi
ano-like crcatiire. the Snowman! The Snowman advanced
deliberately toward tbe fight, and Da Tempa turned
and raa. Next morning Gerald laid he found four very
dear footprints in the gravel mil, wWch be has photo¬
graphed. From qqestioDijig Da T empa and tbe vDlager
Ibcae facts emerged abom our elusive quarty?

He Is about 4 feet * luebe* high, with bnoehed
shoulders and a ?»y pointed bead which dopes back
sharply £ro» hi* forehead. He h covered with thick
reddiub gray hair. His footprfcils are aboat 4 inches
lone* 'n>« villager was shown om pictures of bear, orang
fUn, chlmpaizec, gorilla and prebistoflc man. He un-

S76



heMi(a({a{^y pointed In Ibe (orflla pkclure ts beins most
like the crtalure bo Miw, bat be emphnsUed the bend
was more pointed.

As we trMed up Ibe QM^ang VaBtf to meet Ger*
aid, BTyan nod I are epecotetlng what ibb descrtptioB
of Ibe SnowmaD may ncan. Is the beast sighted by Da
Teenpa the smaller variety of Soowmao known as the
Mcti? Or i» It a young of tbe glonl Yati which has been
desmbed as more than 8 feel laU? Tbe footprlnto are
eenainly moeb smaller than the ItWlocb tracks left by
the unlmai that twice visited our camp by night Is tbe
Bunn Valley. Tbe tnclct our eipeditlon pbotograpbed
last year measiired 33 (oebss.

Peter writes a|aiD oa June 5th (1958) iron) Gong*
tba^g. Nepal:

Frogs are Ibc clue to the Abominable Snownsni and
now we are using Ibem as bail for our elusive quarry.
Twice our party has seen tbe Snowman when he canM
into tbe dar^ gorge of tbe Cboyaag Rirer at mJddIgbt
to catch tbe fool*loag jeDow frogs for food. Now we
have ut oat live frog», lied down by fine nylon fishing
llnei as a lure. We have boOt a bamboo ^’machon,** or
hunter’s bUod. la a tree conuDaadlng a stretch of river
baited with frogs nod have a second blind of rocks
along tbe bank farther down. From these points oi van*
tage ray brother Bryan I arc watching nightly.

We decided on ihh incdc after a reconnalapiaiice
showed where tbe Snowman had overturned huge river
boulders to lus search for food. Some wm so large B
took two of os to move the stones. j\nd we found two
footprints in river sand leading to a flat rock on whkh
were tbe remains of o half^aten frog. Toe prints were
clearly virible In tbe laod. bat tbe 4rincb prints wars
snaller tbaa tbe ones we pbotograpbed In tbe Banu
Valley soows some weeks ago. We have been dogged by
foul weather, moonless skies and relenties rain.

Reavy rain, light rahi, torrentiaJ rain and dreary
drizzle. This has bceo tbe **Cbln<we water torture** en*
dured by ov eipedltioo for more than a month now.
The rain beghis at 9 a.m., continues ati day and night
until the dawn son breaks throogh tbe forest wftb golden
streams of light at 5 a.B. it has hampered our plane
for tracking the creatm.

At fflldnigbtt with tbe rain pouring down in pUcb

877



UiKknna and wmerfall drowning puf even Ibe sounds
Df breaking twigs and falling alonts we hunters lean
fo follow la tbc dark» our Qi|hily rigO bai been a aigbi*
Bare.

The Dzu-Teh is a Himalayan inhobilaiit. However,
there does appear to be still another creature In this pro
Vince and on the southern rim of Tibet. Now. there seems
10 be some evidence pointing to this rcaJly being a gbuK
monkey. Il am for now ignoring the tailed creatures re«
ported by Drs. Moore and Brooks, which would eoesii-
lute ibe OTib local unknown, aod whicb I ffaokJy believe
to be some huge species of Coloboid Monkey and ihus
related to the Mangabeys and Guerezas of Africa, aod
the Langurs. Leaf-Monkeys. Lutoogs. Proboscis tod
Snub*aosi.*J Mookeys of Oheotalia.) The Abb4 Pierre
Bordet has dredged up a tiny gem that is of greet sigoi*
5caoce to this monkey problem. Namely, that the moun*
tain massif that cootaina Ml. Everest a called by Indians
Ma}iaJangur Himal. or "The MouQtajn& of the Great
Monkeys^—4Dd not of great apes, please note. Then,
there is also the fact that the Tibeuns. as opposed to the
Himelayenese peoples, lulk freely of a moruirous monkey
io their territory that has nothing to do with either the
Dzu-Tcfi, We/i-r<h. or Teh-lmo (which, iacldBOtally,
they call io various parls of their country by oumerous
other names). Il is. they say. nothing more than a monkey
and has oil the b^iis and characteristics of a monkey,
even to a son of loulitarian bravado and inaufferable
imvoeaiiveness combined with blind cowardice that in
extreme cares of defeat may lead to its turning into a
CMtpleteiy inseosaie homicidal manioc. There is but one
group of monkeys (hal so very well fils this billing.

To me it is very strange indeed that oellber this whole
idea Qor the possibility of this particular group of monkeya
being involv^ seems ever to have even been so much as
mentioned. The group encountered is the Cynopithecoids
or CynopithtekUtf. the Oog*faeed Monkeys, which in¬
cludes the Gelada and Hamadryad, the Drill and Mandrill,
the Baboons, the BUck Ape of the Celebes, and the Ma¬
caques aod Rhesuses. Not only aie the largest monkeys
members of this group; they are mostly terrestrial: most
of them walk on the whole soles of their feet and hands;
they have extremely maDtiko hands: they are certainty of
high sagacity and. despite snail brains, have a highly de¬
veloped "social" (or ai least commuoal) system. They ore

278



il» jlTOftgly Rcnopbobic, «Ad, fiftally, they are in many
cases ewaocdioarily ingenious, faeiJe, aod adeja at mao^
pulaiioa with ibeir bands. The ancieoi Egyptians iraioed
some of them (Hamadryads) to weed gardens, suck cord-
wood, sweep temples, and serve at banquets: a S. African
rwJroader supposedly uughi one lo throw switches in a
sigaai bo* and water the engines, and this animal is alleged
to have saved a train wreck by pulling the right switches
when ju master bad bad a hean attack. That was a
baboon. Even more icteUlgeol and amenable to co-otdi*
nated activities, however, are the Giant Rhesos and the
strange Stump-tailed Macaques {LyssotUs). to which tba
^panese 'Ape" belongs. The former are customarily
trained to coltea coconuts on planutions. and the Ma¬
layan ForesCTy Service trained them to collect boUdicil
specimens from the topi of taU trees. As to the mastery of
human affairs on the pan of the latter I can personally
attw from many yean’ corapaniooship with several in-
dividuals. Some of the things they learned to do altogether
soipassed anything I have ever seen an ape do, and they
wrk at It with much greaur persistence and reliability

I. . V „ lime, Incorri^Ie

Siobs. ucpredictabl* to strangers, and lenibly dangerous.
But. as If this were not enough, there Is a positively enor¬
mous spwies Uiat lives in the mountain recesses of that
liitle ca^ve of Indo-Chinese territory that runs up the
face of the Tibet-Sikang Plateau and mountains.
This IS known as Lyssod^s (Mocaca) ihibeiaftwi,

T^ese huge monkeys inhabit the fastnesses that are also
inhabited by the Oiani Panda—and which concealed ihU
ammaJ for so long—and these have never been explored.
Jhe species of Dawp-Treea (the \fftMequoios) discovered
ft« » long ago came from there, as also did the very odd
Tnorold’s Deer (Cerviry albirosiis). as well as other rare
creatures like the Royal Chinese Sable (Muyitfc llu. a
son of enormous mink) and a small spotted cat just like
to Ocelot. These great monkeys have no visible uil, that
t^KCi bctfg a tiny, flattened, naked twist concealed in the
long, rich reddish-brown to orange overcoat that cloibm
ihw animals. Sometimes they descend in hordes opon the
cultivated valleys oC the hill peasantry and completely de-
vasuie everything, even attacking and tearing down houses
made of mud and wattle, aod not, it appears, being in the
leas* frightened of men. even if they use fircanns. And
tbm is anoihcf interesting point about their behavior.
When there is snow on the ground, they sometimes walk

279



on their hind legs, which are very sturdy, albeit with an
irra^winging and staggering gait bm whicb, I svis lokl by
an observer, seeiss to be due more to ibe deep snow than
to aay Imbalance. Apparently, like apes, they do not like
to get their Itands cold by puitiog them on the snow.

These monkeys have raiber short feces that are naked
aod pink, going bright red to heat and bluish m cold. Their
other naked parts are dirty gray. The head is very curiously
shaped, having practically no forebead but beetling brows,
is Aanened from side to side and comes to a pcnnt above
but ibes has great domes of loog bair njzming from the
eoraer of the eyes back to the neck to join a profuse
mane. Normally, these animals walk on all fours with a
kind of strutting pace, the four limbs being of about equal
IcDgih. One I saw In Hong Kong had a head and body
fihe head is carried straigbc ahead but the face does not
point downward] length of three foot six. measured di*
rectly aod not along the curvature of the body. My Chi¬
nese traveling compaoioo, who bad collected in outer
Szechwan, told me that this was but a rnoderately tmall
male aod that if a really big leader-male stood up on his
feet, aa they sometimes do. be would look me eye for
eye—I am exactly 6 feel. These monkeys go io snow.

My comment here is that, in view of the existence of
these huge, tailless monkeys in the province conceroed
just east of Tibet, and in view also of certain remarks
made by the great 19U>ctfltury explorer, General Percfra,
who was and Is still just about the only Westerner really to
have crossed this territory and. again, to passing references
msde by the Abb^ David [discoverer of tbe other¬
wise extiocl primitive deer, named after biro, io the
Manebu royal pnrks, and in a way of (be Bti’Shung or
Gtanl Pas da], there could well be a giant species of
owuntain Macaque in eastern Tibet that n>ay occasionally
enter the Himalayan Oriental Province and then become
ertrerocJy “difficult” if met by a lone yak-herder. H
a record of a fairly targe party of unarmed Indian peas-
anliy being attacked by the ordinary little Bandas, or
Rhesus Monkeys, in the Puojab.) Abo, it is just possible
that the same or a related type of Cynopithecoid may be
found io the Karekoram, and one of ibem could be the
creature that a Mr. W. W. Wood and cempantom saw in
1944. He specidcally states that this jumped '*frocn side to
skle" or zigzagged. This is a most typical method of pro¬
gression of many if not all monkeys when io a burry on
the ground, and especially on downgrades, but one which

280



they Bd^t Bven oq perfectly level, unencumbered areae.
Also, please note that the locals with Mr. Wood deSoitely
<.*led the erearure benda or '‘monkeys.’*

At this point 1 want to incer^l a very dellnite state-
ment to my readers, to persons who may review this book,
and to those of the scientific fraternities who might have
gotten this far without having used the thing to throw at
students or bad an apoplectic fit. This is that f do not far
one moment agger/ that ABS\h are Giant Rhesus mon¬
beys.

What I am Crying to say a that. In addition to the two
very distinct forms of ABSM In this, the Himalayan South
Tibet province—the Meh-Teh and the TeWma—there
could be, first a very large foriD of C^oboid Monkcv in
(he cooiferous mootaiie forests, related to (he Langurs
and Rhinopiihecusi and. second, a really giant form of
Lyssodes or Stump-Uiled Macaque, which might be the
origin of some of the Tibetan (and notably the Tibetan)
reports. The really giant Piu-Teh. Tok, or Gin»Sung. of
the eastern Eurasian Massif and the Indo-Chinese Block,
definitely is an ABSM, and more than probably a full
Homintd. but is known to the Nepalese only by hearsay
from their Tibetan relatives. But there are still more
complications in the Himalayan region. These are really of
^uiie a different nature, and extend as far from ABSMery
in one way ai giant Cynopithecoids do is the other. This is
Che matter of Men.

This great province is ooi yet fully explored or known.
Wben some soldiers employ*^ by a person entitled the
Rajah of Mustaag. a sub-aulonoraous province of north¬
western Nepal, kilted an aaimaJ a few yean ago that they
did not know but which had been scaring villagers in their
territory, It was declared to be a yeti (l.e. an ABSM).
The beast was most adequately photographed while stUl
freshly killed. lying on a pristine white sheet. Later, it was
carefully skinned with its extremities complete aiid was
shipped with its boiled skull to Katmandu. It nimcd out
to be a Slotb-Bcar (Melursus). However, this is not the
pojct. Wbat is, is, the fact that nobody bad ever heard of
Mustang: thought it wai a kind of wild horse In our
and that somebody was kidding. Even the wire-
service representatives in Katmaodu, capital of Nepal,
could sot get any clear answer as lo whether there re^y
was such a place, or to whom It belonged, even if only
nominally. T^ same goes for most of the Inno Himalaya
and much more so for the Karakorams. There are some

281



redlf delightful stories emanatins from these parts, oot
the least extraordinary of which was solenuily put out by
two Canadian scico lists aamed JiJl Crossley-Batt and Dr.
irvine Baiid of Montreal.

These two allegedly conducted etboological studies
there in the year 1921, and they staled that "lo an isolated
spot Id the Himalayas, at 17,000 feel” they had discovered
a “lost tribe of Cbaldeaos” who painted on goarsklos with
vegetable dyes, and who all lived to be 107 years old.
Stateaicfifs such as just about Root me; oaore ee>
pecially when some innocent i£ clobbered for remarking
casually that he saw a funny fish in a net off Florida, or
some such mild thing. Even the wildest moroo playing
hookey from a high school would be hard put to it to
crowd more cxiremiiies into a single statement. Why
Chaldeans; and, on what grounds? And who can tell that
anybody lives to over 100 , let alone a whole tribe; and why
107 yean, precisely? The whole thing is a bit balmy but
there it is. and wc just have to try and cope with it.

This is, indeed, an exceptional case, but there has always
been a exeat deal of mumbling about “lost races/' “my^*
tics." hermits, pilgrims, and outcasts in this area. True,
quite £ number of Hindu pilgruus do visit the Brahmaputra
Cutter from India, and there are ascetics living all over
the place high above the ixee>line: also, there never was
capital punishment in Tibet—that country being pro-
faundy Buddhistic—a^d really annoying persons were aU
ways just thrown out of the community and told to fend
for themselves. This, they have done for long periods,
living until their clothes rotted away, while the law«abiding
cltizeary was absolutely forbidden to cooract, aid, or have
anything to do with these criminal outcasts. However,
being Tibetans and Himalayans, aod thus predomiDuitly
Mongoloid, these persons aU started out with particularly
hairtes skins, so thai they simply cannot be put forward
as candidates for ABSMs. (Besides, they grow very long
bead-bail.] When, however, it comes to the Buddhist Eks-
cetics—the so-called Lung-Gompa—we meet quite a dif¬
ferent condition.

These men deny normal life and take fint to monaster¬
ies where they really study the supematura], and in pat¬
terned stages, under persons with a tremendous fund of
knowledge. What they learn is quite beyond os and,
frankly, oetebar understandable to oor even beJtevsd in by
Westcroera. However, they do in time seem to acquire
some quite remarkable talents that smack of the magicaL

262



Dr. Julian HuxJey hu spok«o seriously of their ^ility to
belt a circle of B feet io diameter fo i-foot snow, simply
by lalcing thought upoa the matter; and others have de¬
scribed them as bciog able to teleport themselves: that is,
to be uuuponed mstaotaaeou&ly from one place to an-
oeber; and, most certainly, to be able to send oews in
advance as quickly as by radio, though no radio exists. Of
all of this I know nothing iactnal but of one fact I do have
evidence. This is that the iclliales to these disciplines do. at
one xtage of their CTaining. go galloping about the country¬
side. stark naked, and in the worst of weather. %ad
particularly at sunrise and sundown, fm* the good of
their souls aad (he eaorcisin of sundry worldly hang-overs.
They may then be a pretry eerie sigbi, charging through
the rhodoJeodron thickets and someiimes even bowliog a
Nt. But these chaps are almost as commonpiace to the
Huualayans as are mailmen to us: and they arc not hairy,
don't have separated second and first toes, don’t ea; raw
mouse-hares or any other meat, aod don't run around
gibbering.

There is ooc rather delightful story about a Hindu pil¬
grim. however, which just goes to show what human beings
can do. A cenain Colonel Henniker of the Sriilsb Army
was CTD&sing a 17,000-fooi pass In Ladakh in 1930, in a
blinding snowstorm, when he perceived a rather skinny
fellow, clothed only in a loincloth, and using a staff,
tram ping stolidly Tibetward. Amazed, he hailed the mas
in English and received the astonishing and cheery reply
‘'Good morning. Sir: and a Happy Christmas.’* [It was
mid-July). There may. in fact, he all manner of queer
types wandering about in these appalling fastnesses;
clothed or unclothed; fed or unfed; and everyone minding
his own particular business.

It tate a great deal of patience and some ingenuity^as
well as exceedingly good manners and taste—to get In with
the local people and to be sufficiemly accepted by them to
hear what th^ really have to say. We of (be West lecid to
adopt a lordly attitude to everybody else, and ofteo In our
own igoorance give away, hy gesture alone, if nothing rise,
that we are mocking anything that we don't understand.
The Himalayans are very wise, aod perspicacious people.

But for all ihcir wonderful qualities, it is not to the Sher*
pas and other Nepale&e. nor to the people of the Himalaya
as 3 whole that we must lum for some real pragmatic
information about ABSMs. Rather, we should go to the
Tibetans pic^Ki, Their vdiote attitude U uderly different,

283



for they appear to have the wbde thiof down **pat,” aod,
they )ast doo'i bother to ar^ue (be details. To them, there
are three kinds of these creatures catled. as I have aJ*
ready said, by many names. They are not much interested
in Teh’Jmas, in ihai they dwell in the lower regions, of
which there are none in (heir euJied land. Mfh-Teh they
know and treai as just another (hing iodi|enous to the
land, bu( of the bulking Diu-7eh they take a really peeved
ootioa. They say (his vast creature is hard to handle and
k raids yak herds: ihai they go in groups: they can get
along In appalling climaiic coAdiiions; and (hey have all
the ingenuiiy of humans, plus strength with which one is
really almosc unable (o cope. That is why. (hey also say.
they keep (he skins of (hose which their compatriots sky.
or mummify (heir bodies aod put (hem away, but not so
much out of respect but simply as “hereditary ewM*
warnings'* to other men. Rea] Tibetans have spoken of all
this to both Nepalese and to many foreigner!; in Nepal,
and one much respected Lama uanoed Punyabora even
offered to bring back one of each of tbe three kinds alive,
if tbe Government would put up the money. My pennis-
alble comment is herewith tcmiiiiated but perhaps ] can
afford to eateod mv'self a liiUe and make a few. more
general comments at this point.

Whh all the above, bow is it possible for anyone to
state Oatly that there H nothing io tbe Himalayan region
to be investigated? Tbk. I personally and simply cannot
see. There have been those over ibe years who have en¬
deavored to prove ihai nothing exists there; and many
have tried by disproving or '‘showing up" one facet of tbe
matter to show that all the rest is either myth, legend, or
folklore. But, when you take each of these Individ uaJ
complaints, you find thai none of (hem |ibes with all the
others, while each of them in turn itself provee not to bold
water. The ever-recurrent notion, for insiaace. that the
tracks arc made by local people wearing a particular type
of loose footgear rcscrobhog a mukluk or moecasin^and
which was recently again brought forward by one Michel
Petssel In Argosy Magazioe (December. 1960)—is obvi¬
ously both absurd and impossible if only (he advocates
would just spei>d a few momenta thinking logically about
tbe matter. If this Mr. Felael had considered the following
facts for a moment, be would not have written as he did.

If these ABSM tracka^which. you wiU note, have baf¬
fled just about every really experienced mountaineer for
over a ceniury^wem made by a local mao wearing foot-

284



gear such as h« suggests, tbeo, fint, svery cmw muu have
won ou( the front baZf of both feci precisely, and In such
a manner that neither shoe ever showed a singte mark of
where jt ended or the bare toes prointded. Second, the
men wcariof these overshoes must ail have been of an
extremely rare type—if they ever eJtkted^hsvSa g the sec*
ood toe larger than ihe tiru. and both of them, and on
both feet, also widely separated from the rest of the Iocs.
Tbal there could be so many such freaks among the
limited population of this ooe area i$ much too much to
ask. Also, ii b manifest that Mr. Pelssel has never seen u
im^Dt or a cast of ibe foot that made the medium-aized
[or Meh’Teh] tracks. They are positively shocking when
dm seen, being abs^uiely enormous—and the gape be*
twecQ the separated toes are enormous too, which could
Qot happen physically if the whole was enlarged by melt¬
ing and reflation. Almost the same goes for those, like
Sir Edmund Hillary, who have attempted to debunk the
scalps. Maybe these are made from the shoulder skina of a
Serow (Capricornis), but were the makers not imitating
something ^ they know? And these ihinga are, in any
case, only pJaythinga. like dtristmas hats. Further, even
if they stn not genuine yeti scalps, what made the fresh
foot-tracks?

Let us not forget that Ibe Krakeo, the giant squid, was
regarded as a fable for centuries until Prof. A, E. Verrill
took a small boot and went and got one alive off the eoait
of Newfoundland. Everybody, except the North Atlantic
hsbermen bed said that they did not, and could not exist,
but reports of them persisted in coming in every year. 1
Ihink people should pause, read ibc facis, and also coo-
sid« a while, before making definitive statements about
ihe ABSMs of the Himalayas, or of anywhere else, for
that matter.


285



13. The Western Approaches

RUSSIAN FINDINGS IN THE CAUCASUS
AND THEREABOUTS


We have now reached the summit. Further, 1 have to
sdout albeit with leluctacce, that all ay reperUge up lo
tbis exalted point looks, both in retrospeet and in vi«w of
wbat DOW faces us. pretty paltry, la fact, the cld saw
about straining at goats ininidcs Itself oo my attcBtion,
unwoaied but persbtent. It were os if I hod up till oow
been squeezing a sponge of Its last drop of information
when what bas already been said is reviewed In the light
of what we cow have to lackle. Whereas the reports even
from such ASBMally rich areas as British Coluntbia may
be counted od your fingers and toes, we now find our¬
selves confronted with literally tnousands of them, spread
over & thousand years in time, and ihroagbout a triangular
area with sides measuriog appro&imately 5000. 4000, and
3000 miles in length. Moreover, these reports iocresse in
□umber per annum on what looks suspiciously like geo¬
metrical progression so that the greater part of them are
bunched up in the immedjate past. Also it now transpires,
ibe matter on band has been pursued, and even sclen-
tihcally pursued, in this area for over a century, though
that pursuit has been plagued by all ibe same asinlnitlcs
and obstnictioRs as elsewhW'e,

At this juociure a few words on the gniesame subject
of geopoUdes are called for. Most political boundaries are
ridiculous. At one eslrcme we have gross misconceptions
about “continents,’' ot Um other, such absurdities os the
delineation of the North American state of Montana, in
between these extremes man has further insisted on
ercetbg qui(e arbitrary fences^sucb as that betwcea the
United States of noribern North America and the United
States of Mexico—though these aic sometimes called liOQ,

2d6



bamboo, or “curtains** of other materials. Ridiculous
terms like **tbe Near East'* and '*the Middle East.'* both of
which lie Id what is roaAifeatly and gecsraphically "Th4
tVesl." add to the confusion; and then, to top it ail m
get purely political expressions such as “East" aod “West."
bits of both of wbicb are cow scattered all over the globe
inside each other. Then, some buflbon (like Hausbofer or
Treitscbke) must needs go and coin the phme ''The
Hea/tlaod*' but omit to define it. sotne respects, such a
concept is a splendid idea, as it implies a central blob
which pumps away without cease or surcease, and. if ap^
plied to a certain area in centra! Eurasia, it makes a lot of
sense ethni^ogically. Yet. tbe area that was finally pinned
down for this happens always to have been one of tbe
greatest eibnologicaJ blacks—this is the lowlacds betwoeo
tbe Urals and the great momiiain barrier that cuts straight
across Eurasia from southw’est lo northeaat^whilc the
“pumpieg** appears always to have gooe oo beyond that
lofty barrier to tbe east.

If people insist on spUttmg themselves into two ethno*
logical camps and caJIiog these “West" and “Ban.** they
would be well advised to consider some ineradicable ger^
graphical facts. The most pertinent of these is this mon*
strous mountain barrier lying atbwari Eurasia, since U bas
always formed, aod will always form, the true dividing
line between west and east. It lies along and constiltnea
ibe eastern boundary of the U.S.S.R.; aod. if you want to
be precise about the matter, it also forms by extension
tbe southern boundary of that vast Union. T^ay also H
forms tbe boundary berween the Mongoloid-type peoples
and tbe Caucasoid-type peoples; and 1 add the suffix
''-type” most firmly because a not inconsiderable body of
the peoples west of the barrier were orlglAally Mongo¬
loids, aod some oo tbe east side originally Caucasoids but
today (in tbe now almost classic expression of a certain
comedian imitating a Chinese waiter): “So funny; all
Amcricaa lot^ alike": so also do all Europeans, even tbe
mongoloid Magyars. This great dividing line is of tba ut*
Q>os( significance.

ABSMs are not found west or north * of this line but
they are reported from all along Its edge and more or less
all over the eastern area exclusive of the subconiineot of
India aod tbe eastern fringe of islands, as we have already

MACorreci: They have now been reported from nonheastem
Siberia. (Privaie commimiestiQii from Prof. B. F. Ponhaev.]

287



oote<1. At the lame time our iaformalioo on ABSMs lo this
irea, apart from the Himalayas aod the lado^hinese
PeoiQSuJa, comes almost exclusively from or ihrougk the
Russians who are, of course, wholly in the Western area.
This last fact may bo rather puzzling lo the general
reader and somewhat aggravating to students of disci-
plines other than the purely geographic and biologic.
Nonetheless, short of a mejor shift in the earth’s crust,
notbiog—not even an all-out nuclear war—cao alter the
facts. Nature constructed our bed in the ‘'West,” and we
coigbt just as well make up our miodi that we have got to
lie in it together! 11 cannot refrain from adding, purely eis
a student of plant and animal distribution, that we mi^t
also just as well give up any thoughts of trying to go and
lie in any ether peoples* bods; oot only because, os in tbe
case of eastern Eurasia, it is a bit crowded, but much
more definitely because none of them are oitr environmeat
If we do so. we’U |o Mongoloid or Negroid in time cither
by absorption or physical tautation, just as the Magyars
have become Caucasoids in a few hundred years after
landing up in our bailiwick.]

ConllderadoQS such as these are often regarded as what
Is euphemistically called potitical. They are not; they arc
purely biological. What is more, if such facts rather than a
lot of (often ralSaken) ideas were used to guide our
policies and our activities, our species would get aJoag
much better. Early, primitive, and ardent roan seems to
have appreciated these facts li only instinctively, and
acted accordingly. ABSMs seem to have bad tbe clue
siucc the first. Driven out of their origmal lowland forest
homes they retreated into the montane forests, aod par-
tieulorly into IhoM area! within tho$e vegetadonal zones
where Modern Man finds it hardest to get along. Tlus is
true ’‘survival of the fittest'*: we mi|bt ^vell emulate the
forlorn ABSMs. Tbe process happens also to make an
otherwise appalling task a bt easier for this rTporter. All
1 have to do Is locale said particular xegions. aod the great
mass of facts now to be presented then fails into a very
fair semblance of order. The mesa cao be biokcn down
into manageable pans—geographical units—and pre¬
sented one at a time in logical sequence. To this I shall
now proceed.

Let us assume that we have ended up at tbe north-
western md of the Lesser Himalayas. This lands us lo an
area known as Cllglt which now lies m the north of
Western Pakistan. 11 apologize for this and a comLag

268



plethora of *'poIUieeJ“ deflniiioiu but there is oothlng tbit
a mere biologist can do about it.) At this point (see Map
XV) you wiD oote that we are wry close to (on the right
aide, going west) the end of the even more mighty Kara*
korams, which in turn constitute an extcnston of the
"Mother of AH Mountains," the Muh-Dzhun rDzhung
pBthum of the Tibetans, and which we have called the
southern Ubeten Rim. Ahead of us lies e most unpleasant
complex of mountains known as the Pamirs or TTie Roof
of the World," These form a nodal point for all kinds of
things in Eurasia-<^laaEs. people and other animals, lan¬
guages. and ABSMs.

The Pamirs may be likened to a monstrous starfsh with
the appropnaic Sve arms. These are vast strings of moua-
tain renges that go otf la all directions—(he Himalayas*
the Kerakorams; the Kunluns leading to the Altyn Tagh
and Nan-Shans; the Altai Tagh leading to the Tlcn-Shans;
and finally the Hindu«Kush going off to ibe west,* From
this poinr we have first to follow the FOndu-Kush in order
to get rW of a rather irksome busmess. The is that
ABSMs have been reported from ell along the extension
of those mountaias. which Is to say along the Ala Dagh
and El burr In Iran to Azerbaijan and the Caucasus. There
are those who regard the Caucasus as being ta “Europe.”
As a matter of fact, nobody baa ever made up ib^
minds }uM where Europe does end io the east fvi**
Eumpe: Now Far? by W. H. Paiker in The Geographical

***" PP- September

ISJWJ; end rather naturally, since It does not do so any¬
where, being only a large peninsula at the western side of
Euraaia. If this peninsula needs definition—and it Such it
Should be considered as lying west of the 30tb meridian
cost which runs roughly from the White Sea to the Bos-
phorous. The Caucasus area is profoundly in Eurasia
proper. ^

The Hindo-Kush. Ala Dogh, and Elboo. together with
ttic lower Caspian Sea, form the southern boundary of
me Turkman S-S.R. Between the Caspian and (he Black
Sea (here ore really two great mouDUio ranges with a
lowland gutter between them. The southern Is composed
Of i^eaia and Azerbaijan in the U,S.S.R,; the north is
the Caucasus. Both are still very rugged and over their

^ as awful as

polliie^ dcfinlljODs. I have trted to confine myself to lajier
gencrahbes that are Oown on the map, and ideciify places that
are not on that map by these geoeraJitRS,

289



upper reftches uninhabited by humans, ar>d th« iatrer ap.
peats to be a retreat of ABSMs. Tbeir presence is fully
accepted over both areas not only by mountajo folk but
also by inhabitants of the lowland villages and towns
around their peripheries. As one of the Russian reports
puts its. however, the ymioger geoeratJon put on a show
of scoffing at the whole thing, probably in order to appear
**modem,” while the older people are most reluctant to
speai about the creatures for deep*seated and most an*
cimt '‘r^gious** reasons. This maiter was made abucdaoily
clear to me by the Rabbi Yooab ibn Aharon, who points
out that there still remains a prehistoric animism
throughout this whole swath of Eurasia io the precepts of
which the souls of people eater the lower anthropoids,
which latter are consequently held in such great reverence
that eveo the mention of theh names is most ill*advi$ed.
ABSMs. knowo in this area as Ka^for or Kheeur. seem
to be regarded as the highest of all anthropoids aad near*
est of all “animals" to man.

There arc dozens of reports on these Koptar having
been seen In recent years, as distinct from the endless
older reports and myths, legends, and fciklore, Many of
these are very precise and really quite scientific in (hat
Utey were reported by properly trained persona with the
usual Russian manlA for precision and suitable coodrma-
tion. This makes them the more lostmctive and cooviocing.
1 would that I could quote them in their original form
but, alas> we don’t read Russian so the best I can
attempt is a paraphrasing of translations, using from time
to time phraseology that may look quaint to us bvt w'hich
must be retained as expressing more exactly what the
raconteur had in mind in his own language, Russian Is
almost as "mobile" a language as Enghsb and. when re¬
porting in it, shades of meaning are nsost important.
[Caliing upon another language, to explain what L mean,
the Spanish word noiicw does oot meac precisely 'iio-
t]ces"| a good translator expresses it better as "advices
upon (a subject) to everybody, by persons who are pre¬
sumed to know what tbey axe Ulkiog about" but w)^ a
distinct indicaUoo that the editor does sot take full re-
spooslbility for same. This la a rather more precise form of
our loose phrase “informed sources state.") One must bear
in min H that the average Russian, eepacially wben mak¬
ing a deposition or statement on which be may be called,
ofteo places more emphasis oo the qualif^g words than,
perhaps, on the word hself. Tha “The Engineer X told

290



nM in Tomsk tbai when b« was in Omsk , . has a vtry
spedaJ mwdog. aad aids us io assessing what he ftnaliv
records.

I could devote t whole book, let alooe d foU chapter to
these reports of ABSMs from the Caucasus but. for ob¬
vious reasons caa only give some examples. However I
wiff add the coQcluaioas of the reporters since they are so
sane, orderly, and sigaiflcaat. The only other people
who have published such sane stafcmaiu on this subject
that I know of are ihc Cansdians, U » a pleaeure to get
back to fact without a gross overlay of preconceived
ideas, prejudice and doubt.

The main range of the Caucasus nms from the Black
Sea coast about Krasnodar southeast to the peninsula oa
wbcb the famous port, of Baku is situated oo (he Caspian
Sea. The range b divided into two blocks of higher
mountains, the smaller In the northwea; the greater form¬
ing the boundary between the Dagestan A.S.S.R. and
Cbecben on the north and east side, and Georgia and
what IS caUed (he Trans-Caucaslaa republics (Armenia
and Russian Azerbaijan) on the south. There is a oar-
iicularly wild area cutting across this block and known as
r embraces practictfly the whole basin

ol the River Jurmui and the upper pans of the Averskoy
^u which IS a tributary of the Sulak. the main river of
pagwian.* These mountainous region* arc clothed in
flense, mooiane. coniferous foresu right up to the snow
Ime and right down lo the edges of the few viUages that
lie oo the adjacent lowlands, and are. over wide siretcbci.
really qujie mipcociraWe. At the same time, rbe upper
crags and rocky reaches arc cquaUy imapproachabJe ex-
«pi by i«Tl-ofgani 2 cd professional mounuineeriaa expe¬
ditions. Despite the most ancient clviJizaticai of the

** eDdeavored lo choose plve names

•neb u Krasni^ar and Baku, that can be readily fo^ in stand-
«d u1ai«. and to use the tradlUooal Eoglisb apelliDga for these
rtwgh tb^ are almost invariably quite diflereui ^ iheo^
ficiaJ Rossiaa and/or local spellings. Names ibet are not to be
found oa re^ily obtaiaabla atlases or mipe are speU as
by the traniUiora of the publications from which they were
«.™"‘ !2 m dm and ibe following charter I quote

opt appear on any oWainabte maps. These may
wawiijalely spelt, having been rendered
^oneliciljy first into Ktusian and (faence into English The
i^ta may be quite horrible to the local criizenaFOT ihi I
d^apologue. In the imiiiiiy event that they ever read this


291



Caucatiaa tegioa as a whole, and of the adjacent Armen-
bo hloch to cbe south, huge ueaa remain <)ui(e unexplered,
Ic these, large garoc reserves have been established, and
these are populated by a very large aod varied fauna
jncludtng moose, some remaining Wisent or European
Bison, Red Deer, mountain Sheep, Brown Bear, wolves,
the great northern Lynx, and the Leopard. [The Snow
Leopard’s range dees not eUend west of the Hindu-Kmh.
However, Tiger occur In the Elburz Rangea even west of
Tehufan.]

Opposite the Georgians, on the northeast side of the
main faa|es, the hill folk are called Avars, those herders
and hunters who have for ceoiucies penetrated fartber
upward into these fastoessci than aoy others. Among them
(here U universal belief In and acceptance of tba ABSMs
they call the Kapiar. Surrounding peoples regard them
with bereasing skepticism « Folklore, Legend, or Mytb
m proponioD to their distance from these unexplored up¬
lands; which is the invariable rule as we shall see when we
cocBB to exam be these me ((ore. The description they give
of Ibis creature is remarkably clear aod quite bvariable
except for one set of facts. These ccMcero the number of
kinds of Kaptar that cwst. The (Uscussion on this pdnt
Stems mostly ironj those who live fanhesi from tho area
where they are met with, and it has become enrneshed in a
ccjtam amount of straight myth, notably the curious ootion
that all of one kind are females. According to Russian
invesligatore, however, those who so claim are the least
likdy to have firsthand knowledge of the matter, while
they were quite uoablc to explain bow this race of females
reproduce and maintains itaelf. The notion of self-per¬
petuating, virgin birth, if ! may so express the notioo, baa
been widespread since lime immemorial. It soiinds absurd
but, of course, it is not biologically impossible per se; at
the same lime, there U one very aimplc explonatioo
Even modestly civilized people sometimes separate the
sexes in everyday living quarters, and my wife and 1 once
spent some time with a trtoaj group of South Amerinds
and had to reside in separate though adjacent viUeges.
Then again. ABSMs seem to show a marked sexual di-
tnorphisni everywhere they arc reported, this showiog
Dot only in sixe, but in color of for or hair, while the
yo^g are said to look different again. Also, most ABSMs
arc stated to be soUtary, only occasionally seen in pairs
pr with yooog \o tow* The fecialcSv it 5 C*diSs tend to
associate in going to water, in food gstboring, and so forth,

292



while the roalds ran^ widely. They arc food gatberen
rather than hunters this we must not forget.

In the Caucasian region, the mates seem to be eo-
countered alone in the upper fastnesses w’hereas the
males, which are readily recognaabte it is said by the
great and somcitmcs positively enormous developmeat of
Ibeir breasts (which, unlike any pongids. are peodaol or
hajiging). show up at lower levels. Then, o Dwarf Kaptv
is also spoken of, particularly on the southern face of the
mououiQs. but as one Prof. V. K. Leontiev, who studied
this business locally, with consummate discipline, observes,
nothing is Sated about these beings that obviates their
being the young ones or “(cen^agerB.** who also lend to
band togelbcr aod go of! oo their own. They are said to
be smaller than the average man ond to clothed is
reddish brown wool as opposed to the other two types
one of wtuch. be it noted, is said always to be a male,
while the other as always femalet from which one may
draw a rather obviotis assumption one would have sup'
posed—which are variously described as being dark gray,
black, or silvered hair. This change of coat color, from
gingery to gray-brown, to gray-black, and flnaily lo white
with age, is juu as consistent with what is found uawng
ocher Primates as is the change from shiny black in youth,
as displayed by the sad little J&cko of the Fraser River, to
brown and then grioly. One must note that, with in¬
creasing age. those of us whose bead-hair rums vdiite will
find that our axillary and pubic hairs do the same while
those who have profuse cbesl hair will see that it
follows the head-hair in thb respect. Thus a venerable
male AfiSM might be as white as the old chap who paced
Lbc truck in Oregon (at 35 mph. be it noted) and then
popped into a l^e. if Ncandenhalers were hairy', they
may well have had a fluffy wo<A, like that of a baby
One-bumped Camel as b so repeatedly stated by almost all
the Eurasians who say they have met thdr local small
ABSMs. and an "overcoat" of darker hairs like a muskrat
aAd most ocher mammals of cooler climates, which de-
velops vdeh age, becomes profuse and dominant in the
prime of life, and then goes silvery to pore white with
age.

I cannot find any suggestion that there is mere than one
type of A&SM in (his area, despite the fact that three quite
disdnet sets of names are ap^ied to it (here. The indigeo-
oui name ii Keprar aad its derivatives and associates, but
the Kirghiz '’Gui-i^bait'' group is also u&ed among peoples

293



of similar origlD. while I Rnd that the dotc distantly
orifilnatinf "Alnias" ycm also crops up in the form of
"Aimasiy’' and “Albasry." Some painstakifif analysii of
the origins of the reports of (hew names used in coo-
nection with the Caucasus area however brings to light
the fact that the reports in which they were used were
made by "foreigners" or at least by members of groups
that are known to have moved in from the east. The
Caucasus is an appalling mix*up; a sort of Grand Central
Slatioo for nomads, conquerors, ecnigraots, iounigranU.
wanderers, lost tribes, lost causes, and perhaps also indig¬
enous evolution—hence the deugOddOQ "Caucasoid"
which actually means nothing. The oldest people in the
area, which is lo say those of whom we have no record of
immigration, such ns the Georgians and Avars, one ami
all adhere to the Kaptar designation for their local ABSMs
—which. iDcideulally. have broo perhaps facetiously called
“Wind Men" by more frivolous outsiders!

That these manifestly original Caucasian*—if not Cati-
casotda—are of one variety comes as rather a relief, es¬
pecially at this juncture and before plunging into inner
Asia, because there we are going to be l^set by affirmations
from all aides that there arc not jwt two or three kinds m
any one area, but that these are aJ! quite different from
others in Mher areas. 1 am not quite sure if we will be
able to keep our heads through all that, and I am sure
that 1 have not yet myself got it all straight, but in the
meantime we may take what the Hollanders cal! a pause
(but pronounce pawzer) and try to come to grips with (be
Kaptar.

Tbe clearest account of this creature Is a firsthand one
r^>orted by none other than the Prof. V. K. Leontiev
mentioned before dftd who Is graced in one publication
[No. 120. of the Third Publication of the Special Com¬
mission to Study the Snowman of the U.S.$.R. Academy
of Science*, under tbe Direction of Prof. B. F- Porehaev
and Dr. A. A, Shmakov] with (he inuminatiog title of
‘'Muming Insirucior of the Minisuy of Hunting of Dages-
un A.S.S.R." Tills is a man both of parts and of profound
precision. J herewith paraphrase his account with due
regard to that prccisioo but with considerable compression.

It appears that in late July 1957, this geodeman with
three associates was conducting an oflidal iavesiigatioo of
a territory called the Cagan Saocojary. On August 5 his
companions returned lo their headquarters as their work
was finished, and Leootiev decided to make a few days’

294



tcux an hj» own. He wu then m the head of the Junnot
River and spent two days thora checking on sotoc glacten:
be then uekHed up a tributary stream. He notes that be
came across leopard tracks on a patch of snow. After a
rest oversigbt he coodaued onward and came across a set
of quite difFercct tracks oa another patch of snow. He
uys that **you had the impression that this animal was
walking on hit toes—never getting very heavy on his beeta
. . , you could see (bat his big toe was unusually
veioped. but was it a toe or a claw? These footprints were
deformed somewhat because of the snow being slightly m
a melted condition,"

The neat right he camped under an overhanging rock
but when preparing for sleep. “All of a sudden there came
a strange cry. It stopped as suddenly as it started." be
writes. “Then after a pause It repeated again; this tiaie
SDmewbere lo the side of the original one. Then it was
quiet. The cry was not repeated again. The cry was very
loud. It wasn't like the yell of an animal—not any wild
mammal or bird known to me could make such a sound,
and yet it couldn't be a human being either. lAnd he is a
professional wildlife conservator.] Prom where I was sit¬
ting to the origin of the cry was approaimaiely lOO meiera
CUO yards], and at the time the cry was repeated. 200
Deters. I juat say approumatcly." The following day ap¬
pears to hare been a miserable ooe so that be decided lo
camp before dark at the bead of (be scream in a very dark
gap. He ran out of matches and all cbe wood was wet but
he just managed to keep the fire going long enough to brew
tta; then, be chanced to look up at a ncighbortog snow*
field to (be south. Something moving ihereoo caught his
eye and of this he wrote; “This creature was going across,
ascending slightly the part, and away from me. At

(be moment 1 saw him he was approximately 50 to 60
meters away from me. It was sufficeeni to have only om
glance of him to know that this was a Kuptar."

Leontiev goes on (o state that it exactly resembled the
descriptions he had c*taincd from ali the locals adding,
"He was walking on bis feet, not touching the ground with
his hands. His shoulders were unusually wide. His body
was covered with long dark hair. He was about 2.2
meters [about 7 feet] tall.’* Realizing that this was a
chance for the procurement of the most priceless scientific
information but also realizing that he could nertfaer catch
nor, if be did. overcome the creature, Leontiev took care¬
ful aim and fired a shot It its feeu However, by this time

295



the Kapiar wes at extreme range for his rific and he does
oot seem to ha^ hit U for it turned to hiin and th«o
vith incredible speed valued about and ran up the slope
vilb iremendous speed, cutting through the snowfield,
reachiog high rocks beyond aod disappearing. Leoatiev
tried to follow but it wa.s hopeless so he measured acd
sketched the footprints before it got dark. The next moro-
ing he reexamined these, made more sketches, and then
spent the day searching around for ihe creature. Bcuig
out of food he had to leave the next day.

Altogether he estimates that be had the Kapiar !o view
for 5 to 7 minutes and pursued him for 9. He saw his
back, left side and cheek; when be fired he had just a
second’s right of the face for it was lare eveniag, begiA'
oing to snow, and he could oot see much detail He then
makes some most ioterestitig rcniarks. to wit: “He was not
loo tall [7 foot would seem enomous to me, Aufkor]; his
shoulders were unusually wide; his arms were long—
longer than a num's but shorter than a monkey's. His feet
were sHehrfy bent and very heavy [iulics mine), and the
whole body was covered with a dark gray fur. The
length of the hair oo the body was shoner than the hair
or fur of a bear. He had especially long hair on his bead.
1 bad the imptession that the hairs on the head were
darker dian oo the body. I couldn’t see anything of a tail-
] coulJu*! sec any ears. The heed *as maseive. and when
be turned to ms. 1 saw for one second hU face. It was
somewhat like an elongated animal face, the general out¬
line of the nose. Ups. and forehead, or the chin or
eyes I couldn't see. I had the unprcsslon that bU face, like
bis body was covered with hair. His back was slightly
beat: he was stoop^hculdercd. His general appearance
was human-litc. if you want to compare ibc K^ptar wuh
some livbg creature the best comparbon would be to
think of him as a tall massively built, wide-shouldered
man, with a heavy growth on his face end the rest of bis
body.”

Leontiev measured and sketched the Kapler’s footprints
when only a few minutes old. Of them he says: “This foot¬
print bad a very strange fomiauon. The whole prim was
about 25 ceotiriieters [about 9 inches] long.* The general
impressbn was of the toes pushed deeply Into the scow.
Also around the toes you coiild seo &ome rough formaiioo,

‘There would seem to be something wrong here. A 9-Uwh
foot for a 7-ft. se^ms most Improbable {Author).

296



Tbe «pl<A«t(oa of courso, that h« ws walking wjUi
wnt kneel and Like ‘cl awing* Into the mow. The footerl
fonr toes did cot come very close to each other, &i in
humans, but they were sLighdy spread out—about Vi of a
centimeter tp I centimeter. The width of the big toe was
centimeters; in length, 9 centlmeten. The length of
the other toes about 5 centliwters, You had the impreuioD
that on all the toes there were very hard icar tissue for¬
mations—that the IOCS were widely separated and in be¬
tween there was scar tissue formation. The entire print
n^wed down toward the heel, and there were two par-
^lel deep ndgci like wrioUei. You had the imprest
that It WM 001 the whok step, and only the toes. This
wai not too unusual because when I looked at my own
footprints I noticed that I put a little harder on the to«
than on a bed and actually, that’s the way the Kapiar
would walk. The large toe was very far apart from the
rest and It was very long. It seems wbeo you look thii
over and study the print, tbe entire heel of ibe foot is

rowth of a lough hide interspersed
With all kinds of liiile growths and heavy wrinkles. There
^re no daw? at all. This footprint has no Twcmblance to
[« iwiprints of any of the aoimals that I know. It do«n1
wk like a footprint of a bear, and, of eoune, is entirtly
.if?"' * fcwipriot of a human heel.

The cty of the Kap/ar is very strange and yon f
compare it with anything else. It consists of several re¬
puting high-aod-bw pitched sounds, that remind you of
the sound of a gigantic chord- There Is certainly a kind of
meta he quality about them- In the cry yoo can hear some
plainUve note loo. I, personalJv, did not experience any
hsar hearing ibis cry, but to me they seem to express the
lonelmess of a lost creature. I could not bear any coherent
i«n^, or perhaps I couldn't quite catch the lim shadings

I he way • human being pronouncee
them. The name cry. or tennioology to* actually docs not
(tocribe the sound that the Kaplar issues. This cry is
peculiw. and so much of its own. that there would be
many differeoi ways of describing It and no particular way

At any rate, not any of iho
mamma 8 or birds that 1 know have a cry similar to the
KapW.

This IS by do means tbe only close encounter with a
t^ar 10 modern limes. First there are literaUy dozens of
^ mcludlog whole village population

who reported tbea about at vanous times, and sometiM

297



for moDtlis &fld at low levels. Tbea also, ok appears to
have been captured in 1S41 and physically examined by a
lieutenaot coloael of the Medical Service of Lbe Soviet
Ajt^, by ihe name of V. S. Karapetyan. 1 give ihis report
verbatim os supplied to me, already translated, by the
courtesy of the Russlao InfonnaiiaQ Service. It goes as
follows:

"From October to December of 1941 our Infaniry bat-
talioo was stationed some thirty kiloinoters from the lawu
of Buinaksk Fn the Dagestan AS.S.R.]. One day ihe
representatives of the local authorities asked me to
amine a man caught id the surreunding mountains and
brought to the district center. My medical advice was
Deeded to establish whether or not this cunous creanre
was a disguised spy.

*'I entered a shed with two members of the local au¬
thorities. When I asked why 1 had to examine the man b a
cold shed and not in a warm room, I was told that the
prisoner could not be kept in a warm room. He bad
sweated ia the bou&c so profusely that they bad bad to
beep him in the shed.

*’1 can still see the creature as it stood before me, s
male, naked and bare-footed. And it was doubtlessly a
man. because its entire shape was human. The chest, back,
and shoulders, however, were covered with shaggy hair
of a dark brown colour lit la noteworthy that all ihe
local inhabitants had Hack hair}. This fur of bls was
much like that oi a bear, and 2 to 3 centimeters long.
The fur was thinner and softer below the cbesl. His wrists
were crude atxl sparsely covered with hair. The palms of
hU hands and soles of his feet were free of hair. But the
hair od his head reached to his shoulders partly covering
his forehead. The hair on his bead, moreover, fell very
rough to the band. He had no beard or moustache, though
his face was completely covered with a light growth of
hair. The hair arouod his mouth wai also short and sparse,

‘The man Mood absolutely straight with bis arms bang-
leg. and bis height was above the average—‘about 1 80 cm.
He stood before me like a giant, his mighty cheat ihiust
forward. His fingers were thick, sUong, and exceptionally
large. On the whole, he was considerably bigger than any
of the local inhabitants.

"His eyes wld me nothing. They were dull and empty

_the eyes of an animal. And he seemed to me Ilka aa

animal and oeihirtg more.

"As 1 learned, he had accepted no food or drink since he

293


was cau(iht. He had uked for noihing and said ooUiing.
When kept m i warm room he sweated profiticly. While
I waa there, eomc water and then some food [breadl was
brought up to hla mouth: and someone offered him a
hand, but there was no reaction. I gave Ibe verbaJ coft*
elusion (hat this was no disguised person, but a wild man
of some kind. Then 1 returned to my unit and never beard
of him again.'*

On the little map of Asia In a box at the Icft band
upper corner of Map XV. you will ace a small vermiform
tongue of shading slicking out of tbe left*band lower cor>
ner of the contained rectangle. This represents the «leo-
sioa of tbe Hindu-Kush Range, via the A!a>Dagb and the
Elburz in Iran, to the Armenian bighfands and the Cau-
oa&us in the west This is the farthest west for ABSMs m
the Old World unless some really very startling though
admittedly vague reports that have just reached me from
Sweden should have substance. The Scatsdinavian couninct
arc hotbeds of myth. legend, and folUore regarding
ABSM-like treaiures of long ago but these new state*
meoia sound suspiciously like our own Nonhwesiern ones.
I must admit that this hm quite unner%‘ed me and I am
Dot prepared to say any more until I have at letiM made
cn attempt lo investigme. We may therefore turn east
$gt\n and will follow that liitk wormlike strip back to tbe
Roof of the Wwld. Along the way, wc pass through the
Elburz Ranges.

These are quite surprisiog for their wOdness and the
eaisrence ibercin of such obvious things as Tigers only a
day’s drive from Teheran. But then, I su^osc it is rcafly
xw more odd than Jaguars wandering about almost wiihio
sight of Los Angeles. Nonetheless, there is plenty of space
here For lots oE big as yet uncaughi things and. by jingo,
wc gel an alleged ABSM. This came lo me from the
ladefaxigabte Bernard Heuvehnans. in the form of a plea
for help since we are a son of private “Bureau of Missing
Persons'* for the natural sclencei, among other things. It
transpired that a gentleman in New Jersey had wriiieo
Bernard and stated: ‘'When I was in the Army flo World
War n], one man in my company was an engineer who
bad worked Cor an oil company in Persia. He and I talked
together for bouts and hours, as men do in the anny, and
I never detected bim in a single lie. or what I thought was
a be, or even suspected that be exaggerated anything, but
for one curious thing.

**Hfl said that when be waa working in Persia.

299


some



FeT3iaa8 brought around a ‘gorUJa* ibey had killed lO the
noun tains. I was amazed that be should say such a thiog.
1 assured him that there were no gorillas io Persia, or
anywhere else ouuidc of Africa. Ha ssid thdt it waa as bis
as one, and surely looked like one. He saw h, and ihal
was enough. 1 said thai there were do anthropoid apes in
Asia closer to Persia than the Malay Peninsula [sic]. He
was indignant. SVas 1 telling him that he didn’t see it? Of
course, he thought also that there were no gorillas outside
of Africa—until he saw this one. He was a bit short-
tempered about it, so I dropped the aubjeot.”

n have col yel traced the genilemac coccemed but
bis came is Daniel Dotson; bis borre state is Utah but
he was in Washington. D.C. when he joined the Army. If
anybody knows him. /or the love of mike, please wrilc
me; and if you know where he is. dooh wait on ceremony
but extend to him my invitation to dinner forthwith. He
can name the time and place.] ^

• For luer information see forlbcooilng sequel.



The borders of the Iran, Iraq, and Turkey, and the

Caucasus. Dagestan is one of the Unton of Socialist Soviet

Republics.

300


Hill is thfi ooly speciflcally Iranisn (Persian) report that
1 have hut there are others from the IraniaA-TurkffleD
S.S.R. border, and more from the Iraniao-Af^aoistani
border. The geo^phy of this and the adjaceot area, wtud)
I calj that of the Pamirs ^nerally. and to wbkfa we will
now proceed, rs so complicated both physically and poJi>
ticaUy that I have to resort to the accompanyiof little
maps. Most of the material ibai immediately follows
comes from Rusuao sources and I am simply followmg
their breakdown of this Into regions of their designation.^
These have poUiical or rather ethnic iid>s on them such os
Kir|bi 2 . Uzbek. Tadzhik. Kazakh, or simply ^^bineee**
ossigned to them. This is really most muddling for the
boundaries of these groups are utterly bewildering and
intetiockiDg as the map abows. white all these peoplei

*Tbese sources are first and foremost four Book leu issued by
Ihe Special ComaisslOQ set up to study the Soownian Problem
by the Academy of Sciences of the U.S5.R.. under the Direc¬
tion c^Prof. B, F. Porshflcv aod Dr. A. A. Shmakov Bks 1 and
: vtn published an 1958: Nos. 3 and 4 io 1959 in Moscow.
Secondly there are a number oi ankles klntlly sent to me by
Prof. Porshnev aod a volumioovs report Okadc available by the
Kussiao News Services.



The of the U.S.S.R, China. Pakistan, and Afghani-
Stan. About these borders u the Pamir Range. BAA. 7a the
oedakshan Autonomoui Area.


901


bav» bG«D lurgiag about for eealurias. «rbowiag each
Other, and dozens more peoples, in and out of valleys aod
o(T platesusi gradually getting themselves worked Into a
sorl o£ poitttcaj pudding. Al^ lots of them are still do-
madic, while families and sometimes whole villages Just
up and move soraewbere else. Then the tab ^‘Chinese'* io
this case means simply that the place is od the Chinese
side of tbe border, here principally Siokiang, but also a
whole best of other border provinces, auiODOtnies, and
Buch, Finally, a considerable percentage of the place
names cited are not on any map; cot even the most
cxeellecr, modem, 'Riesiao maps. This area must therefore
be understood to encompass not only the Pamirs them¬
selves, but the adjacent mountainoiis portions of Af^anis-
Un. the Uzbek, TadzWk, Kirghiz, and Kazakh S.S.R.'s
and the Badakshan Autonomous Area [to be called simply
the A.A.) mless otherwise stated- This of course runs
off into the Karakorams to the east and the AJa-Tagh
and Tien-Shan to the north. Most of the infonnstion from
^ese regions was unearthed by the 1958 fiirpeditioa of
tbe Russian Academy of Sciences to investigate the “Snow¬
man” probiem there.

In one of the Ruseian bookJets cited, a mnp wae is-
eluded showing the distribution of myth, legend, and folk¬
lore about ABSMs in Eurasia; the areas from which re¬
ports of sightings, encoimters, and tracks have been
recorded whhio this century: and a dark globular bleb
covering this general Pamirs region. The legead states
that this blob or bioi was coosdered by the Soviet sciea-
fists to be the last remaining stronghold and the only
reiEainlng breeding ground of the Asiatic ABSMs. This is
a very curious notion and not strictly in accord with either
the published opioiom of Prof. Porshnev himself [due to a
ceriaio very pertinent, and in my opinion, correct obser-
vailoa that he makes in one of his articles] not with those
of the Mongolian and Chinese scientists. In fact, 1 am of
the mind that it was an idea imposed on the Commission
by a sort of backhanded tradition stemming from ihc
days before ABSMs were taken seriously even in Russ®*
Once again it was probably due to tbe old "rno’vman” bit;
the everlasting reiteration that the creature or creature
lived in the perpetual upland snowfields, the obvious corol¬
lary to which was the biggest and most perpetual snow-
fields were tbe most logical places to look for them.

ProfeMor Porshnev however stale* In what I can only
describe as a siiniog article in a magazine eo titled Tht

302


Contfmporory East: *Tbe expr^sioo Saowedu is not sup*
pOMd to neu a oreature Uviof among perpetual anew
<or excluarvel^ in the snow.) Similar exprcasions are used
in coooectioo with some aoimals, like tbe &}ow Leopard.
It means oolj that i&is specimen (species) belongs to the
fauoa of the high mouotam ranges. He appears on tbe
snowfieids or glaciers only while migrating. He Lves. how*
ever, and finds his food Maw the loowllne, amoog (be
rocks and ajpioe meadows, sooietiises even in the suhai-
piQS aoae. a tbe forests, as well as among the rocky
saods of tbe desert and in reedy thickets. Tbe alpioe zone
p.e. Upper Montane cooiferous forest) is known for hs
rich and lush vegetation and the variety of its animal
life." Professor Porshfiev is eo exactly right

Neither the Pamirs themselves nor (he area generally
are wholly snow-dad; as a matter of fact the whole is a
vast hodge-podge of deep valleys, gorges, canyons, and
intermediate ridges, and all the former are beavily forested
up to coftsiderahle hdghu hung at a rather low latitude.
This may be called e wilderaen area hut H Is not. strange
as it may seem, anything eo much like one as our own
Northwest. Thera have always been people there, or barg¬
ing through ru since most ancient limes and today there
are meteorological stations dotted all about it, whOe tim
extensive intenutional boundaries meander ihrou^
it are not exactly left to (be imagination or tStsint
of the locale. Both the Russians and tbe Chinese have
conducted reiber (borough explorations into the area,
while the Afghans live there, as do most of ih9 Tadzhiks
and iCirghiz. and quite a lot of other people.

Practically everybody wbo does live, or even camps
there, is of a single mind about the existence among (hem.
and all over (be lot. of ABSMs. This Is another esse such
as that of (lie Himalayas, (he Great Gutter, and (he south¬
ern Tibet Rim. where the cases reported are just too nt^
tnerous to detail as well as too coosistent to be worth
recording specifically. Such a procedure would be quhe
sDly: rather like recording rigbtinp of Mountain Lions
from our Southwest. The bloody things are everywhere
and seem always to have been; nobody locally paid mud)
more attention (o them iban they did to other large wild
fauna until out^dera started asking about (bem. Then they
mostly dammed up; for two very difftfeni reasons, how¬
ever.

First, the ancient arumlsm mesiiooed above. Is here
evea more deeply iograined. but more tisallowly covered

303



by modern faiths such ae Buddhism, and Islam Lhaa it is ia
the Caucasos, so that ABSMs oaly just oot men are
regarded as ideal recipients for departed souls and should
not be molested. This leads to taking special pains to steer
foreigners away from them, while oot meotioning their
real esmes but referriag to them vaguely, in generic terms.
Secondly, to put (he matter frankly, hailed ABSMs pro*
daced the most ettremely potent and magical medicines
for wluch really vast sums, io bar gald> were once paid in
Russia. China, and especially In India. These m^lcmes
were known to the most ancient Chloete. to the Mongol*
iaos. tht Tibetans, and to all Mongolic p^les all the way
to Turkey. In ibe Pamirs area, the boiling, preparaiioa,
export, and marketing of thcie ABSM extracts (moomu*
y<rm) (called mumer by some) was carried on prioctpally
by Uypsles—refen’ed to as the Lull or Asiatic Gypucs
•—wbo wandered all over the lot but mostly in directions
exactly contrary to the normal annual migrations of the
nomads for very obvious trade purposes. These Gypsies
held a very peculiar and unique positloo in this part of
the worid. They were regard^ as having sort of direct
lines of commumcation both with God and iba DavU,
[and the whole pantheons of other entities to boot] and so
to be bolb able and sanctioned to tamper with most ven¬
erated thisgs. Actually, like their Wesiern congeners, they
were coosu/nmatc poachers, and since they could not be
prevented from bunting anything, however sacred, and
did not suem to suffer any dire consequences from doing
so, they were assomed to have some special immunity or
divine dispensation. At the same lime, the whole concept
Of “Extract of ABSM’* was probably a hang-over from
most ancient ritusl cannibalism, whereby token consump¬
tion of special pula of a pcjwerful quarry or enemy [or
even fellow citizen) was believed to transfer to you soma
of his powers. I witnessed just this process in the Cuner*
cons. West Africa, when an enormous male Gorilla was
killed. The local Juju-chap begged bits of certain glands
—and he knew his anatomy ss well as any college demon*
5UBloi~-and other parts ©f ibc body, made a brew out of
these, and passed it around to all the hunters who took a
token np and smeared some on their gun barrels.

These two factors—the deep-seated reverence for
ABSMs by the locals on the one band, and tbeir value as
“medicine” on the other—have proved to be most potent
ones in keeping information about the creatures from all
outsiders. Personally, 1 suspect that them ia somelhiog

304


of the first attitude curreat among both Ibe Nortbero and
Soutben Amerinds. TbU whole attitude in both its upeets
cofflcs to light in another way. This is the careful preser*
vatioo of the beads and hands of ABSMs—and other Pri¬
mates. as well. It ouy be noted. The head, dried wbole,
has special sigAificanee. not for ingestion, like the extract,
but as aa obyeei with its owo awdiciaal qualities, and like
any other sacied reliquary is kept bidden. This custom is
prC'Buddhjst but has been incorporated into Lamaist prac¬
tice. Tbo haadi have enoiber significance. They are kept
as mere talismaoi^, not having any deep religious signifi¬
cance. but rather because the bands of Primatea (and
men) have always seemed a maml to Mongolian peoples,
being literally the key to ibe success of both. There are
muoimified or desiccated bands kept in monasteries and
by ^vate iodrriduals of commenities all over Eastern
Eurasia, from the Great Barrier, east. A few in Nepal
have been shown to foreigners; others have been shown
to Mongolian and Chinese scleatisis; and there are a few
reports of tfaeni recorded ia ibe Russian pubUeatlons.

Th« is not Ibe only aspect of ABSMery that presents a
eonpleicly different face once we pass east, up aad on to
the gmt bigblaads of the Middle Mongoloid peoples.
Here is the true beartlaod, not only of the greater part of
modem humanity, but of culture also, for Icammg was
apptrratly thriving there when even tbo Greeks were yet
occupied la little else but baihiag the Miooaoa’ and each
oAers* heads in, while we ia the far west were runniag
about clothed in blue paint and chipping ftints. The ancient
repositories of knowledge and of documents lie sprawled
up the great **basio” that forms the center of these eastern
uplands, between the Great Barrier oa the west, the
southern Rim of Tibet od the south, and the escarpment
^ that froDts onto the lowlends of Manchuria
Md China proper. Around the periphery, along the Hima¬
layas, through the Pamirs, and DonbeasJ up the Great
«gion of Lake Baikal, there Is only a second¬
hand koowledge of this eocient erudition or of iu records
of such matters as ABSMs; ihU knowledge moreover 1$
oftea vague and distortctL The peoples of the western
Pamijs were mountaineers, hunien, shepherds, and agri-
culn^ peasants; those of the Barrier itself mostly no-
niadic herders, who moved back and forth along the
steppes that fringe the Barrier to the west and north, and
s^lch west to ibc Caspian, They were not liieraie and
they did not support ccoturies-old librarici in monasteries,

309



fts did the inner Mongols. The Chinese en (be other side
of the uplands were settled agriculturists and at an earjy
d&ie took to city dwelling and the formation of ci(y*stBte&.
They too developed an advanced “learning” but. despite
the fact tbat “China” bae for centuries nooiinally spread
west to The Pamirs and to the inside of the Great Barrier,
It absorbed more culture from those inner regions than it
exported to them, whlJe China proper was itself coDstanily
orerrun by Mongols coming notably down ftom the north
through Manchuria.

When we get onto (he great plateau, or rather into iu
great basin we will meet for the first time straight ulk
ahouL AfiSMs, rather than rumors, hearsay, and (he somo
what dumfounded disbelief that we have encountered
everywhere else, even among the most erudite. Educated
Mongolians, using tbat term in its widest and proper sense
to include all (be peoples from the Siberia border to Kepah
aaJ from SlnkloDg to the Chinese escarpment, have a
wealth of historical record ^out ABSMs, and are brought
vp to the notion that they still exist, in several disUnci
forms, 'all over their couolry. in isolated pockets, and all
around Its periphery in ao dinosi unbroken line. Modem
scieotists of (be Mongolian Peoples’ Republic are fuUy
aware of this aod are heginoiog to resrudy, reappraise,
BOd make knovm to the world tbU store of knowledge, but
they have as yei only just scratched the surface. The
mailer of ABSMs is really a rather abstruse item in their
hind of knowted^. Mongolians are very practical people
and aJthougb they have for milleonta delved Into every
aspect of life, ethciology per se was one oi the last of tbeit
ioteresis. Wildlife was ImjMrtant. and medicine very much
so. and it is in these literatures tbat amazing facts ^out
ABSMs are found, as wc shall see In the next chapter.


306


14. The Eastern Horizon

CURRENT CONDmONS ON THE
<SR6AT MONGOLIAN UPLANDS


Ruaaan scientisw appear to have been ju« as stunned u
those of (he West about a decade ago when they were
cofiffoDWd with the new mro io ABSMaJ events that took
place after the Shipioa foot-tracks uproar. Funber, de¬
spite the fact that their jurisdktion has for a Iona time
marched with the Great Barrier, and the expansion of
tneir country was io the past centuries eastward, jusi as
ours was wiward, while their interests in inner MoneolU
were mulijfarjoiis, they don't seem to have known much
more about this huge, truly mysterious lubeontinent in
upland eastern Ecrasia than any other outsiders did. While
the Westeraers. led by the British, bad been rubbling
away at its soutbera border via India, and the Amaricans
ftafl shown some idterest via China, neither bad really
c^n ^oe&aied the great triangle. Soma travelers, con-
«e^ rather ratrepid. had crossed it and a few natural*
, “o accomplished bizarre tasks like unearthing nests of
l^ossil dinosaur eggs ihereb, but the accumulated lack of
Knowledge about it mounted steadily. This is not to say
that Europeans had not been traveling through it since
very eariy times, for some became immortalized for their
accomphshmcfiis like Marco Polo and the great Russian
Mplorer Prjewalski in the last century. There were also
Iwcr known but equally intrepid explorere, such as one
Johann Schiltbergcr of Bavaria in the years 1396 to 1427.
in modCTu times there have been men of exceptional per*
ipreaegf 8iKh as I. NidioUs Roerich and the Englishman
M course almost endless, and in

all this Russians have played a most promincDi pan. Yet,
despite the fact that a very high percentage of these
travelers throughout ihe ages seem to have meniioncd

307



ABSMs. and oot just casualJy, the concept of the con*
tloued existence over enormous areas of some of our
pricQidvc aocestora. of sub*iiicfi, ead possibty evoe of sub*
bominids simply did not penetrate tbe collective mind
of Russian scbolatsbip any more than it did that of West-
cmcrs. The Russian expcdiuoo lo the Pamirs sveoi out
every bit as uoprepared as tbe Western expeditioas to the
Himalayas, whh all the same preconceived notions and
miscooceplions. and it came back just as my'stifed and
empty*banded.

However, the Ruseians bad in the mean^'me made spec*
al invest igarioQs in the Caucasus, and they bad sent an*
other party lo (be oortheru face of the Everes Block
—which endeO lo a sad disaster—«ui<l tbey had uHered
tbeir Chinese and MongoUao colleagues co-operation io
iavesUgaling the whole matter. This inielligeat approach
V3S prompted tn part by the growing tumult in tbe popular
press and in sciendhe circles in the West about the ’*About*
iaahte Snowman.” and In pad by certain bistoric discover¬
ies of what may be called a purely buceaucradc oalurr
by Prof. Porshnev. These prove to be a sad commentaiy
on just about everything, but eomebow make one feel a
little better about some tbiogs. Tbey demoostraie that we
am not the only dumb clucks, or the only ones to let our
seienttfic hierarchy obllieraic any signs of novel ihiokioii
or unexpected discovery, I would Uke to tell this story in
full QOl only for the sake of humanity tut because its
various facets point up just about ewrythiog that has been
wrong with the study of ABSWery daring the pasl ceorury-
Space d»e9 not permit and all I esa give is the bare bones.

There lives in Moscow today a scientist by tbe aame of
V. A. Kbakhlov who ia 1^13 submitted a full and detailed
report cn the cast Asiatic A&SMs to the Ruoslan Imperial
Acaderoy of Sciences. This priceless material was shelved,
be was denied funds to continue his field invesllgetions,
and he was frankly told to sbut up. Professor Porshnev
happened to stumble on these reports in 1959 and sought
out Dr, Khakblov. He writer of his fint inlervicw: ‘'Here
be sits in from of me, this white*haircd lUin. an emeritus
scholar, n Professor of eompararive animal anatomy, a
ACientiat wbo mode valuable eoovibutione In tbe field of
zoology. He talks about the discoveries be was about to
make while he was a young man; bis talk Is eotburiastle
and bitter at the same time. He Is bitter not only at the
general attitude uken by the pre-revoluiionary Academy
of Sciences, but ai tbe action of tua former advisory

306


protcMor, P. P. SuachLia. In 192S, SuschkiD cama oat
v\\ii a stariJing, ai Lbe lime, hypothesis; fiamcly. that ths
region where the cbao|e from a monkey (sic) to a man
fool: place was oq the bigb plateaus of Asia . . . but not
one word about the extensive contributions made by him
[Khakhlovj or about his reports ot the exisience of 'Wild
Men' in Central Asia." Need 1 say more?

Nor was KhakUov the only enlightened scholar and
enthusiasdr field worker who was rapped ovor the koueklei
and threatened with limbo at tbal lime for the same rea*
son. There was a young man named B. B. Boraidin who la
1905-07 specialized In Eastern folklore. He was given s
commissiofl (o travel through MongoLa to Tibet on assign*
merit from Ihe Russian Geographical Society of [thenl
St. Petersburg. While doing so he eiBOunicred an ABSM
at close range, while in company with many others in a
caravan, and a young monk pursued the creature, which
the locals called sn Alnua, Baraidlo made a full report oo
this, but Ms boas, one 5. F. Oldenburg, head of the geo*
grapbicAl society and Secretory of the Academy of Scl*
cnees, ordered him to delete aU meoiion of the mstier
fiotn his report, gating that '*00 one will ev^ believe t ha t,
iiiti it may prove embarrassing.” At least, they were direct
about it ia Imperial Kussia!

Young Baraidia had been befriended by a Mongolian
scholar naiued Z. G. Jaroizarano, aod when be told hem of
the incideot, the latter was inspired to devote much time
to pursuing ABSMs. This he did with the help of two
assutantx named A. D. Simukov and a Dr. Rincbm. The
latter is now a Professor m ihe University at Ulan Bator,
MoagoUoB D.R., still mosi actively engaged In pursuing
the matter, and bas given a great deal of information to
the Russian Special CommiseloD. It was these "discoveries"
In the attics of Russian science that did more ihan all the
firsthand reports of tracks and encounters along the entire
length of the Great Barrier to nid Prof. Pofshnev in
mounting & proper investigatico of A^Mery in Ruseiao
t^tory. Yet there remabed a great skepticism, right irp
till ihe lime of departuia of tbe expeditiou and mveati*

galora. Id the previous year (1937) one A- J. Pronin, a
byd/ographer from Leningmd Univeraity, bad mode the
world press with a story that be had observed an ABSM
twice, for a brief lime but at some distance on the Fed-
cbeako Glacier in the Pamirs. Tills bad at first been pro-
claimed by, but then just as violently decried in tlie Russian
press, to such oq exteot that the inevitable debiinking

309



^whicb as usual amounted to nothing more ibao some
“expert” 8a>ia| that be did not believe huu—was sdaed
oa by everybody as final and absolute proof that all
ABSMs have never been anything bui myths. 1 am sincerely
sorry for Mr. Pronin, but I must say that this also makes
cne feel a little better: for it is manifest that our press also
is not the only miiddJebcaded group or the only coe that
lumps to grovel in abject compliance with (he least ponti*
ficaiioti on the par! of an “expert” Reviewiug press
reports on the 195$ expedition to the Paroirs. I find an
almost similar story—first considerable enthusiasm and
even pride in this opea*miQded aod truly scientific en*
deavor. then s sad retrogresrion to tbe age-old bolt-hole
. . . “Sorry to have to do this, dear Readers, but Fm
afraid we have finally to bury the poor Snowman. He
lUTDS out to be just i myth after all. We hate to see a
good mylh die: v/c need them in this day and age. but
. . . etc., etc. etc." 1 have a whole file on these periodical
requiems on ABSMs. the latest, as of wnciug. a highly
facetious lead editorial In the Chrution Science Monitor
anenr Hillary’s scalps. They make aiausiug reading but are
a and commcuiary on toTelitgeRce in whatever part of the
world.

Nonetheless, although this expedition to Ihe Parain did
not bring back a pickled ABSM. it did bring to light a
wealth of itioa fascinating reports. Not a few of these
were from resident Russians. One of the most notable
only came to light later In a commuoicarioo lo Prof.
Porshnev. who remarks of it in one of his articles: “Not
only the ’authority of official science’ acts as a hindrance
lo obtaining more Informatloii about the ‘snow men.' There
ore other ob^ades as well, wtJcb mcidenially still remain:
lack of co-ordination in gathering data is the most izn-
portaoi [or most dcirlincnul of ah). Investigaiofs work*
ing in different regions are not aware that similar data is
being collected in another area and. lacking this most
basic tool of science—comparison—they ore unable to
accomplish anything. As an example we can cite a recent
communicatton from a geologist by the name of B. M.
Zdotick. He writes ihst much to bb regrel while he was in
the Pamirs in 1926-5$ he had no information about tbe
Himalayan ABSMs [called >#f0, and just could not under*
stand all the stories he was told about furry men. or even
what ht had ^een himself (italics cnhift, Author) "

"In 1934 Zdorick accompanied by his guide was ruak*
log bia way through a narrow path among a growth of

310


wild oats on a liltle alpine plateau at about 8000 feet
altitude between tbe Darwa 2 Ridsa aiid the eastern
reaches of (he Peter the First Range. Unexpectedly the
path leveled oS and one could see bow tbe grass was
trampled on. the iround giving evidence that someone
was diggiog around. There were splotches of blood oo tbe
path and remains of a gopher’s skin. Just a little way
from Zdorich and bis guide, on a mound of freshly U{v
turned earth» was a creature, asleep on bis belly, fully
stretched out. He was about a meter aod a half us length
(approximately 4 feet 10 inches). Tbe bead and (he for-
limbs could not be seen because they were bidden by
a growth of wild oais. The legs, however, could be seen.
They bad black naked soles, and were too long and grace¬
ful to have belonged to a bear; his back was also too flat
to be a bear's. Tbe whole body of this animal was covered
with for, more like tbe fur of a yak, than the rich fur of a
bear, The color of the fur was a grasisb-browo. somewhat
more prominent brown than a bear’s. One could see the
sides of the creature moving rhythmically in bis sleep.
The fear that took possession of tbe guide transmitted
itself to Zdotick and they botb rumed around and ran for
their life, Krambliog and faUing ifi the uU. wild grass.

*‘Oo ibe followiog day Zdorick learned from tbe local
residents, who were much alarmed by the news, that be
came across a slewing 'dew.' The local residents used
another word In naming (be creature, and Zdorick bad
the Impression that they were using (be word 'deV just
for him. so that be could understand better. Tbe local
residents ventured the information that in valleys of Tal-
bar and Saffedar there were a few families of these ‘devf
—men. women and children. They were considered like
beasts, and no supemarural power was ascribed to them.
They cause do harm to tbe people, or tbelr stock, but
meeting them is considered a l»d omen.

’Tbe geologist was very much surprised to bear (bat the
*dev' was lisi^ aa an animal, and not a supernatural crea¬
ture, He was told (bat tbe ’dev' Ictoked like a short stocky
man, walkiog on two hind legs, and that bis bead and
body were covered with short grayish fur. In tbe Sanglakb
region tbe Vev* ss seen very rarely, but they do roam
about, ^ther singly, or in pairs—male and female. No
one had seen any young ones, but last summer they
caught a grown one at tbe flour mill, where he evidently
was eating either flour, or ^ain. This wu at (be eastern
foothills of Sanglakb, only a few kilometers from Tut-

311



fcaul. The captive was chained for at*out iwo montfas bj
the mill and was fed raw meat and fiour pancakes. After
that he broke his chain and escaped. They also pointed
out a man who bad a large scar on bb bead fjom a
wound supposedly inflicted by the 'dev/ ”

The tsl of encounlen with, let alone mere sightings of
ABSMs throughout the Pamirs region gcocrany (aa defined
above) are literally eodless, The same can be said of the
other major areas of the Mongolian upland triangle. These
areas are as follows: first the supefupland plateau of Tibet
with its three principal super mountain ranges, in the south
ihe Rim with the Karakoram, in the middle the Kunluns
that turn south to the head of Indo*Chioa, and alrag the
north the Alryn Tagh, that leads into the Nan Shans and
on to ihc Tsin-Ungs of Oaina. Second, north of the Pa¬
ra! re lie the Alai*Tagh. and from them stretch the Tien
Shans to form the northern boundary of the Tarim Basin
of SinJdang. Next, north of these come the Grand Altai,
formiog the soutbero border of Maogolla proper. North
of these are the Tannu-Ola snd the mighty Khangal be*
tween Mongolia and Tannu Tuva. Still north again come
ihc Sayan complexes and ihe BaikaJs, lying along the
Shore of the great lake of the same name. Then, in the
Gobi Desert lie the YabJonovol Mountains. Finally there
are Ibc Khij3|aiu running eorib W south berween the
Gobi aad the eastern lowlaads of Manchoria. There Is
some suspicion that ABSMcry may have to be extended
still fonheE north through tbo SUnovoia, w the Dzhugd-
rhurs and Gidan Mountains which border the Sea of
Okhotsk. There Is also a most Important triangle sand¬
wiched in Between the Nan Sbaits. the ea:sLerc end o£ the
Tibet Rim and the upper end of the Indo-Chinese Penin¬
sula, that has no collective name, but is filled with Immense
north to south ranges. This Lcs in Slkang, now locorpot-
aied into the Chinese Proviace of Szechwan. [All these
sub-arcss or naruml provinces will be found on Map XV
with the exception of the peoultimate group which arc in
far eastern Siberia, aad from which wc have no definite
ABSMery.] I cannot stress loo forcibly the sheer volume
of such reports and of those of fool-tracks, dr^plngs,
and other corollary evidence that have been found year
after year all over all of these subareas within the great
upland Mongolian Triangle. The full record of those (hat
have been published—some 200, that have been poperiy
investigated and assessed scientifically by competeci spec-

312



islisU—will fomi the subject ol Mother bookJ For oow,
T ibeU b«ve to coofloe my^self to « few iimples and some
further expluutory remarks about the country, vegetation,
and general bickpound tgeiast which they were recorded
First, m the general Pamiis region, the Russian expedn
(itti brought to light half a dozen most recent and cat>
egohc reports. One was supplied by a man, descnbed as a
'‘quite well-to-do.*' resident in Cbesh Teb, who did a lot of
huaUng for pleasure. Is 1939, in the spring, about 4
o'clock in the aftemooo, whSe he was walking around he
saw some man who actually jumped on him. "They started
wrestiiDg. This was a Cul-Biavart. The hunter was very
itroog and tall and heavy and once be was able to lasso a
bear. Now, this hunter wrestled with Gul-Bicvan. The
Qut-Biavon was covered with short, soft wool and the
man could not get hold of anything. On the face ot this
man there was also short wool and there wes a terrible
odor coating from him. Finally, the bunta was able to
throw (he CuUBuvan to the ground, but ai the some
trme he lost consciousness himedf. The villagers came
upon the man and brought him home. When he came to. it
was late in the evening and he told how be met the Cul-
Blavon, and the villagers told him (hal be was lying on
the ground, and the ground around him bore evidence of
this wrestling match.'’

In the same area intelligent local peo^e made many
sworn statements such as “A man in Rohary was traveling
with two others ihrough ihc Pass of Karaiegifl and Vahio,
when they saw a naked man covered wHh short black hair,
who was slightly taller than an average ordinary man.
and which had a very strong smeir IltaHcs mioe]. As
elsewhere al] over the aorld. this matter of a strong stink,
attad^cd to ABSMs keeps cropping up throughout the.
east Eurasian cases. Then, there was Ihc hunter. Aodam
Kerimov, from a place called Uskrog between Roharv and
Bodaudi. who called the creature he encountered a Voiia
(just another local name for an ABSM). Ii was not much
Ngger Than a man, was covered with hair hut not much on
its chest. It bad a bare face, and ears sticking out. the
nose was wide, and '‘over the nose and on the ears ha
did not have much hair." Rather pleasantly (he report
Slates that *‘At the time Aodam met the yoita he was
leading a gou but gave way to him—the yoira." A group
of burners named Alaer, Altibai, Matai, Bckaagir, and

' See sequel,

aid



Tastambek who were with the reporter his father, one
Abiiurahmana* Abdulhsaud, when eocamped for ihc
sight, beard '^meihing treading Dgbtly on ibe grass’* and
njnoiog out aj^arently with a light saw what they called a
GuUBkivan about $ feet 6 inches tall covered with hair.
*‘lt bad & powerful and uoplcasajit smelK" That was in

1951.

Some of the most interestiag informatios collected oa
east Eurasian ABSMs comes from Kbakhlov’s ori gin al
inquinea at the beginning of this ceotory. mentioaed above.
Khakblov obtaioed most of this throu^ that group of the
Kazakh aalioo which had Ttioved northeast and settled
along the edge of the Great Barrier, north of Kirghiz
territory and oonb of Lake fiaikbash, in the area lyiog
between the Abakan Mountains aad Tanou Tuva. These
people were aauaUy foretgoers to and were not acquainted
with the uplands beyond the Barrier but they peoctrattd
into it via certain lowland basins having entrances point¬
ing to the west. The inoa ooiabte of ihe&e Is called Dzuo-
garis which Is an immcn&e lowland pocket, into which the
western steppes [t’e. prairies, to us] penetrate \id. two
great valleys separated by the Tarhagatai Mountains. Fa-
tient iaquiiy by Kfaakhlov elucidated the fact that reports
gathered by the Kazakhs from a wide ares seemed ail to
come from Dzungaria. Khakblov makes a p<^ of noting
chat these reports came from herders, hunters, aod those
engaged in other pursuits striedy in that order numerically.
Hia first most astonishing discovery, which has receniJy
beeo much confirmed, was that file ABSMs from that
region bad **beeo seen, captund, left footprints in sand,
had an odor, resisted capture and yelled, and lived in cap¬
tivity for a while.”

’‘One witness, a Kazakh, stated that he was In the
mountains of Iran*Kabirg and once, together with local
herders, was lakiog care of a herd of horsee at night.
Toward dawn they saw some mao prowling around aod
suspecting a tlaef. they jumped in the saddle taking along
long poles with nooses which are used to catch horses,
^rkans’ Because the *man* was running awk¬

wardly and aoi too fast, succeeded m capCuriag him.
While he was being captured, the 'man* was yelling, or
rather screeching ‘like a bare.’ Looking the captured ara-
ture over, the herder explained to the visitor that this is a
*WUd Creature' not doing any harm to any one. and ibat
be should be released.

**The 'wild mao’ was a male, below average height,

314



covered with bftlr like A youag ctnel.' He hod long armi,
far below his koees, stooped, with shouJders huoebed for¬
ward; his chest was flat aod narrow; the forehead sloping
over the eyes with promlneotly arched brows. Lower law
was massive without any chin; dom whs small with large
Doscrils. The ears were large without arty lobes* pointed
back [like fox's). On the back of his oeck was a rise
[like a bound's). The skin on the forehead, elbows and
kaeea hard and lougb. When he was captured be was
suadiog with his tegs spread, slightly bent in the knees;
when he was ruonlog be was spreading his feet wide apart
awkwardly swinging his arms. The instep of the *«^d man'
resembled a human, but at least twice the sue with widely
5q>arated flogen [toesi; the large toe being shorter than
that of humans, and widely separated from the others.
The arm with long fingers was like a human arm. and yet
differenL

"When the VUd man’ at ihe Insistence of the herders
was allowed to go free, both Kazakhs followed him and
discovered the place into which be had vanished: an
lodentatiofl under a banging rock strewn with high grass.
The local residents offered additional information about
these creatures: that they lived in pairs, seldom seen by
people, and ooc at aU dangerous to bimians.

"A second witness found by Khakhlov srated that for
several months be observed a 'wild man’ in the region of
the Riwsf Manass. or Dam. This creature of female sex
was for some time chained to a small milf but was also al¬
lowed to go frae. The general descriptiM was the same
as of the male: hair>* cover of ihe skin, stooped, narrow
chest, shoulders were inclined forward, long arms: bent
knees, fiat insteps, spread out toes resembling a paw. the
contact with the ground fiat without the instep. The head is
described in the same fashion—absence of a cbin and a
rise Id the bacL

"Tho creature seldom issued any sounds and usually
was quiet and silent. Only when approached she bared
her teeth and screeched. It [sic] had a peculiar way of
lying down, or sleeping—like a camel, by squattiog on the
ground ot its knees and elbows, resting the forehead on
the ground, and resting (he wrists on the back of the bead
fsee sketch). This position accounts for the unusually
hard skin of the elbows and knees—like camel's soles.
When offered food, (be female ate only raw meat, some
vegetables and grain. She did not toucli cooked meat, or
grain, although later she was getting used to bread. Some-

315


(Tov) Hypothetical skuH of the Ksy Gilk type of AC>omlnaDte
Snowman as reconstructed by Russian scientists.

{Center) A drawing made by Prof. Khaklov of the Almas type
of Abomirrable Snowman sled^ins. from native descriptions.

(Bottom, teft] An ancient mask from the greet Mongolian
plateau. (Battom, right) Reconstruction of head end face of
the creature on the mask, drawn by Russian scientists.

31 e



(i<n9s sbe would catcb and eat some tosecu. She would
drink in animal fashioa, by Uppini water, or someiiities
she would dtp her arro io water and lick Ibe water. Wben
she was allowed to go free, she raa awkwardly swinging
ber long tarns, to tbe nearby reeds where she disappeared/*

Khakhiov notes that “The Cfearure^ has nothing in
common with the Jez Ttrmak (‘Copper-Nails'), or with
tbe Almas." This is a most siarlliag staiement but one of
the utmost signiiiCAnce. and also one that has been totaHy
overlooked. We flod on aoalyaing the reports Irom the
general Pamirs area that, despite variations in coat coior,
all ABSMs there appcflr to be of on© type. This i« abo^t
mao-size, and io many respects very manlike with, as U
frequently meotiemed. something like a primitive language
Or at leasi s vocal coromuQicaiicQ ayetom more elaborate
than enyrhlog known among snlm^s. Its footprints, while
baring a very widely separated and extra-large big toe,
are eaJd to bo human in form. This type—whk:h laci-
demslly seems to be the sarne as the Caucasian Kaptar
—>s most commonly called ty one of the names to the
CuU-evan group [due, of course, to the regionaiiiy of tte
languages in the area) and extends north into erd along
the Ticn Jhans, and east into the Kunluns and the Kaia-
korams. Moreover, I do not know of any remarks to tbe
effect ihut there are more than one kind of ABSM
throughovS these three regions. Tbe larger and more be¬
stial Meh-Teh type with two semi-opposed toes begin
ody east of the Karakorams along the Soiilhepo Ttbetao

Kim and. possibly, in the Himalayas: though_and this

is exceedingly strange—1 cannot actually find a single re¬
port of this type from any pan of that range.

It would seem that Khokhlov'i creatorcs from around
Dzungaria are also of the Culi-avan type and that they
extend north to the Grand Altai and b^'ond to the Sa-
yaos. The descriptioos of Iboac front the Naa Sham
[which is to say the norihern rim of the Tibetan super¬
uplands] secni also to be similar. Thb creature, which
givcj every indication of being a Neanderihajer-t>pe of
sub-mao. and wbosc footprints exactly match those of a
Neanderthaier discovered in a cave in Italy,'* would seem

•Known locally by the names srotfped around the sums Kxy
ardCt/k, Tbe latter means "*ild”as in At-Giik, Wild Horse.

In tbe 5>rins of 1948 tKe ofiiciftl careiakcrs of a cevp knows
as ‘The WSeb’s Cave" near Toirano in Italy [all caves in Italy
are fovenunent controlled] obtained permission to blast through
whai proved to be 11 feel of floft’stone formrng s blocksee to

317



to be a mountaifi dwelliag fono: in fset. they ar^ monUoe
forms, for not one single report of them from down oa
eilber tbe lowlands or even on the Mongolian PUteaa
Itself has ever been recorded,

'From the latter, which is to say Mongolia proper [with
tbe Khaogai Mountains that arise In Its center] and the
vast Gobi Desert, together with the Ala Shan, (he Ordos.
Xurfan, and even possibly ibe lowlacJs of Deuagarla
the Tarim, we get reports only of tbe little Almas. These
ara much smaller and apparoitJy even more butnan. and
seem always to have been regarded simply as extremely
pnmitive haroans; hairy and without speeidi uoderstand-
ab(e to us. but having more or less all the human qualities
such as suckling human infants and even, It has been
alleged. "tTadtog” with normal humans, in that iDey would
leave skins at appointed places, and take away certain
simple basic articles lefl there by tbe oomsdic trlbesmea
in return. There is even a report of a scholar in a Mon*
goiian monastery who was a half-breed Almas. This report
comes from Prof. lUncben, mentioacd previously, and
reads f 'There was a lama in the Lamin-gegen monastery
who was famous for his scholarship, and known under the
name of—'"a son of an Abnasska.” The father of this
lama supposedly was captured by A Imas and begot a boy
with aa Almas woman. Both father aod son cvcatualJy
managed to escape by joining a passing caravan. Tbe boy
was allowed to become a pupU in a monastery and
achieved scholarly fame." The same iDformant, one Gcn-
dul from Khuremal of the Bilnkbongor District. receolJy
told [Dr. Rincben) that in 1937 be saw in a monastery,
Barun-Khurc, an entire skin [or hide] of an Almas which
was fastened to the ceiling of the temple. This skin was
laicQ off by a cut along the back so that it remained
pracdcally intact and one couVd see that ft had buman-Iike


ooe of the cave's passsgee. Ip tbe off-tounsi season. They had
seen bats flymg in and out of a snail hole leadfng into this and
had rightly assumed *ai unexplored areas lay beyood. On
DreaKUtg tArougn. extensive passages wiiA clean, smooth, wet,
clay floors were found. On these there were enormous numbers
of foot-tracks of large cave bears, of modem-appearing man.
and of what arc obvious NeanderthaleTs. together with many
artifacts and even evidence of tome kind of game played by
throwing clay bulls at a circle ©n the wall The cave seems tc
have been fioally abandoned and sealed by the flowatoae cur¬
tain about 50,000 yeaia ago. An outline tracing of one of the
NeandertbaUc footprints found iherein is reproduced, App. A

31B



legs 9xtd arms- The face was framed by loog hair banging
from the bead. The entire skin was covered with eabaiistk
signs and painted by ibe lamas. This Almas was supposedly
killed in Gobi and brought as a gift to the monastery by a
famous burner, Mangal Durekcbi.’*

Although ] am gelling somewhat ahead of my story. I
would like to point out that the idea of a balf'breed Ne-
anderthaler becoming a great scholar is not to be scoffed
at Those submen had relatively large brains, while there
is realty no evidence that a large brain is necessary for a
large intellect. One should take to heart the couplet that
states:


••Lillie brain, little wit.

Big brain, not a bit"

and note that Anatole France’s gray-matter capacity was
only 1100 cubic centimeters while that of a proto-Ne-
anderthaler so lowly as Rhoduiao man was 1280 f

Professor Rincheo. already mentioned, reports that a
mao by the oame of Anukh, traveling in the South Gobi In
1934 wiib a compaolon '’noticed in thick growth of sak-
eaul grass a strange, Cwo-lcggcd creature that sUacd ruo'
ning away from them. 'DzagifTntgen'I [saksaul grand¬
mother] decided both, and, making lassos out of rawhide,
they staned in pursuit of the creature. The fast Gobi
camels had no difficulty in overtaking the creature whose
body was covered with shan wool. At the sight of people
twirling the lassos, the creature issued such a piercing cry
that the frightened camels would not budge any further
and the creature wa.s able to escape behind a rocky fur¬
row."

Then, again, there Is the story of •‘a caravan on the way
to Xuku-khoto !□ Inner Mongolia. The caravan was tra-
veliog from the region of Uliasuiaii in Eastern Mongolia
and ep^oaching the scutberu borders of Khalkhl when it
was decided to stop for rest near a place thickly grown
with saksaul grass. When they were ready to start again
the man who was sent to get together the camels could
not be found anywhere. An old experienced guide told
the men that in this location may be some 'Ozagin Atmos,'
and advised that more than one man should go searching.
After a while the three men who were sent out to search
came to a cave and saw on the ground in front of it signs
of struggle between two people-—one having shoes, the
other barefoot. The frigbteoed men did not attempt to

3^9



enter the cave anti, recovering the canriSf returned Hkb
tbeir observations to the caravan, insisLag that ah should
go to the help of their compajuon. The old guide agsio
cautiooed them against such an act. He stated that the
Almas never kill< people but, having captured one, wlH
bole up tor a while and will not come out of the cave, He
suggested that they should wait till they came by on il)eir
way back;, and then attempt to free their comrade.

**Aad so 00 their way back they came to the same spot
and, armiag tbemeelves with a guo. they decided to hide
□ear the cave and wait till the Almat came out. They
waited a whole day. and then toward sunset out of the
cave emerged a two-legged creature covered with hair
all over. A shot sounded and the creature fell dead. Re¬
loading the gun, the men ran into the cave looking for
their lost corDpanioo. They found him, but he seezned
wild and listless. He oeTcr told anyone what occurred is
the cave, he avokied talking to people, and In two months
time be died."

Reverting to the creanircs called }ez~T9rmak* which is
alleged to mean Copper-Nails Imeanis^. of course, “fin¬
gernails”] we should aoia that this nane is applied to a
larger, grosser, and more bestial type of ABSM than the
Dzungarian Ksy-Guk, and is alleged to be fomd on the
super-uplands of Tibet. It U said to be clothed la rather
long, shaggy, veiy dark gray to black hair, aod to have
fiogemaiis of copper. The implicatioa in the folklore on
this typo and io alJ undocumantod stories about It asserts
that their nails are actually made of cc^per. This idea is
illogical and as oear impossible as anything could be but
there could be a very simple aod logical e:tplanatioo for
it. It is that the fingernails of some primates and notably
adult gorillas are quite often bright copper-colored and
even look burnished. Tbe explanation seems lo be that
(hey are atained—os tbe material of which all nails ood
claws are made, known as keratin, so readily is—by the
juices of certain fruits, barks, or berries on which they
feed, I have collected monkeys of more lhan one species
in Africa that displayed remarkable variations from tite
described coat-color and pattens by reason of bright red
areas in the inguinal region; soiDetimcs on the lower face,
aod even ou d)e chest and inner arms. After preparing
skins, it is a custom to wash them in warm soap Md

* This term actually mesns *Tbe Mounialo one that scramble
using its huids."


320



water before drying them for museum preservatioo. Oo
doing this to these mool:ey pelts we were amazed to find
that all this bright copper color washed out and left the
fur pure white or yellow. Experiment clidied the fact that
the iugestion of certaia fruits, selected for us by local
people, although looking gieco and otherwise quite In Do¬
cent, produced this vivid ted stain os the pelt of caged
monkeys within s matter of days by dribbling from the
moutb or onus; and. when said fruits were eliminated
from their diets, the color persisted for weeks. Their fin¬
gernails also remained bright copper-colored until they
grew out from the bottom up.

While everybody has for ceoturies been alludiog to Tibet
as the real center of ABSMery, there turns out to be sur¬
prisingly little of a eoacrete oalure ftom (bat vaal land.
This may appear sstonishing bur should not be regarded as
indicating that there are no ABSMs there. Quite the coa-
trary, it appears to be the true “heartlaDd" of the whole
matter but, as I have been at pains to try and explain
above, there is a deep-seated, proto-refigious prejudice
against speaking of the matter to foreigners while, at the
same lime, the Dumber of foreigners to yist Tibei through-
out the ages has really been extraordiaarily How-

evCT, almost all of those who have visited the country and
written about their travels have mentiooed ABSMs.

The American William W. Rockhill wrote in 189! cf
hcAring many stories from Tibetans in Pekin, China, and
elsewhere of the “Hairy Mountain People” of their coumry
birt be discounted these reports as being merely ca.ses of
mistaken identity; namely, of bears. However, he goes on
to say; “One evening, a Mongol told me of a journey he
had oBce made lo the la ibc company of a Cbioese
trader who wished to buy rhubarb from the Tibetans, who
annually visit tbeir shores lie. the lakes of central Tibet].
They bad seeo innumerable herds of yaks, wild asses,
^telopes, sod Oirhun Bamburshi. This expression means
literally *S*-ild men”; and the speaker inristed that such
they were: covered with long hair, standing erect, and
making tracks like men’s: but they could not speak."

M. McGovera in bis book To Lhnsa in DlseufsP
nearly all parts of Tibet one fiods the
tradition of the cslsiencc of a primitive race of men,
former inbabitanis of the land who have been driven out
of the plains by tho Tibetans and who now dwell only in
the passes and in inaccessible mountain crags. My own
servant referred to them as snow men. They are said to be

321



bairy creatures, huge hi eiae, and poseeaeed of in¬
credible physical nrcogtb. Although having a certain low
cunning, they are deficient in intelllgencei and it is the
intellectual superiority of tbc Tibetans th^ has enabled
them to otst the primitive snow raeo from ihe plains. It
baj been permitled to no white mas to meet tbeae snow
mcQ.” He adds at another point that ''RockhiU, who came
across ibis tradition io the extreme eaatcra part of Tibet
ll.e. ihe land of the Dzu-Teh] suggests In his land of the
Lamas that the wild men may be nothing odwr than bears!
For ocher pans of Tibet this explanaiioa could scarcely be
valid, since in many parts of Tibet, as. for example, in
Kampa Dzong, Pori, and the surrounding dbtricts, bears
are unknown.*'

This is a rather s4ttifiC3nt stateizieni in view of the con*
staat insistence that ail kinds of bears {thou|h all varie*
ties of the Eurasian Brown Bear] arc found all over Tibet.
Actually, it does oot mart^ a "tuppenny^emn*' whether
they are so found or not, because ibe Tibetans know their
local animals and (beir distribution much better than any
ouisiders do, have completely different names for bears
and A^Ms with qualifying terms for the various kinds of

each_none of which for oqb kind of creature couJd in

any way be contused with those for the other—and would
never for one oioment coftfusc one with the other. Fur¬
ther, Rockhill himself states in another passage that "lieu-
teoani Lu Ming-Vang, when speaking of wild tribes to the
north of the Horba country, assured me that men in a
autc of primitive savagery were to be fouad in Tibet
Some few years ago [ibat was before 1890, Author} there
was a forest fire oo Ihe flank of Mount Kn-Lo, east of
tHanie, and the flames drove a munber of wild mco out of
the woods. These were seen by him; (hey were very hairy;
(heir language was incomprehensible 10 Ttbelans; and they
wore cno«t primitive garments made of skins."

This is a pretty smrtling 8iatem«mt. for Rockbill wis a
rather nasty kind of skeptic, given to debunking anything
possible and imbued not only with the then current pom¬
posity of ah Westen rcavcleis, but with an almost modem
crar.e for mediocrity and the dispc^al of all things that did
noi fit the accepted partem. Having disposed of ABSMs
proper os ''bears sfaiiding oa tbeir hind legs" be then fell
wiib a wallop into a report on primitive "humans,” vith
hairy bodies, in a pJace where they "ought not to have
been" fat least by Victorian esdinationl, and ah on the
say-so of a Chinese lieutenant It is a simnge commentary

322



on closed mlod of even a famous traveler and at the
same time ao eye opener on our subject, for we must not
forget that there is still ample room for whole hosts of
mere "primitives” let alone ABSMi all over this vast Tri¬
angle. Further, we must not forget those forloni people;
still, at least until recently, maintaining a Bear-cult. caBed
the "Hairy Amu" of the Japanese island of Hokkaido.
They seem to have been Caucasoids of an extremely early
vintage and they certainly were hairy [and in some cases
still are. despite their pcnecutionl]. Hairy chaps, wearing
skins, running out of burning Tibetan forests do not quite
coincide with then [1890] or even current anthropological
beliefs but this is no reason to gainsay their previous or
continued existence. Apparently Tibetans took, and still
lake, all this quae complacently.

Just to make matters worse, this same RockhiU must
add still another brief passage that states "Legends con-
cemiog wild men in Central Asia were current in the
Middle Ages. King Halihon of Armenia- in (he narrative
of his journey to the courts of the Barn and Mangu Khans,
in 1254-55 A.a, speaks of naked wild men inhabiting the
desert southeast of the present Uromchi." Almost every-
body who has traveled in Tibet both before and since the
date of these statemeots have reported the same
and some have said they have met the creatures. Bm. I
stress again, these are all foreigners, since the Tibetans
themselves just won’t talk about the business. Ona stwy
that bas always fascinated me is (hat of a Klrgl^ named
Soikbaia Karalaein who told the Russian investigating
commission about a Chinese family who had started wan¬
dering during the war and finally settled io Tibet. It ap¬
pears that one of their women disappeared and they
thought her to be dead. However, "a year later she came
back, and told them the story that she was taken, while
gatheriag wood, by what she called a Kish-KUk, or wi)d
man. He was comparatively little differenl from an [ordi¬
nary] mac but was covered with hair and could not speak.
She also said that she was expecting a child by him. Hear¬
ing ihai, her husband killed her; and he was taken by the
police. The woman also told where the wild mao’s den
was. They went up there and actually saw wild men and
women all covered with hair."

^ several occasions 'Hbetaos of higher education have
said (sec Chapter 12) or have been reported to have
slated that they know of three distinct types of ABSMs
UJ or around the periphery of their super-upland plateau,

323



while, in addition, (hey speak of tvo ‘^animals'* with man¬
like or iuper*anthropoid charaetcnsUes. These latter they
Identify as. 6rst ^ giant monkey and. stoondly. (he Meh~
Teh. Of the other three ‘•Man-Cieatures" they are quite
cognisant, afhnning that they are Urst, the little dwarl
Teh-fma of the lower valleys; second, the mao-sized hairy
one tte. the Kapiar, GuU~ay<in. er Ksy~GUk type]: and,
third, something quite else. Tliis is the might)’ Dxu-Teh
type known to the Chinese as the CinSung: a real giant,
ehaggV'Coaled. and able to stay for long periods in the
rugg^esi country; daogecous, a Stock raider, but pos*
sessed of an almost exactly tiuman*type foot This, they
and everybody else agree rs not fotind along either the
Himalayas or the Soutbern Tibetao Ricn. nor even in tha
^an Shans. but is confined to (he unnamed triangle be*
tween these, upper lado*Chiaa, and the Chinese escarp*
meet. This same type seems to prevail also in the Taps
Shan, the Tsio-Lings. the ranges between Shensi end the
Gobi, and again nonb along the mighty KiimgarG that
sepuste the Gobi from Manchuria, and on iota the little
Khxngaiu tbat lU athwart Lba aonhem edge of thot pro*
Vince. Also, as 1 said before there are indicaiicpns that this
ot ABSM may exist still farther oorth in (he Staoo-
7 ois, Dzhugdzburs. Gidans. and even in (he Anadyrs. This
is of the utmost signifieance since it is only a skip from
there to Alaska, while ibia Vzu^Teh type ABSM seems to
conform very closely, if uoi be ideoiica! with, our Sas-
qualckt% and 0/t-iVfnAr.

Here indeed Is a strange situation to conlempiate. We
start out with a suggestion that (here might possibly be
some one kind of as yec uncaught and uadesenbed ammal.
probably an anthropoid [or a race of runaway human
deUat^ueoidl in the HimaJayu whkb somehow got color-
folly celled “Abominable Snowmen" and we end up with a
whole galaxy of unknowns, spread over five continents,
and concentrated in e;iStcm, upland Eurasia, where, by
the word of those people who know most about the
subject locally, speak tbe local languages, aad have da*
vot^ the most time to the matter, there appear to he no
less than Sve v«ry distuct types, each with its own ebarae*
(eristics and habitat; namely, (1) the Mountaio Neaoder*
ihalen of the West. (2) the little Almas: also Neanderthal*
ers. or mere primitives, of the bot deserts, (3) the bestial
Meh-Teh of the Tibetan upper plateau. (4) the giant
Dzu-Tch iGiganiopiihtcus?). 7ok^ or and

(5) the liny tro^cal, forest*dwelling Teh^lma of the

324



goulhem valleys. This may sound fabulous but, Ibc deeper
you ddve ioio the reports aod the baclcg round, the more
obvious aod logical this becomes.

The disiiDctive aature of eacb of the five h perfectly in
accord witli the varying oaiurs of other groups of fnam-
coals. Take for instance the wild sheep of this area. There
are distinctive species aad/or races in eacb of the great
mountain blocks, while other hoofed animals replace these
00 the lowlands or comparative lowlands; one set on the
ftof deserts, another on the upland cold desena, Then also,
the actual geographical distrlbotioo is also perfectly con-
aatent, in that ott» Liod inbabtra the far west (the Cau¬
casus) and the wesiem fringe of the plateau; another the
comparative lowlands oi the middle; a child tbe eastern
mount&iflous edge; still anolber the Tibetan Plateau and
ks superimposed mountain ranges; and tbe Iasi only the
warmer valleys of Oie cKtreme sou (hem periphery of the
area. These divbions. furlberiDore, coincide with the dis¬
tribution of both vegetation and vegelatiooal types of
growth. For instance, the amngcmral of the l&ner going
north from tbe Pandrs to the Sayam up the Great Barrier
parallels (but is differeoi botnaically Crom) that goiui up
tbe eastero escarpment from Isdo-China to the Siancvois
Id S ib frlB The whole pieture, in fao, dospite its esonsous
complexity [and our gross over-all lack of knowledge of
the ana] ia perfectly logical asd coiBisieot with all ostural
facts and factors.

To reiterate—and 1 cannot help doing this and for some
very red reasons—we should wipe away out sense of
belplefincss and hopelessness on taking our first lock at
Map XV, and yust remember that tbU tremendous mish¬
mash may be quite simply divided into five parts: the
Great Barrier on the west; the ceotral desert basins; the
Great Barrier and escarpmeot on the east fronting Man¬
churia and Quna; the Tibetan super-uplands and their
mountains; and, 1^ tbe fringe area of the Uimal&yas.
This is eastern Eurasia in, as it were, a nutshell. The only
thiogs loft over a^e the two enormous m&sscs of uplands
and moUQtakis In Siberia, west and east of the Lena River
respectively. These, however, do not at the mcment con¬
cern us.

And so we find ourselves coding our world tour in an
area that is only one stage removed from where we
started The animil life and much of the vegetation of far
saatofi) Siberia la Ideotical to that otir extreme north¬
west. What is more, as you go south from the Beriog

325



SCraJt 9 n cither side—down Qirougb Siberia on the Aaiao
side, or through Alsska to the Yukon, and British Colum¬
bia 00 the Anencao, you pass through tbe sume successloa
of vegeiatiooal belts and mountainous zones at each lati¬
tude. Msay large animals, like Ibe Brown or Dish-iaced
Bears and (he large Red Deer or American Elk, have
crossed from ooe to the other iu comparatively recent
times. The Amerir\ds seem to have done the same too;
and the Arctic or Cakimo-type Mongoloids even later [un¬
less they were on both sides all ihe lime). As I asked at
the outset, what was there to prevent the Neo-Giants from
doing so also, at some dmc? They ace. of all the ABSMs.
appsreatiy the most rugged, surpassing jo this respect the
Neanderthalcr Kepiar-Culi- (or Gulh) -ovens, the desert¬
dwelling Alntas, and the little warm-forest TeMmas. That
the Meh-Tehj did not do likewise seems to me fairly
reasonable for it would appear that (hey arc more apes
thao incn and, like all of that Ilk, are neither catholic In
(heir tastes nor so readily n<)aptaKle at are Ihe Hominlds.
Like the GonUas in Africa and the Onmgs in Indcaesia
they got into a special environmcnul niche and have
remained stuck therein.


329


4



Appendix A

THS IMPORTANCE OF FEET


The HMtSy of footpriota 40 d foo('tr»cks—the difference be¬
tween which was discussed earner in ihis book —form the
subject of a very precise science caUed /cknclogy. This
discipline is employed in quite a number of fields, notably
in police work and in paJaeontdogy. The ideolificatioo
(he tracks of living animals in snow and mud has, of course
also been an art in bunting since time immemceial, aod
it is of great interest (o (he field aaruralisL lu more psy>
chological aspects were also discussed when we firs to*
troduced the matter of ABSM tracks. We shonld now
consider the details of Ibis discipline.

Tracks [the word I shall use from now on. uolesa dealing
specifically with a single print} are caused by gravity. The
first requirement is ibal the object on top that presses down
be composed of a denser material than that upon which it
is press^, but this does not mean that trkeks wifi invariably
result. Thus, a body made of steel if rolled across a sheet
of lead need not leave tracks. There appears here another
factor—that of weight—which results io the beginning of
the erection of a complicated formula. Above a certain
weight the upper body will (cave tracks, hut the point at
whkh it starts to do so is also depcodeot upon the com*
pressibility of the under body, or surface. Then again,
tracks can be either pressed or punched into a substance:
In other words energy, in additwo to mere gravity, may
be exerted. In this case the point at which an impression
begins varies according to quite a number of facion which
fortunately need not concern us since they lie in realms
of engineering that do not apply to purely biological mat-
ten. Nevertheless, one must bear io mind that there is a
considerable difference in appearance between o print made

327



b7 pressing and onn made by punching an object down*
ward bto a surface. The forraer e/Ul be found to be sur¬
rounded by Uttio cracks all rumung inward to the "guaer"
of the print, while the latter wiD be surrounded by a sort
of levee or ridge,

One of the easiest ways to spot an arriiicially made print
is to find such an impact ridge around a print where ^ere
U no cause for it under the natural conditions pertaining
on Che terrain. By this is meant, where tbe creature [and
this does not ap^y to machines] had no cause to jump.
Jumping results in the application of ''weight'* to tbe nor*
mal gravity and so is equivalent to ’'punching." Thus a
creature running, rather thtm walking, will leave differently
formed individual prints, and wbeu going downhill, they
wiU be quite other than when It is going uphill. Already
the mstter becomes, as you may readily agree, complicated.
But there are several further complexities.

Perhaps ibe most notable Is the area of the object whit^
mokes any print and, in the cose of ooimsis. the number of
such objects (i.e. bands, feel, tail, or cOier appendages)
employed in so walking, running, hopping, jumplag, or
otherwise progresstog. Tbe oiber most ienportant factor is
naturally the nature of the material or surface Inic which
the trucks are itupressed. This is itself an enormously com*
plicated subject

Tracks may be left in gravels or sands, all of which are
of course much denser then any animal foot that passes
over Uaein, This is due to their parliculacion or "looseness.*'
They ore dry, and such substances range widely in coc-
sisteacy from what are called screes, of sometimes enor>
znoua boulders plied against the sides cf mountains, to dry
plaster of Paris. Much finer substances have now been
aniJictally developed but in Nature we need not concern
ourselves with anythiog mud) finer than what we call a
fine dried silt, which is a Uitle coarser than dry plaster.

There are two other types of solids b which Lnipriots
may be left. These are, first, materials, such as lead, that
arc themselves malleable or wbal is commonly called ''soft*'
and. secondly "solutions" in the widest sense of that word.
This means, popidarly speaking, wet. We need not overly
concern ourselves with the first since such substances may
be regarded as nonexisieot in Nature^thal is to say In tbe
noohionan world. The second a of course the most impor¬
tant type of muleiial io which the (racks of wwliviAla appear
—^d this goes for snow, which in many respects holds

326



an interrnedi&te posHioa, sipce» depend^t vpoxt Mmpare*
ture, il mty be either a particuUied ffiatehal, or a mere wet
cEiixture. Prints can thus be left in three kinds ot substances
—(1) dry* aa sands, ( 2 ) wet. as in muds, or <3) 8now»
which has to be separately claasiAed.

There are those, such as the technologists of police labc^
ratories and road^onstmcdon engineers, who know so
much about the factors just named and the results of
nmktftg imprcsMDs ID various subslooces (hat it would
really startle you. On another band, certain palaeontolo^sts
have made profound studies of this subject, and most
notably in connection with tbe interpretation of fossil foot*
prints of early amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds.
The findings of all three groups of specialists of couise
coincide for, as I lay, Ichnology is a very precise science.
However, most unfortunately, totally insufficient applica¬
tion hat been made of their findings in AfiSMery. Also,
there has been an extraordinary lack of appreciation of
the basic theorem of Ichnology which is, simply stated,
that t print can be left only by an object that exactly
Tnirron" it—a term that should be self-excHanaiory. This
brings us to tbe questions arising from the conformation
of vertebrate animals* feet.

For some reason—and there may well be no real reason
—it just 50 happens that the first crearores with backbones
to crawl out of water oo to land dispensed with all but
five of the rays <digits) on the four appendages they r^
tained. This gave aU of us land vertebrates a basic pen-
tadacryl pattern—i.e. four ^'legs** each with five "fingers”
or toes. True, there are some animals like wbales that have
somehow again redapUcated the number of phalanges in
tbeir digital extremities. This is, actually, one of the most
extraordinary things in zoology as II flies in the face of
one of the basic precepts of genetics; namely, that a char«
acterisiic once lost caortot be resuscitated from the same
source. (The additional phalanges of ihu Cetaceans are
phylogenetkally developed by reduplicatkm.! This basic
five-fingered end five-toed pel tern speaks much for tbe
unitary origin of all land verTebruies*~ihe amphibjaos>
reptiles, birds, and mammals.

Many forms of all these major groups have at one
time or another lost one or more phalunges on various
digits, whede digits, or even whole Umbs. The snakes, for
instance, have lost everything. The results may be the most
readily sera in the [mirrored} prints left by the bands and

339



of the vaiicijs types; and from sucb prints a great dea]
about tbdr tnaliars ma^, by infereace from known types,
be recoQstnjcied. This brings u$ to the cUs»5cation of feet
and specifically of manmaiiaE extremities. HappUy we do
not have to go ioto this vast question and may concentrate
upon those of the Primates—l.e. the Ord^r to which we
belong, together with the ap«a, monkeys, kmufoMs, and
a few more abstruse types l^e ibe Feetbertails.

The Primate foot [as opposed to their hands, which we
may also from now on ignore) Is peotadactyl—i.e. flv^
toed—but is otherwise of a variety of forms. These fonns
may be classified In various ways but two sets of factors
are of particular interest to us. The first b whether they
are what is called wholly plantigrade or not; the second,
whether the big, great, or first toe is opposed to or Ues
alongside and points in the same direction as [acd^or h
bound to] the other toes. A plantigrade foot means tbu
its owner stands and walks with the whole under surface,
from the tips of its toes to iis heel—which is to say the
laa bone of the ankle—on the ground. Some Primaies,
such as the tiny Tarsiers, do not do this, the ankle bones
being greatly elongated. Men (Hominids), Apes (Pongids),
and mosi Monkeys (Semloids) are plantigrade, Purtber,
none of these Ihm groups of higher Priinatea have long
enough nails to produce clawljke excrescences whl^ touch
the ground and leave noticeable marks though those oi
some Cynocephaloids (i.e. Baboons and Macaques) may
do so wbeo they are mnning or galloping. There are few
—if any, as a fflairer of fact^^ther mammals that do not
leave claw marks. Then again, claws and nails ^though
having a similar ongin anaiomicaJly, are not idea deal
structures: but this also need not, fortunately, coocem us
further.

Jn dealing with Primate footprints we arc therefore pil*
mnrily concerned with the nature and position of the big
or great toe. The only one that docs not have an opposed
big toe is the Homlnid group. Nonetheless, this digit in
Hominlds also varies considerably in the degree to which
it is set off from the other four toes. From both the prints
found in the cave at Tcirano in Italy and from the sk^eton
of a whole foot found in the Crimea, we now know that
the big toe of 6e Neanderthalera was rather widely sep¬
arated, There are people living today who have feet not
unlike those of NcanderlhaJeB—notably certain Amerinds
from tbe extreme soutbem end of South America (see s

330



pboiognph \Q in article by Dr. Carleion S. Coon, in Sat-
ural History, iafluaiy, 1961} and some Amtralotds. How*
ever, tbcfo is no indicatnA, even among tbo&e which we
know, of any cvideoce whatsoever of a truly "opposed'*
big toa. among any Homioid.

One known fact about abnormalities among human feet
b nonetheless of some significance m our story. This b that
shown in the two photographs of a strange type in which
(ha second loe is longer than the Rnt, sometimes more mas¬
sive, and also widely separated from the remaining three
toes. This is tbe more odd In that the second and third
toes of normal Modem Mao arc partially webbed. If a
foot, normal or abnormal, of this nature developed [or
even morely occurred) one would have supposed (hat the
second and third toes [togetber] would have become widely
separated from, on tbe one hand the big loe. and on the
other, the ramaining two. When this abnormality occura.
both the big and (he second toes tend to curl downward
and inward not unlike those of the Meh-T^h. But they are
still not opposed.

l.at us now anatyre or try to analyse the prints left by
the four types of ABSMs. These, we will arrange in tbe
followiof order: (1) the Proto-Pigxnies. (2) the Almas.
(3) the Neo-Qiants, and (4) the very different Meh-7eh
type. It will be seen from the skeichai of the outstanding
types of known human feet [accompanying this Appendix]
that (hose of the living pigmy buctas types such as the
Negrillos and Negritos show a distinct tendency toward a
very short broad foot with rather large (ic proportion]
and widely splayed toes and a very constrlcttd or narrow
bcel. It is bardiv evm a ‘'step** from them to the Sedapas,
TeMmas, and ^er alleged pigmy ABSMs. Such a tiny,
human-type, plantigrade, flat foot docs not however begin
to approach the form of (he various bears, and not even
(he Malayan Sun Bear {Htiatxtos'}.

Coming to the prints allegedly left by what I have called
(he Almc type, one finds that they are hardly in any respect
different from (hose of tbe Neanderthalcrs left in tbe cave
in Italy. This, in turn, perfeedy accords with the now
expresed belief of the Russian scientists that the former
are but living representatives of the latter. Despite their
relatively low plantar index [l.e. tbe number of times tbelr
width goes into (heir length) they arc hardly at all noa-
bumao: in fact, they can be matched by the prints left by
not a few Modern Men living today and most notably by

331



ptrsons who have nevar wore shoes or other fooigeaf. We
baldly have to discuss these tracks any further, except to
wot Ion that such base been mmortd from roany places
other than eastern Euiasia—such as. I may say, oonhwttt
North America. South America, and Africa, Bur how are
-we to tell whether such prints—if they ever really existed—
were left by some wjSd thing or by local men, walldng
without footgear and happening to have Neaodenhalotd*

problems begin with the Nco-Gianls, Here, I
want first to try and wipe away a loi of dross. It has been
said, and rcrwaiodly, that such tracks aod prints have been
found aQ over northern Indo-China, and on noithward
through the arc formed by the upl^ds and mouatains of
Szechwan via the Tsin Lings to .Manchuria, The same-
up to 20 -inch-long humanold type prmts—ate also said to
have been found ic the Matto Grosso and in Patagonia jq
South America. This may be ao but after, lo, these many
years 1 have been completely unable to obtain any photog¬
raph or even sketch of one that is staled to have been
made on the spot. 1 have sev«al “sketches” made by mem¬
bers of expedirions to those places but sketches made la
retrospect after questioning and mesUy in my aparrmeol
in New York, but nothing -original." The only areaa from
which I have been able to obtain such first-haiW pbotes
OP sketches, ondplasiet cases has beeo from British Colum¬
bia and northern California.

These prints ai first look wholly human and, I inay say,
A bit ridiculous. Hovfever, on further analysU they display
other qualities. As may be seen from the accompanying
sketch, they show one or two extremely old charactensiJcs
that fiixj definitely noi typically human. As photographs
of whole tracks of these monstere have shown, they walk
with their feel pointing slrai^t forward: not pigeon-toed,
like bears, or io any may out-turned like roost men. Thus,
they must flex about lor acroasl a line that forms an arc
at right angles to that line of travel behind the toes. Then
IhH means that although the whole foot is enonnous and
at firei looks very long, it is really a very ^lort and broad
one [with on index of only 1.61].

A friend of mine, Mr. Fred Laue, long in the shoe buai-
ocss, has worked out the trade equivalents of these propor¬
tions. Working from one of ouf plaster casts with an over-all
length of 15^' and e width of 7", a No. 21 shoe would
be needed but po less than 13 sizes in width greater than

332



Cl) HUMAN »dult CWdsC Caucasoid). Imprint In clay mold
C2) HUMAN Adolescent. 14^ years (West Caucasoid}. Wet im>
print of left foot on hard surface. (3} HUMAN WILD« lOV^
years (West (Caucasoid). Wet imprint of left foot on hard
surface. {4) HUMAN Infant, 2K years (West Caucasoid). Wet
imprint of left fool on hard surfoca.

(S) HUMAN Adult (Cromagnon Man). From clay floor of cava
In Franca. (6) HUMAN Adult (Southern Ameriri^. From mud
of river bank Chisiiua. Patagonia (7} SUBHUMAN (Neander*
theMf). From moist clay floor of cava, Tolrano. Italy. (8) ABSM
(GuSi^avan type). From a sketch of track In mud, Kirghiz
S.S.R.

(9) ABSM (Ueh'Teh). From photo of cast made from photo
of print in snow, by Eric Shiptco. (ID) APE (unknown form).
Sketch made by Charles Cordler in the Congo (cpvenaff, 3)
cefflimtters). (U) APS (Lowland Gorilla). From plwto of cast
of foot, (12) APE (Chimpanzaa). Outline of extended foot from
plester cast


333


(13) HUMAN Adi/lt (Bushman). From a sketch made frem &
cast. (14) ABSM (Sasquatch). From tracing of deeo oriftt jn
ffrin wet ciay, (15J ABSM (Dzu-Teh). Drawn by author Uftfler
supeATislon of Gerald Russetl. (ISJ ABSM (?) (Kakundakari),
Sketch made by Charles Cordrer in the Congo. (Over*all iO
c«>timeters)

(Mafayan Negrfto). From photo of cast. (18)
ABSM (Sedapa). Traced from print found in Danau Bento
Sviamp. Sumatra, by Dr. Jacobson, (19) ABSM fTeh-lma). From
a., euthor, under supervision of Gerald

RusselJ, (20) ABSM (Apamandi), Sketch made by CheriH
Cordjer In the Congo. CDwer^ii, 20 centimeters}

OutHne of extended foot from plsrter
MSt (22) APE fOrang«ulan). Imprints of knuckles and foot, ex
H«wlmens (23) APE (SJlve^t Gibbon). Outline of extended
foot from plaster cast (24) MONKEY (Old Male Rhesus). Drawn

Irom live ^eimen, ex Oamen Hid,

334


(Top mi, loft} ASIATIC BROWN BEAR (Ursuo aretosK Ufl
hind and right foro foot imprints. (Top row, right) NORTH
AMERICAN SiACK BEAR {EuarctDS amarieonus). Loft hind
and right foro foot Imprints.

(Cantor row. loft} PUMA (mountain lion) (Profalls coneolorL
Right hind foot (Fora and hind prints of tha largo cats ara
vary similari so also aro all prints Of tha Great Cats.) (Cantar
row, right) NORTH AMERICAN PORCUPINE (Erathlian dor-
satun). Loft hind and right fora foot imprints.

(Bottan raw, loft) THE FAMOUS FOOTPRINTS OF CARSON
CITY MIL Tna outllnad portion was "rastorad" by Dr. Haric*
n*ss. Vth was a left foot print in sandstone. Tha trades wer*
not found in the lall yard but soma mllas distant. (Battm
raw, HgM) ECTINCT GROUND SLOTH (Mylodon). Skeleton of
a left foot from the side.



335


the widest shoe made^i.e,, a EEE. Second, it means that
tbe curious double inner pad und^ the ball of the foot has
flomething to do with tbe baaaJ joint of tbe big toe and
not with the end or outer end of tbe first metacarpal, If
this is 80 , and the foot bends or flexes along the are that
runs between the two pads all the other toes are not just
extraordinarily but so exceptlooall 7 long that they cannot
be of the typically human form. But, if they are that long,
why don't they splay or, alternatively, why does aot tbe
mud in which the tracks were left well or squeeze up
between them as il does with even a normal human foot?

1q all the tens of thousands of prints that have now
been found and oxamioed of these creatures this bos ocver
bees observed to have occurred. Tbe only thing tbat I
know of that could prevent this—and at ibc same time
produce such a sharp left-io-right ridge under tbe flexure
of tbe toes—is an almost complete *veb beiyy««n all of ikem.

Thus, although the NechOiant prints at first look almost
completely human they are not They have a double first
subdigitaJ pad; they are extremely short and broad for their
vac, uid, tbe second to fifth toes seem to be conjoined.
The significaoce of these points should by now be ajv
predated.

This leaves us with the most abomi cable problem of all
—tbe A/eA*re^-type prims—and abominable this is, Indeed.
These simply do not fit into any pattern. They arc defi¬
nitely not Pongld in thei the big toe though enormous is
not truly opposed. Similarly, ^ey are oo more Hominld
in uiat said big toe is ' set oS.’' However the second toe
looks for all the world like a semi-opposed digit. Such a
condition is not known in any mami^. As we already
pointed out, the development of such a condition Is some¬
what more likely to be able to be undertaken by a Pongtd
[with an already oflset and opposed big toe] than by a
Hoffinid without one. These prints are not those of a string
of foxes all jumping into tbe same bole in tbe soow as we
by DOW know all too well; also, and this has perhaps not
yet been sofficicntly stressed, the prints show very dear
indication of a rather complex museuJarura which, although
so far unknovn m any other anlroaJ, accords perfectly
with what would be expected if one developed such a foot
and was bipedal.

Most but by oo means all of tbe Meh-Teh tracks have
bcco found in stiow. Tbe others have been to mud and
sometimes first in one and then In tbe other Id a continuous

336


Une. Ttui ftbsiriutcly aod posltrvely dupc«es of another
propositioa baa coostaatly been put forvard; namely,
that the prino were made by a comparatively amall creature
aod were then tubwquenUy enlarged by meftlng of the
snow witb Of without regelatioo. Coaaidenbte work baa
oow beeo dooe oq ihia pbeoomcnoo ud h la true that
small preota may become large ones in thia way. aod it b an
extraordinary fact that tbe tracks tetm or appear in some
uncanny way lo grow to fit them. By this I mean that,
c^ftical sBusioQ or whatever, the stride seema to grow. Thia
of course ia i^yaically impossible whereas mcacily the re*
verse shonld occur because, as the priota get trigger aod
bigger, their peiipberies must get closer together. I ob>
served thk mon closely at my farm by excluding all from
going Dear a set of tracki made by my aosalJ wife wearing
clote^fitdog boots in frt^ firm soow from the house to tbe
traab>dUpc^ affair beyond our lawn, lo a few days her
priota h^ grown to enormous proportioDs aod lo^ed ui«
credibly siDisier aod as seen from an upper floor window
appearing for all tbe world like those of a p o sitiv e giaot-^
aod with a giant stride. Actual meaauretneot however
showed that the stride had of course reinamed as origioaiiy
laid down. Nevertheless, noae of these thiogs. aetu ti iv
illusory can occur in mud.

The Mth‘Tth tracks and prints are, in fact, by far the
most pusiing of all, and especially since such persoos as
Sbipion. Bordet, and others obtained clear photograpte of
them takeo from direcOy above. Here ia obviously a bipedal
creature of considerable size and weight that iohabiis the
Himalayas aod the ranges north of tbe Tibetao gateau. It
was tbe original "Abomioable Snowman'* and it coosee out
as the last ‘‘abominahJe enigma."


337



Appendix B

Thf Known Mammalian
Fauna of the ffimalayan Area


Tbe knowQ rndminalian faimi o£ \bt Tibetao Plateau, the
PainUs, fifid ibe Himulayan raoges id very extensive, lo tho
list area we find a combinaiion of typical Burauan and
Orieotal forms, togeiher witb several unique types not
found clsewtaere. We are eocceroed, in Our discussion,
only with maemnais. la that other animals do not have
haix; and it has been hair above all else [other than foot¬
prints and tracksl that has been brought forward In
ei^posidOD of ABSMs; and especially In these areas. More¬
over, for some reason—^ui one which docs not seem
quite logical to me—it has been the larger tnammals that
lave been suggested as the possible origsos of these hairs
which have been said to be of yetis.

This actually need not be finsU for there are toany
medium-sized and small mammals the hairs oi which are
just as loog, and sometimes almost as sturdy as those
alleged to be from ABSMs. Some alleged ASSM teroains
have been proved to have bcea mode from the good ike
animal called the Serow; while some of the Callfomiaa
hairs have been Idrotifiod, oo the one band as those of a
Moose [oot found in ihe trea, tockJentallyl. and on (he
other as “those of a large cal" [i.e. the belly-hairs from a
Puma, Frcfelis concolor]. Therefore It is of Brit importance
to list those larger mammals known from the Tibetan and
Himnlayao areas chat might be used lo make arti-
fsets." The most outstanding ol these are:

Prioates

Hoolocfc Gibbon (Hylobetes hooloch)

Langurs (^r/wnopiVirecui jcAisfaceus, enfellus, etc.)

Snubnosed Monkey (,FhJnopti/u:cus roxeff<Mi3e)

338


Csmivofi

Snow-Leopard {?anihera uneia)

CUot Panda {Ailuropoda melAnolfucus)

Leaser PaiMla iAilurus fulg^ns)

Wolf {CanU iupiu, subsp.) —Eurasian form {net the
Wolf Camr peUipes)

Red Bear (Unus arctos. luhsp^

Blue Bear (C^rria <zfcror prulnosus)

Snow Bear (VrsM arctex tsabelUnus)

Himalayan Black Bear (SeUnorcM thihrianus)
Slolb-Bw iMtIursus ursinus)

Artlodnclyla

(1) Camelioea iComelldae)

Bactriaj) Camel {Camclus bacirianus)

(2) CerviiMa {Cfrvidae)

Red Deer—Hangul {Ctrvus kashmirianta)

Red Deer—Shou (Cervwr walUcMi affinis)

ThoroM's Deer (Cervw cibirostrls)

(3) Bovines (Bovinat}

Yak (Bos gru/jniens)

Milhan (Bos fronialis)

(4) Anteiopioes (Gazellinas)

Zereo (Procopra gutlerosa)

Goa (Procepra piclicaudaia)

(5) Goat-Antelopes (Saiginae)

Saiga iefarica)

Chiiu (Pa/iihaJops hedgsoru)

(6) Rock-Goats (Rubicaprinae)

Coral (Naomorhsdua cinerrus)

Scfow (Caprfeomis sumair^nsls iher}

(7) She^Oaen (Ovlhovinae)

Takio fStfdbrcai laakolor. B. rtbcMnus. and B.
bodferdi)

(8) Goats (Ceprittae)

Ibca (Cepn ibex, subjp.)

Sheep (GvjVtee)

Bkaral (Pscudovis nahura)

Argali {Ovii ammon)


339



Bibliography


Aell9nu5» C. [flJ Ccntory) (1832). Jilian! dg neiura anlmaliim
Ifbri V«tba ad fldem librorum manuscriplorum cou-

stituit (et ODDotaiiOQlbus nimtravit F. J&cobs. Intcxtae sujit
mrae 9e«ui3Jne posluroac J. Q- Scbacidcrl Soxonis^. Adjceli
suni iodiccs, remn) ei uiierpreiatia LaiiiM Geso^ 4
GmnoWo ecDcndaLfi. (Cum addtndb ct cooje?tuns iobdltb
J. J. Reiskii.) Jeoae: impreosk Friderici ProausaanL 2V,

AgQssii-Horrison The Advence Newspaper <19d0). "ka^quatuk
Wauhes Berr? Pickar Near Nelson,” Oct. 20. B.C.. Caoada.

Ab, S., & Sasl^aii, H, (1554), “The Abommablo SnowmaiL*
/. Bombay nau Hist. Soc. Bombay, 52, 594-8.

Alfliuov. A. <1957)- "Ooes tie saow loaB exist?” Evening
Moscow, Aipf. 24, p. 3-

Amerrc&a Karakoiam ^pedliloe, Isc, 1938 (1939). Five Miies
High. New Y(>rk (Dodd, Mead 8t Co.).

American Natiirolal (1882V "The Seceni Dlscos'erics of Fowfl
Footprint Id Ca^s, Nevada." v. 16. pp. 921-23. Pbila.

Bantier, U. (1958). ”3ur les traces de I’hunrme des nelgos.*
L^humamit^ Dfntdtnche, Ftb. 9

fiarlclfi, M. (1881). "Cber Mensebenschwarre." Arch. Anihrop.
vol. 13. PP 1-41. Braunschweig,

Bartels, M. (1884). “Die Oeschwannen Merechen." Arch. A/t-
tilfop. vol. IS, pp. 4.5-132. Braimachweif.

tba Balula (1829). The Travels of Ihn Batma. Transluied bf
Rev. Ssunuel Lee. pp. 187-8. Lo&dos.

Bcauman, E. B. (1937). Letter to the Editor: 'TTie Abominable
Snowman.” The J'imes, July 17. Loadoa,

BoU&der. C. (1959). f^e Dared the Andes. London. (Abelard*
Sebuman).

Bolm, D, (195T). Das SehntWiaarbuck. Milcheo. (Mayer Verlag),

Bonlius, J. (1658). Hestorioe HofuraJis et Medicce JrtUlm
Orienro/is. AnLstcrdam.

Bordet. P. (1955). 'Traces de yeti dans rHimalaya." BitiJeiia
Mf/trum AtU, Alstoire nniur. vo). 27. no. 6. pp. 433—439,
Paris.


340


Bofdcl. P. (J«6). Tma d« jwr dost rHInjjItyt.'* Monutnt
*t tdpinigme. co. 7, pp. 206-209.

Boole et Vailoi* (1?52), Us BMtmes FossiUs. 44h ed Pirfs.

(Messon).

BoiMlIlofi. J. (1956). m, tu Shtrp^t. Lowtoa.

Bowlcf. L. P. (I9U). Goid Coast Falaver. London.

Kj A Eisecterti. R (1939). Spurenkunds.

6t& cd. Berlin. (P. Pvcy)

®^***^* ^ (1936), Mm Cftcsstj dans la iunfla dr Sumatra.

BrbtoB, S. W. (1955). ‘'Man Walls Uprighl Becaose of Soov"
Seuncr News Utter. Apt. 23, Wtshmefoa.

BfOOto, R. (1950). Flndinp the MUtin$ Unk. Loftdoo.

Bfoom, R.. A Robinson, i. T. (19506). “Man Contefoporaiieous
wjUj tbe Swartlrans Ape-Man." Amer. J. pkys. Anthrap.
vol. 8, pp. 151-5. PbOadelidiia.

Broom, R, A ftobinm J. T. (1950b). "Ape or Man?'* Nature.
vol, 166, pp, S43-4, London.

Broom. R. (1952). "Swankrana Ape-man Paranthropus eras*
sideiia. Tronrv. Hdus.. Moo. No. 6.

Brue^ Qca. C. O. <1924). V/Usanr du Mont Evertri. t922.
Maeco. (Pretat Fren$).

fimilCT, J. (1953). you Shall Know Them. TransSadon of Lea
A^bux Deoitans. Boston. (Lrnfc, Brownl. fteiL
"Vercori").

1. (1959). Letter lo the Edhor: "The Soowman." Ma.
337. London.

BuddhacarUa (t934X (Pali Theological Tra^ise, a •dlAam
Buddha TexL Avaflable M Eagiub tranalaciOB by Rhys
DaWl) Beaares.

Bun^ J. W. (1929). "lotrodudng B.C.*s Hairy CUots" Moe-
lean s Uagadne. Apr. I, ToroBla Ctetario, Canada.

r, C. V. (1940), ■The Hairy Oianu of

Bntlsb Columbia." Wtd* World Mag. iao., pe, 296-307.
U)M6as

Burton, M. (1956). ‘TTie Snowman.” The Jllusrroted London
News. Nov. 3. toodoa

Boam B,, A Leroy, O. (1955). £</ dernlen secreu de la tern.
Faria.

•Tiogs Lure AbomiiMhle Snowmao." New
York soumal^American, June 5.

Bym^ P. <1956bJ. ^‘Searching for (be Abomlaoble Snowman."
^ ^<^t^niat’Amertcen. June 15.

CcpUli. T. (1954). "Doca tbe mu of tbe snows eater* la De¬
fense of the World, do. 4, pp. 92-94.

ChaJ^eau, A. (1954). Empreintes et 'voks des animaut eibier et
det MuAbtes. Paris.

Cbar^ J. R. S. (1936). British Animal Tracks. London. fC. A.

rWTSOll),

tTNissoire Naturelle. Paris.

ChevaUey, O. (1953). Ayfans-premtires d f£wMf. Pam.

S41



Cfork. L. <2 M3). Umklng WM. Londoa. (RoteMndna)

Cliford, Sir H. (1S97). In Court and Kampcng. L4nKloo.

C<Ab, B. H. (1952). me Abomtiuble SaovmuL^' Couiurj
Lift, m, 163. LondoiL

Combe, O. A. CJ926). ti Tlbeun on Ttlret. Icmdos. O'. PUh«r
Ltd).

Cooa. C S. (1954). Tht Story of Man. New York. (-Mfred A.
KMpf}.

Cope. & P. {1863a). 'Tbe Nevada Biped Tracka." Amertcan
Naterallsr. v, 17, pp. 69>7J. PkQadelphia.

Cope, t D. US33b). mie Caraon Fooiprinb.” American Sa-
uraltst. V. 17. p. 1153. Pbiladelphia.

Ctesias (1612). “Indka Op^rtT in PlioL*us: M)Tiobibloa.
Oe&fva.

Dammennan. K. W. (1924). **Da Onng Pandak van Sumatra."
Trop. Uasuur. 13, 12. 177-42. Veltcvreaco.

Dammeroian. K, W, (1930), "The Orang Petidek or Ape Maa
of SuoMUfl." Pwc. 4A focifk Sci. Congr. voL Ill, Bio*
logical pepertj B3tavia*Banloen$.

OamaarmAfl, 3L W. (1.933), "Pe Nieov*ontdekte Oraog
Peniek.” Troo. NaTut/r, 21. 8. 123-31. Weltevreden.

Davis, H (1940). Land of the Eye. New York. (Eeiuy Holt «
Co.)

Delaquys, O. (1953). L'homme de nelgee. Parij.

Delavaille. J. H. (1862). "lee bomntes a queue." HUt. nal. 1st
serin, p. 243. Paris,

Deeman. E. (1954). Alow to Everest. New York.

Dtrioger, D., D. Un. (Unlv. of Florence). The Alphabet, A Key
to the History of Mankind witb a Foreword by Sir Ellis
M iniw, Emeritus Proiessor of Arcbaeology, Carabridge^
Secood Edition, Revised. New Yo^ (PhUosopliical Libraiy,
a.d.)

Dollmao. O. (1937). Letter to the Editor: me Abominable
Snowman." The Timet, July 19. London.

Downios. R. (19S4X '"The Soowmaor The Strangest Story Yet.**
Daily Mad, Jan. 7. Loedon.

Dreonan, Prof. M. R. (1953). "A new race of prebisterle nen:
The Salbanha skull, foood with stOQO aod bone tools, and
the (oseO mname extinct Seuih African aoiBela." Tht
Illusiraied London Hetes, Sept. 26. London.

Dubois, E. (1894). Pitheeaatbropus erecius: eine menseben*
ahaiiebe UberganesfonD aus Java. Batavia.

Duit, N., £,L., Pb.D,, D.Litt. (1934). The Paneovimsa-

tisahasrika Prajnap<rraw\Ua. No. 28 In the Calcutta Oriental
Sence; Accepted as thesis (pt. id lor the Degree ef Doctor
of Literature in the Udvenity d London. Umdon. (Luzac).

Dyhrenturth, C. 0. (1952). Zum drUien PoL MUeben (Nymph*
enberger Verla^andhiag},

Dyhrenfurth, Prot O. O. (1955). To the third Pole. London.
(W. Laurie)

Eickstedt, £. Freiherr voo (1942). i?assenA:unde uni Hassem

342


I


ttxMlcfu itr hitnichHfIt. Stntlgwt (FcrdlBUja
ElW a J. (J91J). “Oo tbe Poubte Exbtaneo cf a Um As*.

Ebopw, O. L (1»SI»). -QuJ «, I'rtomia.bie bonmw do
seiget?” Les Alpes. 35, Laosass^

(J95fi>. Kangehenfu/tga. Loodoa. (Holder & Stougb-

Plnot L. (1928). “A pci^ des Mol a quoie." Bull. Amis Vtma
Hue. DO. 4, pp. 217-21, Haaol. Hofebou

”"*t/ provide Mwclw to tb« Saowmao."
The Obserter. Ocl 23, Uadoa.

^ (1802)* hitmoirt iUr It Commtft^

&pto«riwi da Pan national Albert.

Onstmu d«s

_ , "arcA Natiofitux dii Codao BcIa)

Jen*. (Fbebw)

“S»l9 ol« AbooUfttWe Soo«.
^

» £vervff. Trutlated from Eo^i^

*

"« »’•’'« ia

P, *' “■* ~* «■

'^''''~” “"■«« ‘f* rA/fiiM.

«•*’!!: "T? *“*”“>! Do*» •» Mill?" Hi Wuf
» voJ. 79, Fob. t OD. 10-11.

****^c^ Generalle Morphologie der OtBantsmen,

***^2i’i ^ Clowfr. Kew Yort

(Duell, SloAD aod P««jc«)

aaaoDg ibe

o L^odoft. (G. Allen A Unwia)

Hoijudfa V. (19WX “E«n t)i,uii«ti,,| m« cea Aapoeoeb.*
Tnp. Ncuur. B3, iOJ-6. Walte^a. »P®‘“W>-
Hnn^u, B. (!«:«. -L'Komne da, C.v««,

«! M.i.“f^' ' * "


343



HeuveltBuu, B. (I9i2b% '’L’Hoffime d«s Cavems coana
da Oianls ipewuram 3 a 4 M«r«s?" ScUnce e( Avenir.
DO. 6%. Msl. 9. 20T. Paris.

K«uv«kMos, 6. (1935). Sur la piste das blias i^norfa. 1. 1.

eh. 6. Paris.

HeuvelmaASi B. (195S). “Oui, Hjontme-dcs'iwiscs «!««.“ Sci-
fme ef Avenir, no. 134. AvriJ, p. 174, Parb-
HeuvelmiBs, B. ((958). On the Track of Unknown Aiiimait.
LOQdOD. (Rupert Hari-Oavis)

HUl. W, C. Osmaa <1945). 'Nlrtaewo, an Unsolved Problem of
Ceylon." Loris, 4, 231-62, Colombo.

Hfllaby, 1. (1957). "Tte Kwangsi Jaw." Amer /. phys. Anthrop.
IS. 281-5, PhUadelphk.

Hillary, E. (1955), High Adventure. London. CHoddet k Sloufifi*
ton)

Hillary, Sir. B. (I960). "Abominable—and Improbable?" New
York Timer Magazine.

Hooijar, D. A. (1949), ‘'Seme Notes oo ths Olganropltbecw
queaioQ." Amer. J. phys. Anihrop. 7. 513-18, Philadelphia,
Hooijer, D. A. (1951). ‘The Qeologicol Age of Pitbccaoihropua,

Ms^nthropiw end Oigaompitbaeua." Amer. }. phyr. An-

throp. 9. 26S-2.

Hooker, J. D, (I&S4). HinoUryon Journals, v. D. pp. 14-15,
London. 2V. (J. Murrey)

fTposUr Folkiore (1946), -Strange Beast Stories," v. 5, p. 19,
Maicb. indtanapoUs. (PublUbed for the Hoosier Folklore
Society by the Indiana HIsioricsl Bureau.)

Hooton, fc. A. (19371. Apes, Men. and Moroits. New YotL
(G, P. Putnam's Sons)

Howard-Bury, C<d. C. K- (1922). Mount Everest, the Recon-

naisaanee. Loadon.

Hunt. A. (1957). “The Wesi Coast’s Abominable Trecfocn." The
Clohe MoQoiine, July 6, (Toroaio Globe and Mail)

Hunt. J. 0954). “Siege and assault," The Natioruii Ceopraphkai
Mapsiine, v. 106, no. I, pp. 1-44.
niustrated Times (1956). 'TraveUing Soowmno; Abomiaabl*
Snowman trseks." Jan. 23. Loodon.

bzsrd. R, (1934). The Innocent on Everest. Mount Evcfctt «•
pillion. 195J. New York. (E, P. Dulloe & Co. Inc.)
Izzard, R. (19551, The Abominable Snowman Adver\Iiire. Ac-
oouni of the Daily Mail Himalayan expedllioo, 1954
London.

Jackson.). A. (1955). More Than Mountoint London. (George
G. Harrap & Co, Ltd,!

faccJjson, E. (1917). "Rtmboclevcn m Sumatra. ” Trop. Natuur,
6, 69. Wellevredsu,

lacobsoo. £. (1918). "Nog eons do Oraog pandak." Trop.
Natour. 7. 173, WeUe«r«d«eu

Taschke. H. A. <U89). Tibeian-English Diethnary. London,
fascbke, H. A. (1954). TIberon Orvnjnar. New York. (Fralcrick
Ungar)


344


ftlmti /Ihac (1959). *T!ie mTSteiy of the soov mmo iriZI be
uocovered.* An interview by the eorrupendent of
oew^aper ieimio Jibao with Pro! B. Porshnev (in
Chisese). Apr. IS.

lUlmpflert, W. (1956), '‘Abootloeble Snowmes ji e beat?*
Sdenct Digest, no. 4.

fCaolback. R- (I937e>. “20 Moalhe in Tibet" The Times. July
12» LocmIob.

Kwlbaci. EL (]937bX "Tbe Mououin Men.** The Times, July
U. l«0040Q.

Reaae, A. H. (1920). Man Past end Present. Cembrid^ (The
UnNenicy Pmi)

Keel. J. A. (1958). Jedoo. LoQdoo. (W. R Allen)

Keiik Sir A. (1929). The Anrt^ulfy oj Man. voR I ft IL Loa*
doo. (Williams and Norgate, Ltd.)

KUiakow, N. (1959). “Soow auo? No. a kgeBdr Llteraturt
and Life, Au|. 23.

KleioeDbery. E., ft Ponhoev, B. (1959). "Stwile* in tbe SovM
Uakn in cooaection wrth the soow man. Huanmln ilhaa.'“
Feb. n Co Chinese).

KoenRswald. G. H. R. voa (1935). “Eiae fo&sile SaugeUerfsime
mit SimU ins Sudebue." Pnx. Acad. Sel Amst. 36. (8).
pp. S72-9. Amsterdam.

Koeoiifweld. O. K. R. voo (1947). '*$evch for Early Min.”
Nat. Hist. N.Y. 56, I. New York.

Koeeigswald. O. H. R. von (I95fi). Meeting PrehissorU: Mosl.
New Ycrt. (Harper ft Brothers)

Komromof Truth (1959). “Facts and isrumpiicni.* Aa teterrfew
with A. Proaic and D. Evteoiev. iaa. 19,

Korolev, A. (1957). Beyond the Border of Asia. pp. ?0-'7L
Moscow.

Kofovnikov. V. (1959). ‘Tlw Mystery Snow Man." Jovkr Ku>
sia, Feb. 25.

Lnl. R. N. (1947). The Students Pwricol Dlefionasy. CobuJb*
ing Hlodustani Words with Meanings In Persian

Cbancter. Ekveolh Edition, Revised. Allababad. India.

Lambert, R. S. Exploring the Supematurai: The Weird in
CtpadlBB Folklore. Ch. 10. pp. 167.180. LondoB. (Arthur
Barker, Ltd., n.d.)

Lane. F. W. (1955). Nature Parade. 4ib «d. revised. London.

Lo Bret (1885). “Nodee sur rEiisicacc d*une Race d'Hommes a
Queue." Arch. gen. Med. Fcbniary, Paris.

Le Conte. J. (1883). "Carson Footprints," Nature, voL 28,
London.

Le Double, A. F, ft Hoasaay. P. (1912). Lea Velus. Paris.

Lo Oros Clark. W. E., F.R.S. (1950). History of The Primates.
London. (British Museum rNaiural History])

Leroi-Oonrhan. Prof. K (1952). "Amonf tbe ten mcot aoeied
buman reoialiu yet docovceed: early Mouiteriio jaa^es
fouod at Arey-sur-Cure on a unique sde cocuinuously oc-

345



copied for 140.000 yean." The lUustrofed London News,
Nov. 79. London.

LatBvtt, A. (JW8). "Was it a Snowraaa?'' ^doseow News, Jan-
2L

Lewis, H. (1919), "Notes on Animal aod Plant Life iD tbe
Vedda CounCry." SpoUa zeylan. 10. Colors^

Lay, W. (19j5). Sahmaodtrj and Oiher Cb. 4i Tbe

Abominabje Snowmen. New York.

Loebta. T. (1938). Alias de' menschlichen mtd tlerisehen tiaare.
CCitiogen, Leipzig. (Schoeps)

Lanaberg, £. (1932). *'Ert avatojat swindelforaok meddenfelan
de lanken." Fauna och Flora, 249>S4. Uppsala.

Lyall. D, D. (1929). Tht Hunting and Spoor of Central African
Game, Londoo. (Seeley, Service & CoO

MeCorern. W. M. (1924). To Lhasa in Disguise, Loadcs.
(Ibomton Buiierworth)

McOorern, W. M. (1924), To Lhasa Ui DIsgiAse. New York.
(The Century Co.)

Maclniyre, Maj.-Gca. D. (1889). Hindu^Koh. Edinburgh. (W.
Bbekwood & Sooa)

Maelniyre, N. (J936>. Afioc/c on Everert. London. (Methuen A
03,)

Maier, R. (1923), 't3e Orang psodak of Orang pendak.” 7rop.
Neiuur, 12, U4. Welievreden.

Maitre, H. (1912). Let JungUa kloi. Explorallon es Histeirt dts
Hinterlandj Moi du Cambodge, de la Cochirfchtne, de
fAnnam et du Bas-Laoa. Paris.

Marlagin. G. (19S8a). "Aima^the snow mao?^ Ao Interview
wMh Prof. Rinchen. Vieraiure and Life. Nov. 12.

Mariagia. G. (1958b). "Aimawtbe snow man?'* Reply from B.
Penhnev. Literalirre and Life. Nov. 16.

MarqueS'Riviere. 3. (1937). L7nde Secrete ei sa Magte, Paris.

Maisb, O. C. (1883). "On (he supposed human fool-prmli r^
ceady found b Nevada,” American Journal of Science,
Ser. J, vol 26, New Hbvvo. ConnceliciU.

Mason. G. F. (1943). Animal Tracks. New York. (WilJiaol
Morrow A Co)

Master, I- (1959). "The Abominable Snowman." Harper's Maga*
ziae, January,

Mayer, Ur, B, (1942). Recherche de I'ejpece animale par
Fexamcn des pntU des foi^ures. Lyon, (Bose Frerca, M.
er L. Riou)

Megasthencs (1846). tndica, fragmenta In L. A. Schwanbeck:
Msssatbenrs tndica. Cce«)t (cxI, Bonn.

Mendia W. (1945) "Where the Pygmies of Ceylon Lived,"
Loris, December, p, 262, Colombo.

Merejinsky. U. (1959). "From (he ancient manusciipts." Eve¬
ning Kiev, Oct, 23 (in Ukrainian).

Mccrlct, H. ((934). 'AbormnaOle Snowman," Hew Statesman
and Hation, v. 27, no. 6, p. 152. London.

346


Moor^ MJ^. (1957). *1 MM tbt Aboniittble SDcywous.**
Sfx^s AfiM. M«y, New York,

Morift, M. (1953). Everrst du premier aaaut d la -ektolre
Oreaoble.

W. R. J. (1947). Grammar cf the NepeU
Languages In the Raman and Nagri Seripa. Louloa.
(Uizac)

hiotcow Komsomoters (1558). “Soow man—Who b heT An
iatcrview with Lb« kicoco editor ?ro(. of Asihraeotosy
A. Shmekov. )ul 2d.

Murie, 0. J. (1954). A Eleld Guide to Animal Tracks, fiostoo,
(HouftMon MiOUo)

Muiray, W. (1953). The Story of Everest. New York.

Mumy. W. <1953). "I* there id Ahomioabk SnownuD?* Scott
Magatlne, May, pp. 91-97,

'‘0“««naU Mylha." voL 6, no. 3. pp.

Nebesky.Woiowftz, R. von (1954). Where the Gods Are Moun¬
tains. Londoo. (WefdenfleM t Nkolaon)

N«f. E. D, (1948). “Nature’s Model-T Mao." Nature, Deecm-
her. Londoo.

Nevada, a goide to the Sflver SiMe (1940). Wrftoa ptotrem.
Am^lcu guide series, p. 16.

NeviU, H. (1886). ‘The Nittaewo of Ceyloe." Taprobaninfu

Febniary, pp, 6^ Bombay.

Newmap. M. (1937). Indian Eeepthoiv. Loodoo, (G. BeU A Soss)
Nod, <>pt. J. (1927). The Story of Everest. Boetoo. (LiRjt
Browo A Co.)

Northern Neighbors (1959). “AbOmlDaWe Soowmao aftaio.-
Noremher, OiHarm, Canada-

Noyce, W« (1554). ’The Aaceot of EveresL" Asian Rev., A|ri,
p. 128, Londoo.

G$iiey. Dr, K. P., A Hoskins, Or, C R. (1950). “New Evidence

PUldown Man." Nature. Mar, 11, pp.

379*3b2«

Ohnichev, S. (1957). '*The fooqjriols of the wow man In (he
ITi^lByaa, Nmvs o/ the Ceofrephice/ Society, v, 87.
edition 1. pp. 71-73.

Ohnacb^, & (1957b), “New materials ahoni (be toow min
of the Geographical Society, v. 89, ediiioD 4,
PP» 33 ^ 342 *

Obruchev. S. (1959). "?Tcaent day rvaloation of the snow mao."
Nature, no. 10, London.

OsanM, A, (1957). “1 Was Kidnapped by a Saseuateta"
Agastis-ffarrison The Advance. Aug. 22, British Columbia.
Csfiftdi* ^

Pai-HSm (1958). "loformaiion of a Chinese moving picture
director Paj*HSia, bow be bad seen the snow man." Beiden
Jlboo. Jan, 29 (in Cbtoesa)

Palladius. Bi&hc^ (1665). PalladU dr Ceniibus Indiae et Brtu-
manibus. Latin A Greek tctti. London.

347



Parker, W. {I960), “Eorope: How Far?" Tht G^grffphlcal

Jomnal, ▼oi, ourvi. part London.

Pas5aj<lJe, C. (1958). “Alerto au yeti (vcxs U certitudeX"
et vit, April, no. ^87, pp. 96-92.

Peissel, M. (I960). “The Abcmiaable Snow Job." Arsosy Moga-
ziHf. December.

Pei Vcn-)un, U Ju*K8nd. «ow Mio-Ocn li9SB). 'Ttte riocUe of
tbe 8O0W mao." HHOfimln Jittao, Feb. 27 (in Cbloeae).

Pel, Weii*ChuJig {1956). “New Materia] on Mao's Origins."

Ciifta Reconstruefs, Augusl, Peking,

Pei, ^'eo'Chimg (1957). 'Tlnd M«n-Like Ape.*' Seienct News
Leiiet, Ocl. 5, Washington.

Petzscb, H. (1958a). “Dcr Schneetneo^cb i$t Keln Hlragespinst"
Liberal Oemotrat^ehc Zeimog. Ian. 23.

Petzsck. H. ()95Sbl. "Nocbrnals dcr dec problemallsche &hoe^
Deoitfb." Llh4rtii Deniokrotisfhe 7e/liiKg, Feh. 15.
Pianikov, P, <1959). “Ji a not a legend." Komsomol TtuXH,
Feb. I.

Fiji, L. vea der (1938). “E>e Orang Pendek ats Sneeuwman."
Tropliche Nai 27, 53, Weitevredeo.

PUny ihe Elder {160J), The Rlnwie o/ the World, Traealated

bj PhilecioQ Holland, vol. 1. p. 157. Loadon.

PoUakov, .A. (1957). '‘Only foolprioa and legends." Pirysicai
CuUnff and Spon. tw, 4, pp. 20-22,

Polo, M. (1818). The Travels cf Marco Polo, a Venerian, in ihe
Tiif/reenrA Century, helns 0 Deeonpiion by That ISoHy
Traveller of Rmtorkable PJoee.e and Things in the Faeiern
Pens of the World. Translated whh notes by Williuo
MaradeQ. Lontton.

Poppe. N. (1954). Grammar of Written MooftoUan. Studies oo
Asia. Far Ebtera and Russiao lostibite. University of
TVa&hington at Seanle/Porla Lingutrum Orlenlnliiim
Wiesbaden {Otto Harrasowiti [WGB GmbH])

Pora. E. (1959), “Poate exteta yiri—omul apex^r?" Nolura,
«. 2, no. S.

Porshne*. B. (195ta), "Does tbe snow mao exist?" Evening
Moscow. Nov-13-

Porshoev, B, (1958b). "Does the snow man exist?" £ve7rinf
Moscow. Nov. 29.

Porshnev, B. {I958c>. 'Tegends? But they may be tltt real
thing." Komsomol Truth, Jiioe 11.
porshnev, B. (1959a). "Search for a snow man.” Komsoptol
Truth. Feb. 15.

Porshnev, B. {1959b). *‘Froir) the pages of aiKieot ttaoQScnpta."

Komsomol Tmlh. June 7.

Porshnev. B. CJ959c). ‘‘The riddle ol the snow mao.” Contempts
rory Eevf. no. B, pp. 56-57.

Porahjiev, B. (19S9d). "The riddle of the snow man." Confempo*
mry Last. no. 9, pp. 52-55.

Pranavananda, 5. (1950). Expioratlon m Tibet. Calcutta.

348


Pnkn»v»Madi. S. (1995). “AbomlMbfe Soowmu.” The //k/Mm

OeQgraphkal Journal, 30. 3,99^)04.

Pnflavit)and&. S. (1955a). Tbe Abominable Soowman." /.

Bombay naf. Hist. Soc. 54, 358-44. Bombay.
Pnoaveaanda, S. (1955b). ‘Toolprucs of SoownuD,” /. Bombay
nar. HW. Soc. pp. 448-50. Bombay.

Pnevslsky. N- (1878). Mongolia, the Tangur country, and rke
soUtudes of Northern Tibet. Londoo. (S. Loro)

Bronin, A. (1958). ‘'Aa encouater wiih a now mea.'’ KcmAornd
7>rtrA. jen. J5.

PubiKatioBS (4 booklets) (1958-9). Tbe Speo'al Conmluioo
formed to eiudy tJie problem of ibe Soowman by Um
VI.S^.R. Academy of Sdeoces. CompQed ooder tbe suptf-
vision of Prof. B. F. Porshaev and Dr. A. A. Sfamakov.
Moscow (in Rusiad).

Qasirefates de Breau. A. de (1887). Les t^gmees. Park.

RabuJ. K. (1960). “Stories Increased Seveb tot Yeti.** Tka
Christian Science Monitor. Dee. 17.

RaowtedL G. J. (I90Z). BergtscheremistiKhe SprackitudUn.

Helsinki. (Soclotc FbcoOuKrienoe)

R^k. V. (1959). “AceofdiDf (o me ... no more of him.*
Physical Cuiture and Sport, so. 4. pp. 20-25.

Reodall. E. B. (circa 1957). Heating Waters.

Reoben. D. E. (1955). “TTie Abomtoable Ssowman." }. Bombay
nor. Hist. Soc. 54. 3, Bombay.

Riochen, Prof, (1958). ^'Almaa—'MongoJuto relative of the
now enaa,* Contemporary Mongolia, bo. 5, pp. 84-38.
Rockhlll, W. W. (1891). The Land of the Lomas. Uiukm.
(LoQ 8 in 8 s. GreeB Co.)

Roerkh. N. Abai Himalaya, a rravel diary. LoBdon. (Jamilda»
n.d.}

Roosevelt. T. (1893). The Wilderness Hunter. New York. (O. P.
PutXLum'a Son)

RpOaeofekS. A. (1959). "About some dated (out dated) aocleiR
bcllcfc of die people of Pamir, in conocction wiib tbe
legeml of the snow man." So\'l*t Ethnography, no. 4.
Roaeofcld. M. (1931). Across MongoHo in an ( 2 itf<Mio 8 xfe.
Moscow.

Russel, Df. S. (1946). Mountain Prospect. LoDdem. (Chottd ft
Windos)

Rimiedge. H. (I934X Bvertst mS. Undon. (Hodder ft
Stoughton)

Rualedge, H. (1937), Eve/vrf.- The Unfinished Adeentun. Lon*
don. (Hodder ft Siougbtoo Lid.)

Saadersoo. L T, (1950). •‘Tbe Abmlnable SDOwman.” True
Magai/ne. May, New York.

Saodenoo, L T. (1955). //ow ft? Knote the American Mammals.
New YoriL (Hanow House)

Swderson, I. T. (1957). The Monkey Kingdom, New Yort
(Uaoovef House)


340



1 . T. (1959). “The 5iranB6 Story of AmeHCA's
Abominable Snowman.'* True Magailne. December, New
York.

Sander^cpn, 1. T- (1960). "A New Look at Amerlea'e Mystery
Oiaai.** True idasazine, March, New Yoriw

Self net (1956). "Abomiaable Snowmea." 123, )024.

^lencf (1956). “Afain the Abooinable Snowmaa.** 126, 3210.
22, July (, Wsshioston.

Science News Letter (1956). “Abomiiiable Snowman." 69, 26.
445, iun« 90, Toronto.

Schaefer. E. (1951). Crandss Chasses sur le Toll du Idonde.
Ptris.

Schjltberser, J. (1S79). The Bondage end Travels e/f A 5. h
Europe, Asia, Africa, 1396-2427. Loadoo. (Hakluyt Society
Works, V. 58)

SchJegeT, H., & Muller, S. (1839-44). Biidragen lot de Natuur-
lijke Hiaorie van den OraAg<Fetan (Simia satyns) in
Vcrhandelingea over de Natmirljjke Oescbiedeois dcr
N<derlanU»che Oederaeesebe BcajitingeD, door de Ledeo
der Naruurkiiadige Commissic in ladle ao Aadere
Schrijven), p. 12, Leiden.

Seton. E. T. (1958). Animal Tmci* and Hunter Signs. New

York (Doublsday)

Sialimov, A. (1955). ‘Tbe snow man in PimirT" Around the
World, DO, 7, pp, 29-32.

Shiplon, E, (1938). Blank cn the map. pp. 202-3, (Ch. by H. V.
Tilmaa) London. (Hodder & Stoughton}

Shiplon. E. (1951). "A Mystery of Everest: Footprioui of the
Abooilnable Soowman." The Times. Dec. 6, LoodOQ.

Shipton. E. (19S2). The Mount Bverest Recceinaissanee Expedl-
flan. I9S1. London. (Hoddef & Stoughton)

SKlproo. E. (!952). '‘Evereol: 1951 Reconoalsence of tbe South-
cm Route.” The GeogrephcaJ Journal. lufiO, London.

Sb^ton, E. (1953), “Th© expedhJon lo Cho Oyo." The Ceiv
graphical Joumai, 119, 2, 12^133, Looden.

Tipton. E. (1955-5$). Men asteinst Byfrest, Englewood C11&.
N.i. (Prentice Hall)

Shipton. E. (1956). “Fact or fantasy." The Geographical Joia^
nnl. 122. 3, 370-72, London,

Simonov, B. (1957). “Snow man—myth or lealUy?" Litcra-
uirnaya Oazeu (Literary Newspaper). Notes by S. Obru'
cbev, A. AJextodrov, A Liiovet and N. Slrotkio.

Simonov. E. K. (1959). 'To tbe hlgbeet elevodoo on the globe."
Geography in the school, do. 1, pp. 29-38.

Sioftonov, J. (1959). "Po sn^iUo iruSe.” Veda s tecl^

nieka mladeu. no. 10, v. 2. pp. 12-15.

Simpkins, F. J. (1952). “HimaJayao footprints." The Field,
July 12. London.

Skeai. W. W., k filagden. C D. (1906), Pagan Races of the
Malay Peninsula, vol. 11. pp. 281-3, London.

Smyibe, F. S. (1930). The Kangchenfimga Adventure. London.

3S0


Sraytbe, P. S. (1937). “AbomiiiAble Snownttn.* The Jllasrrattd
Lcfiion Hty/s, Nov. J 3, p. $41, London.

Scoyt&e, F. S. (1938). Tkt V^ley of Flow^. London.

Seasth. S. ()937>. At Grips with Evertu. London. (Tbo Pefcr
Pms)

Soleeki. Prof. R. S. (I960). “NeMdenbal Men In the Heart*
Land of Hum&o Evolution: Diicoverws at Sbaoidar Cavn,
a Northern Iraq." Tft« lllustraied London Ntws. May 7,
p. 772, LofidoiL

Soale, O. (1952). “TTia World's Most My^rious Footpriota.*
Fopuhr SH^rtcf. December, p. 133.

Speakinan. P- S. (1954), Tracks, trails and signs. London.

SpilKl. R. L. (I933K Far-off Thirty, pp. 61*74, Colombo.

SpUte). R. L. {1936X "Leacama, Land of tlie NiKaevo." loAs.
1. 37-46, Colombo.

Stans^d. LtCol. H. 5. (1932). *HiaiaJayu footprmts.** Tho
Field, A\Jt. 2, p. 194. London.

Sunukowitob, K. (1937X "Golub-Jawno." News cf the C«o-
traphkol Societw. v. 89, pp. 343-345. editjon 4.

Suudi&iet, P. (1932). Eioige Aogabeo Gber den Oraog Peadek
Oder Oraog Let jo. S. 6. Gcs. naiurf. Fr. Berlin.

SlOBOr, C. (1955). The Sherpa and the Snowtnai^ London.
(Hollia & Carter)

Stooor, C (195$). Sherpas and the Snow Man. Moscow,

Strain. W. (1956). 'Abominable Snowman." Science. 123, 320&
1024-1025. JuBo $, WasbiARion.

Semys. J. (1791). Voyage en TartaHe, Perse, tnde. voL 1, pp. $$»
100, Rouea.

Stuart. J. (1959). "Canada’s Abominable Soowmaa." Argosy
Magazine. December.

Technika for Youth (1959*). “Who Is her oo, 4. pp, 31-34.

Technika for Youth (1959b). -Who ii be?" oo. 5, pp. 37-39.

Teilhard da Chardin. P. (1947). -Sor uoe Martibule da
thropu8.'’C. R. Soe. geol. Fr. 15, 309-10, Paris.

Tannlog, N. (with Ullmaa, 1. R.) (1955), Tiger of the Snows.
Naw Vofk. (G. P. Pumam)

Teowsen, E. (1936). Fdhrten and Spuren. Neudamm. (f. Neu¬
mann)

TQmao. H. W. (1937). Snow on tha Equator. Loodoo. CO- Bell
& Sons Ltd.)

TUfflan. H. W. (193$). "The Mount Everest ExpediUoB of
1938.- TAe Geographical Journal, v. 92, pp. 481^9$^
LofldOQ.

^Imaa, H. W. (19461 When Men and Mountains Meet. London.

TUman, H, W. (194$). Mount £ve««, 1939. Cambridta (Uni-
vcfsfty Press)

TDcnan- H. W. <J949). Two Mountains and A River. Cambridae.
CUniveealry Press)

TJoun. H- (1932). Nepat Hlmaiaya. Cambridge. (UnJv. Press)

Tmbmi, A. (1925), Account of a plioeographic expedition to

357



the aouOiern glaeiart ei Keng^erttunga in tht Sikkim
Ritnaiaya. Bombay.

TopI«y. Mrs. M. (1960). L«tt«r» Man, 60, no. 59. Febniafy,
London.

Tsehofiiezky, W. <1954). ^^onire of tb» AbotsieabU Soomnan."
Monchetier Guardiaii, Feb. 20.

^heroezty, W. (1958). “Od ibe neruxe of tbe Snow Man."
Added to ibe boob of K. Qzaxd. Foilovlng the FootprUus
of the Snow Man. Moacov.

Tscbernezk;. W. (I960). “A reconstnctlod of the foot of tbo
Abominable SnowiMn." Naiure, 186, 4723. 496-7, May 7,
London.

'nilpluB, N. (1641), Observaiienum Mtdifari/m, Llbri Tres.
Ansterdam.

Tuner, S. (1800). An Aaouat of an Embatsy io tht Court of
tht Ttihoo Leni4X, rn Tibet. Loodoa.

Tyson, E. (1699). Orang-uiang, slve Romo Sylvestris, or the
AnaioTTty of a Pygmit Compared with that of a Monkey,
an Apt. and a Men, London.

Udio, T. (1959). “Rve expeditions to the Himalayas." Evtning
Moscow. Feb. 7,

UUmaa, J. a. (1947). Kingdom of Adveitturt: Everest, New
York. fW. Sloane Asioc., Ibc.)

Urbais. A , k Dekeywf. P L. (1953). “Lc Gorflle." NaitfelUu
DO. 3. December, Peris.

UryssOD, M. <1958X Das Gtheimnis des Yeti. Freie Weis, Heft
17, Apr, 24, j. 14-17.

Uslnger, A, (1954). fahrien, Spteren und Gelauft. Muncbfo.

Vaodirefl, W. & R, (1957). Common Wild ArdmaU and thtif
Young, New York. (Dell)

VercoTs (see finiJler. J.)

Verma. B. K (1959). “Mao’s Nearest living Coiisin: The Yell."
Tht Ulusmied Wetkiy of India., Sept. 27.

Virebow, R. (1885a). “De la Qieue cbez rUomme." Zbl. Chir.
p, 539, (-eipzig,

Virebow, R. (1885b). “L’Appaidice Caudal Chez IWomme."
Gaz. hebd. Med. Ch'\r. p. 29. Paris.

Vl«k, E., M.O. 0958). ‘Co vlme o soeioMD mufi?” Ziv»
Roeaik VI (T^V), Brazen, bo. 2.

Vlcek, E, MD. (1959). “Old literary evidence for the exfetence
m the 'snow sian' ia Tibet and Mongolia.” Man, v. 50,
Ajgust, London,

WaddeU, Mai. L. A. (1899). Among tht Rimafayas, LODden.
(Archibald Constable)

Waddell, Ma), L. A. (1905). CJtOM and Its Mysierits. p, 482,
New York.

Wals, H, (19)8). La Chasse a Java, Paris.

Weldenreich, F. (1945). “Oiant Early Mad from lava and South
Ouna,*' loi, 40, part 1, New York (Anibr^^ologica! papers
of the Afflerkan Museum of NatnnI Ifatory)

Weidcarckb, F. (1946). Apes, CiaMs end Mat. Chicago.

352


Weber. Dr. 7. S. (1955). Tht Hkdo\fn Foritry. Oxford. Olie
Uiuvervity Press)

Weioen. H. (1945). "Otar die Keueo Vorund FruhnMnscbeo,-
foodo ew Afrlke. J*v«, Cbbe und Freakrekh.*^ Z. Morph.
Anthr. Sxw^ut, xlcL

Weben. H. (1949). "Measchnufieii Oder Afiemaeiuctan. das
OoJoiben ProbletB der Heueo Africt*Fuods." OrUm, 4»
pp. 169-74, Musicb.

Webert, H. (1951). "Zur Frage dee OigaotenprcbleiDs der
SodUDOprimsten.* Anal. Anz.. 9S, pp. 279-47. Leipap.
Webmui. A. (1945). -Nliuewo." 4, ». 2, pp. 337,

Colooibo.

Wodt, H. {3960). Ota of Noah's Ark. Boston, (nougbtoa

Uifflin)

Westenek. L. C. (1911). 'Orant Faadal; (BoeebmenschM) of
Soematn-" Trap. Nfituur., 7, p. 208. Weltcmden.

Wood. W. W. (1948). "SnowtDaji or Mook^." Counfrj LHft
103. p. 1334, LoodM.

Worokbiton, H. M. (1957). Ancient Man In North America.

Denver. Colo. (Tta D^ne Museum of Natoral HisscH?)
WyUCT-8l)lb. M. A. (1952). "A Ndturalist b (be Northwest
Hlmtlsya." /, Bombaji NUt. See.. 50. pp. 559-73,
Bomba;.

Wy^Dunant, E (1953). "The fint Swiss expedition to Mount
Everest." The Geofraphicat Jourttal. September, Loodon.
ZaborowsU, S. (1897). "Us Hommea a (Steve." BulL Soc.

Amkrop. series 4, 8, pp. 28-32. Parts.

ZerebaozDOV, U (1959K “PoUovioi the footprtou of Kapter.*
Komsomot You/K Auj. 29.

Zona. V. (I960). "Farewell, Soviet Soowmaa." MarKhester
CaardloM Weekly, Feb. 11.


3&3



BOOKS BY IVAN T. SANOERSON


Trove/


AHMAt TREASURE

1937

Viking (& Pyramid^

BARIBGEAN TREASURE

1939

ViUng (& Pyramid)

LIVING TREASURE

1941

Vikjni [& Pyramid)

Juveniles

HISTERY SClOQNER (P-H)

1941

ViUng

ANIMALS NOlUOT KNOWS

1944

VlUng

THE SILVER MINK

19S2

Little. Brown

JOHN 1 JUAN IN THE JUNGLE

ISS3

Dodd. Heed

THE STATUS OUO IP-N)

19S6

Merlin Press

C»//erfed MferJrs

ANIMAL TALES

!9S6

Knopf

’1HIN6S''

1967

Pyramid


ftifersrtee


Hew 10 KJIOtt THE NORTH AMERICAN
MAMMAtS

LIVING MAMUAU OF THE WORLD
FCILOW THE WHALE
TIE MONKEY KINGDOM

ABOMINABLE SNOWMEN
m CONTINENT WE LIVE ON
TIE OTNASn OF ABU
TIE BOOK BE GREAT JUNGLES
TIIS TREASURE LAND
UHIHVITEO VISITORS


l%\ Little, Brown {& NAU

1955 Hsftfivtf House

1956 UHle, Brown

1057 Manovar House t
ChlllDa
ISBl Clillbn

1961 Ranflom House

1962 Knopf

1965 Messner

1966 Putnam

1967 Cowles


tn preparofren

OIIR ANIMAL ALLIES
IlfTERMINABLE WOOQDSMEN
MORE ^'THINGS''

MIES—THE CARIS


Profllice'N^I

Pyramid

^ramid

^r&mia


354


INDEX


Mttku Ma. SI)

AUdlM 20*. 207

AfUful^ Mm. 119
A<ft« (jBun). u*^

* im. of Sd.

ADVAhCi. TNK (AtiMit. #.C.>.

ts. lOt, ni

»]*W2

A«m. 2M429. 25J

U3, 27t. 3D0. ja. »32

AMe^ 0. IM, IIS

AfMll. lie, T7, 99, W, tOT
VM. 2J2

AAwo*. Ye«i* N, ite, 290
AlBlcftS, 174
AtaMtHtl. Tb*. 2t|

AkbftM. 122. 127
*b hi^ Ml&. 2>9, 299
AkkTi# Mo., SO. 212
AMhaa Dwav 49, 924
AJMta. «, 77.71. 90. 129. J2t,
223, JS4

AMa Ift. 63
AJbUT (On.). 164
AJ*«^y. 293
Altwla. 2JS

Aterov Ut> 77

AllftMrt. 77

Artiji, w. 3K 309. 317.J29, 324.
334

AAm^fr, 107. 29«

Al9M(ra. Ill

AMMi <Tba Qrtaii 63. 3i2
AJte PlsM (ot the Aades). iM
A30« Tkcb Mu.. 319, Si2
AauoB Wailn, I77*17S. {ftf. aj
AaecbOw. PruL Flenattso. |92
Am4fMkt4fioUt» loyal, J90
Abm^ 0«ofliapUeal Sodetr.

AaeNetM, Tb*. S07

AMsda. M. 7*, T^7S. 79, Sl. R,

•I, ML 104.107. IM. tl«.ni.
Ill, m. 122. 141. 143-144,144


ABcriAda-^ootlaned

ISl, l«3, 161-162, W7, m. US.
192*I93. 196’IM. 246. 233. 262.
303, 313. 326 ^

Aoadyr Mu.. 924
AaduiM bikp*. 37
Aftdenns. Alnud«r C. 69
AiideL ltd. 29. 176,176, Ml
Aatob, 301,219
Abamb Mu.. 249
Aaeaut, Oim. 142
AochrapoMt. 164. 229, 3«7, 299. 300
AMUe^MdM. 127
Atef, 111
AMUtfndr, 224

Apn, 99, 46. 64. ■. 9SA4. 106. 111.
122. 127, 19t. iiyi-W. 207. 2t9.
221-226, 230. 2)1, 233. iS^I.
7ii. 260461. rA 279. 290. SM
AraUa. 226427
AzakMa (0viu>, 249, 26S
Artvtka.TL4. 197
Arctic. U, 64, 79
AmtcTfr. 952
Mnnilii 192

Afuuiiiia BlanianD Eisd., 290
AMOOST HAOAZINK. 214
ArkAMi, 123
AraaRda, 209, 292. 299
An VaOer (^4fwl), 270
Ajla,^26, 230, 241, 300, 3W, 322.

An. 63. 270

d;#ter. 1I9>|90

Acr«o Blfv (C^cnbla). 171
Aiw. 231

Aufiat. AMUae. 107
ABTodis (#4r pvtmittHHu'i. 230
AaatnlorltbacliwA, 944S. 203. 2l2.
22S, 227

Avasa. Ibd. 29L 294
Arankor Kovfn PU««f (U.S.SJL),
2«, 291 '

Aarballan. 2|9, 291

Baboau. 208-209, 21S, 217. 2IL
261, 271-379

BadaUhaa A. A.. 201402
Baikal. Laio, SOS


355



BA Mis. 911
B«M, Dt. liTloe, 282
■«s CsUvnlB. i«9. ]24
a«}s V«rtM< (OuJL>. 18i>

B*k4«9 (Ccnso). 231

Bttu 2yi

BsbniQ <Cc«so>. 224

islttsn. Lik». 314
BsJuUalMSA.

BucaA. fitfvwd. 1 *B
tm4$. 380-211

fHn|i»i iHlii Rl*w (SanMtra), 2JS
BSM Ptoplct. 211-212
BVtltts. B. B. 309

—I ^

BsrkiU Mu iSsmtoa), 39. 219.
221-233. 239

BkMA E^la IUas«, ifO. 277
Biflu KiiimUoQS8vry» 211
B«tB Uuftt, Tbe, 32}

BatalB. Tha mU, lOi
Bmia (A Tnpper}, IH
PninM> T<M7. 245
BcsT-Han tMk»B«A 0 , IfU
Bean. 77, 79. B8, B». 99. )l)4.105,
110. 145.1U. 18I.213.3014U,
20. 271.275-276, 2«1. 2*2. 29?.
51U 316. 319020.226
Bear. Black Aoetleaa. 261
Blor. 261

BrovB. 26I-262. 292. 232. 226
Ca«e.3l6

r«*-r»c«l. 262. 226
GdBlr. 262

UlDalayia Black. 36l«26Z
laabelllBr. 261

MO«B, 261

Rad 261
SI0U-. 361.261
«iW%, 261

Baaiimin, Wtag^ooL, B. 8., 268
BAsMc <8«tt*B6l(>.2S$

BoMad, Frol. Nelio. I9^

Bade (m4» 9? ABSUa). »

P e ta B, Mn. 3 «m, 1M
2M

B9U»<B. n.j. JP7

BM4. Br CUAm, 47
Baoial. <4. rr
B«S8al Pro^ttee. 46
BaoBwVfl (Siwntfra). 230-3J1
BarMaa Bl«*r CB.O.), 199

BtfinsSvalues, ?a, 119 . ias.225*
926

Bhmta. 11

Bbna6u Vtie7 (ls41k). 268
Blatsa Olaeler. 268

. 250

ffiftti. 60. m. 147. 1S9. ISS-IH.
167

BlaMfiddy Rim (Ul.}. 125
VhBMAC, 25^

BiKA Oaesa Oladsr, 268
KaAop'i 0X6 B.C., 73
Bliea. lAueBcaa. 291


Bbna, Dr. A.. 59
Ap6 390. 278
Black Sm. 289, 292
Blaeo, Cv«. 25
Bleed (of ABSMi). 228-239
filid (Cal). U3, 150-m.

157

Bodaodl (Ptttdr*). 919
BMM ■cm. 31

BocUiMta (Suaern). 239. 299-C4
BosdaoOc. Tlu. 233
B<«SO AOaMlw, 323
Bofutte (DL), I2«

BoRkt, TM Abt6 PktTO. 270. 272
BoiDM). 97. 2M-23*

Sos prtnlitnius. 390
Boa aovclL 250
Bo«pb»Ri» Buell. 288
SoooBtaOa. 19. Si. 125.127
Bovlae. UaB. 221
Brmekrf"»iM4 2»

BralunajiQUa Oauac. 265. 274. 252,

»9

BaaaO. SO. I76. 199. 199
Breczale. Bob. 157
Brtifcb’a Uoate^. 2S0
Brilldi Colcabla. 50. 60. O. 6$. S.
69, 71.7?.79. C49. 91. 96. IQI.
lOA. 110, 128, 132, 140. 191.
286. 926. 232

BrMih Kooduns. 179. l?9,195
Biecka, Dr. Ocero* R.. 296
Brovg. OiarlM BarrlBctoa. ]98
BrovQ. gawwft C (Cai), 17».19(^
183

9r9*<7*e. O. M.. 241
BokakaK (0*«e«aa ASSB), 298
Bidai&aaa Ooava C^epal). 360
Boneyse. CmBMn. 209
BonDB, 33.253. 26)

Bans. J. 68. 74-76. 89, 102.

104. Ill
BuiaMWm, 226
BuiblHKk. 206

Buakaao, 211-212. 225. 239. 394
Byna. Pete. 58. 270. 272. 276

CaaHtifB (IfraB)l, Tbc. 29. 176
179. m. 192

CaUemfa. 35. 58. 60. 69. 71. 91.
103. 127. 17M11, 143, 148-1».
170, 17)

CalDozBia Acad. ScL. 141
CM1» ABSKs), S9-40. 93. lO.

105. 110.112. DM24.136. 161.
1«8*IT0. 17»>18>. 189, 199-195.
198. 349, 972. a»4. 9M, 3J4-211,
317. 3K

Caotodla. 39

Canis. 992, dlMOO. 93S. 939
CassrooB. 211. 9CS
Canecua. 202
fan^ he (USX.). 17B

356


CUatfa. *». 71. 1^24), \29. 129.

1«0. \4t. W

Cantfians. Tb«, 77>79, 291
C^pUmuo, Tbt S.S.. 73
Ca^fecnila. 2^9
CarftMan. Tha. 27. 179
Caril'I. tti« Ameeind. 197
Oun^ Tba 9b4k. lM-136
CarahiwnMa AHSMa. la). 19!. 342.
2S3

Caraoa Ctv (Na«.], I41-142
Ca/*b«a (of i)c«

pleiloitt

Cify. 04(¥*i. 2U
CupUa 9«a. 288. 2W. IfH
Caacadea. The. 2i. 25. 129. Id4
CaaMvarki, 226
Cancarnu/ 22(i

Caucasoid ilaca. The. 3) |. 3S»4. 3M.

323

Caucasan, 59, 63. 299-290. 293-294.
XO. 308. 323

Ca«aUr IU«a( (GUjsm?. 207
Caa yoUf. 179
CfMo*. IW

Ceboid MonlcTs, 37. 230. 278
Ceo&al AflietiPQ. 27, 119, I76. i7IU
379, les

eomit. 113
C«TaM6iw. 260
Ce^riif 179

Caykat. 33. 226-327
OtaMesoa. fba. 3^7
OapmaA. Mf. and Mrs. Ocorse.

98. lOCWlOl

OacBsi {U.S i R.). 291
Chaeuh. 247
C^ehalk. The. 8.1
Oeoun Mas. 96.1)9
CbeOTeb (Ramies), 302. 310. 313
Ckcdo Hiva (CaJ ). 143
CSmctI. Boinbaha«>ur. 46-47
C3)lipai (Mas ). r, 174-t75. ]79
OillUa'ack (B.C.), 73-76. BS, 105
CUmranaaea 94. 148. 164. 138. 190.

203, 2I4>215, 217. 219. 276
Chios. 37, 48, 59, 78, 96. 249 2$2.

254, 263. 301, JM-306, 312. »3
otens. The. 351. 302-303. 306. 306
Chinm Bscarpnam. 324
emsyanjaa. The. 2)8
OeyanR VeOar (Nepal), 270. 27fr
277

CUMSTIAN SCIF^CE Jtf OW-
TOR. Tfte. 309
ChrtuJe, 86

Auntttcnaai, 46
Chu lUver, 2M
CteBtoa (AJa), 127
Ci«u Lake <C«I.>. 25. 129
C oawH Raoaea a'.5j6,), 21
Coban tOuaC ). 184
CoelMeaixii Rlrim. 39
CoWeaU Menfceya. 226. 240. 278.
Ul


ColBtnblao Kaaslf. 178, 188
Conto BasU. 31. 63, 135, 201-202,
316-2U. 219. 04
Cohasr. Lake (On.), 164
CONrFMPORA/tr EAST. Tns.
303

Cook. S. V., 209
Cope. Prof. E. D.. 142
Cf»rpwft/.Ma, 3J7. 320
Cordiet. Charles. 320. 224, 333-334
CcNtoD's Ceraeoei>ece, 2l2
Cetiaar Lake 77

Couneaay. Risser, 310
CBurteetlle. Koen. 191
Ctev, Jairree. 151
Cte*'. JenUI. l50-t51. 153-354
Crpecpddiacs, 7fl
CroisBinoo Mao. 118
Crusa)ey>Baie, 3111, 292
Cnsu Rivet (Niiertn), 211
CrysUi M(« , 201
Cubulce (Cuat.). l8Ckl81
CyWpilhftldae, 3T8

Monkeyi, 37t, 280
CyrwHtkmt, 23U

T>B({eMBn A, S. S. K„ 291, 300
□ahindm. R«n6. 46
U4 It r SkiTtUt CM<7.V1ST,
TUB. 63. 67
Daily Man S.xpi.. 27Q
DAILY MAIL. 7HL Cu! Uodoo).
57. 57

DunmermaQ. Dt. K. W.. 33). 23B-
239

Dan, Flank. 102-103
Dadecllne, 46. 49, 268
Dan. Dr. Raymvnd. 96
Darwaz RmIbc (Pamcn). 312
Doreiiolsn, 202
Da Temna. 276
Daeld. The AbM Pierre, 280
Dsvh, Uaiaotdl. 25.V254
Da»aon, Chailee. 202
DftJres lOUIs). 197
Deer. 279, 292. 326. 339
Del None Cauery (Ca(.). 150
Doneran River iB.G,), 200
DenlsJiMMren AsJaiie Bspd.. 253
P£ TPOPISC/IS HArt/Vk, 252,
234
Oes', Jl)

Deed Sakai. 22?. 241

Discoyenr <■ pnb.). 208

Diakana (Java), 250
Doe-faced Menkeya, 278
Duss. 56. 101. 105. 157, 183. )8S.
147

DOVBT (0 periodical), 79
Dock Mnnkeya. 240. 2SQ
Dtavidjana. The. 64
Dramnf (aJ ABSMe)—Me Depie-
tlOAl


357



DdU. i7B
Drv/fUctUu, 226

Droppflm («( ABSMs^-'f^r St-

tfmttU

Dr. EQB»se. K
DbcM (taatflt). 2OT
S>a« (of »ff BxerfMtiti

Dmufo (M«i.), !7j
Oma NgQfllb« Kills (UeudAl, 209
(Duriulet), lS6>t87
Dymfarfb. Dt. N, O.. 270
0«urii Atmat. 317
Dtt»dshsr Mm,, IIX 324
Dai)«»rta, ?14. 3t7-3iS
Dtt-Trh. 2S4. 2«, 263, 27*475,
Vi. Ul. 2M, 321. 324

Eui&'wmn*. Gt&u. 166
Em Ainei, 63, 96, IIMIO, 203.

226>227
Silt lodJcs. 57

SntfT A.. 74
SdXlvM <CaI). 169
eifcun Mrs.. 7S9. 292. 249
BstiiBii, U6
EMtf B49lft. 31
BUrMfoWAV in
B QuUU (Oval). 1«l
Bln*. Bcsry J.. *9.50. 267
Cd*«TT« Plaioa lU»ko4A). 209
(UfudA). 209
ficm. 226

Iskad. 229
BatiraM, Tbt. 376
EMBOOfbo River (8.O.). 199
eomiA, 31. MMi. 49. 3a 202. 2*9.
26J. 26S466. 26|. 227490, 302.
305. 307. 324-323
Buiete (Cd.). 132. 1S4. 1S9.169
SVHEKA DAILY LEADBE. TUB.
136

Emnpt, 2*8. 250, 229
Sufopous, 207

EVENINO STAyDARD. TUB
CSdl|bur7, $. RnoOoU), 2(9
EvtfM, MouAI. 40. SI. 33.54. 39,
«5. 249. 3044*5. 3«6. 278, 306
Bscreoeal, 266.237. 270. 274. 3l2

Faosei ( 0 ^ AG 3 M 8 )^M Sra>

mett

FaM/Ad AuAdna. 179
FAre 1/AOA27V6, 64
FaabaulU, 223
F«6:b«rike OiAdtr, 3]0
FeoAodo Pcs 31
Flmi (Uflil), 211, 218
Fleoiss. Yvtr, 9V7
Flood (B.C,). Ill
Flood, CBArles, 77
FlAUa, 76, 123. 282
FooprlBii. lOl. 107, 112*118. 127*
126. t>5.|38, 7444144, 147. 132,
162. 237. 219420, 22*. 23K23S,


FooQnlBB—ConJjreed

263464, 267^1. 27*^78, 28*.
28S. 295. 297. »?. 312. 314.
917. ni

Foneia fTdwte). 37

Pofi, CteM. 60, 79

Far Laadar (FC.). 85

PraoM, AuiOte. 319

PraoUia, 67

PrtMr IUv«t. 22, 63. 66. 71, 75. 90.

96*99. 113, 2»3
Prencb. l^e, SJ
prog*. 277
Prosb. Jab. 269
PuU«a (Ortsa). 34*25
Pokoeka Dalgaku Bapd., ?7]
PUrU’HaimeodOff, P^. C. vos,
55,271

Cabuo, 201403

Oa^ SaiKtan? (U.$4.X.)> 394
Caiato, Z26
Oai««8 JUvar. 2«6

O.rMtaJ (liuUa), 248
Catf. Mff. ASllie. 213
G<i8da BaOeoa. 278
Osa. J. K O.. 49. 267
Oeipoll. Aodrew. 154-159
QBQQKaRBKaL iODRSAL,
7MB. 2»

OMpAacp. ]82. 273
0e«8ia lUB S-A). 291492, 2M
Gitfftm Bonhurthi, 321
OboA&aa. Tha. *6, 265
Oiaaca. 75. 9*. 103. 107. IIL 133.
140.143. Iti, 157. 162, »7,22*.
260. 263, 266. 27*, 297, 334. 326
GIbtotf. H 203, 229. 233, 2»
GidtB |pta.. 312, 324
Gtgtnt9pUh£CU, 60, 254, 274, 324
Ctteh. 268
Oficoere. Himy. 25*

Glol. Prat Corrodo, 211

254, 243. 274, 211, 32*
Goa (Porttigpifk* ladla), 32
GoW, 272

Oo«8 Demt. 3l2, 318-319. 524
OoM Ceaic {Qluna), 221
QoUea Moakey. 35i
Goddwaaalaod, 226
GOfAa*. 83-8*. 9*. 191, 303-204.
217.219. 211.225. 276, 300, 304.
320. 926

Oaadokuad PaM (Nepali, 256
Grud AUal MU. 317
GtasCs Pafs, ISO

QrMl Barrier (Earasla). 41^2, 305.

507, 3Vf. 314, 3U
Greil Baniar <N, Am.l. 19,21. 79
Great BaBbt, ?ia, 21. 140
Greai Ceotal (Vaosotmc
!».), 73

Oreee. SeOa W., 85, itl
Groaad-Sioas. 25, 142, l9l


358


OvMaUan (Ua ). 179
o—a suiLt 270

Om»i1i,27, IT>.|7«, 170
OmkmI* CHy. |7»

G«mo»Q (6««*dw). 1S7
Gsayuli. The. 119
OmMt- Th«. 200
C«ef«2« MoolKn. 226, 278
GuUm 2». 178. J8A. 19^

199

<Mom MtM. m. SM

(CMr.Mc%«i). 2M, 313.

9u. 317, aw. m
riMliiiii <Nfp*|), 227
(Astute), 304

H^u. 37

HWn (Of ABSMs). 168, 339. 2S4.

346. 269

Ktlry Alfhi. The, 333
HoBMiA. Ki^ W AroMhU. aU
HOM. 137

HMiirrid Babeea, 279
HimWr People*, 211
a*a* CBUffiOiM), 305
Wmiy 5«8e<, Tta. 227
Hem C*mp (C*L>. 150, I7l
•UertMO Uke «<. 7), 79,

U. Ill

MOB (9jC.). 112
HvrbM Klw (BX:.). 102
Bade (B.C.). 109
Bavii, Mr*. AOeUK IM
ffetotwe, 2J4
HeMte. Cel.. 203
BevnOMoi, bf. BeniMO, 55, 57.
173. 101. 1M. 204. 209. 231.
232. 254. 3«3. 274. 299
UlAmP. tUpL WUlMt, 300
Htofe*. Ofeeo. 77
ADI. Dr. -W. C. Ono), 9S, 232
BOtarT. Sir Bdm>«4. 61. 270. 285.
310

Rta*U?*BI, M3

■MderM. 41, 40^ 93. 55, 51.
4M1. 43. 224, 230. 349^90.
Ml. M3 347. 273. 374. 311482.
MS. 288489. 303. 305. 508. 217.
924-325
FelUi. 265

HMde-KcM Mo., 3>9. 392. 399
Hoatflfl. 196

523

HcOeftdm. Tl**, S7. 233
Holy Oeei Mouai«b« <>.€.). 77
IlnMUi, 59. 74. 94.96. 118.119.
144.167. 187, in. 194. 303. 220>
32i. 225. 227.331, 259434, 242-
243. 251, 281. 236. 330-331. 336
HaaOsm. Bight ef, 173. J85
Hottest Oibhos. 290
Hoope Volley <CiL>. 133. lS0>l5l.
IM

Ho»« O.C,), 74


Heovlwn. The. 13
CTibeO. 323

Howird-Borv. LL CoL C. X., 9I
Ho«lec Mooluy*, 141
Modsofl's B«7 Geapifiy. 68
HvmlMild! CeaW? ICeL>. |90. 152
ttVUBOLDT TIMLS, TttS. Ut
154. 157 ^

Hyat, Sir )oM. 364
Hum. Jufvley, III
KOppu, TlM. 44. 94, 144
Hualey. Dr. ToIMa. 283
Hyaeoas. 192.193

2S0

Hf9jha»t mefeeO. 23J

IchnoloBy, 127
1d«he, 61. 64.71.133
lllleele, 122. 134
hLLVffTflArtti LONDOV
NEWS. TUB. 54

(•die, 35. 57. 44, 51. 236. 241. 2*3.

304, 307

lodlcD Ckeaa. 22fr277
MtABS. The. 46. 274
lede-ChiM. 37. SO, 57. 63. 3|3
aodo<C(UaM« MmIT, 35. 349. 255.

374. 279. 3S1. 211. 312. S34.»
loOooeiU, 33. 37. 237, 331. 235. 821
INLAND 5£VTi«Bt. THE. 67
Ino-Kablrg 34u.. 314
iru <PenlA>. 33. 399. 299, 3M
Iraq. 300
haly. 236

tom Purer (Como). 223*a24
CU4H (0«to«). 301. 307
liiMS, BaJph. 95. 370

Jerke. 44. 84. 94. 105. 293

)^(en CosMy <BI.>. 125

Jackm (Tea.). 133

3acM>«oc. Dt. Bdvaid. 232-233

/■fuan. 195

/aowrine. Z. 6« 309

JaptM 71

5epai m « Ape* 379

JapeiMM. Tt4. 41, >37

5Mpet (Canada). 104

Java. 37. 96. 22*^. 231432. 340

JeSenoa Mt.. 164

3«k^La (Hepal).4<

Jc«e. T>ie. I IB
frt-TfrmiA. 330
lotvaen. F. X.. 54
JOVHN. B. A f me AN A

UGANDA NAT. NiST. 50C,
209

3^ua cDiufcas). The, 196
JmfH AStfU. 49

Jennwt River (U.S^X), 291.295
Kaha. Ml. (Swaua). 233
Km. Mr. (SIkkM). 369
Xeeharul Mi. (0 «ul>. Il9


359



KriatefI D*wv 210
AatBipons (Mb), 40
K»4A Ml. <TI0«i). 322
KoBloeot (dC ), 67, 9t
KnbaDsMb <T(bet). iU
Curnw Rh« (SiuMlni). 2M

JK«nc-n/ {C4Mmu< M/ft: MI$o;

W«a; Smi), SI
Raiue (Tibet], 322
Kaplv (Xtuttif). JQ6, 290. 292.

296. 317. 324 . 326
KarvltoraTS £«pd.. Firtt Am , 269
Xankonms, S3. 269. 2B0.261. 269.
302. 312.317

Kii«oe»sa. U. Co). V. S.. 296
Kaniocin Pbs (Pamln?. 313
KauJ <ConiiD>. 202
Kasbrntr, 269
Kasl. 240

KUBsanOu (Sepal). SI, 2SS. 266,
261

Kaulbftcb Roiuld. S2-S4. 369
KftBKnA, ItM. 106. 301-302. 314
Red. John. 46-47. S7.210
Eetao (Wash.). iU
Kemy, Joha.2S3
Keaei (Rawnyo) (Boma). 2S3
Kurufikx. 122. 123
tCetinov, Aadam. 312
KetbOi. Mf, (Santaln). 233
Kmt. Ra)', in

Rhakhlov. PtoL V. A.. 10. S9. 14S,
308.304. 113. 317
KtuJ^IU (Monp>li3l. 31^

Rhsa«a< Mu. 63. 3)2. 318
Efiaal. Tbe. 2S1
KhlDfaft Mb. 63. 31L 324
KliMU (Cblaa), 33
Ktaiaiht. DMAS, 246
Rbl. Mbe. 1J.72
Rir^Kh. Tbe. 291. 301.K3. M4
CieMUi«, 323

XJamAin SUvcr (CaL). |29. 132
RbaiAUtS. T1». 25, 146, 16), 171
Hu^ 267

K«aCBtti Haul. 25S
Kerbel <Ca1.i. )S2
Reupnr (Ow MuveJ0> !S0
Hi. zei
fMkea. 2S1

KnABOder CC.SJl.R.). 291
KvH'X- IM, 3(6. 320. 324
Ka&le Lumpb (Malara,. 244
k.«u», Th>, 3J|, 315
IU3ni*UM*» (MOOBOIU), 3)9
KtiifLo. Za. 2M. 263, n4
KaolBfi MB.. 63. 239. 312, 237

KiBAliv (Qlitai. 252

KvO*. TlN. >6

EuTlve CNyiaelAod}. 216

LadaU. U3
Lekpa Teosirg. 269
Tjiiatg FaUfi, 26S, »5


Umas. 269-270. 2H
LesUfr^eteB MoateteiT, 216
Laasor Moi^eya. «9. 227. 240. 2S1,
26a 262. 263. 278. 2Sl. 319
L«aawr. Meeuari bbM 226-229
Uos, .11

L« n«(» Baala. Thk 29
Leal-Mrafeeyi. 234 239, 251. 279
Leal'MMikey. Rao4ed. 240
Leakey, Dr. L. 8. B., 96
Ledoui, Prof. A., tM
Lena IU««r, 325
Lcnisgiad Uolvarnty, 309
Leoader, Prut. V. K., 293>2R4
LeopsrU, 222, 292. 295
Lepdui, The. 265.272
Uiakpa-La Pees, 51
Lkau (Tibet). 46
Liard Rl«er (CacAde). 79
Lklieiia, 273

Uddarvat (Kaabmlr). 269
UbpaB Bcidee (Sywalaad). 213,
aie

LWle KblBfiaa Mu.. 924
LJiiU NopIt. 164

IMtU Red Men. 122. )26> 205. 309.
210

Uzatda, 74

Locb Neb Meesut. 126, !47
Leosenol. Mt. (Kao's). 210
Liwbuk SeJaelk (Samatra), 232
Loneea (tefU), 326
LorWeib. 226

LOS AHOBLBJ EXAMINS^
THE. 149
Loulebw. 132
Leys. Dr. Pun^b de. 189
LuU (Asianc Oypelb). 304
Lu Mlne-Yaag. L2-, 322
LUBf-Geoipi, 282
Luiofts MOBkeya, 239, 262. 271
Lyse, 292

Ly^SpJa. 155. 279, 2S1 _

Lvifodes (Upcaca) lAtonenta, rtf
LyiloB (B.C.). 63.66

MacafftB Meueya 230, 251. 259.

276, 2U-281
Macoam, MMr. 330
StuB39'<Alled. 255.179. 281
Mack, Oaret. 132
Mackeitzb Raoee, 69
Mickenne Rlster. 79
Madaebcar. 51
MadRl^er (CaL). 148, 152
Maeyen iHimdaslaos). 2ll7*161
Ma4«b ladlaa RbervailoB. 167
MUlAb (Nepal}. 370
Malaya. 33. 2Z7430. 263
MaloyM Forcbry Servlcs, 279
Ualayaa Seewrfry Cuard. 244
Mala? Peslasala. 65, 227-229. 240>
U\,263. 300


360


MakT*. Tt9. ^ 10«. m. 231. 2}>.
239. 2«l-2«2

W4MV«lh Cm CKr.). 19
Ma*. 19. 91. U. 104-107. 109-110,
IIMII. 10^147, 100-102.
J02-aw. U1-212. in45». MO.
241. 274, 202. 240. 290. 300
M4M tDMiJ PU««r. )I2
MaaAufl*. 40. SO$<304. 912. 224.

Mk^rin. 270

M«a«*bvT HBttk«y«. 240. 270

Mm»i Kh4A4. Tho. 223

10

H4p»ig0srr. 193
MmM. MU 229
M4«o 9cHo, 40. MO, M9, 307
MknOm. Wmtarn. 2 »

Ma/^ 9toL O. C., |4|

Mm*. 312
MmoOwu, 19

Mmo amtw, TTta. 29. 176. 171.

IW. 19X 194 ^

Mu Perest UUenl. 210
Mu-Mau. Tte. 244
Vamr*, 230

Mara Mia. (Orfi. HvsOwai). 179.

I»X 194 ^

Mar«. TU. 49. 174. 100, 109
Maaanm (0X3 ). I9I
Mamlia rUn.i. m

MeO«*«fo. W. M.. 32J
UMcaon, Ja^B. 123
4f«amrAn>p«u. 229

J4X 191

M4*>r»4. J01. 147-la. 224. Ml
263. 274. 210. 241. 2S4^. 297.
117. 324. 324
343. 201

M«ltai4 Tm 0«»clir. 309-370
M*Hawl Uiao^ 31, 203. 229
M w u a QBW. 279
Mrta4Jt«9ifBJ. $>

19. 79. 140, 154. 171. 119.
I79

Miaa jOftnt aimj, los, 123-124.

203. Ml

Ml«a Moua(4lB 95. 109

M#-##. 271

224

Mfiilitlfcl Vil^. 78. 121

Mlnown. la

Moau (Tnada br ABSMs)—

MoOm Man. UD, 209. 310
Moofote. 44. 907. 399. 312, 319.

Mcw4La^Peo(>le4’ K«rgbllc. 4».

MoaveUaw. TN. M. 302, 304.

306, 309. ni

MoviMd Kac^ Tht, 115. 239.
292. 207-249. 3O4-30. 324


UooksTt. 50, 46, «4, 119, 122. 18|,
189. 194. 197, 202. 3M-2DX 219.
2». 230. 239. M0.75I, iSS. 260.
261.271. J77-MI, 309. 320.321.

Moaaana, 284

Moore, Dt, Gcerte, 256. 760, XU
Moor MaEB«i4 Monkan. 230
MOfOMO. 215
Monli Crvtk 103

Moacfi*/ (Uv&SS.l, 301
Mo«Vr<«r'aU-MouflisfBB. TW. 41.
299

M otfaaii. |B9. |9l
Mow Bakat, 9i
Mt. Vcmoo (in ), |24
MetwcriAn Culnira.

Momk-Mnit. 251. 254
Moaajtaauc, |9S. 2tt4
SI-229

Mi<a.OcAvra rPltlunt fUtum, 41.

249

Muse IMoonicyaeil, 304

Muammad AfiSMi,

Mii*l BK«r (SiUMiri). 23S
Mumui. TIw Raian ot. m
MmMa liu, 219
V^la^n. 142
MyfwtteopHaim, 143

NaM HiiU (Panaa), 249
Kahaoal (CanaOa). 79
Namrtc Pant (NapMi, 270
Na^aa Mta. 43. 249. 312, 517.
324

NaL Miacnure Dept 9t Kaota

{Cbbia). 252

Mat Mvs. Rhodolan Fed. ili
N m re ii ia (Nraaabaai. 2JI
Naak Par (Watftl. 141
Neuonthatets. 59.44). 1I9. 144. 293,
317.314. 324

NcOAkr-WoJKowba. Prof- R«b 4
«oa. 35, 272
K«|rMa. 230, Ml
NtttPii Raec, TW, Il5. 2 lt
N40<3ianl4. M. 524
Nepal. 31. 5(.52 6?, l». 249, 239.
265. 268, 2K. 24(. 243

the. 41. 265. 281. 253.284
N««kala Islastf (B.C.), 14
Nevada, 73. 140.141
Newfawadlaod. 2*5
New Culma. 227
N.Y. HERALD TRIBCfYE. SI
Ulnattut, 174. 171. 186
Nkotoar falandi, 31
NiMrik 202. 2M. 211
Kile m««T. 311

NIC4I4 Pay (L»t« Nranl. 2l2
Nolaa (Bade by ABIMii— m*

CtHt

Nonb Asurlu. 19. 21. 44. 40. 4L
113.119.120,263.266.


36t



ttOKTn AMtMCAS hkws
fAftk ALUA}iCB. re
KenbwM TerT<ior]a», Tbe Cub*
diu. 6t>4X. 79. HO
Ui

NsRSACklf Mut. 120

MyMB. Life*. 213
NyBulud. 212.2 }3, 2lS. 2ii
NyBulaiU (af. Deoi. 2|5

0<lor (of Slinks

OSBVi. Pftf. T, 2n
<Attm. Chus U.. )S7

eo, 72. H. 102. 10^ 11$,
U2, 146, 16S. 160.162, 167. 196.
229, 274. 324
Ofei^ (Okapla). 261. 2|2
Oka« (IB). 127
(Aouk. Su of, 912
OMcsburi. S. P.. 3D9
Olynplfi MooBtaiBt. 23. 64. i3
Ootttacb. Mr.. 234

Oaiang. 106. 229
^TM| Ovrw, 231. 235
^reni Xafry, 231
Qrwit ItVa. 229

O'ang 104. iX9. 2J1, iS9,

236

OT*Bt.cBBB. 94, tC6. 123.J24, 203.

221. 232. 239. 06,276.326
Ofdoc D«aer(, 63. 3|8
Oroftt. a. 69. 71. 129, 143. I9l.

164, 170-m. 2»3
OfscpUkseus, 226

Orfulai RHdM (Otec«3l43.99. 47*
46, 59, 203. 2(4. 226*226. Ui-
249. 377

Orlooco BbsIo. THe, 29
Osbomleils. 20l

Osnu. Aioen, 73, 69-a7. n. in.
191

O«rk«o. 226

(ACfo (8. W. AirlcO. 219

Orts sfnmsn, 339

FactOc Ocsu. 140.176. 168
Faduv (Sunair3>.239
Piloting} (of ABSMi)—m D*pi^
Us ns

PftldMU. 33, 37, 266, 301
FtlAViJi Idaod, 20, 230
?alM>bu4 (SumaUB), 23$, 140
FBiiiin, 41, 59. 63, 265. 27$. 289.

3QI>3a4, 306, 348-3I3. 32S
5»nataBni«B Iflbni,*, 176
Pu6i. Gant. 33. 27M80
FugbccM (Nepal), 266. 271
fm ptmitfUi, 203
9«paue. Tb», 337
Fftrlcor. W. H.. 269
Paeans NrioB, 269
PU£^ais, 65, 1S8, 1P2


Paacoet, Coeso. 301, 2I2
Palod. Ml«ba«1, 264^

PeUn (CUaa). M
P«Uo >lan. 96
P«aBJ7)*«iiU, 140
?eo>Tals, 328
P«rak (Malaya), 343
Pudra. Qes., 293
Ftrl^Meiu. 226
Penla dru), 63, 289, 249'300
Paien tGaaumala), 173, I78*179,
186

Peiet of Or««e«, Priaeo, 269
Paiar ii» Pim Raosa (PatLiia). 311
Phalut (iBdla), 49, 268
PUltppbo Uudi, 37, 227*228. 230
PlfsUea. 106, U7. I6(. 187. 204*310.

212, 233.225, 227^, 3g0. 345
Plgay Chlapaase, 203
Plsmr (fOTllla, 2C3
PUidova Mu, »
PUhecaaihrorloea. 60. &7,231
Plihteanh/opus, 229
Pkbtocma. I67
PiittMtkrspus, 222. 225
Polsi, WUUiB, 10?

Pongia, 59. 66, n»<ll9. 166. 203,
220^21,233, 231, 274,293
Poreuplan, 86. 163
PoQkaar. Prof. B, P., 55. 294, 301>
303. 3«64«9
Port Doiglaa (B.C). 68
Ponlaad (Oa). 16S
PorrspuM Bast Africa, 2C9
Poiaro KKftf (B.Q,), 199
Ponoi. 226

Powell Biver 88

Pruavasaada, Svaml, 275
PmBporfO OYtuKv/M. 230
Ar««Or<U. 229*240

Prioatei. 84. 92. 94. n8. 147. 189.
197. 207. 2»229, 250431, 293.
905, 320

PriawoUAI. N. M.. S07
Preboscii MooBar, 230, 278
Prooia, Or. A„ 9i. 309416
PioroPVtDl^. 227
228

Puerto Barrios (GoaUsiols). 18S
Pugec Seud, 129, 132, 146
Pugna, the. 89
Pulo-PUsau (SuoUra), 2)6
Pu}ab.280

PujiCa GoTda (SJT,), 163
Purp)e*Pae«6 Monkoy*. 249
/ytiahru, 240, 2»

Qualleoa (B.C.), 73
Q4eM«. 60, 80

(juintaaa Hno (Max.), 17KI74

BadJo UalzTa, 24
IUiel8b, Sir W<lar, 198
862


ftatm ClMi). 2 M

M iH(D (OMm). TM, UO
Moca (Ak.). m

(IM Wrcxticm). ?4
KfeMM Mourn. 2S|. 271. UO
teiw. Oi^m
tr^rffnmit. zn. iS)
MAOpUkMUl. 2 M. 2 il
ASOWMV l/£ft.4LD. Tflff.
219.117

toaiiUM Mu. 211
KjMduUHftCHooe Mm.. M
9ihA90. Prof., m. 212
Uo K*fra (GwMAa). 120
UmsU* <C<.>. l«1
BoMf (m«ic tv
CdUf

ftoG^. WAtlwn W.. 321433
BMfe7 Mouaote. 21, «{. «9, IS,
IM

Bm. Wiaiam. tS. 1«0, tn«. lU
XmriU. 3. KkbolM, 307
BAhuv ^Pamirs). 3(2
nokta. Tim lUJab of. 339
MmIMUTT. us
Boc«et«R. Tbeedon. 71.13«
tMbot (On.). MO
t AJ*. MetempMrtu Sxpd.. 279
B«nl OfOffppWnJ Soo. Load.,

W

Mbr Cr««k (8£.>. n

KopoBUti (B.O.l. tbc. 191
BikMl. W. K. (Gcnid), 96, 9.
27J. 275

Rnoskii Acadoor ^ SdMCM. $0.
21

KBMttfl Ocopaphkol Sockty. 301
TtoMlao tofamtflop <Sew») im«*
IM, 29. 301

BiMluM. Tb^ 97. 3t. 303, 307*300

0*^ Aorelopa. Oloa. 212
OaMe. ChlMM. 279
Sammeaio VaOn. 31. 25. t29
&«0«dv Valter (Ppain). 3U
blun 0«KR. 31
SUil. Tbo, 227. M
Oaluuodef A 70
teMaaba Sowiako. PmIo. IK
hllduTT (S. Rtotek;. 214
OaHali. Tbe. 13
SalBOQ Biver (Idato). 122
SatvMO Rivet. 260
Saa BKsafOlao Valter (Cal). 1«0
SawftA. Mt (OuaMala), 27, !M
Sw FnaelKO (CM.). 27. I22
8ai«laU (Faottn). 112
S«i LuU POMtf (Met.). 175


Smtu 9kM. 241
•arawak, 23

Smqu«nh«$, 00. 79.70. M. OMO.
20. M. 29. 10»>1«. 107. III.
115. 120. 144. 146. 107. IM,
274. 324

ffmaalfa Rlw (Ootaea). 207
Sana M&. 63. 312. in. 32$

Sealoi (to <ua).2l5. 3l0
Ocaieloiy-an Eaieffmtiii
tehilibwan. iotoaa. 30?
lecana (sa* by ASSHaj->««

e^h

Oaakalt lolat flX.). 9i
OnfuOc. 231
Sfdepa. 39. 229439
Sneela (Gateca), 207
S*hU4. 200. 212
S*lmen»$. 263
Banani. Tba. 237. 241
S^mwpU/uttst. 240. 26). 363
OwM, Tba. Z27. 233
9«a faUDO. 2t9>2?0
Ocn*!. 295

Sha Sum (OnBa). 253
SbMp. Mewak. 392
SkBMl Pro*. <CblM). 324
Sbarpas. Tto S|. 220. 269. 27I-272.
274476.203

Ohlptca. Bnc & $>44.260-269.290k
907

OAlrv, m. 191

Shmako*. Pr. A. A.. 394. 901
SbuihPap (0,C.). 74
Siak Rh« (tototem). 234

203, BO-229. 222-234. 240
SiomaQs. Ptoar ((.caaM), 203. 219

SUmany, ^ TtUiwt

229

Steia.41. 306.312. 12$

Olefc. HaliPM. no. 192
Stem da Ckaaaaa (Qwtamala). 27.
130

Stem 6a Ptritel I9l, 199
Stern Miktea OccldMiial (Mu,),
174*173

Stem Madn OrtemaJ (Mcl). 27,
174

Stem K««aila, |49
Sikaoff fOtea), 254. 263. 274<37S,
279. 312

U Xteflf <Chtea>. 2»

OlkUm, 93. 44. 46. 267. 272
Slobhi Ponte (Tauanylka). 200
llnto nacato, 239
Sfanfkd (Mopfcey). 240
SiookoT. A. D., 309
SteAif, 240

SMklaai (Otaa). 303. 306. 9l2'
SlakluacM. Tba. 246
StMMUr (ffUlwleO. ISMI3
Slaklyow Wte.. U, 149
Skteuao. WudeO. lOC


363



TboaiB B. {ud Ezpdt,), 97,
27M72.J74
aetb-Bw. 9At, ai

(ol 9rJA/s

ta^thB, F. S.. Vi
SakKb. StaAk)’, 267
SubB Rtw CMa^B). I )2

Bnow-Lccpart. 263. 292, 303
MookByi. 230, 27S
Sooe BOBod Modba?, Maiua»l
UaDd,Z29
Sagpc. 49

Sewdt (mads by A5SM9)—

CaJb

9oVh Alda. S9. U-95, 203. 211.
227

ScMb AiD«i»fc f7, U9. 174. 17S,
1U. 191, 2Dt. 263
Sevtb FBfl UmM, 203
SW0)W«« AMu. 219. 223
SOT k t AfBy M«4Jc«l BcrrlK, 299
Bp«Al. OodwtB. 270
SOAldcr^ Tbe. 12X. 194
BHd«r MAntsTi. 1*9
SfOftTS AUBLP, V9
SpuWB Rai (B O. 6$

Suaerel Mu.. 312, 324-923
BiMMrJq <o( ABSMl)—Zkpl«-
tfMd

>»pp» (SuAO). 41. 306. 314
BWTOWB. Ndl 184
6(hk <Odor) cl ABSM*. 103, 133.
J47. IM. 195. 341, 244. 246,
313414
jMTtlo. 22i

fleWKifwimth 92. 99, 261. SOB
Sue-HtfBaaa, 63
Bttoei. 93-96. 241. 309. 318
SitfaAMa NcdoU*. 111. 313
BuOaM. TboThics. 211
autak UfW (U.a.S.fL), 29)
9imtn. 90. «1. 63. 106. 203. 227,
732. 29»’239, 263
Sb»B«U, 234. 240
SimOAr UAIL. 7BB (2fF«ha),
ai3

^ i i uu i (ec Dutch Gulafift). 197
9iudikiB. ProL P. F.. 309
8w«dni. 29v

9p4iBAatav«<. 203. 229
SzBcAwu, 0, 290. 269, 2B0. 3l2

TaOrMfc". Tha. 30I-3Q3
Tailed M«e. 230. 241. 291. 296
Talbai VaD47 (Ptinln). 312
TiUb. ConwnJ, 244
Taacanytta. 203. 30*

T^B»0(4 Uu. 312
Tam Turl, 312. 314
r«v <?(««/. 221. S4-225
T^ 6BaA Mu. 32*

Tapir. Malayan. 228. 232
r^fny itAkus, 132
TarbaftauJ Mu. 314


Tartti Butn (dswM). 3^ 318
Tiniara. 23B
T«b«na Clm). 292. 299
Teft-laa. 263.271.274479.278.
291,284. n4436

Tthaamcpac IsUnnas. 173, 174, 176
TiKMNISLA UOLOPyOtBI, 59,
152

TnaaiaeAs. 242, 249
Tenoaasee, 123
Tea»ro4 Kocfar, 170
TBte laoMOebe <B.C.). llO
Ttudlaftd {Siam;, 33. 37. 249
Tboibaff. Aaoa. VO
TboralO'i Dt«r. 279
Stnoderlacc. OUef Michael J.,

2.^3

T^oAfbMh* (Ka{vs)>. 249
TIbel, 31. 44. 46, 48, 51, 60. ISS.
2*8, 294, 269^, 27i 274, 278-
282. 309. 312, 321. 3^329
Tlbetaa Rim, The South, 289. 9Q3,
303. 312. 3)7, 324

-nbetaio. The. 265. 372, 278. 281.

283-»4, 289, 304. 321. 323
Tles-^B Me*., 63. 09, 302. 312,
317

Turra dri Facse, 1?9, 196
riser*. 228. 253. 271. 292,2»
Tnmaa, 3. W.. 369
TlyarailD IU»«rve (D.S.SX). 291
T«ba lain (B.C ). 89, 87
Toiraso c«r« (Tuiyj. S17
Tok, ISMM. 263. 274, 281. 924
Tnk*^V3ff. 8*. 144. 146. 160
Tootbail, A. N.. 144. 266
TmiUa iVlrt Mio), 250
Tfothypuhecus. 239*240. 261
Tradu (of ABSMM^ee Fooh

rrlrnj

TwuOktfuiia (U.S.5JLJ, 291
TnchCloo—eer Hatrt
Trljlliy Mia.. 25

Trofiak [Tk 40U Be^m (Malaya).

143

TAUB MAOAZitfB, 61. 122, 129,

144

TdifUts Mti. 63. 269. 312. 324
Turfafl DMert, 318
Turkey. 300. 304
TurkDea S, S, B.. 269. 301
Tuthaut (Pamirs). 312
Tvalo. Mark. 141

Uanrrai Fiver (Bndl). 194
Vbasgl.abar1. 202.224
Uale (CeeBTs). 210
Vfill [Plftin. 212*213. 216, 219
Dlao Boer (Doivershr eO. 309
UUasunn (MeesoU*)* 819
'U.O.8.B. Acad. «f S d a ne aa, M4,
301, 308

U.t.S.K. Tbe, 33.106, 286287, 300-
301.306


364


Udittd &IM> («f K Aa.>.

119. lit.

of M«««ub tU

Uni MU. »7
UnM Rh«t (Bmed). )9«
UrwcM. m

UM«r« F«n* (ToAiofljrOu). 20
irniiiiiUit Mvcr (C. Am.). 17«
Uuh. 79

Uxbcti. n«. »!4ai

VuKOimr. 71. M4S. 9). 103. Ill
Vucoi^W U«iid. 71. 71,1*41.17.
93

Vmco9i« Fobltf MuMsm. 103
\m Ota SbM Mu {<21aa), 251
Vu HMnnf*^ R.

231

rtatn. i9t
VHUBlOC. 97. 117
VmBMU. 199
V«1 Ctm 21.79

voM (B.c.), ni
V*T<n. rrcif. A. 215
V^. Okirtta. 73. 104-103
Vkmta (B C ). *7
Vkwk MemoiW Mo*. iSaiUbarr,
F<4 cf NyiMUad «»0 Bb^
data). 215
Vtat Mta. ii
Vlu KiA. 33
VkMitaAZTl
VoUm. JlJ

W»M«I. M4er L. A, 43. »7
W«taR, CvL Jowph. 138
WitM** Ltat. 37. 230
WaAam. Ray. 111. IH. lit
Wauie*. Wltar. \H

Blau. *1. 9M9, 71. <3.
127. 170>17l
WoMvCKu. 201
Wavdd. Tiu Marquis (k. 187
trUKMMD UACaZINS. 67
Wamnan PUlsa iTufafiTfta).

200


Wcn«et«B,342
Wan.'Xbfi rofN. Am.). |29. 217
Wa« Airlo, 63. IH. 260. 3M
Wm ASnam. 111. 232
WcctMb. 1. C.. 232. 234
WcstmAfiCT n

W«R VltslAit. 71
Wfalu Sai. 289
WIJiaoM. Start. 1M
WOlameCie ValUy, 166
WUIew Craak (Cul.). 133. 190.171.
154, 156. 161

WtaAoak <S. W. AfTtaa). 219, 222
trtnd^an. 19, 3M
WlKot (BvTopM Btaodl, 292
Wetaom iUrcc ildatai), 134
WolQb. Tbo. B4
WciTM. 263. 292
Woiu Yoa Mol. 243
Wm 4. Mn. I6a F,. 217
Wood. W. W., 269. 2S1V31
Wow.Wo* OlMon. 233
WtuluB Mumu. 74

Wya.DBUi, Dr. £.. 51, 270

Ytblevoval Mu. 312
YBki,228

Yta6 (B.C>. 63» 67. 75. 9t. HI
Ymitii rtani Bltar, 78
YaduU. The, 175

Ydift (viAde by ABSMs)—trf

esu

rats. 163. 259. 271. 276. ?10
Yueawi. 09. 174
Y0kO9.6l.63. 99. 83. 826
YuDftaB (Chtaa). 3tt. 252. 265
Yvefc*. TiM. 68. M. 132.146.119

Zderkb. B. M.. 311
2 ae)U 049. 268469
BMMadtao^dr. 119>l»

Zoflibt (MrMOlaod). 211. 2IS
Zeo. Soc. ol Lomjoo, 232
ZwMb dhtluartaod). 203


365



I


LATEST

Science

Fiction!

A WAY HOME

Dieodore Sturgeon X*1739/60jS

THE BOTTEPFLY KID

Chester And erson X-i730/60^

VENUS EQUILATERAL

GeorgeO. Smith T-1724/75^

AGAINST THE FALL OF NIGHT

Arthur C. Clarke X'1703/60^

THE SYNTHETIC MAN

Theodore Sturgeon X-1691/600

ONE AGAINST THE LEGION

Jack Williamson X*1657/60^

THE COMETEERS

Jack Williamson X-1634/60^

Note: ryrvffiJd pty* eenag* cr order* ter 4 or mor*. On ordoio f»r

(e>s then 4 hooks. 8«a top per copy for pMtsco snt handling

—WHEREVER PAPERBACKS ARE SOLD OR USE THiS COUPON—

mUMID BOOKS

Dept 214* 444 Msdleon Avonufr. Now York, N. Y. 10622

PIWM tind m» tho SCtCNCEFIcnON dro3ed botow. 1 pnelciM

S.


X1739 X1730 T1724 X4703 X>ld9i X1657 X1634


Brand New Inexpensive Editions... The Most Thrilling


SPV STORIES

Come From Pyramid!

ASSIGNMENT K by Hartley Howard X-1737/GOtf
A tense spy thriller of a double agent and a triple cross—now e
major motion picture.

THE 9TK DIRECTIVE by Adam Kail T-1734/75<

Smash successor, to THE QUiLLER MEMORAMDUM. Secret agent
Quiller duels wrth a deadly Mongolian assassin In Bangkok. ''Best
counter-espionafe novel of todap—PHbRsbars Weakly

THE INVISiDLE EYE by Paul Tabori X-1728/60<

A monstrous erifflinal scheme against humanly Is foiled by the dedl^
Gated group of HUNTERS. Second m a popul^ series.

THE COUNTERFEIT TRAITOR by Alexander Klein T4722/^<

The most dangerous spy of World War 11... an Incred^ie inie story
of espionage at Its most daring.

COMMANDO X by Poke Runyon X469a/&0<

The private amiy whose dedicatfon to the overthrow of Castro could
ei^oda IfrtovfDmwarl

THE VENGEANCE MAN by Manning Coles X-1631/6Ck

Tommy Kambledon’s most bitarre case fn which the ectioA be^m
in Montmartre and reaches a stunning climax on the coast of Span.

THE aUlUER MEMORANDUM by Adam Hall T4570/75r
The most widely read end admired espionage novel since THE SPY
WHO CAME IN PROM THE COLD and FUNERAL IN BERLIN. "Seat spy
novel of the year"—The New Tort Times.

TON6UEOFTREASONbyRobert<^8n6 fi-1633/S0(

Special agent Ben Coftln faces dtabollcal killers and swinging spy '
girls In this spy thriller.

MTb PynnM pj;^ RMtin m ordBra for 4 boohs «r Bwr«. On ofrisrs fv Ism tfesn
4 bMitt, M4 jef PK MP7 Tsr fstlias sM MM I l(l«.

-VmeREVEB PAPOOACIS ARC SOLD M USE THIS COUPON *«»•

PYRAMID U0K$ Diyt 2n, 444 Kidhea Aveeae. Niv York. Hiw Ym 10022
Plaau 4ia4 m tee SPY STOR lES drt led N lew. I enclose &

X<17ST M7S4 X*172a Um 11803 X-1C31 T-ISTO Rim

Naae_

Addrea.____

CHy_State_Op_


More Light Reading
From Pyramid

... Nowin Inexpensive Editions... Yours forPenniesl

TILT'byHu^fiafron T-1G90/7»

Tha shock of VALLCY Of THE DOLLS and the ferar of THE ADVE>4>
TUtURS In INIs novel of corrupt men and iheir. passionate wornen.

ft A M br Ceoi^ W. Rae T*17Ca/790

Katv-fast, furious and fun*(ovinB-a spicy nova] from today's
York.

A WILDEU4ESS OF VINES by Hal Bennett T-16&S/75d

The ’frank i^ovel that tells (he shocUns truth about a Negro "Peyton

Place."

im SUNG AND THE ARROW! by Stuart England T‘1629/7H
A shocking, adult slorv oi a man driven by uncontio (labia drives and a
woman who had to satisfy her deslrer anyway she could.

’THE MODERNS by Daoma Wlniton X-1625/SOe
A frank, revealing novel of today's wanton couples.

HAPPENING AT SAN REMO by Bruce Casdday 7-1S14/7S«

A novel of today’s troubled and Intense college youth.

THE RE5IUSS lOVERS.by Marguerite Ford X-IMVSOd
A wild carousel of wives, lovers end neighbors.

DOLE 9\SV by Hugh Barron T-ISIT/TSd

A blazing portrait of a Hollywood 8a< goddess and the men who ruled
and ruined her.

fHt GREMMIE by Frederick Kohner R-l574/50d

A frank rtovel about surfeia and surflng-the world's most glamorous

sporL

NOTE: Pyramid pay* postage on orden for A boob or mere. On orders hr less
than 4 beab, add por copy for pcstageand handUng,

"WHfREVER PAPERSAOS ARE SOID OR USETHIS COUPON —

PVftAMS BOOKS

Dept. 204,444 Madison Avenue, New Votk. N. Y. 10022

Please send me the paperbacks I have circled below. I enclose $--

T.16W T-1708 T-165S T-1629 X.16» 1-1614 X-1601 T-ISM M574


Name-
Add reas



More Light Reading
From Pyramid

... Nowin Inexpensive Editions.. .Yours forPenniesl

TILT'byHi^fianon T-1i»0/7»

Tha shock of VALLCV Of THE DOLLS ani^ tho fevar of TTiE ADVEh^
TUtURS In this novel of corrupt men and Iheic passionate women.

R A M by Geoi^ W. Rae T^ITOe/TM

Katy-fast, furious and fun*lov 1 nB-a lively, spl^ novel from today's Kmv
York.

A Wl LDEfMESS OF VINES by Hal BenneK T.1685/7?d

The ’frank novel that tells the shocUns truth about a Negro "Peyton

Piece."

im SUNG AND THE ARROW! by StuvC Engsbajid T‘1629/7»

A shocking, adult story oi a man driven by uncontrollable drives and a
womar who had to satisfy her desires anyway she could,

THE MODERNS by Daoma Wlnifon X-1636/SOe
A frank, revealing novel of today's wanton couples.

HAPPENING AT SAN REMO by Brace Caadday T-1S14/7S#

A novel of today’s troubled and Intense col lege youth.

THE RESTLESS LOVERS by Margtierile Ford X‘1W1/6<tt
A wild carousel of wives, lovers end neighbors.

DOLIB W by Hugh Barron T-15B1/7Stf

A blazing portrait of a Hollywood 8 q;< goddesr and the men who ruled
and ruined her.

fHt GREMMIE by Frederick Kohner K-iS74/St»

A frank rtovel about surfeia and surfing-the world's most gUmorous
sporL

NOTEt Py*anld paya pwTage on orden for A boob or mora. On orders lor lea
tfufl 4 beoki, add 10C par copy fcr postage and handling.

"WHEREVER PAPERSAQS ARE SOID OR USE THIS COUPON—-

PYRAMID BOOKS

Dept. 2P4,444 Madison Avenue, New York. N. V. 10022

Please send me the paperbacks I have circled below. I enclose S--

M690 T-1708 T-166S 7-1629 X.1626 7-1614 X-16m 1-1551 R-1574


Name-

Address



