Interpretations of Poetry and Religion (George Santayana, 1900)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/cu31924026398192). Santayana's first book: poetry and religion as twin expressions of the imaginative life.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

If 00


COKl^ELL ,
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME
OF THE^ SAGE ENDOWMENT
FUN^D GIVEN IN 189I BY

HENRY WILLIAMS SAGE


DATEJ>trE


ABLip^sTSfl


MAY 1 8


4Q?«


W


r


o«


^^^^;


PRINTEO IN U.S A,


Cornell University
Library


The original of tliis book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9240263981 92


INTERPRETATIONS


POETRY AND RELIGION


BT

GEORGE SANTAYANA


NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

1900

K


Tl4

i<fOO


A. \'^% \ns;

COPYRIGHT, 1900, BY
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS


HoriiJooi ^nm

J, S. CuBhing U Co. — Berwick & Smith

Norwood MaaB. U.S.A.


PREFACE

The following volume is composed of a number
of papers written at various times and already par-
tially printed ; they are now revised and gathered
together in the hope that they may lead the reader,
from somewhat different points of approach, to a
single idea. T his idea i" t.ha.t Tp.liginn anri popt^y i
are i dentical in essence, and differ mereljr_in-the

wa y in which they htp. aftaohpA fcf pra.p.tip.a.1 affairs

Poetry is c alled religion when it intervenes in li fe,
an d'religion, when it merely supe Tyflnfii' i^p"" Jifpy
is seen to be noth ing but poetry . ;

It would naturally follow from this conception,'
that religious doctrines would do well to withdraw!
their pretension to be dealing with matters of fact.'
That pretension is not only the source of the con-i
flicts of religion with science and of the vain andl
bitter controversies of sects ; it is also the cause of i
the impurity and incoherence of religion in the
soul, when it seeks its sanctions in the sphere ofj
reality, and forgets that its proper concern is toj
express the ideal. For the/&ignity of religion, like'
that of poetry and of every moral ideal, lies pre-
cisely in its ideal adequacy, in its fit rendering of


VI PEEFACB

the meanings and values of life, in its anticipation
of perfection •\ so that the excellence of religion is
due to an ijjealization of experience which, while
making religion noble if treated as poetry, makes
it necessarily false if treated as science. Its func-
tu)n is rather to dra w from reality materials for an
image oi that lAeaJ to which reality ought to con-


'no


form, and to make us citizens, by anticipation, in
the world we crave.

It also follows from our general conception that
p oetry has a universal and a moral function . Its
rudimentary essays in the region of fancy and
pleasant sound, as well as its idealization of epi-
sodes in human existence, are only partial exercises
in an art that has all time and all experience for
'Its natural subject-matter and all the possibilities
of being for its ultimate theme. /As religion is
deflected from its course when it rs confused with
a record of facts or of natural laws, so poetry is
arrested in its development if it remains an un-
meaning play of fancy without relevance to the >
ideals and purposes of life.") In that relevance lies
1 its highest power. As its elementary pleasantness
comes from its response to the demands of the ear,
so its deepest beauty comes from its response to
the ultimate demands of the soul. V" VCiC^

This theory can hardly hope for much commen-
dation either from the apologists of theology or
from its critics. The mass of mankind is divided


PREFACE Vli

into two classes, the Sancho Fanzas who have a
sense Jorjreality, but no ideals, and the Don Quix-
otes with a sense for ideak, Biit mad. The expe-
dient of reeognizmg facts as facts and accepting
ideals as ideals, — and this is all we propose, —
although apparently simple enough, seems to elude
the normal human power of discrimination. If,
therefore, the champion of any orthodoxy should
be offended at our conception, which would reduce
his artful cosmos to an allegory, all that could be
said to mitigate his displeasure would be that our
view is even less favourable to his opponents than
to himself.

The liberal school that attempts to fortify re-
ligion by minimizing its expression, both theoretic
and devotional, seems from this point of view
to be merely impoverishing religious symbols and
vulgarizing religious aims ; it subtracts from faith
that imagination by which faith becomes an in-
terpretation and idealization of human life, and
retains only a stark and superfluous principle of
superstition. Por meagre and abstract as may be
th e content of such a reli pon. it contains all the
venom of absolute pretensions ; it is no less cursed
than the more developed systems with a contro-
versial unrest and with a consequent undertone of
constraint and suspicion. It tortures itself with
the same circular proofs in its mistaken ambition
*a enter the plane of vulgar reality and escape its


TUl PEEFACB

native element of ideas. It casts a greater blight
than would a civilized orthodoxy on any joyous
freedom of thought. For the respect exacted by
an establishment is limited and external, and not
greater than its traditional forms probably deserve,
as normal expressions of human feeling and apt
symbols of moral truth. A reasonable deference
once shown to authority, the mind remains, under
such an establishment, inwardly and happily free ;
the conscience is not intimidated, the imagination
is not tied up. But the preoccupations of a hun-
gi'y and abstract fanaticism poison the liberty nomi-
nally allowed, bias all vision, and turn philosophy
itself, which should be the purest of delights and
consolations, into an obsession and a burden to the
soul. In such a spectral form religious illusion
does not cease to be illusion. Mythology cannot
become science by being reduced in bulk, but it
may cease, as a mythology, to be worth having.

On the other hand, the positivistic school of
criticism would seem, if our theory is right, to
I have overlooked in its programme the highest
functions of human nature. The environing world
can justify itself to the mind only by the free life
which it fosters therej AU observation is observa-
tion of brute fact, all aiscipline is mere repression,
until these facts digested and this discipline em-
bodied in humane impulses become the starting-
point for a creative movement of the imagination


PREFACE IX

the firm basis for ideal constructions in society,
religion, and art. Only as conditions of th ese
huma n activities can the facts nf na.tnrft anH Vi ig-
tory become morally i n tell ipfi biff "" fn^tiTnry- im
po rtant. \ In themselves they are trivial incidents,'/
gossip or the Fates, caeklings of their inexhaust- "■
ible garrulity. To regard the function of man as
accomplished when these chance happenings have
been recorded by him or contributed to by his
impulsive action, is to ignore his reason, his privi-
lege, — shared for the rest with every living crea-
ture, — of using Nature as food and substance for
his own life. This human life is not merely)
animal and passionate. The best and keenestj
part of it consists in that very gift of creation anc|
government which, together with all the transcen-j
dental functions of his own mind, man has signifi4
cantly attributed to God as to his highest ideal.}
Not to see in this rational activity the purpose ana
standard of all life is to have left human natiwe*-
half unread. It is to look to the removal of cer-
tain incidental obstacles in the work of reason as
to the solution of its positive tasks. In comparison
with such apathetic naturalism, all thrf' errors and
follies of religion are worthy of indulgent sympathy,
since they represent an effort, however misguided,
to interpret and to use the materials of experience
for moral ends, and to measu re the value of reality
by its relation to the ideal. \


X PREFACE

f

The moral function of the imagination and the
poetic nature of religion form, then, the theme of
the following pages. It may not be amiss to
announce it here, as the rather miscellaneous sub-
jects of these essays might at first sight obscure
the common import of them all.


CONTENTS


I. Uksebstahsino, Ihaqinatiok, and Mtsticisu 1

II. The Homebic Htmks 24

III. The Dissolution of Paganish ... 49

IV. The Poetbt op Chbistian Dogma . . 76
v. Platonic Love in Soke Italian Poets 118

VI. The Absence of Beligion in Shaxespeabe 147

VII. The Poetbt of Babbabism .... 166

VIII. Emeeson 217

IX. A Religion of Disillusion .... 234

X. The Elements and Function op Poetbt . 251

li


UNDEESTANDING, IMAGINATION, AND
MYSTICISM

When we consider the situation of the human
mind in Nature, its limited plasticity and few
channels of communication with the outer world,
we need not wonder that we grope for light, or
that we find incoherence and instability in human
systems of ideas. The wonder rather is that we
have done so well, that in the chaos of sensations
and passions that fills the mind, we have found
any leisure for self-concentration and reflection,
and have succeeded in gathering even a light
harvest of experience from our distracted labours.
(Our occasional madness is less wonderful than ourl
occasional sanity^) Eelapses into dreams are to
be expected in a being whose brief existence is
so like a dream; but who could have been sure
of this sturdy and indomitable perseverance in
the work of reason in spite of all checks and
discouragements ?

The resources of the mind are not commensurate '
with its ambition. Of the five senses, three are of
B 1


2 POBTKY AND KBLIGION

little use in the formation of permanent notions:
/a fourth, sight, is indeed vivid and luminous, but
furnishes transcripts of things so highly coloured
and deeply modified by the medium of sense, that
a long labour of analysis and correction is needed
before satisfactory conceptions can be extracted
from it^ For this labour, however, we are en-
dowed with the requisite instrument. ( We have
memory and we have certain powers of synthesis,
abstraction, reproduction, invention, — in a word,
we have understanding, y' But this faculty of un-
derstanding has hardly begun its work of decipher-
ing the hieroglyphics of sense and framing an
idea of reality, when it is crossed by another
faculty — the imagination. Perceptions do not re-
main in the mind, as would be suggested by the
trite simile of the seal and the wax, passive and
changeless, until time wear oif their sharp edges
and make them fade. No, perceptions fall into
the brain rather as seeds into a furrowed field or
even as sparks into a keg of powder. Each image
breeds a hundred more, sometimes slowly and sub-
terraneously, sometimes (when a passionate train
is started) with a sudden burst of fancy. ' The
mind, exercised by its own fertility and flooded by '
its inner lights, has infinite trouble to keep a true
reckoning of its outward perceptions.) It turns
from the frigid problems of observation to its own
visions; it forgets to watch the courses of what


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 3

should be its "pilot stars." Indeed, were it not
for the power of convention in which, by a sort of
mutual cancellation of errors, the more practical
and normal conceptions are enshrined, the imagina-
tion would carry men wholly away, — the best men
first and the vulgar after them. Even as it is,
individuals and ages of fervid imagination usually
waste themselves in dreams, and must disappear
before the race, saddened and dazed, perhaps, by

/the memory of those visions, can return to its
plodding thoughts.

Mve senses, then, to gather a small part of the
infinite influences that vibrate in Nature, a mod-
erate power of understanding to interpret those
senses, and an irregular,, passionate fancy to^dver-
lay that interpretation — such is the endowment;
of the human mind. And what is its ambition?/

QiNothing less than to construct a picture of all}
reality, to comprehend its oww origin and that of,
the universe, to discwir the laws of both and;
prophesy their destiny. Is not the disproportion,
enormous ? Are not confusions and profound con-
tradictions to be looked for in an attempt to build
so much out of so little?

Yet the metaphysical ambition we speak of can-
not be abandoned, because whatever picture of
things we may carry about in our heads we are
bound to regard as a map of reality ; although we
may mark certain tracts of it "unexplored couji-


4 POETRY AND RELIGION

try," the very existence of such regions is vouched
for only by our representation, and is necessarily
believed to correspond to our idea. All we can do
is, without abandoning the aspiration to knowledge
which is the inalienable birthright of reason, to
control as best we may the formation of our con-
ceptions ; to arrange them according to their deri-
vation and measure them by their applicability in
life, so prudently watching over their growth that
we may be spared the deepest of sorrows — to sur-
vive the offspring of our own thought.

The inadequacy of each of our faculties is what
occasions the intrusion of some other faculty into
j its field. / The defect of sense calls in imagination,
j the defect of imagination calls in reasoning, the
i defect of reasoning divination, j If our senses were
clairvoyant and able to observe all that is going on
in the world, if our instincts were steady, prompt-
ing us to adequate reactions upon these observar
tions, the fancy might remain free. We should
not need to call upon it to piece out the imperfec-
tions of sense and reflection, but we should employ
it only in avowed poetry, only in building dream-
worlds alongside of the real, not interfering with
the latter or confusing it, but repeating its pat-
tern with as many variations as the fertility of
our minds could supply. As it is, the imagination
is brought into the service of sense and instinct,
and made to do the work of intelligence. This


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 5

substitution is the more readily effected, in that
imagination and intelligence do not differ in their
origin, but only in their validity. Understan ding
isja^apfilieablfi-ficiifin, a kind jof. wJi.witkA_prae-
tical us e. Common sense and science live in a
■world of expurgated mythology, such as Plato
wished his poets to compose, a world where the
objects are imaginative in their origin and essence,
but useful, abstract, and beneficent in their sugges-
tions. The sphere of common sense and science is
concentric with the sphere of fancy ; both move in
virtue of the same imaginative impulses. The even- 1
tual distinction between intelligence and imagina-
tion is ideal ; it arises when we discriminate various
functions in a life that is dynamically one. Those
conceptions which, after they have spontaneously
arisen, prove serviceable in practice, and capable
■^o f verifica.tinn in sense, we call ideas of the und er-
standing. The others remain ideas of the imagina-
tion. The shortness of life, the distractions of
passion, and the misrepresentation to which all
transmitted knowledge is subject, have made the
testing of ideas by practice extremely slow in the
history of mankind. Hence the impurity of our
knowledge, its confusion with fancy, and its pain-
ful inadequacy to interpret the whole world of
human interests. These shortcomings are so many
invitations to foreign powers to intervene, so many
occasions for new waves of imagination to sweep


6 POETBY AND KELIGION

away the landmarks of our old labour, and flood
tlie whole mind with impetuous dreams.

It is accordingly the profounder minds that com-
monly yield to the imagination, because it is these
minds that are capable of feeling the greatness of
the problems of life and the inadequacy of the
understanding, with its present resources, to solve
them. The same minds are, moreover, often swayed
by emotion, by the ever-present desire to find a
noble solution to all questions, perhaps a solution
already hallowed by authority and intertwined inex-
tricably, for those who have always accepted it,
with the sanctions of spiritual life. Such a coveted
conclusion may easily be one which the understand-
ing, with its basis iu sense and its demand for veri-
fication, may not be able to reach. Therefore the
impassioned soul must pass beyond the understand-
ing, or else go unsatisfied ; and unless it be as dis-

j ciplined as it is impassioned it will not tolerate
dissatisfaction. From what quarter, then, will it
draw the wider views, the deeper harmonies, which

I it craves ? Only from the imagination. There is

I no other faculty left to invoke. The imagination
therefore, must furnish to religion and to meta-

i physics those large ideas tinctured with passion
those supersensible forms shrouded in awe, in which
alone a mind of great sweep and vitality can find
its congenial objects. Thus the stone which the
builder, understanding, rejected, becomes the chief


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 7

stone" of the corner ; the intuitions which science
could not use remain the inspiration of poetry and
religion.

The imagination, when thus employed to antici-
pate or correct the conclusions of the understand-
ing, is of course not called imagination by those
"who appeal to it. The religious teachers call it
prophecy or revelation, the philosophers call it a
higher reason. But these names are merely eulo-
gistic synonyms for imagination, implying (what is
perfectly possible) that the imagination has not
misled us. They imply on the contrary that in the
given instances the imagination has hit upon an
ultimate truth. A prophet, unless he be the merely
mechanical vehicle of truths he does not under--
stand, cannot be conceived as anything but a man
of imagination, "whose visions miraculously mirror
the truth. A metaphysician "who transcends the
intellect by his reason can be conceived only as
using his imagination to such good purpose as to
divine by it the ideal la"ws of reality or the ultimate
goals of moral effort. His reason is an imagination
that succeeds, an intuition that guesses the principle '
of experience. But if this intuition were of such a
nature that experience could verify it, then that
higher reason or imagination would be brought
f down to the level of the understanding ; for under-
standing, as we have defined it, is itself a kind of
imagination, an imagination prophetic of experience,


8 POBTBY AND BELIGION

a spontaneity of thought by which the science of
perception is turned into the art of life. The same
absence of verification distinguishes revelation from
science; for when the prophecies of faith are veri-
fied, the function of faith is gone. Faith and the
higher reason of the metaphysicians are therefo^e--
forms of imagination believed to be avenues to
truth, as dreams or oracles may sometimes be truth-
ful, not because their necessary correspondence to
truth can be demonstrated, for then they would be
portions of science, but because a man dwelling on
those intuitions is conscious of a certain moral
transformation, of a certain warmth and energy
of life. This emotion, heightening his ideas and
. giving them power over his will, he calls faith or
high philosophy, and under its dominion he is able
to face his destiny with enthusiasm, or at least with
composure.

The imagination, even when its premonitions are
not wholly justified by subsequent experience, has
thus a noble role to play in the life of man. With-
out it his thoughts would be not only far too narrow
to represent, although it were symbolically, the
greatness of the universe, but far too narrow even
to render the scope of his own life and the condi-
tions of his practical welfare. Without poetry
and religion the history of mankind would have
been darker than it is. Not only would emotional
life have been poorer, but the public conscience


XTNDEESTANDIKG AND IMAGINATION


9


the national and family spirit, so useful for moral
organization and discipline, would hardly have be-
come articulate. By what a complex and unin-
spired argumentation would the pure moralist have
to insist upon those duties which the imagination
enforces so powerfully in oaths sworn before the
*^ods, in commandments written by the finger of
God upon stone tablets, in visions of hell and
heaven, in chivalrous love and loyalty, and in the
sense of family dignity and honour ? What intri-
cate, what unavailing appeals to positive interests
would have to be made before those quick reactions
could be secured in large bodies of people which
can be produced by the sight of a flag or the sound
of a name ? T he imaginat ion is the great unifier ,
o f human ity. Men'sperceplT5fts»ffliayH3e""Various,(
their powers of understanding very unequal; but
the imagination is, as it were, the self-conscious-!
ness of instinct, the contribution which the inner!
capacity and demand of the mind makes to ex-|
perience. To iad^daa thei magination is to ex^ega'
the universal se lf, the common and coMagious ele-
m ent in all indiviSu alg, that rudimentary pjtepcyl
which they all sh ara To stimulafe~the imagina-
tion is to produce The deepest, the most pertina-
cious emotions. To repress it is to chill the soul,
so that even the clearest perception of the truth '
remains without the joy and impetuosity of convic-
tion.


10 POETBY AND EELIGION

The part played by imagination is tlius indis-
pensable ; but obviously the necessity and benefi-
cence of this contribution makes the dangers of
it correspondingly great. Wielding a great power,
exercising an omnipresent function, the imagina-
tion may abuse a great force. While its inspirar
tions coincide with what would be the dictates
of reason, were reason audible in the world, all
is well, and the progress of man is accelerated by
his visions ; but being a principle a priori the im-
agination is an irresponsible principle ; its right-
ness is an inward Tightness, and everything in the
real world may turn out to be disposed otherwise
than as it would wish. Our imaginative precon-
ceptions are then obstacles to the perception of
fact and of rational duty; the faith that stimu-
lated our efforts and increased our momentum,
multiplies our wanderings. The too hasty organi-
zation of our thoughts becomes the cause of their
more prolonged disorganization, for to the natural
obscurity of things and the difficulty of making
them fit together among themselves, we add the
cross lights of our prejudices and the impossibility
of fitting reality into the frame we have made for
it in our ignorance of its constitution and extent.
And as we love our hopes, and detest the experi-
ence that seems to contradict them, we add fanati-
cism to our confusion. The habits of the imagina-
tion, in conflict with the facts of sense, thus come


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 11

to cloud science with passion, with, fiction, with
sentimental prejudice. ITor is this the end of
our troubles. For Imagination herself suffers vio-
lence in this struggle ; she seeks to reduce herself
to conformity with existence, in the hope of vindi-
cating her nominal authority at the price of some
concessions. She begins to feign that she de-
manded nothing but what she finds. Thus she
loses her honesty and freedom, becomes a flatterer
of things instead of the principle of their ideal
correction, and in the attempt to prove herself
prophetic and literally valid (as in a moment of
infatuation she had fancied herself to be) she for-
feits that symbolic truth, that inner propriety,
which gave her a moral value. Thus the false
steps of the imagination lead to a contorted science
and to a servile ideal.

These complications not unnaturally inspire dis-
couragement and a sense of the hopeless relativity
of human thought. Indeed, if there be any special
endowment of mind and body called human nature,
as there seems to be, it is obvious that all human
experience must be relative to that. But the truth,
"the absolute reality, surrounds and precedes these
operations of finite faculty. What value, then, we
may say, have these various ideals or perceptions,
or the conflicts between them ? Are not our senses
as human, as " subjective " as our wills ? Is not
the understanding as visionary as the fancy ? Does


12 POETRY AND RELIGION

it not transform the Untnowable into as remote a
symbol as does the vainest dream ?

The answer which a rational philosophy -would
make to these questions would be a double one.
It is true that every idea is equally relative to
human nature and that nothing can be represented
in the human mind except by the operation of
human faculties. But it is not true that all these
products of human ideation are of equal value,
since they are not equally conducive to human
purposes or satisfactory to human demands.

The impulse that would throw over as equally
worthless every product of human art, because it
is not indistinguishable from some alleged external
reality, does not perceive the serious self-contra-
dictions under which it labours. In the first place
the notion of an external reality is a human no-
tion; our reason makes that hypothesis, and its
verification in our experience is one of the ideals
of science, as its validity is one of the assumptions
of daily life. In throwing over all human ideas,
I because they are infected with humanity, all human
ideas are being sacrificed to one of them — the idea
of an absolute reality. If this idea, being human,
deserved that such sacrifices should be made for
it, have the other notions of the mind no rights ?
Furthermore, even if we granted for the sake of
argument a reality which our thoughts were es-
sentially helpless to represent, whence comes the


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 13

duty of our thoughts to represent it? Whence
comes the value of this unattainable truth ? Prom
an ideal of human reason. We covet truth. / So
that the attempt to surrender all human science
as relative and all human ideals as trivial is
founded on a blind belief in one human idea and
an absolute surrender to one human passion.K,

In spite of these contradictions, which only a
dispassionate logic could thoroughly unravel, the
enthusiast is apt to rush on. The vision of abso-
lute truth and absolute reality intoxicates him, and
as he is too subtle a thinker, too inward a man, to
accept the content of his senses or the conventions
of his intelligence for unqualified verities, he for-
tifies himself against them with the consciousness
of their relativity, and seeks to rise above them
in his meditations. /JBut to rise to what ? To some
more elaborate idea ? To some object, like a scien-
tific cosmos or a religious creed, put together by
longer and more indirect processes than those of
common perception ? Surely not. If I renounce
my senses and vulgar intellect because they are
infected with finitude and smell of humanity, how
shall I accept a work of art, a product of reason-
ing, or an idol made originally with hands and
now encrusted all over, like the statue of Glaucus,
with traditional accretions ? Y Poetry, science, and
religion, in their positive constructions, are more
human, more conditioned, than are the senses and


14 POETKY AND BELI6IOK

the common understanding themselves. The lover
of inviolate reality must not look to them. If the
data of human knowledge must be rejected as sub-
jective, how much more should we reject the in-
\ f erences made from those data by human thought.
[ The way of true wisdom, therefore, if true wisdom
is to deal with the Absolute, can only lie in absten-
tion: neither the senses nor the common under-
standing, and much less the superstructure raised
upon these by imagination, logic, or tradition, must
delude us : we must keep our thoughts fixed upon
the I inanity of all this in comparison with the un-
thinkable truth, with the undivided and unimagi-
nable reality. Everything, says the mystic, is
nothing, in comparison with the OneA

This confusion, the logical contradiction of which
we have just seen, may, for lack of a more specific
word, be called mysticism. X It consists in the sur-
render of a category of thought on account of the
discovery of its relativity>;' If I saw or reasoned
or judged by such a category, I should be seeing,
reasoning, or judging in a specific manner, in a
manner conditioned by my finite nature. But the
specific and the finite, I feel, are odious; let me
therefore aspire to see, reason and judge in no spe-
cific or finite manner — that is, not to see, reason or
judge at all. So I shall be like the Infinite, nay
I shall become one with the Infinite and (marvel-
lous thought !) one with the One.


TTNDEESTANDINS AND IMAGINATION 15

The ideal of mysticism (js accordingly exactly
contrary to the ideal of reason ; instead of perfect-
ing human nature it seeks to abolish it; instead
of building a better world, it would undermine
the foundations even of the world we have built
already ; instead of developing our mind to greater
scope and precision, it would return to the condi-
tion of protoplasm — to the blessed consciousness
of an Unutterable EealityJ In the primary stages,
of course, mysticism does noli venture to abolish
all our ideas, or to renounce all our categories of
thought. Thus many Christian mystics have still
clung, out of respect for authority, to traditional
theology, and many philosophical mystics have
made some room for life and science in the post-
scripts which they, like Parmenides, have appended
to the blank monism of their systems. But such
concessions or hesitations are inconsistent with the
Ajnystical spirit which will never be satisfied, if
fully developed and fearless, with anything short
of Absolute Ifothing.^

Eor the very reason, however, that mysticism
is a tendency to obliterate distinctions, a partial
mysticism often serves to bring out with wonder-
ful intensity those underlying strata of experience
which it has not yet decomposed. The razing of
the edifice of reason may sometimes discover its
foundations. Or the disappearance of one depart-
ment of activity may throw the mind with greater


16 POETEY AND RELIGION

energy into another. So Spinoza, who combined
mysticism in morals with rationalism in science,
can bring out the unqualified naturalism of his
system with a purity and impressiveness impossi-
ble to men who still retain an ideal world, and
seek to direct endeavour as well as to describe it.
Having renounced all ideal categories, Spinoza has
only the material categories left with which to
cover the ground. He thus acquires all the con^j.
centrated intensity, all the splendid narrowness,.",
which had belonged to Lucretius, while his mysti-
cal treatment of the spheres which Lucretius sim-
ply ignored, gives him the appearance of a greater
profundity. So an ordinary Christian who is mys-
tical, let us say, about time and space, may use
his transcendentalism in that sphere to intensify
his positivism in theology, and to emphasize his
whole-souled surrender to a devout life.
(^ "What is impossible is to be a transcendentalist
" all 'round." In that case there would be nothing
left to transcend ; the civil war of the mind would
have ended in the extermination of all parties)/The
art of mysticism is to be mystical in spots and to aim
the heavy guns of your transcendental philosophy
against those realities or those ideas which you
find particularly galling, j Planted on your dearest
dogma, on your most precious postulate, you may
then transcend everything else to your heart's con-
tent. You may say with an air of enlightened


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 17

profundity that nothing is " really " right or wrong,
because in Nature all things are regular and neces-
sary, and God cannot act for purposes as if his
will were not already accomplished; your mys-
ticism in religion and morals is kept standing, as
it were, by the stiff backing which is furnished by
your materialistic cosmology. Or you may say
with a tone of devout rapture that all sights and
sounds are direct messages from Divine Providence
to the soul, without any objects "really" existing
in space ; your mysticism about the world of per-
ception and scientific inference is sustained by the
naive theological dogmas which you substitute for
the conceptions of common sense. Yet among
these partialities and blind denials a man's positive
insight seems to thrive, and he fortifies and con-
centrates himself on his chosen groimd by his arbi-
trary exclusions. The patient art of rationalizing
the various sides of life, the observational as well
as the moral, without confusing them, is an art
apparently seldom given to the haste and pugnacity
of philosophers.

Thus mysticism, although a principle of disso-/
lution, carries with it the safeguard that it canl
never be consistently applied. (We reach it only^
in exceptional moments of intuition, from which
we descend to our pots and pans with habits and
instincts virtually unimpaired. Life goes on ; vir-
tues and affections endure, none the worse, the


18 POETRY AND EELIGIOil

mystic feels, for that slight film of unreality which
envelops them in a mind not unacquainted with
ecstasy. J> And although mysticism, left free to
express itself, can have no other goal than Nir-
vana, yet moderately indulged in and duly inhib-
ited by a residuum of conventi onal s anity, it
serves to give a touch of strangeness and eleva-
tion to the character and to suggest superhuman
gifts. It is not, however, in the least super-
human. It is hardly even abnormal, being only
an exaggeration of a rational interest in the high-
est abstractions, f The divine, the universal, the

, absolute, even the One, are legitimate conceptions.
They are terms of human thought having as such

•- a meaning in language and a place in speculation!
Those who live in the mind, whose passions are
only audible in the keen overtones of dialectic,
are no doubt exalted and privileged natures, choos-
ing a better part which should not be taken from
them. So the poet and the mathematician have
their spheres of abstract and delicate labour, in
which a liberal legislator would not disturb them.

f Trouble only arises when the dialectician represents
his rational dreams as knowledge of existences, and
the mystic his excusable raptures as the only way
of life^ Poets and mathematicians do not imagine
that their pursuits raise them above human limi-
tations and are no part of human life, but rather
its only goal and justification. Such a pretension


UNDEESTANDING AND IMAGINATION 1*

would be regarded as madness in the mathemati-
cian or the poet; and is not the mystic as miser-
ably a man ? Is he not embodying, at his best, the
analytic power of a logician, or the imagination
of an enthusiast, and, at his worst, the lowest and
most obscure passions of human nature ?

/Yes, in spite of himself, the mystic remains
huigan. Nothing is more normal than abstraction.
A contemplative mind drops easily its practical
preoccupations, rises easily into an ideal sympathy
with impersonal things.^ The wheels of the uni-
verse have a wonderful magnetism for the human
will. K)ur consciousness likes to lose itself in the
music of the spheres, a music that finer ears are
sometimes privileged to catch. The better side of
mysticism is an aesthetic interest in large unities >
and cosmic laws. The sesthetic attitude is not the
moral, but it is not for that reason illegitimate. ( It
gives us refreshment and a foretaste of that per-
fect adaptation of things to our faculties and of
our faculties to things which, could it extend to
every part of experience, would constitute the ideal
life. Such happiness is denied us in the concrete ;
but a hint and example of it may be gathered by
an abstracted element of our nature as it travels
through an abstracted world. Such an indulgence
adds to the value of reality only such value as it
may itself have ii^ momentary experience ; it may
have a doubtful moral effect on the happy dreamer


20 tOETRY AND KELIGIOK

himself.^ i^ut it serves to keep alive the convic-
tion, -whicli a confused experience might obscure,
that perfection is essentially possible; it reminds
us, like music, that there are worlds far removed
from the actual which are yet living and very neiar
to the heart._^ Such is the fruit of abstraction when
abstraction bears any fruit. If the imagination
merely alienates us from reality, without giving

As either a model for its correction or a glimpse
into its structure, it becomes the refuge of poetical
selfishness. Such selfishness is barren, and the
fancy, feeding only on itself, grows leaner every
day. Mysticism is usually an incurable disease.
Facts cannot arouse it, since it never denied them.
Reason cannot convince it, for reason is a human
faculty, assuming a validity which it cannot prove.
The only thing that can kill mysticism is its own
uninterrupted progress, by which it gradually de-
vours every function of the soul and at last, by
destroying its own natural basis, immolates itself

' to its inexorable ideal.

Keed we ask, after all these reflections, where
we should look for that expansion and elevation of
the mind which the mystic seeks so passionately
and so unintelligently ? We can find that expan-
sion, in the first place, in the imagination itself.
That is the true realm of man's infinity, where
novelty may exist without falsity and perpetual
diversity without contradiction. But such exercise


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 21

of imagination leaves the world of knowledge un-
touched. Is there no escape from the prison, as
the mystic thinks it, of science and history which
shall yet not carry us beyond reality? Is there
no truth beyond conventional truth, no life behind
human existence ?

Certainly. Behind the discovered there is the
discoverable, beyond the actual, the possible. Sci-
ence and history are not exhausted. In their deter-
minate directions they are as infinite as fancy in its
indetermination. /The spectacle which science and
history now spread before us is as far beyond the
experience of an ephemeral insect as any Absolute
can be beyond our own; yet we have put that
spectacle together out of just such sensations as
the insect may have — out of this sunlight and this/
buzz a;nd these momentary throbs of existence.
The understanding has indeed supervened, but it
has supervened not to deny the validity of those
sensations, but to combine their messages. We
may stilf continue in the same path, by the indefi-
nite extension of science over a world of experience
and of intelligible truth. Is that prospect insuf-
ficient for our ambition? With a world so full
of stuff before him, I can hardly conceive what
morbid instinct can tempt a man to look else-
where for wider vistas, unless it be unwilling-
ness to endure the sadness and the discipline of
the truth.


22 POETRY AND EELIGION

But can our situation be made better by refusing
to understand it? If we renounced mysticism
altogether and kept imagination in its place, should
we not live in a clearer and safer world, as well as
in a truer ? Nay, are we sure that this gradually
unfolding, intelligible, and real world would not turn
out to be more congenial and beautiful than any
wilful fiction, since it would be the product of a
universal human labour and the scene of the ac-
cumulated sufferings and triumphs of mankind?
When we compare the temple which we call Nature,
built of sights and sounds by memory and under-
standing, with all the wonderful worlds evocable
by the magician's wand, may we not prefer the
humbler and more lasting edifice, not only as a
dwelling, but even as a house of prayer ? It is not
always the loftiest architecture that expresses the
deepest soul; the inmost religion of the Pagan
haunted his hearth as that of the Christian his
catacombs or his hermitage. So philosophy is
more spiritual in her humility and abstinence than
in her short-lived audacities, and she would do well
to inscribe over her gates what, in an ancient
Spanish church, may be seen written near the steep
entrance to a little subterraneous crypt : —

" Wouldst thou pass this lowly door ?
Go, and angels greet thee there;
For by this their sacred stair
To descend is still to soar.


UNDERSTANDING AND IMAGINATION 23

Bid a measured silence keep

What thy thoughts he telling o'er ;

Sink, to rise with wider sweep

To the heayen of thy rest,
r^For he cUmbs the heavens best
VJV^ho would touch the deepest deep."


n

THE HOMEEIC HYMNS

We of this generation look back upon a variety
of religious conceptions and forms of worship, and
a certain iinsatisfied hunger in our own souls
attaches our attention to the spectacle. We ob-
serve how literally fables and mysteries were once
accepted which can have for us now only a thin
and symbolical meaning. Judging other minds '
and other ages by our own, we are tempted to ask
if there ever was any fundamental difference be-
tween religion and poetry. Both seem to consist
in what the imagination adds to science, to history,
and to morals. Men looked attentively on the face
of Nature : their close struggle with her compelled
them to do so : but before making statistics of her
movements they made dramatizations of her life.
The imagination enveloped the material world, as
yet imperfectly studied, and produced the cosmos
of mythology.

Thus the religion of the Greeks was, we might
say, nothing but poetry: nothing but what imagi-
nation added to the rudiments of science, to the
24


THE HOMEEIC HYMNS 25

first impressions of a mind that pored upon
natural phenomena and responded to them with
a quick sense of kinship and comprehension.
The religion of the Hebrews might be called
poetry with as good reason. Their "sense for
conduct" and their vivid interest in their na-
tional destiny carried them past any prosaic record
of events or cautious theory of moral and social
laws. They rose at once into a bold dramatic
conception of their race's covenant with Heaven :
just such a conception as the playwright would
seek out in order to portray with awful accel-
eration the ways of passion and fate, finally, we
have apparently a third kind of poetry in what
has been, the natural religion of the detached
philosophers of all ages. In them the imagina-
tion touches the precepts of morals and the ideals
of reason, attributing to them a larger scope and
more perfect fulfilment than experience can show
them to have. Philosophers ever tend to clothe
the harmonies of their personal thought with
universal validity and to assign to their ideals
a latent omnipotence and an ultimate victory over
the forces of unreason. This which is obviously
a kind of poetry is at the same time the spontane-
ous religion of conscience and thought.

Yet religion in all these cases differs from a I
mere play of the imagination in one important I
respect ; it reacts directly upon life ; it is a factor) '


26 POETRY AND KELIGION

fin conduct. Our religion is the poetry in which
we believe. Mere poetry is an inefEectual shadow
of life ; religion is, if you will, a phantom also, but
a phantom guide. While it tends to its own ex-
pansion, like any growth in the imagination, it
tends also to its application in practice. Such
an aim is foreign to poetry. The inspirations of
religion demand fidelity and courageous response
on our part. Faith brings us not only peace, not
only the contemplation of ideal harmonies, but
labour and the sword. These two tendencies — to
imaginative growth and to practical embodiment
— coexist in every living religion, but they are
not always equally conspicuous. In the formative
ages of Christianity, for instance, while its legends
were being gathered and its dogma fixed, the im-
aginative expansion absorbed men's interest ; later,
when the luxuriant branches of the Church began
to shake off their foliage, and there came a time
of year

" When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,"

the energy of religious thought, released from the
enlargement of doctrine, spent itself upon a more
rigid and watchful application of the residuum of
faith.

In the Pagan religion the element of applica-
bility might seem at first sight to be lacking, so


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 27

that nothing would subsist but a poetic fable. An
unbiassed study of antiquity, however, will soon
dispel that idea. Besides the gods whom we may
plausibly regard as impersonations of natural forces,
there existed others ; the spirits of ancestors, the\
gods of the hearth, and the ideal patrons of war;
and the arts. Even the gods of Nature inspired
reverence and secured a cultus only as they in-
fluenced the well-being of man. The worship of
them had a practical import. The conception of
their nature and presence became a sanction and
an inspiration in the conduct of life. When the
figments of the fancy are wholly divorced from
reality they can have no clearness or consistency ;
they can have no permanence when they are wholly
devoid of utility. The vividness and persistence
of the figures of many of the gods came from the
fact that they were associated with institutions
and practices which controlled the conception of
them and kept it young. The fictions of a poet,
whatever his genius, do not produce illusion be-
^ cause they do not attach themselves to realities
in the world of action. They have character with-
out power and names without local habitations.
The gods in the beginning had both. Their image,
their haunts, the reports of their apparitions and
miracles, gave a nucleus of empirical reality to
the accretions of legend. The poet who came to
sing their praise, to enlarge upon their exploits.


28 POETRY AND RELIGION

and to explain their ctiltus, gave less to the gods
in honour than he received from them in inspira-
tion. All his invention was guided by the genius
of the deity, as represented by the traditions of
his shrine. This poetry, then, even in its most
playful mood, is not mere poetry, but religion. It
t is a poetry in which men believe ; it is a poetry
that beautifies and justifies to their minds the
positive facts of their ancestral worship, their
social unity, and their personal conscience.

These general reflections may help us to approach
the hymns of Homer in a becoming spirit. For in
them we find the extreme of fancy, the approach
to a divorce between the imagination and the faith
of the worshipper. Consequently there is danger
that we may allow ourselves to read these lives of
the gods as the composition of a profane poet. If
we did so we should fail to understand not only
their spirit as a whole but many of their parts, in
which notes are struck now of devotion and affec-
tionate pride, now of gratitude and entreaty. These
may be addressed, it is true, to a being that has
just been described as guilty of some signal vice
or treachery, and the contradiction may well stag-
ger a Puritan critic. But the lusts of life were
once for all in the blood of the Pagan gods, who
were the articulate voices of Nature and of passion.
The half-meant exaggeration of a well-known trait
in the divinity would not render the poets that


THE HOMEEIC HYMNS 29

indulged in it unwelcome to the god ; he could feel
the sure faith and affection of his worshippers even
in their good-humoured laughter at his imaginary
plights and naughtiness. The clown was not ex-
cluded from these rites. His wit also counted as
a service.

The Homeric Hymns, if we may trust the impres-
sion they produce on a modern, are not hymns and
are not Homer's. They are fragments of narrative
in Ionic hexameter recited during the feasts and
fairs at various Greek shrines. They are not melo-j
dies to be chanted with a common voice by the
assemblage during a sacrifice ; they are tales deliv-
ered by the minstrel to the listening audience of
citizens and strangers. They usually have a local
reference. Thus we find under the title of a hymn
to Apollo a song of Delos and one of Delphi.
Deles is a barren rock ; its wealth was due to the
temple that attracted to the place pilgrimages and
embassies, not without rich offerings, from many
Greek cities. Accordingly we hear how Leto or
Latona, when about to become the mother of Apollo,
wandered about the cities and mountains of Greece
and Asia, seeking a birthplace for her son. None
would receive her, but all the islands trembled at
the awful honour of such a nativity, profitable as
the honour might eventually prove, —

" Until at length
The lovely goddess came to Delos' aids


30 POETBY AND RELIGION

And, making question, spake these wingfed words :

' Delos, were it thy will to be the seat

Of my young son Apollo, brightest god,

And build him a rich fane, no other power

Should ever touch thee or work ill upon thee.

I tell thee not thou shalt be rich in kine

Or in fair flocks, much fruit, or myriad flowers ;

But when Apollo of the far-felt dart

Hath here his shrine, all men will gather here

Bringing thee hecatombs. . . . And though thy soil be poor,

The gods shall make thee strong against thy foes.' "

The spirit of the island is naturally not averse
to so favourable a proposition but, like some too
humble maiden wooed by a great prince, has some
misgivings lest this promise of unexpected good
fortune should veil the approach of some worse
calamity. "W hen th e god is born into the light
of day," she says, "will he not despise "me, seeing
[ha^ haxieiL I am, andsmk Sieln the^eiT

" That ever will
Oppress my heart with many a watery hill ?
And therefore let him choose some other land.
Where he shall please, to build at his command
Temple and grove set thick with many a tree.
For wretched polypuses breed in me,
Retiring chambers, and black sea-calves den
In my poor soil, for penury of men." >■

Leto reassures the island, however, and swears
to build a great temple there which her son will
haunt perpetually, preferring it to all his other

1 Chapman's version.


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 31

shrines. Delos consents, and Apollo is born amid
the ministrations of all the goddesses except Hera,
"wrho sits indignant and revengeful in the solitudes
of Olympus. The child is bathed in the stream
and delicately swaddled ; but after tasting the nec-
tar and ambrosia -which one of the nymphs is quick
to offer him, he bursts his bands, calls for his
bow and his lyre, and flies upward into the sky
announcing that he will henceforth declare the will
of Zeus to mortals. Thereupon —

"All the immortals stood
In deep amaze. . . .
AH Delos, looking on him, all with gold
Was loaded straight, and joy'd to be extoll'd.
. . . For so she flourished, as a hill that stood
Crown'd with the flower of an abundant wood." i

This legend, with all that accompanies it con-
cerning the glories of Delos and its gods, and the
pilgrimages and games that enlivened the island,
was well-conceived to give form and justification to
the cultus of the temple, and to delight the vota-
ries whom custom or vague instincts of piety had
gathered there. The sacred poet, in another part
of this hymn, does the same service to the even
greater sanctuary of Delphi. He tells us how
Apollo wandered over many lands and waters, and
he stops lovingly to recall the names of the various
spots that claimed the honour of having at some
1 Chapman's version.


32 POETET AND KBLIGION

time been visited by the god. The minstrels, ■wan-
derers themselves, loved to celebrate in this way
the shores they had seen or heard of, and to fill
at the same time their listener's minds with the
spell of sonorous names, the sense of space and
the thrill of mystery. In his journeys Apollo,
the hymn tells us, finally came to the dell and
fountain of Delphusa on the skirts of Parnassus.
The nymph of the spot, fearing the encroachments
of so much more powerful a deity, deceived him
and persuaded him to plant his temple on another
site, where Parnassus fronts the west, and the
overhanging rocks form a cavern. There Apollo
established his temple for the succour and enlight-
enment of mankind, while Trophonius and Aga-
medes, sons of Erginus, men dear to the immortal
gods, built the approaches of stone.

Thus the divine origin of the temple is vindi-
cated, the structure described, and the human ar-
chitects honoured, whose descendants, very likely,
were present to hear their ancestors' praise. But
here a puzzling fact challenges the attention and
stimulates the fancy of the poet: Apollo was a
Dorian deity, yet his chief shrine was here upon
Phocian ground. Perhaps some traditions re-
mained to suggest an explanation of the anomaly ;
at any rate the poet is not at a loss for an account
of the matter. The temple being established,
Apollo bethought himself what race of priests he


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 83

should make its ministers: at least, such is the
naiive account in the poem, which expects us to
forget that temples do not arise in the absence of
predetermined servants and worshippers. While
pondering this question, however, Apollo cast his
eyes on the sea where it chanced that a swift
ship, manned by many and excellent Cretans, was
merrily sailing: whereupon the god, taking the
form of a huge dolphin, leapt into the ship, to the
infinite surprise and bewilderment of those worthy
merchants, who, as innocent as the fishers of the
Galilsean Lake of the religious destiny that awaited
them, were thinking only of the pecuniary profits
of their voyage. The presence of the god be-
numbed their movements, and they stood silent
while the ship sailed before the wind. And the
blast, veering at this place with the changed con-
figuration of the coast, blew them irresistibly to
the very foot of Parnassus, to the little haven of
Crissa. There Apollo appeared to them once
more, this time running down to the beach to
meet them in the form of

" A stout and lusty fellow,
His mighty shoulders cavered with his mane ;
Who sped these words upon the wings of sound :
' Strangers, who are ye ? and whence sail ye hither
The watery ways ? Come ye to traffic justly
Or recklessly like pirates of the deep
Rove ye, adventuring your souls, to bring
Evil on strangers ? Why thus sit ye grieving,


34 POETRY AND EELIGION

Nor leap on land, nor strike the mast and lay it
In your black ship ? Por so should traders do
When, sated with the labour of the sea,
They quit their painted galley for the shore,
And presently the thought of needful food
Comes gladsomely upon them.' So he spake,
Putting new courage in their breasts. To whom
The Cretan captain in his turn replied :
' Since thou art nothing like to things of earth
In form or stature, but most like the gods
That ever live, Hail, and thrice hail, O Stranger,
And may the gods pour blessings on thy head.
Now tell me truly, for I need to know.
What land is this, what people, from what race
Descended ? As for us, over the deep
Broad sea, we sought another haven, Pylos,
Sailing from Crete, for thence we boast to spring ;
But now our ship is cast upon this shore.
For some god steered our course against our will.'
Then the far-darter spoke and answered them.
' Priends, in well-wooded Cnossus hitherto
Ye have had homes, but ye shall not again
Return to your good native town, to find
Each his fair house and well-belov6d wife.
But here shall ye possess my temple, rich
And greatly honoured by the tribes of men.
Por I am son to Zeus. Apollo is
My sacred name. 'Twas I that led you hither
Over the mighty bosom of the deep.
Intending you no ill ; for ye shall here
Possess a temple sacred to me, rich,
And greatly honoured of all mortal men.
The counsels of the deathless gods shall be
Revealed to you, and by their will your days
Shall pass in honour and in peace for ever.
Come then and, as I bid, make haste to do.
. . . Build by the sea an altar ; kindle flame ;


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 35

. Sprinkle white barley grains thereon, and pray,
Standing about the altar. And as first
Ye saw me leap into your swift black bark
In likeness of a dolphin, so henceforth
Worship me by the name Delphinius,
And Delphian ever be my far-seen shrine.' "

Thus the establishment of the Dorian god in
Phocis is explained, and the wealth and dignity
of his temple are justified by prophecy and by
divine intention. For Apollo is not satisfied with
repeatedly describing the future temple, by an in-
cidental epithet, as opulent; that hint would not
have been enough for the simplicity of those mer-
chant sailors, new as they were to the mysteries of
priestcraft. It was necessary for Apollo to allay
their fears of poverty by a more explicit assurance
that it will be easy for them to live by the altar.
And what is more, Hermes and all the thieves he
inspires will respect the shrine; its treasures,
although unprotected by walls, shall be safe for-
ever.

These were truly, as we see, the hymns of ^J
levitical patriotism. With Homeric breadth and'
candour they dilated on the miracles, privileges,
and immunities of the sacred places and their ser-
vitors, and they thus kept alive in successive gen-
erations an awe mingled with familiar interest
toward divine persons and things which is char-
acteristic of that more primitive age. Gods and


86 POETKY AND KBLIGION

men were then nearer together, and both yielded
more frankly to the tendency, inherent in their
nature, to resemble one another.

The same quality is found in another fragment,
the most beautiful and the most familiar of all.
This is the hymn to Demeter in which two stories
are woven together, one telling of the rape of Per-
sephone, and the other of the reception of Demeter,
disguised in her sorrow, into the household of
Celeus, where she becomes the nurse of his infant
son Demophoon. Both stories belong to the relig-
ion of Eleusis, where this version of them seems
intended to be sung. The place was sacred to
Demeter and Persephone and its mysteries dealt
particularly with the passage of souls to the nether
world and with their habitation there. The pa-
thetic beauty of the first fable — in which we can
hardly abstain from seeing some symbolical mean-
iag — expresses for us something of the mystic
exaltation of the local rites ; while the other tale
of Celeus, his wife, his daughters, and his son,
whom his nurse, the disguised goddess, almost suc-
ceeds in endowing with immortality, celebrates the
ancient divine af&nities of the chiefs of the Eleu-
sinian state.

The first story is too familiar to need recount-
ing; who has not heard of the gentle Persephone
gathering flowers in the meadow and suddenly
swallowed by the yawning earth and carried away


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 37

to Hades, the god of the nether world, to share
his sombre but sublime dominion over the shades ?
— a dignity of which she is not insensible, much
as she grieves at the separation from her beloved
mother ; and how Demeter in turn is disconsolate
and (in her wrath and despair at the indiffer-
ence of the gods) conceals her divinity, refuses
the fruits of the earth, and wanders about in the
guise of an old woman, nursing her grief, until
at last Zeus sends his messenger to Hades to
effect a compromise ; and Persephone, after eating
the graiir of pomegranate that obliges her to return
yearly to her husband, is allowed to come back to
the upper world to dwell for two-thirds of the year
in her mother's company.

The underlying allegory is here very interestingJ
We observe how the genius of the Greek religionJ
while too anthropomorphic to retain any cleai
consciousness of the cosmic processes that Wer^
symbolized by its deities and their adventures, wa
anthropomorphic also in a moral way, and tended
to turn the personages which it ceased to regard
as symbols of natural forces into types of human
experience. So the parable of the seed that muslj
die if it is to rise again and live an immortal, if
interrupted, life in successive generations, gives 1
way in the tale of Demeter and Persephone, to
a prototype of human affection. The devotee, no
longer reminded by his religion of any cosmic laws,


38 POETRY AND RELIGION

was not reduced to a mere superstition, — to a
fable and a belief in the ef&cacy of external rites,
— he was encouraged to regard the mystery as the
divine counterpart of his own experience. His
religion in forgetting to be natural had succeeded
in becoming moral; the gods were now models of
human endurance and success ; their histories

\offered sublime consolations to mortal destiny.

jFancy had turned the aspects of Nature into per-

/sons; but devotion^ directed upon these imaginary
persons, turned them into human ideals and into

I patron saints, thereby relating them again to life
and saving them from insignificance.

A further illustration of the latter transforma-
tion may be found in the second story contained in
our hymn. Demeter, weary of her wanderings and
sick at heart, has come to sit down beside a well,
near the house of Celeus. His four young daugh-
ters, dancing and laughing, come to fetch water in
their golden jars, —

" As hinds or heifers gambol in the fields
When Spring is young."

They speak kindly to the goddess, who asks them
for employment. " And for me," she says, —

" And for me, damsels, harbour pitiful
And favouring thoughts, dear children, that I come
To some good man's or woman's house, to ply
My task in willing service of such sort


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 39

As agfed women use. A tender child

I could nurse well and safely in my arms,

And tend the house, and spread the master's couch

Kecessed in the fair chamber, or could teach

The maids their handicraft."

The offer is gladly accepted, for Celeus himself
has an infant son, Demophoon, the hope of his race.
The aged woman enters the dwelling, making in her
long-robed grief a wonderful contrast to the four,
sportive girls : —

" Who lifting up their ample kirtle-folds
Sped down the waggon -furrowed way, and shook
Their curls about their shoulders — yellow gold
Like crocuses in bloom."

Once within the house, which she awes with her
uncomprehended presence, the goddess sits ab-
sorbed in grief, until she is compelled to smile for
a moment at the jests of the quick-witted maid
lambe, and consents to take in lieu of the wine that
is offered her, a beverage of beaten barley, water,
and herbs. These details are of course introduced
to justify the ritual of Eleusis, in which the clown
and the barley-water played a traditional part.

Thus Demeter becomes nurse to Demophoon, but
she has ideas of her duties differing from the com-
mon, and worthy of her unusual qualifications. She
neither suckles nor feeds the infant but anoints him
with ambrosia and lays him at night to sleep on the
embers of the hearth. This his watchful mother


40 POETHY AND EELIGION

discovers with not unnatural alarm ; when the god-
dess reveals herself and departs, foiled in her desire
to make her nursling immortal.

The spirit that animates this fable is not that
poetic frivolity which we are accustomed to asso-
ciate with Paganism. Here we find an immortal
in profoundest grief and mortals entertaining an
angel unawares ; we are told of supernatural food,
and of a burning fire that might make this mortal
put on immortality did not the generous but igno-
rant impulses of the natural man break in upon that
providential purpose and prevent its consummation.
Eleusis was the natural home for such a myth, and
we may well believe that those initiated into the
mysteries there were taught to dwell on its higher
interpretation.

But there are other hymns in a lighter vein in
which the play of fancy is not guided by any moral
intuition. The hymn to Hermes is one perpetual
ebullition of irresponsible humour.

Hermes is the child of Maia, a nymph of Cyllene
whose cave Zeus has surreptitiously visited while
the white-armed Juno — for, unsympathetic prude
as this goddess may be, she must still be beautiful
—slept soundly in Olympus. The child is hardly
born when he catches a tortoise, kills it, scoops out
the shell, and makes a lute -of it, upon which he
begins to play delicious music. Kot satisfied with
that feat, however, he escapes from his cradle, and


THE HOMERIC HYMNS 41

drives from their pasture the kine that Apollo has
left feeding there. Accused afterward of this mis-
chief, he defends himself after the following fash-
ion, while he lies in his crib, holding his new-made
lyre lightly in his hand under the bedclothes. I
quote Shelley's version : —

" ' An ox-stealer should be both tall and strong

And I am but a little new-born thing
Who yet, at least, can think of nothing wrong.

My business is to suck, and sleep, and fling
The cradle-clothes about me all day long.

Or, half-asleep, hear my sweet mother sing
And to be washed in water clean and warm
And hushed and kissed and kept secure from harm.' "

" Sudden he changed his plan, and with strange skill
Subdued the strong Latonian, by the might

Of winning music, to his mightier will.
His left hand held the lyre, and in his right

The plectrum struck the chords : unconquerable
Up from beneath his hand in circling flight

The gathering music rose — and sweet as Love

The penetrating notes did live and move

" Within the heart of great Apollo. He

Listened with all his soul, and laughed for pleasure.
Close to his side stood harping fearlessly

The unabashed boy, and to the measure
Of the sweet lyre there followed loud and free

His joyous voice : for he unlocked the treasure
Of his deep song, illustrating the birth
Of the bright Gods, and the dark desert Earth ;

" And how to the Immortals every one
A portion was assigned of all that Is.


42 POETRY AND RELIGION

But chief Mnemosyne did Maia's son
Clothe in the light of his loud melodies.

And, as each god was horn or had hegun,
He in their order due and fit degrees

Sung of his birth and being — and did move

Apollo to unutterable love,"

In fact, after the most enthusiastic encomiums
on the young god's art, and on the power of music
in general, Apollo offers the child his protection
and friendship : —

"Now, since thou hast, although so very small.
Science of arts so glorious, thus I swear, —

And let this cornel javelin, keen and tall,
Witness between us what I promise here, —

That I will lead thee to the Olympian hall.
Honoured and mighty, with thy mother dear.

And many glorious gifts in joy will give thee

And even at the end will ne'er deceive thee."

Hermes is not insensible to this offer and its ad-
vantages ; he accepts it with good grace and many
compliments, nor does he wish to remain behind
in the exchange of courtesies and benefits : he ad-
dresses Apollo thus : —

" Thou canst seek out and compass all that wit

Can find or teach. Yet, since thou wilt, oonfe, take

The lyre — be mine the glory giving it —
Strike the sweet chords, and sing aloud, and wake

The joyous pleasure out of many a fit
Of trancfed sound — and with fleet fingers make

Thy liquid-voiofed comrade speak with thee, —

It can talk measured music eloquently.


THE HOMEEIC HYMNS 43

" Then bear it boldly to the revel loud,

Love-wakening dance, or feast of solemn state,

A joy by night or day : for those endowed
With art and wisdom who interrogate

It teaches, babbling in delightful mood
All things which make the spirit most elate.

Soothing the mind with sweet familiar play,

Chasing the heavy shadows of dismay.

" To those that are unskilled in its sweet tongue,
Though they should question most impetuously

Its hidden soul, it gossips something wrong —
Some senseless and impertinent reply.

But thou, who art as wise as thou art strong.
Canst compass all that thou desirest. I

Present thee with this music-flowing shell.

Knowing thou canst interrogate it well. . ."

Apollo is not slow to learn the new art with
which he is ever after to delight both gods and
men; but he is not at first quite at ease in his
mind, fearing that Hermes wUl not only recapture
the lyre but steal his friend's bow and arrows into
the bargain. Hermes, however, swears by all that
is holy never to do so, and the friendship of the
two artful gods is sealed for ever. The minstrel
does not forget, at this point, to remind his hearers,
among whom we may imagine not a few profes-
sional followers of Hermes to have been mixed,
that the robber's honour is pledged by his divine
patron to respect the treasures of Apollo's shrines.
Let not the votary think, he adds, that Apollo's
oracles are equally useful to good and to bad men :


44 POETEY AND EELIGION

these mysteries are truly efficacious only for the
pious and orthodox who follow the established
traditions of the temple and honour its servants.
Apollo says : —

" He who comes consigned
By voice and wings of perfect augury
To my great shrine shall find avail in me :

" Him I will not deceive, but will assist.

But he who comes relying on such birds
As chatter vainly, who would strain and twist

The purpose of the gods with idle words,
And deems their knowledge light, he shall have missed

His road — whilst I among my other hoards
His gifts deposit. ..."

The wildest fairy-story thus leads easily to a
little drama not without its human charm and moral
inspiration; while the legend is attached to the
cultus, and the cultus is intertwined with the prac-
tice and sanctions of daily life. Even here, in its
most playfvil mood, therefore, this mythological
poetry retains the spirit and function of religion.
Even here sacerdotal interests are not forgotten.
Delphi shall be safe ; the lyre is Apollo's by right
although it be Hermes' by invention. A certain
amiable harmony is after all drawn from the riot
of foolishness. All is sweet and unmalicious and
lovable enough, and the patronage of both the
friendly gods, the enthusiast and the wag, may be
invoked with confidence and benefit.

Not less remarkable, although for other reasons,


THE HOMEEIC HYMNS 45

is the hymn to Aphrodite. Here we find a more
human fable and a more serious tone: while the
poem, if we choose to consider it in its allegorical
meaning, touches one of the deepest convictions
of the Greek conscience. All the gods save three
— Athena, Artemis, and Hestia, — are subject to
the power of Aphrodite, Zeus at least as much
as the rest. In revenge for this subjection, Zeus
determines to make Aphrodite feel the passion
which she boasts to be able to inspire in others.
The fair shepherd Anchises feeds his flocks upon
Mount Ida, and with him Aphrodite is made to
fall in love. She presents herself to him in a
human disguise, and meets his advances with a
long account of her birth and parentage, and begs
him to take her back to her parents, and having
asked for her hand and fulfilled all customary
formalities, to lead her away as his lawful wife.
The passion which at the same time, however, she
is careful to breathe into him cannot brook so long
a delay : and she yields to his impatience. When
about to leave him she awakes him from his sleep,
turns upon him the full glance of her divinity, and
reveals her name and his destiny. She will bear
him a son, ^Eneas, who will be one of the greatest
princes and heroes of Troy; but he himself will
be stricken with feebleness and a premature old
age, in punishment for the involuntary sacrilege
which he has committed.


46 POETBY AND RELIGION

The description of the disguised goddess, with
its Homeric pomp and elaborate propriety, is a
noble and masterly one, underlined, as it were,
with a certain satirical or dramatic intention; we
have the directness of a Nausicaa, with a more
luxurious and passionate beauty. The revelation
of the goddess is wonderfully made, with that
parallel movement of natural causes and divine
workings which is so often to be admired in
Homer. The divinity of the visitant appears only
at the moment of her flight, when she becomes a
consecration and an unattainable memory. The
sight of deity leaves the eyes dull, like those of
the Platonic prisoners returning from the sunlight
of truth into the den of appearance. Nay more,
a communion with the divinity, closer than is
consonant with human frailty, leaves the seer im-
potent and a burden upon the world; but this
personal tragedy is not without its noble fruits to
posterity. Anchises suffers, but his son ^neas,
the issue of that divine though punishable union,
lives to bear, not only the aged Anchises himself,
but the gods of Ilium, out of the ruins of Troy.

Such analogies carry us, no doubt, far beyond
the intention of the hymn or of the exoteric re-
ligion to which it ministers. The story-telle'r's
delight in his story is the obvious motive of such
compositions, even when they reflect indirectly
the awe in which the divine impersonations of


THE HOMBEIO HYMNS 47

natural forces were held by the popular religion.
All that we may fairly imagine to have been in
the mind of the pious singer is the sense that

I something divine comes down among us in the
crises of our existence, and that this visitation is
fraught with immense although vague possibilities
of both good and evil. The gods sometimes ap-
pear, and when they do they bring us a foretaste
of that sublime victory of mind over matter which
we may never gain in experience but which may

/constantly be gained in thought. When natural
phenomena are conceived as the manifestation of
divine life, human life itself, by sympathy with
that ideal projection of itself, enlarges its custom-
ary bounds, until it seems capable of becoming the
life of the universe. A god is a conceived victory "
of mind over Nature. A visible god is the con-
sciousness of such a victory momentarily attained^
The vision soon vanishes, the sense of omnipotence
is soon dispelled by recurring conflicts with hostile
forces ; but the momentary illusion of that realized
good has left us with the perennial knowledge of
good as an ideal. Therein lies the essence and the
function of religion.

That such a function was fulfilled by this
Homeric legend, with all its love of myth and
lust of visible beauty, is witnessed by another short
hymn, which we may' quote almost entire by way
of conclusion. It is addressed to Castor and Poly-


48 POETEY AND RELIGION

deuces, patrons of sailors no less than of horsemen
and boxers. It is impossible to read it without
feeling that the poet, however entangled he may-
have been in superstition and fable, grasped that
high essence of religion which makes religion
rational. He felt the power of contemplation
to master the contradictions of life and to over-
spread experience, sublime but impalpable, like a
rainbow oYer retreating storms : —

' Ye wild-eyed Muses, sing the Twins of Jove
. . . Mild Pollux, void of blame,
And steed-subduing Castor, beirs of fame.
These are the powers who earth-horn mortals save
And ships, whose flight is swift along the wave.
When wintry tempests o'er the savage sea
Are raging, and the sailors tremblingly
Call on the Twins of Jove with prayer and vow,
Gathered in fear upon the lofty prow,
And sacrifice with snow-white lambs — the wind
And the huge billow bursting close behind
Even then beneath the weltering waters bear
The staggering ship, — they suddenly appear,
On yellow wings rushing athwart the sky.
And lull the blasts in mute tranquillity
And strew the waves on the white ocean's bed,
Fair omen of the voyage ; from toil and dread
The sailors rest, rejoicing in the sight.
And plough the quiet sea In safe delight." i

> Shelley's translation.


Ill


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM

Greek religion seems to have contained three
factors of unequal prominence, but ultimately of
about equal importance and longevity. Most obvi-
ous, especially if we begin our study with Homer,
is the mythology which presents us with a multi-
tude of gods, male and female, often related by
blood, and having social and even hostile relations
with one another. If we examine their characters,
attributes, and fables, we readily perceive th at most
of them are imperso nations of natural forc es.^
Some, however, figure prominently as patrons of
special arts or special places, as Apollo of prophecy
and music, of Delos and Delphi; and yet others
seem to be wholly personifications of human powers,
as Athena of prudence and of martial and indus-
trial arts.

Underlying this mythology is another element,
probably more ancient, the worship of ancestors,
local divinities, and domestic gods. With these
were naturally connected various ritual observ-
ances, and especially the noblest and most impor-
B 49


50 POETRY AND KELIGION

tant of rites, the sacrifice. Such practices may be
supposed to have belonged originally to the tribal
religion, and to have passed by analogy to the great
natural gods, when these had been once created by
the poet and perhaps identified with the older
genius of that spot where their efficacy was first
signally manifested.

Finally, as a third element, we find the religion

of the priests, soothsayers, and magicians, as well as

the rites of Orpheus, Bacchus, and the Great

Goddesses at Eleusis. These forms of worship

showed Oriental affinities and partook of a kind of

■j nocturnal horror and mystical enthusiasm. They

1 were the Greek representatives of the religion of

[revelation and of sacraments, and bore much the

)same relation to the supernaturalistic elements in

Christianity as does the idea of a shade in Hades

to the idea of a soul in heaven. The fundamental

intuitions were the same, but in Pagan times they

remained vague, doubtful, and incoherent.

These three forms of religion lay together in
men's minds and habits throughout the formative
period of Greek literature. There was an occar
sional rivalry among them, but the tolerance char-
acteristic of Paganism could reconcile their claims
without much difficulty, and admit them all to
a share of honour. The history of the three
elements, however, differs essentially, as might be
expeeted after a consideration of their respective


THE DISSOLtJTION 01* PAGANISM 51

natures. The antique family religion lived by
inertia; it was obeyed without being justified
theoretically, and remained strong by its very
obscurity. Many customs which a man may have
occasion to conform to only once or twice in his
life endure for ages and survive the ebb and flow
of intellectual and political systems. Ji Tursery: tales ,
trivial superstitions, customs connected with wed-
dings or funerals, or with certain days of the year,
have a strange and irrational persistence ; they
surprise us by emerging into prominence after
centuries of a sort of subterraneous existence.
Thus the deification of Koman emperors was not
the sacrilegious innovation which it might appear
to be, but on the contrary a restoration of the spirit
of the most ancient faith, a revival called to the
aid of a new polity by the mingled statecraft and
superstition of the times. Thus, too, the Christian
care in the burial of the dead (contrary as it is to
the theoretical spiritualism of Christianity), the
feast of All Souls, and the prayers for the departed
are evidences of the same latent human religion
underlying the cosmic flights and public contro-
versies of theology.

The mysteries, on the other hand, had essentially
a spirit of self -consciousness and propaganda. They
came as revelations or as reforms ; they pretended
to disclose secrets handed down from remote
antiquity, from the primeval revelation of God to


52 POBTEY AND RELIGION

man, or truths recovered by the inspiration of
later prophets superuaturally illumined. The
history of these movements is, accordingly, the
history of sects. They never constituted the nor-
mal and common religion of the people, and never
impressed their spirit on the national literature,
^schylus or Plato may have borrowed something
from them ; but they did so most when they
assumed an attitude of open opposition to the
exoteric religion of their country. Thus when
Plato makes his Socrates propound a Pythagorean
or Orphic doctrine of transmigration, he represents
the very members of the Socratic circle as surprised,
or as incredulous; and when they are finally
silenced by the proofs advanced, it is only because
they are overawed by the dogmatic unction of a
dying sage, who stimulates their imagination with
poetic myths, and confuses their intellect with
verbal equivocations. When the mist of the argu-
ment has cleared away, like incense after the
sacrifice, there remains indeed a profound emotion,
a catharsis produced by the sublimity and pathos,
so artfully mingled, of both scene and argument;
but the bare doctrine enunciated, true and profound
as it is in its deeper meaning, is quite incapable of
appealing to an undisciplined mind, and could not
pass for a religious dogma except for the priestly
robes in which it is dressed. Thus the function of
the mysteries of which Plato's Phaedo may be


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 63

regarded as a philosophic echo, was to be the
vehicle of revolutionary tendencies, tendencies
which a philosopher might privately shape in one
way and a superstitious man in another. Both
could find in the spell of an occult ceremonial and
in the prophecies of an oracular creed an escape
from the limitations of the official religion. Mysti-
cism and the claim to illumination found in these
mysteries their natural expression. The many
fundamental questions left unanswered and unasked
by Paganism, the many potentialities of religious
emotion left unexercised by it, were thus allowed
to appear.

Independently of these two comparatively silent '
streams of religious life, we may trace the current of
polytheistic theology, — a current which naturally
left a plainer trace in literature, since it contained
all there might be in Greece of speculation and
controversy in religious matters. The moral sanc-
tions of religion were embodied in the domestic
and civic worship ; the pious imagination remained
thereby all the freer to follow the analogies of
physical objects in its mythology. Apollo was the
father of Asclepius and the leader of the Muses;
his ideal dignity and beneficence were vouched for
by those attributes. He could well afford, there-
fore, as the Sun-god, to decimate the Greek army
with the same fatal shafts with which he slew the
Python. The moral function of the god was cer-


54 POBTKT AND RELIGION

tain on other grounds, being enshrined in the local
religions of the people. The poet might follow
without scruple the suggestions of experience ; he
might attribute to the god the various activities,
beneficent and maleficent, observable in the ele-
ment over which he presided. This is a liberty
taken even in the most moralistic religions. In the
Gospels, for instance, we sometimes find the king-
dom of heaven illustrated by principles drawn from
observation of this world rather than from an ideal
conception of justice ; as when we hear that to him
that hath shall be given and from him that hath
not shall be taken away even that which he hath.
Such characterizations appeal to our sense of fact.
They remind us that the God we are seeking is
present and active, that he is the living God ; they
are doubtless necessary if we are to keep religion
from passing into a mere idealism and God into
the vanishing point of our thought and endeavour.
For we naturally seek to express his awful actu-
ality, his unchallengeable power, no less than his
holiness and beauty. This seng p ff ^-^'^ ^""i exist-
e nce of religious obje cts can o nly be maintaine d by
i dentifying them with objects of actual experienc e.
with the forces of Nature , or the passions or con-
science of man, or (if it must come to that) with
written laws or visible images.

An instinctive recognition of this necessity kept
Greek mythology ever ready to return to Nature to


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 55

gather its materials afresh from a docile, if poetical,
observation of reality. The character of the god
must be studied in the manifestations of his chosen
element ; otherwise men might forget that, although
the form of the god was poetical, his essence was
a positive reality of the most practical kind. Zeus
must still toss his ambrosial locks with a certain
irritation, in order that we may recognize him in
the rumblings of the sky ; he must still be capable
of wrath and deliberate malice, that his awful hand
may be thought to have hurled the thunderbolt.
Cronos must not be forbidden to devour his chil-
dren, else we should no longer reverence in him the
inexorable might of time. Mythology was quite]
right in not shrinking from such poetic audaci-j
ties. They were its chief title to legitimacy, the!
proof, amid the embroideries of fancy which ovevj
lay the divine idea, that the god was not an invenl^n
tion, but a fact. He had been found, he was known.
His character, like all character, was merely a prin-
ciple which reflection discovered in his observed!
conduCtT The reality, then, of the mythological!
gods was initially unquestionable; and the morej
faithful the study of Nature by which the poet wasl
inspired, the more authority did his prophetic vision]
retain. j

, But the intense imaginative vitality that must
have preceded Homer and Hesiod, the prodigious
gift of sympathetic observation to which we owe


56 POETRY AND RELIGION

Zeus and Pan and all their endless retinue, was too
glorious to last. No later interpreter could find so
much meaning in his text. Mythology was accord-
ingly placed in a sad dilemma, with either horn
fatal to its life ; it must either be impoverished to
remain sincere, or become artificial to remain ade-
quate. The history of Greek religion, on its specu-
lative side, is nothing but the story of this double
decadence. Reflection upon the process of Nature
and desire for pHxros^hic truth led inevitably to
a blank pantheism and to the reduction of positive
tradi.tions to moral allegories. This was the direc-
tion taken by the Stoic theology. On the other
hand, adherence to the traditional gods, with no
further vivifying reference to their natm-al func-
tions in the world, couM lead only to arbitrary
fictions, which, having no foothold or justification
in reality, were incapable of withstanding the first
sceptical attack. What an age of imagination had
intuited as truth, an age of reflection could preserve
only as fable ; and as fable, accordingly, the religion
of the ancients survived throughout the Christian
ages. It remains still the mother-tongue of the
imagination' and, in spite of all revolutions and
.admixtures, is the classic language of art and
poetry, which no other means of expression has
superseded. ^

Beginning, however, with that zealous Protestant,
the old Xenophanes, the austerer minds, moralists,


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 57

naturalists, and wits, united in decrying the fanci-
ful polytheism of the poets. This criticism was in
one sense unjust; it did not consider the original
justification of mythology in human nature and in
the external facts. It was, like all heresy or partial
scepticism, in a sense superficial and unphilosophi-
cal. It was far from conceiving that its own tenets
and assumptions were as groundless, without being
as natural or adequate, as the system it attacked.
To a person sufficiently removed by time or by
philosophy from the controversies of sects, ortho-
doxy must always appear right and heresy wrong ;
for he sees in orthodoxy the product of the creative
mind, of faith and constructive logic, but in heresy
only the rebellion of some partial interest or partial
insight against the corollaries of a formative prin-
ciple imperfectly grasped and obeyed with hesita-
tion. At a distance, the criticism that disintegrates
any great product of art or mind must always appear
short-sighted and unamiable. Socrates, invoking
the local deities of brooks and meadows, or paying
the debt of a cock to Asclepius (in thanksgiving,
it is said, for a happy death), is more reasonable
and noble to our mind than are the hard denials of
Xenophanes or Theodorus. But in their day the
revolt of the sceptics had its relative justification.
The imagination had dried up, and what had once j
been a natural interpretation of facts now seemed an I
artificial addition to them. An elaborate and irrel-'


68 POETRY AND KBLIGION

evant world of fiction seemed to have been im-
posed on human credulity. Mythology was, in
fact, already largely irrelevant ; the experience
poetized by it had been forgotten and the symbol,
in its insignificance, could not be honestly or use-
fully retained.

The Greek philosophers, as a rule, proceeded
cautiously in these matters. They passed myth-
ology by with a conventional reverence and looked
elsewhere for the true object of their personal
I religion. But the old mythological impulse was
not yet spent; it showed itself still active in all
the early philosophers who gave the godhead new
incarnations congruous with the character of their
respective physical systems. To the .Socratic
School the natural world was no longer the sphere
in which divinity was to be found. They looked
for the divine rather in moral and intelligible
ideas. But not only did they carry the mytho-
logical instinct with them into that new field, they
also retained it in the field of Nature, whenever
they still regarded Nature as real. Thus Aristotle,
while he rejected the anthropomorphism of the
popular faith, attributing it to political exigencies,
turned the forty-nine spheres, of which he con-
jectured that the heaven might be composed, into
a pantheon of forty-nine divinities. Every pri-
mary movement, he argued, must be the expression
of an eternal essence by which the movement is


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 59

justified, as the movement of the mind in thinking
or loving is justified by the truth or excellence of
the object of thought or of love. Without such a
worthy object, these spiritual activities would be
irrational; and no less irrational would be the
motion of the spheres, were each not obedient to
the influence of some sacred and immutable prin-
ciple. Forty-nine gods accordingly exist; but no
more. For, since the essence of each is to be the
governing ideal of a motion, the number of motions
in the sky determines the number of divine first
principles. The gods, we see, are still the souls
of Nature; a soul without a body would be a
principle without an application ; there can be
no gods, then, without a phenomenal function,
no gods that do not appear in the operations of
Nature. This astronomic mythology was surely
not less poetical than that of Homer, even if, by
virtue of a certain cold and abstract purity, not
unworthy of the stars of which it spoke, it was
more difficult and sublime. We may observe in
it a last application of the ancient mythological
method by which the phenomena of Nature became
evidence of the existence and character of the
gods.

But the celestial deities of Aristotle, and the
minor creative gods of Plato that correspond to
them, retaiaed too much poetic individuality for the
still poorer imagination of later times. The most \


60 POETRY AND RELIGIOlSr

religious of sects during the classical decadence was
that of the Stoics ; in them the spirit of conformity,
which is a chief part even of the religions of hope,
constituted by its exclusive cultivation a religion
\ of despair. The name of Zeus, and an equally
equivocal use of the word "reason" to designate
the regularity of Nature, served to disguise the
alien brutality of the power or law to which all
the gods had been reduced. Against the back-
ground of a materialistic pantheism, in which Stoic
speculation culminated, two positive interests stood
out: one, the resolute and truly human courage
with which the Stoic faced the reality as he con-
ceived it, and kept his dignity and his conscience
pure although heaven might fall ; the other, the
efforts he made, in his need for religion, to re-
juvenate and reinterpret the pagan forms. The
fables he turned into ethical allegories, the oracles,
auspices, and other superstitious rites, he trans-
formed into quasi-scientific ways of reading the
book of Nature and forecasting events.

This possibility of prophecy constituted the Stoic
" providence " which the sentimentality of modern
apologists has been glad to confuse with the benevo-
lent Providence of Christian dogma, a Providence
making for the salvation of men. The Stoic provi-
dence excluded that essential element of benevo-
lence; it was merely the fact that Nature was
prophetic of her own future, that her parts, both


THE DISSOLUTION OP PAGANISM 61

in space and in time, were magically composed into
one living system. Mythology thus ended with
the conception of a single god whose body was the
whole physical universe, whose fable was all his-
tory, and whose character was the principle of the
universal natural order. No attempt was made by
the ancient Stoics to make this divinity better or
more amiable than the evidence of experience
showed it to be ; the self-centred, self-sufficient
Stoic morality, the recourse to suicide, and the
equality in happiness and dignity between the wise
man and Zeus, all prove quite conclusively that
nothing more was asked or expected of Nature
than what she chose to give ; to be virtuous was in
man's power, and nothing else was a good to man.
The universe could neither benefit nor injure him ;
and thus we see that, despite a reverential tone and
an occasional reminiscence of the thunderbolts of
Zeus, the Stoic's conscience knew how to scorn the
moral nothingness of that blank deity to which his
metaphysics had reduced the genial company of the
gods.

Thus the reality which the natiiralistic gods had
borrowed from the elements proved to be a danger-
ous prerogative; being real and manifest, these gods
had to be conceived according to our experience of
their operation, so that with every advance in sci-
entific observation theology had to be revised, and
something had to be subtracted from the person^


62 POBTEZ AND BELIGION

ality and benevolence of the gods. The moral
character originally attributed to them necessarily
receded before the clearer definition of natural
forces and the accumulated experience of national
disasters. Finally, little remained of the gods
except their names, reduced to rhetorical synonyms
for the various departments of Nature; Phoebus
was nothing but a bombastic way of saying the
sun ; Hephaestus became nothing but fire, Eros or
Aphrodite nothing but love, Zeus nothing but the
general force and law of Nature. Thus the gods
remained real, but were no longer gods. If belief
in their reality was to be kept up, they could not
retain too many attributes that had no empirical
manifestation. They must be reduced, as it were,
to their fighting weight. All that the imagination
had added to them by way of personal character,
sanctity, and life must be rejected as anthropomor-
phism and fable.

Such is the necessary logic of natural religion.
If Nature manifests the existence of a god, she
must to that extent manifest his character; if she
does not manifest his character, she cannot involve
his existence. We observe to-day a process exactly
analogous to that by which the natural divinities
of Greece were reduced again to the physical or
social forces from which poetry had originally
evoked their forms. Many minds are grown too
timid to build their religious faith unblushingly on


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 63

revelation, or on that moral imagination or inward
demand which revelation comes to express and to
satisfy. They seek, therefore, to naturalize the
Deity and to identify it with some principle of
history, of Nature, or of logic. But this identifica-
tion cannot be made without great concessions on
both sides. The accommodations which ensue in-
evitably involve many equivocations, and some
misrepresentations of the heterogeneous principles,
now natural, now moral, which it is sought to
unify. Confused and agonized by these contra^
dictions, the natural theologian, if he keep his
honesty, can only rest in the end in a chast ened
recognition jf_Jhe.Jajgts_,rf__experien^
which he will, no doubt, exercise his acquired
habits of acquiescence and euphemism. But these
habits, the survival of which gives his philosophy
some air of being still a religion, will not be in-
herited by his disciples and successors; a pious
manner may survive religious faith, but will not
survive it long. The society to whom the reformer
teaches a reticent and embarrassed naturalism will
discard the reticence and avow the naturalism
with pride. The masses of men will see no reason
why they should not li ve out their native impulses
or acciuired passions without feaj M, th at env iron -
ing power of whi c h they are, after all, the highest
embodiment ; while a few thinkers, devout and
rational by temperament, will know how to main-


64 POETKY AND RELIGION

tain their dignity of spirit in the face of a universe
of which they ask no favour save the revelation of
its laws. Thus irreligion for the many and Stoicism
for the few is the end of natural religion in the
modern world as it was in the ancient.

But natural religion (th at is, the turning of t he
facts and laws of Nature or of experience into an
object of wofsEipJls by no means a primitive nor an
ultimate form of religion; it is rather of all the
forms of religion the most unnatural and the least
capable of existing without a historical and emo-
tional setting, independent of its own essence and
inconsistent with its principle. No nation has ever
had a merely natural religion. What is called by
that name has been the appanage of a few philoso-
phers in ages of religious disintegration, when the
habit of worship, surviving the belief in any proper
object of worship, has been transferred with effort
and uncertainty to the natural order which alone
remained before the mind, — to the cosmos, the
self, the state, or humanity. Mythology, of which
natural religion is the last and most abstract phase,
was originally religious only in so far as it was
supernatural ; in so far, I mean, as the analogies of
outer Nature led the poet to conceive some moral
ideal, some glorious being full of youth and serenity,
of passion and wisdom. Only when thus trans-
figured into the human could the natural seem
divine. The Greeks were never idolaters, and no


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 65

more worshipped the sun or moon or the whole of
Nature than they did statues of bronze or marble ;
they worshipped only the god who had a temporal
image in the temple as he had an eternal image in
the sun or in the universe.

It happened, therefore, that in the decay of
mythology the gods could still survive as moral
ideals. The more they were cut off from their
accidental foothold in the world of fact, the more
clearly could they manifest their essence as expres-
sions of the world of values. We have mentioned
the fact that the greater gods of Greece were almost
wholly detached from the cosmographical hints "
which had originally suggested their character and
fable. Thus emancipated, these nobler' gods could
survive in the consciousness of the devout, fixed
there by their purely moral significance and poetic ,
truth. Apollo or Athena showed little or nothing
of a naturalistic origin ; they were patrons of life,
embodiments of the ideal, objects of contemplation
for souls that by prayer would rise to the sem-
blance of the god to whom they prayed. This
transformation into the moral had been going on
from the beginning in the religious mind of Greece.
It was really the legitimate fulfilment of that
translation into the human to which mythology
itself was due. But mythology had merely turned
the physical into the personal and impassioned;
religion was now to turn the psychical into the


66 POETEY AND EBLIGION

good. This tendency came to a vivid and rational
expression in Plato. The gods, he declared, should
be represented only as they were, i.e. as moral
ideals. The scandal of their fables should be
removed and they should be regarded as authors
only of the good, in their own lives as in ours. To
refer all things to the efficacy of the gods . should
be accounted impiety. They, like the supreme and
abstract principle of all excellence which they em-
bodied, could be the authors only of what is good.

Had this remarkable doctrine been carried out
fully it would have led to important results. We
should have had goodness as the criterion of divin-
ity, to the exclusion of power. God would have
become avowedly an ideal, a pattern to which the
world might or might not conform. Such potential
conformity would have remained dependent on
causes, natural or free, with which God, not being
a power, could have nothing to do. Plato and
Aristotle did, in fact, construct a theology on these
lines, but they obscured its purity in their well-
meant attempts to connect (more or less mythically
or magically) their own Socratic principle of ex-
cellence with the cosmic principles of the earlier
philosophers. The elements of confusion and pan-
theism which were thus introduced into the Socratic
philosophy made it more acceptable, perhaps, to
the theologians of laler times, in whose religion a
pantheistic tendency was also latent. In the hands


THE DISSOLITTIOK OF PAGANISM 67

of Jewish, Christian, or Mohammedan commentar
tors the mythical and magical part of the Greek
conceptions was naturally emphasized and the
rational part reinterpreted and obscured. Plato
had spoken, in one of his myths, of a Demiurgos, ,
a personification of the Idea of the Good, who
directly or indirectly made the world in his own
image, rendering it as perfect as the indeterminate
Chaos he worked on would allow. Aristotle had
spoken of an intelligence, happy and self-contem-
plative, who was the principle of movement in the
heavens, and through the heavens in the rest of
Nature. Such expressions Jiad a sound far too
congruous with Mosaic doctrine not to be seized
upon with joy by the apologists of the new faiths,
who were glad to invoke the authority of classic
poets and philosophers in favour of doctrines that
in their Hebrew expression might so easily seem
V crude and irrational to the Gentiles. This assimila-
tion gave to the casual myths of Plato and to the
meagre though bold argumentation of Aristotle a
turn and a significance which they hardly had to
their authors. If we approach these philosophers
as we should from the point of view of Greek
literature and life, and prepare ourselves to see in
them the disciples of Socrates rather than (what
Plato was once actually declared to be) the dis-
ciples of Moses, we shall see that they were simply
mythologists of the Ideal ; they refined the gods '


68 POETRY AND RELIGION

of tradition into patrons of civic discipline and
I art, the gods of natural philosophy into principles
[of intelligibility and beauty.

The creation described in the Timaeus is a trans-
parent parable. Elements which ethical reflection
distinguishes in the field of experience are turned
in that dialogue, with undisguised freedom of
fancy, into so many half-personified primitive
powers ; the Ideas, the Demiurgos, Chaos, the In-
determinate, and the "gods of gods." Plato has
not forgotten the lessons of Socrates and Parmen-
ides. He distrusts as much as they any natural
or genetic philosophy of existence. He virtually
tells us that, if we must have a history of creation,
we can hardly do better than to take ideal or
moral principles, combine them as we might so
many material elements, and see how the intelligi-
ble part of existence may thus receive a quasi-
explanation. God remains the creator of the good
only, because what he is mythically said to create
is merel y that, in 'N'a.tiire which spontaneously re -
sembles him or conforms to his idea ; only this
element in Nature is intelligible or good, and
therefore the principle of goodness may be said
to be its cause. Thus, for example, if we chose
to write an Anatomy of Melancholy, we might
attribute to the Demon of Spleen or to the Blue
Devils only the sombre elements of that soulful
compound, which, however, the evil imps would


THE DISSOLUTION OP PAGANISM 69

eternally tend to make as absolutely dyspeptic
and like unto themselves as its primordial texture
would allow. In exactly such a wa.y Plato, in his
allegorical manner, constructed a universe with a
poetical machinery of moral forces, personified and
treated as agents. When the thin veil of allegory
is drawn aside, there remains nothing but a splen-
did illustration of the Socratic philosophy ; we are
taught that the only science is moral science, and
that, if we wish to understand the world, we must
bend our minds to the definition of its qualities
and values, which are all that is intelligible in it.
Essences and values alone are knowable and fixed
and amenable to science. If we insist on history
and cosmogony, we must be satisfied with hav-
ing them presented to us in allegorical form, and
made to follow ethics as the Timseus follows the
Kepublic. Natural philosophy can be nothing
but a sort of analytic retrospect by which we trace
the first glimmerings and the progressive manifesta-
tion in Nature of those ideas which have authority
over our own minds.

Phenomena had for Plato existence without
reality, that is, without intelligibility or value.
They were a mere appearance. We need not be
surprised, then, that he refused altogether to con-
struct a theology by the poetic interpretation of
phenomena and preferred to construct one allegori-
cally out of- his moral conceptions, the good and the


70 POETRY AND RELIGION

ideal. Aristotle, too, while adhering incidentally,
as we have seen, to a purified astronomical the-
ology, capped this with a purified moral theology
of his own. The Platonic picture-gallery of ideas,
with the abstract principle of excellence that
unified them, gave place in his 'philosophy to an
Ideal realized in the concrete and existing as an
individual. We may venture to say that among
the thinkers of all nations Aristotle was the first
to reach the conception of what may fitly be called
God. Neither the national deity of the Hebrews,
as then conceived, nor the natural deities of the
Gentiles, nor the half-physical, half-logical abstrac-
tions of the earlier Greek philosophers really
corresponded to the notion of a being spiritual,
personal, and perfect, immutable without being
abstract, and omnipotent without effort and with-
out degradation. Aristotle first constructed this
ideal, not out of his fancy, but by building on the
solid ground of human nature and following to
their point of union the lines which moral aspira-
tion and effort actually follow. Nay, the ideal
he pointed to was to be the goal not of human life
only but of natural life in all its forms. The
analytic study of Nature (a study which at the
same time must be imaginative and sympathetic)
could guide us to the conception of her inner
needs and tendencies and of what their propel"
fulfilment would be. We could then see that this


THE DISSOLUTION OP PAGANISM 71

fulfilment would lie in intelligence and thought.
Growth is for the sake of the fruition of life, and
the fruition of life consists in the pursuit and
attainment of objects. The moral virtues belong
^ to the pursuit, the intellectual to t he afc^jjtfiiilgili'if
Knowledge is the end o f all endeavour, the justifi-
c ation and fulfilment o f all gro wth, tatelligence
is the clarification of love.

A being, then, whose life should be a life of
pure and complete knowledge, would embody the
goal toward which all Nature strives. When we
ponder duly the short phrases in which Aristotle
propounds his conception of God we find that he
has called up before us the noblest possible object
of human thought, the presentiment of that
thought's perfect fulfilment. There is no alloy
of najbiiralism in this conception, and at the same
time no suspicion of irrelevancy. This God is not
a mere title of honour for the psycho-physical ,
universe, confusedly conceived and lumped to- j
gether; he is an ultra-mundane ideal, to be an I
inviolate standard and goal for all moving reality .-|
Yet he iS not irrelevant to the facts and forces of
the world, not the dream of an abstracted poet.
He is an idea which reality everywhere evokes in
evoking its own deepest craving and need. Noth-
ing is so pertinent and momentous in life as the
object we are trying to attain by thought or
action, since that object is the source of our in-


W'


72 POETKY AND RELIGION

spiration and the standard of our success. Thus
Aristotle's God is not superfluous, not invented.
This theology is a true idealism, I mean an ideal-
ism, itself purely ideal,, which establishes the
\ authority of human demands, ethical, and Ipgical,^
Wthout impugning the existence or efficacy of that-
Ifnaterial universe which it endows with a meaning
>nd a standard.

Yet this rational conception, the natural out-
growth of the Socratic philosophy, establishes a
, dualisin between the actual and the ideal against
which the human mind easily rebels. Aristotle
himself was hardly faithful' to it. He tried to
I prove the existence of his God, and existeuQe is
■something quite irrelevant to an ideal.- This con-
fusion is very excusable, especially in an age
when, the strictly mechanical view of Nature still
seemed hopelessly inadequate. Aristotle conse-
quently tried to understand the natural world by
viewing it systematically from the point of view
of moral science, as Plato had done less coherently
in his myths ; and hence came what we must re-
igard as the great error of Aristotle's philosophy,
the belief in the efficacy of final causes and in the
(pregxistence of (entelecKes^i" But, apart from this
unhappy question of existence, which is, as we
have said, irrelevant to an ideal, Aristotle's concep-
tion of God remains, perhaps, the most philosophi-
cal that has yet been constructed. Without any


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 73

concessions to sentiment or superstition, it presents
■us with a sublime vision of the essentially human,
of a natvire as free from an unworthy anthropo-
morphism as from an inhuman abstractness. It is
made both human and superhuman by the same
principle of idealization. It is the final cause of
Nature and man, the realization of their imminent
upward effort, the essence that would contain all
their values and escape all their imperfections.

We may well doubt, however, whether men in
general will ever be ready to accept so austere a
theology in guise of a religion ; they were certainly
not ready to do so at the end of the classical
period. The inheritance of Paganism fell instead
to Christianity, in which ethical and naturalistic/
elements were again united, although united in a
new way. For, while the scheme of Paganism,
and of all the philosophies that sought to rational
ize Paganism, was cosmja. and static, the scheme ^
of Christianity was historical. They spoke of the\
dynamic relations of heaven and earth, or of the
immutable hierarchy of ideas and essences; even
Aristotle's God was somehow in spatial relations
to the Universe which he set in motion. The re-|
ligion of the Hebrews, on the other hand, had been
essentially historical and civic: it had been con-
cerned with the moral destinies of Israel and the
dealings of Jehovah with his people. Christianity
inherited this historical character; its mysteries


74 POBTKY AND BELIGION

occurred in time. Not only the redemption of the
world but the vocation and sanctification of the inr
dividual were progressive, and when the habits and
problems of Christian theology were carried over
by the German idealists into the' region of pure
metaphysics, the systems they conceived were still
systems of evolution. God was to be manifest in
the development of things. For Christianity in its
own way had spoken from the beginning of a grad-
ual and yet to be completed descent of the divine
into the .natural by the agency of prophecy, law,
and sacramental institutions; it had represented
the relations of God to man in a vast historic
drama, of which creation constituted the opening, •
the fall and redemption the nexus, and the last
judgment the unravelling.

Thus appeared a new scheme for the unification
of the natural and the moral. The harmony which
the old religion had failed to establisli,in space and
in Nature, the new sought to establish in history
and in time. It was hoped that life and experi-
ence, sin and redemption, might manifest that
divinity which had fled out of the sea, and sky, and
which it seemed sacrilege to identify any longer
with the animal vitality of the universe. Whether
the same criticism that disintegrated mythology
and isolated its elements of science and of poetry
would not be fatal to the new combination of the
moral and the factual in the history of man, is


THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM 75

hardly a question for us here. Suffice it to point
out the problem and to register the solution which
was found in the ancient world to the analogous
problem that presented itself there. The first im-
pulse of the imagination is always to combine in
the object all the elements which lie together in
the mind, to project them indiscriminately into a
single conception of reality, enriched with as many
qualities as there are phases and values in ou r
experience. But these, phases and values have
diverse origins and do not permanently hang to-
gether. It becomes after a while impossible to
keep them attached to a single image; they have
to be distributed according to their true order and
connections, some objectified into a physical uni-
verse of mechanism and law, others built into a
system of rational objects, into a hierarchy of logi-
cal and moral ideas. So the lovely pantheon of the
Greeks yielded in time to analysis and was dis-
solved into abstract science and conscious fable. ^
So, too, the body and soul of later religions may
come to be divided, when they render back to earth
what they contain of positive history and to the
heaven of man's indomitable idealism what they
contain of aspiration and hope.


IV

THE POETEY OE CHEISTIAISr DOGMA

The deathbed of Paganism was surrounded by
doctors. Some, the Stoics, advised a conversion,
into pantheism (with an allegorical interpretation
of mythology to serve the purposes of edification) ;
others, the Neo-Platonists, prescribed instead a
supernatural philosophy, where the efficacy of all
traditional rites would be justified by incorporation
into a system of universal magic, and the gods
would find their place among the legions of spirits
and demons that were to people the concentric
spheres. But these doctors had no knowledge of
the patient's natural constitution ; their medicines,
prescribed with the best intentions, were in truth
poisons and only hastened the inevitable end.
Nor had the unfortunate doctors the consolation
of being heirs. Parasites that they were, they per-
ished with the patron on whose substance they had
fed, and Christianity, their despised rival, came
into sole possession.

Yet Neo-Platonism, for all we can see, responded
as well as Christianity to the needs of the time,
76


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 77

and had besides great external advantages in its
alliance with tradition, with civil power, and with
philosophy. If the demands of the age were fo:
a revealed religion and an ascetic morality, Neo.
Platonism could satisfy them to the fall. Why,
then, should the Hellenic world have brokfen with
the creations of its own genius, so plastic, elo-
quent, and full of resource, to run after foreign
gods and new doctrines that must naturally have
been stumbling-blocks to its prejudices, and fool-
ishness to its intelligence ? Shall we say that the
triumph of Christianity was a miracle ? Is it n61ri
a doubtful encomium on a religion to say that only '
by miracle could it come to be believed? Per-1
haps the forces of human reason and emotion suf-
fice to explain this faith. We prefer to think so ;
otherwise, however complete and final the triumph
of Christianity might be, it would not be justified
or beneficent.

Neo-Platonism arose in the midst of the same^
conditions as Christianity. There was weariness
and disgust with the life of nature, decay of polit-
ical virtue, desire for some personal and super-
natural good. It was hardly necessary to preach
the doctrine of original sin to that society ; the vis-
ible blight that had fallen on classic civilization
was proof enough of that. What it was necessary
to preach was redemption. It was necessary to
point to some sphere of refuge and of healthful


78 POETEY AND RELIGION

resort, where the ignominies and the frivolities of
this world might be forgotten, and where the hun-
ger of a heart left empty by its corroding passions
might be finally satisfied. But where find such a
supernatural world ? By what revelation learn its
nature and be assured of its existence ?

Neo-Platonism opened vistas into the supernat-
ural, but the avenues of a,pproach which it had
chosen and the principle which had given form to
its system foredoomed it to failure as a religion.
This avenue was dialectic, and this principle the
hypostasis of abstractions. Plato had pointed out
this path in his genial allegories. He had, by a
poetical figure, turned the ideas of reason into the
component forces of creation. This was, with him,
a method of expression, but being the only method
he was inclined to employ, it naturally entangled
and occasionally, perhaps, deceived his intelligence;
for a poet easily mistakes his inspired tropes for
the physiology of Nature. Yet Platonic dogma,
even when meant as such, retained the transparency
and significance of a myth ; philosophy was still a
language for the expression of experience, and dia-
lectic a method and not a creed. But the master's
counters, current during six centuries of intellect-
ual decadence, had become his disciples' money.
Each of his abstractions seemed to them a dis-
covery, each of his metaphors a revelation. The
myths of the great dialogues, and, above all, the


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 79

fanciful machinery of the Timseus, interpreted with
an incredible literalness and naive earnestness, such
as only Biblical exegesis can rival, formed the
•starting point of the new revelation. The method
and insight thus obtained were then employed in
filling the lacunae of the system and spreading its
wings wider and wider, until a prodigious hier-
archy of supernatural existences had been invented,
from which the natural world was made to depend
as a last link and lowest emanation.

The baselessness and elaboration of this theology
were, of course, far from being obstacles to its suc-
cess in such an age. On the contrary, the less evi-
dence could be found iii common experience for
what a man appeared to know, the more deeply,
people inferred, must he be versed in supernatural
lore,, and the greater, accordingly, was his author-
ity. Kor was the spell of personal genius and even
holiness wanting in the leaders of the new philoso-
phy to lend it colour and persuasiveness with the
many, to whom metaphysical conceptions are less
impressive than is an eloquent personality, or a
reputation for miraculous powers. Plotinus, to
speak only of the greatest of the sect, had, in fact,
a notable success in his day. His lectures at Rome,
we are told, were attended by 'all the fashion and
intellect of the capital ; and his large and system-
atic thought, his subtlety and precision, his com-
paratively sober eloquence, and his assurance, if we


80 POETRY AND RELIGION

may say so, in treading the clouds, have made him
at all times a great authority with those persons
who look in philosophy rather for impressive results
than for solid foundations. His contemporaries
were eminently persons of that type. A hungry
man, when you bring him bread, does not stop to
make scrupulous inquiries about the mill or the
oven from which you bring it.

But the trouble was that the bread of Plotinus
was a stone. The heart cannot feed on thin and
elaborate abstractions, irrelevant to its needs and
divorced from the natural objects of its interest.
Men will often accept the baldest fictions as
truths; but it is impossible for them to give a
human meaning to vacuous conceptions, or to grow
to love the categories of logic, interweaving their
image with the actions and emotions of daily life.
Eeligion must spring from the people; it must
draw its form from tradition and its substance
from the national imagination and conscience.
Neo-Platonism drew both form and substance from
a system of abstract thought. Its gods were still-
born, being generated by logical dichotomy. Only
in the lower purlieus of the system, filled in by
accepting current superstitions, was there any
contact with something like vital religious forces.
But those minor' elements — hopes and fears about
another world, fasts and penances, ecstasies and
marvels — had no necessary relation to that metar


THE POETRY OP OHRISTIAX DOGMA 8l

physical system. Such practices could be found
in every religion, in every philosophical sect of the
time. The Alexandrian dialectic of the super-
natural accordingly remained a mere schema or
skeleton, to be filled in with the materials of
some real religion, if such a religion should arise.
As such a schema the Neo-Platonic system actually
passed over to Christian theology, furnishing the
. latter with its categories, its language, and its specu
lative method. But that dialectic served in Christi-
anity to give form to a religious substance furnished \
by Hebrew and apostolic tradition, a religious
substance such as, after the Pagan religion was
discredited, Neo-Platonism necessarily lacked and
was powerless to generate.

We have mentioned apostolic tradition. It is
fortunately not requisite for our purpose to discuss
the origin of this tradition, much less to decide
how much of what the Christian Church eventually
taught might be traced to its Founder. That is a
point which even the most thorough scholars seem
still to decide mainly by their prejudices, perhaps
because other material is lacking on which to base
a decision. Tor our present object we may admit
the most extreme hypotheses as equally possible.
The whole body of Catholic doctrine may have been
contained in the oral teaching of Christ; or, on
the other hand, a historical Jesus may not have
existed at all, or may have been one among many


82 POBTKY AND EELIGION

obscure Jewish revolutionists, the one who, by
accident, came afterward to be regarded as the
initiator of a movement to which all sorts of forces
contributed, and with which he had really had
nothing to do. In either case the fact remains
which alone interests us here ; that after three or
four centuries of confused struggles, an institution
emerged which called itself the Catholic Church.
This church, possessed of a recognized hierarchy
and a recognized dogma, triumphed, both over the
ancient religion, which it called Paganism, and
over its many collateral rivals, which it called
heresies. Why did it triumph ? What was there
in its novel dogma and practice that enchained the
minds that Paganism could retain no longer, and
that would not be content with Neo-Platonism,
native, philosophical, and pliable as that system
was?

The answer, to be adequate, would have to be
long; but perhaps we may indicate the spirit in
which it ought to be conceived. Paganism was
a religion, but was discarded because it was not
supernatural: Neo-Platonism could not be main-
tained because it was not a religion. Christianity
was both. It had its roots in a national faith,
moulded by the trials and passions of a singularly
Religious people; that connection with Judaism
gave Christianity a foothold in history, a .definite
dogmatic nucleus, which it was a true instinct in


THE POETRY OF CHEISTIAN DOGMA 83

the Church never to abandon, much as certain
speculative . heresies might cry out against the
unnatural union of a theory of redemption with
one of creation, and of a world-denying ascetic
idealism, which Ch ristianity was essentially, wit h
the national laws, the crude deism, and the stre nu-
ous worldliness of the ancient Jews. However,
had the Gnostic or Manichaean heresies been vic-
torious, Christianity would have been reduced to
a floating speculation: its hard kernel of positive
dogma, of Scripture, and of hieratic tradition would
have been dissolved. It would have ceased to rep-
resent antiquity or to hand down an ancestral
piety: in fine, by its eagerness to express itself
as a perfect philosophy, it would have ceased
to be a religion. How essential an element its(
Hebraism was, we can see now by the study of
Protestantism, a group of heresies in which the
practical instincts and sentimental needs of the
Teutonic race found expression, by throwing over
more or less completely the Catholic dogma and
ritual. Yet in this revolution 'the Protestants
maintained, or rather increased, the intensity of
their religious consciousness, chiefly by absorbing
the elements of Hebrew law and prophecy which,
they could find in the Bible and casting into that
traditional form their personal conscience or their
national ideals.

How inadequate, on the othei: hand, this Hebraic


84 tOEiT?R¥ Ai^D BEtitGlOir

element would have been to constitute the super-
natural religion that was now needed, appears very
clearly from the case of Philo Judaeus. Here was
a man, heir to all the piety and fervour of his race,
who at the same time was a Keo-Platonist three
hundred years before Plotinus and, as it were, the
first Father of the Church. But his religion, be-
ing national, was not communicable and, being
positivistic, was at fundamental odds with the
spirit of his philosophy. It remained, therefore,
as a merely personal treasure and heirloom, the
possession of his private life : his disciples, had
he had any, must either have been Jews them-
selves or else must have been the followers merely
of his philosophy. His religion could not have
passed to them ; they would have regarded it, as
we might regard the Christianity of Kant or the
wife-worship of Comte, as a private circumstance,
a detached trait, less damaging, perhaps, to his
philosophy than favourable to his loyal heart.

Philo, in his commentaries on the Bible, sought
to envelop and transform every detail in the
light of Platonic metaphysics. His interpreta-
tions are often violent, but the ingenuous artifice
of them would have delighted his contemporaries
as much as himself, and was adopted afterward by
all the Path'ers and theologians of the Church.
Philo's theology was thus a success, even a model ;
yet he failed, because of the inadequacy of his


THE POETRY OP CHKISTIAlSr DOGMA 85

religion. What interest, what relevance, could it
have for any Gentile to hear about the deliverance
of Israel out of Egypt or out of Babylon, or about
circumcision and prescribed meats, or about the
sacrifices in the Temple? What charm or credi-
bility could he find in further promises of glorious
kingdoms, flowing with milk and honey? Such
images might later appeal to the imagination of
New England Puritans and make a religion for
them: but what meaning could they have to the
weary Pagan? No doubt the Jews carried with
them an ideal of righteousness and prosperity;
but the Gentile was sick of heroes and high priests
and founders of cities. Stoic virtues were as vain
in his eyes as Sybaritic joys. He did not wish
his passions to be flattered, not even his pride or
the passion for a social Utopia. He wished his
passions to be mortified and his soul to be re-
deemed. He would not look for a Messiah, unless
he could find him on a cross.

That is the essence of the matter. What over-
came the world, because it was what the world
desired, was not a moral, reform — for that was
preached by every sect; not an ascetic regimen —
for that was practised by heathen gymnosophists
and Pagan philosophers ; not brotherly love within
the Church — for the Jews had and have that at
least in equal measure; but what overcame the
world was what Saint Paul said he would always


86 POETEY AND KELIGION

preach : Christ and him crucified. Therein was a
new poetry, a new ideal, a new God. Therein was
the transcript of the real experience of humanity,
as men found it in their inmost souls and as they
were dimly aware of it in universal history. The
moving power was a fable — for who stopped to
question whether its elements were historical, if
only its meaning were profound and its inspiration
contagious ? This fable had points of attachment
to real life in a visible brotherhood and in an extant
worship, as well as in the religious past of a whole
people. At the same time it carried the imagina-
I tion into a new sphere ; it sanctified the poverty
and sorrow at which Paganism had shuddered; it
awakened tenderer emotions, revealed more human
objects of adoration, and furnished subtler instru-
ments of grace. It was a whole world of poetry
descended among men, like the angels at the
Nativity, doubling, as it were, their habitation, so
that they might move through supernatural realms
in the spirit while they walked the earth in the -
flesh. The consciousness of new loves, new duties,
fresh consolations, and luminous unutterable hopes
accompanied them wherever they went. They
stopped willingly in the midst of their business for
recollection, like men in love ; they sought to
stimulate their imaginations, to focus, as it were,
the long vistas of an invisible landscape.
If the importunity of affairs or of ill-subdued pas-


THE POBTKY OP CHEISTIAN DOGMA 87

sions disturbed that dream, they could still return
to it at leisure in the solitude of some shrine or
under the spell of some canticle or of some sacra-
mentatl image ; and meantime they could keep their
faith in reserve as their secret, and their resource.
The longer the vision lasted and the steadier it be-
came, the more closely, of course, was it intertwined
with daily acts and common affections ; and as real
life gradually enriched that vision with its sugges-
tions, so religion in turn gradually coloured common
life with its unearthly light. In the saint, in the
soul that had become already the perpetual citizen of
that higher sphere, nothing in this world remained
w ithout reference to the other, nor waa anythi ng
go ne save for a supernatnTa.1 end. Thus the re-
demption was actually accomplished and the soul
was lifted above the conditions of this life, so that
death itself could bring but a slight and unessential v
change of environment.

Morbid as this species of faith may seem, vision-
ary as it certainly was, it is not to be confused
with an arbitrary madness or with personal illu-
sions. Two circumstances raised this imaginative!
piety to a high dignity and made it compatible witU
great accom plishments, both in thought andin actio n.]
In the first place the religious world constituted a!
system complete and consistent within itself. There
was occasion within it for the' exercise of reason,
for the awakening and discipline of emotion, for


88 POBTEY AND RELIGION

the exertion of effort. As music, for all that it
contains nothing of a material or practical nature,
offers a field for the development of human faculty
and presents laws and conditions which, within its
sphere, must be obeyed and which reward obedi-
ence with the keenest and purest pleasures ; so a
supernatural religion, when it is traditional and
systematic like Christianity, offers another world,
almost as vast and solid as the real one, in which
the soul may develop. In entering it we do not
enter a sphere of arbitrary dreams, but a sphere of
law where learning, experience, and happiness may
be gained. There is more method, more reason, in
such madness than in the sanity of most people.
The world of the Christian imagination was emi-
nently a field for moral experience; moral ideas
were there objectified into supernatural forces,
and instead of being obscured as in the real world
by irrational accidents farmed an intelligible cos-
mos, vast, massive, and steadfast. For this reason
the believer in any adequate and mature super-
natural religion clings to it with such strange
tenacity and regards it as his highest heritage,
while the outsider, whose imagination speaks
another language or is dumb altogether, wonders
how so wild a fiction can take root in a reasonable
mind.

The other circumstance that ennobled the Chris-
tian system was that all its parts had some sig-


THE POETRY OP CHRISTIAN DOGMA 89

nificance and poetic truth, although they contained,
or needed to contalin, nothing empirically real.
The system was a great poem which, besides being
well constructed in itself, was allegorical of actual
experience, and contained, as in a hieroglyph, a
very deep knowledge of the world and of the
human mind. For what was the object that un-''
folded itself before the Christian imagination, the
vision that converted and regenerated the world ?
It was a picture of human destiny. It was an epic,
containing, as it were, the moral autobiography of
man. The object of Pagan religion and philosophy
had been a pictu re of the material cosmos r~con-
ceived as" a vast animal and inhabited by a multi- j
tude of individual spirits. Even the Neo-Platonists
thought of nothing else, much as they might multi-
ply abstract names for its principles and fancifully
confuse them with the spheres. It was always a
vast, living, physical engine , a cosmos of life in
which man had a determinate province. His
spirit, losing its personality, might be absorbed
into the ethereal element from which it came ; but
this emanation and absorption was itself an un-
changing process, the systole and diastole of the
universal heart. Practical religion consisted in
honouring the nearest gods and accepting from
them man's apportioned goods, not without look-
ing, perhaps, with a reverence that needed no
ritual, to the enveloping whole that prescribed to


90 POBTKY AND RELIGION

gods and men their respective functions. Thus
even Neo-Platonisni represented man as a minor
incident in the universe, supernatural though that
universe might be. The spiritual spheres were
only the invisible repetitions of the visible, as the
Platonic ideas from the beginning had been only
a dialectic reduplication of the objects in this
world. It was against this allotment that the
soul was rebelling. It was looking for a deliver-
ance that should be not so much the conscious-
ness of someithing higher as the hope of some-
thipg better.

Now, the .great characteristic of Christianity,
inherited from Judaism, was that its scheme was
historical. Not existences but events were 'the
subject of its primary interest. It presented a
story, not a cosmology. It was an epic in which
, there was, of course, superhuman machinery, but
\of which the subject was man, and, notable cir-
jcumstance, the Hero was a man as well. Like
Buddhism, it gave the highest honour to a man
who could lead his fellow-men to perfection. What
(had previously been the divine reality — the engine
'of Nature — now became a temporary stage, built
|for the exigencies of a human drama. What had
been before a detail of the edifice — the life of
man — now became the argument and purpose
of the whole creation. Notable transformation, on
which the philosopher cannot meditate too much.


THE POETKT OF CHEISTIAN DOGMA 91

Was Cihristianity right in saying that the world
■was made for man ? Was the account it adopted
of the method and causes of Creation conceivably
correct? Was the garden of Eden a historical
reality, and were the Hebrew prophecies announce-
ments of the advent of Jesus Christ? Did the
deluge come because of man's wickedness, an,d will
the last day coincide with the dramatic denouement
of the Church's history? In other words, is the
spiritual experience of man the explanation of the
universe? Certainly not, if we are thinking of a
scientific, not of a poetical explanation. As a matter
of fact, man is a product of laws which must also
destroy him, and which, as Spinoza would say,
infinitely exceed him in their scope and power.
His welfare is indifferent to the stars, but de-
pendent on them. And yet that counter-Coperr
nican revolution accomplished by Christianity —
a revolution which Kant should hardly have
attributed to himself — which put man in the
centre of the universe and made the stars circle
about him, must have some kind of justification.
And indeed its justification (if we may be so brief
)on so great a subject) is that what is false in
) the science of facts may be true in the science of
-jralues. While the existence of thing s mnat hp.
understood by referring the m to their cause s,
which: arfe mech anical , iheir functions can only
be explained by wnat is interesting in their results,


92 POETRY AND RELIGION

in other -words, by their relation to human nature
and to human happiness.

The Christian drama was a magnificent poetic
rendering of this side of the matter, a side which
Socrates had envisaged by his admirable method,
but which now flooded the consciousness of man-
kind with torrential emotions. Christianity was
born under an eclipse, when the light of Nature
was obscured; but the star that intercepted that
light was itself luminous, and shed on succeed-
ing ages a moonlike radiance, paler and sadder
than the other, but no less divine, and meriting
no less to be eternal. Man now studied his own
destiny, as he had before studied the sky, and
the woods, and the sunny depths of water; and
as the earlier study produced in his soul — anima
naturaliter poeta — the images of Zeus, Pan, and
Nereus, so the later study produced the images of
Jesus and of Mary, of Heaven and Hell, of miracles
and sacraments. The observation was no less exact,
the translation into poetic images no less wonderful
here than there. To trace the endless transfigura^
tion, with all its unconscious ingenuity and har-
mony, might be the theme of a fascinating science.
Let not the reader fancy that in Christianity every-
thing was settled by records and traditions. The
idea of Christ himself had to be constructed by the
imagination in response to moral demands, trar
dition giving only the barest external points of


THE POETRY OP CHRISTIAN DOGMA 98

attachment. This facts were nothing until they
became symbols ; and nothing could turn them into
symbols except an eager imagination on the watch
for all that might embody its dreams.

The crucifixion, for example, would remain a
tragic incident without further significance, it^we^
regard it merely as a historical fact ; tcfmake it
a religious mystery, an idea capable of converting
the world, the moral imagination must transform
it into something that happens for the sake of
the soul, so that each believer may say to him-
self that Christ so suffered for the love of him.
And such a thought is surely the objectificar
tion of an inner impulse; the idea of Christ be-
comes something spiritual, something psetical.
What literal meaning could there be in saying
that one man or one Crod died for the sake
of each and every other individual ? By what
effective causal principle could their salvation be
thought to necessitate his death, or his death to
make possible their salvation ? By an va-rcpov vpo-
Tcpov natural to the imagination; for in truth the
matter is reversed. Christ's death is a symbol of ,
human life. Men could "believe in" his death,
because it was a figure and premonition of the
burden of their experience. That is why, when
some Apostle told them the story, they could say
to him : " Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet :
thou hast told me all things whatsoever I have


94 POBTEY AND RELIGION

felt." Thus the central fact of all Christ's history,
narrated by every Evangelist, could still be nothing
but a painful incident, as unessential to the Chris-
tian religion as the death of Socrates to the Socratic
philosophy, were it not transformed by the imagina-
' tion of the believer into the counterpart of his own
moral need. Then, by ceasing to be viewed as a
historical fact, the death of Christ becomes a re-
ligious inspiration. The whole of Christian doc-
1 trine is thus religious and efficacious only when it
l becomes poetry, because only then is it the felt
tcounterpart of personal experience and a genuine
expansion of human life.

Take, as another example,^ the doctrine of eter-
nal rewards and punishments. Many perplexed
Christians of our day try to reconcile this spirited
fable with their modern horror of physical suffering
and their detestation of cruelty ; and it must be
admitted that the image of men suffering unending
tortures in retribution for a few ignorant and
sufficiently wretched sins is, even as poetry, some-
what repellent. The idea of torments and ven-
geance is happily becoming alien to our society
and is therefore not a natural vehicle for our relig-
ion. Some accordingly reject altogether the Chris-
tian doctrine on this point, which is too strong for
their nerves. Their objection, of course, is not
simply that there is no evidence of its truth. If
they asked for evidence, would they believe any-


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 95

thing? Proofs are the last thing' looked for by
a truly religious mind which feels the imaginative
fitness of its faith and knows instinctively that, in
such a matter, imaginative fitness is all that can be
required. The reason men reject the doctrine of
eternal punishment is that they find it distasteful
or unmeaning. They show, by the nature of their
objections, that they acknowledge poetic propriety
or moral truth to be the sole criterion of religious
credibility.

But, passing over the change of sentiment which
gives rise to this change of doctrine, let us inquire
of what reality Christian eschatology was the imagi-
native rendering. What was it in the actual life
of men that made them think of themselves as
hanging between eternal bliss and eternal perdi-
tion ? Was it not the diversity, the momentousness,
and the finality of their experience here? No
doubt the desire to make the reversal of the injus-
tices of this world as melodramatic and picturesque
as possible contributed to the adoption of this idea ;
the ideal values of life were thus contrastedwith
its apparent values in the most absolute and graphic
manner. But we may say that beneath this motive,
based on the exigences of exposition and edification,
there was a deeper intuition. There was the genu-
ine moralist's sympathy with a philosophic and
logical view of immortality rather than with a
superstitious and sentimental one. Another life


96 POBTBY AND EELIGION

exists and is infinitely more important than this
life; but it is reached by the intuition of ideals,
not by the multiplication of phenomena; it is
an eternal state not an indefinite succession of
ehanges. Transitory life ends for the Christian
when the balance-sheet of his individual merits
and demerits is made up, and the eternity that
ensues is the eternal reality of those values.

For the Oriental, who believed in transmigra-
tion, the individual dissolved into an infinity of
phases; he went on actually and perpetually, as
Nature does ; his immortality was a long Purga-
tory behind which a shadowy Hell and Heaven
scarcely appeared in the form of annihilation or
absorption. This happened because the Oriental
jnind has no middle; it oscillates between ex-
tremes and passes directly from sense to mysti-
cism, and back again ; it lacks virile understanding
and intelligence creative of form. But Christianity,
following in this the Socratic philosophy, rose to
the conception of eternal essences, forms suspended
'above the flux of natural things and expressing
the ideal suggestions and rational goals of expe-
rience. Each man, for Christianity, has an immor-
tal soul ; each life has the potentiality of an eternal
meaning, and as this potentiality is or is not actu-
alized, as this meaning is or is not expressed in
the phenomena of this life, the soul is eternally
saved or lost. As the tree falleth, so it lieth.


THE POETRY OF CHEISTIAK DOGMA 97

The finality of this brief and personal experiment,
the consequent awful solemnity of the hour of death
when all trial is over and when the eternal sentence
is passed, has always been duly felt by the Chris-
tian. The Church, indeed, in answer to the demand
for a more refined and discriminating presentation
of its dogma, introduced the temporary discipline
of Purgatory, in which the virtues already stamped
on the soul might be brought to greater clearness
and rid of the alloy of imperfection; but this
purification allowed no essential development, no
change of character or fate ; the soul in Purgatory
was already saved, already holy.

The harshness of the doctrine of eternal judg-
ment is therefore a consequence of its symbolic
truth. The Church might have been less absolute
in the matter had she yielded more, as she did in
the doctrine of Purgatory, to the desire for merely
imaginary extensions of human experience. But
her better instincts kept her, after all, to the moral
interpretation of reality ; and the facts to be ren-
dered were uncompromising enough. Art is long,
life brief. To have told men they would have infi-
nite opportunities to reform and to advance would
have been to feed them on gratuitous fictions with-
out raising them, as it was the function of Chris-
tianity to do, to a consciousness of the spiritual
meaning and upshot of existence. To have specu- '
lated about the infinite extent of experience and its


98 POETRY AND RELIGION

endless transformations, after the manner of the
barbarous religions, and never to have conceived
its moral essence, would have been to encourage a
dream vrhich may by chance be prophetic, but
which is as devoid of ideal meaning as of empirical
probability. Christian fictions were at least signifi-
cant; they beguiled the intellect, no doubt, and
were mistaken for accounts of external fact; but
they enlightened the nnagi'natio n ; they made man
understand, as never before or since, the pathos and
nobility of his life, the necessity of discipline, the
possibility of sanctity, the transcendence and the hu-
manity of the divine. Tor the divine was reached
by the idealization of the human. The supernatu-
ral was an allegory of the natural,' and rendered
the values of transitory things under the image of
eternal existences. Thus the finality of our activity
in this world, together with the eternity of its ideal
meanings, was admirably rendered by the Christian
dogma of a final judgment.

But there was another moral truth which was
impressed upon the believer by that doctrine and
which could not be enforced in any other way withr
put presupposing in him an unusual philosophic
acumen and elevation of mind. That is the truth
that moral distinctions are absolute. A cool phi-
losophy suffices to show us that moral distinctions
exist, since men prefer some experiences" to others
and can by their action bring these good and evil


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 99

experiences upon themselves and upon their fellows.
5ut a survey of Nature may at the same time im-
press us with the fact that these goods and evils
are singularly mixed, that there is hardly an ad-
vantage gained which is not bought by some loss,
or any loss which is not an opportunity for the
attainment of some advantage. While it would be
chimerical to pretend that such compensation was
always adequate, and that, in consequence, no one
condition was ever really preferable to any other,
yet the perplexities into which moral aspiration is
thrown by these contradictory vistas is often pro-
ductive of the desire to reach some other point of
view, to escape into what is irrationally thought to
be a higher category than the moral. The serious
consideration of those things which are right accord-
ing to human reason and interest may then yield
to a fanatical reliance on some facile general notion.
It may be thought, for instance, that what is
regular or necessary or universal is therefore right
• and good; thus a dazed contemplation of the actual
may take the place of the determination pf t.TiA
ideal. Mysticism in regard to the better and the
worse, by which good and bad are woven into a
seamless garment of sorry magnificence in which
the whole universe is wrapped up, is like mysti-
cism on other subjects ; it consists in the theoretic
renunciation of a natural attitude, in this case of
the natural attitude of welcome and repulsion in


100 POETRY AND KBLIGION

the presence of various things. But this category
is the most fundamental of all those that the
human mind employs, and it cannot be surren-
dered so long as life endures. It is indeed the
conscious echo of those vital instincts by whose
pperation we exist. Levity and mysticism may do
all they can — and they can do much — to make
men think moral distinctions unauthoritative, be-
cause moral distinctions may be either ignored or
transcended. Yet the essential assertion that one
thing is really better than another remains involved
in every act of every living being. It is involved
even in the operation of abstract thinking, where
a cogent conclusion, being still coveted, is assumed
to be a good, or in that aesthetic and theoretic en-
thusiasm before cosmic laws, which is the human
foundation of this mysticisin itself.

It is accordingly a moral truth which no subter-
fuge can elude, that some things are really better
than others. In the daily course of affairs we are
constantly in the presence of events which by turn-
ing out one way or the other produce a real, an
irrevocable, increase of good or evil in the world.
The complexities of life, struggling as it does
amidst irrational forces, may make the attainment
of one good the cause of the unattainableness of
another ; they cannot destroy the essential desira-
bility of both. The niggardliness of Nature can-
not sterilize the ideal; the odious circumstances


THE POETKY OF CHRISTIAK DOGMA 101

which make the attainment of many goods condi-
tional on the perpetration of some evil, and which
punish every virtue by some incapacity or some
abuse, — these odious circumstances cannot rob any
good of its natui-al sweetness, nor all goods to-
gether of their conceptual harmony. To the heart
that has felt it and that is the true judge, every
loss is irretrievable and every joy indestructible.
Eventual compensations may obliterate the memory
of these values but cannot destroy their reality.
The future can only furnish further applications
of the principle by which they arose and were
justified.

Now, how utter this moral truth imaginatively,
how clothe it in an image that might render its
absoluteness and its force ? Could any method be
better than to. say: Your eternal destiny is hang-
ing in the balance: the grace of God, the influ-
ences of others, and your own will reacting upon
both are shaping at every moment issues of abso-
lute importance. What happens here and now
decides not merely incidental pains and pleasures
— which perhaps a brave and careless spirit might
alike despise — but helps to determine your eternal
destiny of joy or anguish, and the eternal destiny
of your neighbour. In place of the confused vistas''
of the empirical world, in which the threads of
benefit and injury might seem to be mingled and
lost, the imagination substituted the clear vision


102 POETKY AND BELIQION

of Hell and Heaven; while the determination of
our destiny was made to depend upon obedience
to recognized duties.

Now these duties may often have been far from
corresponding to those which reason would impose;
but the intention and the principle at least were
sound. It was felt that the actions and passions of
this world breed momentous values, values which
being ideal are as infinite as values can be in the
estimation of reason — the values of truth, of love,
of rationality, of perfection — although both the
length of the experience in which they arise and
the number of persons who share that experience
may be extremely limited. But the mechanical
measure of experience in length, intensity, or mul-
tiplication has nothing to do with its moral signifi-
cance in realizing truth or virtue. Therefore the
difference in dignity between the satisfactions of
reason and the satisfactions of sense is fittingly
rendered by the infinite disproportion between
heavenly and earthly joys. In our imaginative
translation we are justified in saying that the
alternative between infinite happiness and infinite
I misery is yawning before us, because the alternar
Itive between rational failure or success is actually
jpresent. The decisions we make from moment to
(moment, on which the ideal value of our life and
teharacter depends, actually constitute in a few
jears a decision which is irrevocable.


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 103

The Christian doctrine of rewards and punish- \
ments is thus in harmony with moral truths which 1
a difEerent doctrine might have obscured. The \
good souls that wish to fancy that everybody will
be ultimately saved, subject a fable to standards
appropriate to matters of fact, and thereby deprive
the fable of that moral significance which is its
excuse for being. If every one is ultimately saved,
there is nothing truly momentous about alternative
events : all paths lead more or less circuitously to
the same end. The only ground which then re-
mains for discriminating the better from the worse i
is the pleasantness or unpleasantness of the"^ath
to salvation . All moral meanings inhere, tlien, in j
this life, and the other life is without significance.
Heaven comes to replace life empirically without
fulfilling it ideally. We are reduced for our moral
standards to phenomenal values, to the worth of
life in transitory feeling. These values are quite
real, but they are not those which poetry and re-
ligion have for their object. They are values pres- ,
ent to sense, not to reason and imagination.

The ideal of a supervening general bliss presents
indeed an abstract desideratum, but not the ideal
involved in the actual forces of life ; that end «
would have no rationail relation to its primary
factors; it would not be built on our instinctive
preferences but would abolish them by a miracu-
lous dream, following alike upon every species of


104 POETKY AND RELIGION

activity. Moral differences would have existed
merely to be forgotten; for if we say they were
remembered, but transcended and put to rest, we
plunge into an even worse contradiction to the
conscience and the will. For if we say that the
universal bliss consists in the .assurance, mysti-
cally received, that while individual experiences
may differ in value they all equally conduce to
the perfection of the universe, we deny not merely
the momentousness but even the elementary valid-
ity of moral distinctions. We assert that the
best idea of God is that least like the ideal of
man, and that the nearer we come to the vision
of truth the farther we are from the feeling of
preference. In our attempt to extend the good
we thus abolish its essence. Our religion consists
in denying t he authority of .the ideal, which is its
only rational foundation; and thus that religion,
while gaining nothing in empirical reality, comes
to express a moral falsehood instead of a moral
truth.

If we looked in religion for an account of facts,
as most people do, we should have to pass a very
different judgment on these several views. The
mechanical world is a connected system and Nature
seems to be dynamically one ; the intuitions on
which mysticism feeds are therefore true intuitions.
The expectation of a millennium is on the other
hand quite visionary, because the evidence of


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 105

history, while it shows undeniable progress in
many directions, shows that this progress is essen-
tially relative, partial, and transitory. As for the^
Christian doctrine of the judgment, it is something
wholly out of relation to empirical facts, it assumes
the existence of a sup'ernatural sphere, and is be-
yond the reach of scientific evidence of any kind.
But if we look on religion as on a kind of poetry,
as we have decided here to do, — as on a kind of i


po etry that expresses moral, values and reacts bene f-
i cently upon life. — we shall see that the Christiar
doctrine is alone justified. Por mysticism is not an
imaginative construction at all but a renunciationl ,
or confusion of our faculties ; here a surrender or
the human ideal in the presence of a mechanical
force that is felt, and correctly felt, to tend to
vaguer results or rather to tend to nothing in
particular. Mysticism is not a religion but a
religious disease. The idea of universal salvation,!
on the other hand, is the expression of a feeble |
sentimentality, a pleasant reverie without structure \
or significance. But the doctrine of eternal re-
wards and punishments i§, as we .havej^rigjl,. to
show, an expression of mor al truth, a poetic_r!


dering of the fact th at rational values are ideal.
momentous, and irreversible.

It would be easy to multiply examples and to
exhibit the various parts of Christianity as so many
interpretations of human life in its ideal aspects.


106 POETRY AND RELIGION

But -we are not attempting to narrate facts so mucli
as to advance an idea, and the illustrations given
■will perhaps suffice to make our conception intelli-
gible. There is, however, a possible misunderstand-
ing which we should be careful to avoid in this
dangerous field of philosophic interpretation. In
saying that a given religion was the poetic trans-
formation of an experience, we must not imagine
that it was thought to be such — for it is evident
that every sincere Christian believed in the literal

' and empirical reality of all that the Christian epic
contained. Nor should we imagine that philo-
sophic ideas, or general reflections on life, were the
origin of religion, and that afterward certain useful
myths, known to be such by their authors, were
mistaken for history and for literal prophecy.

""That sometimes happens, when historians, poets, or
philosophers are tm-ned by the unintelligent venera-
-tion of posterity into religious prophets. Such was
the fate of Plato, for instance, or of the writer of
the " Song of Solomon " ; but no great and living
religion was ever founded in that way.

Had Christianity or any other religion had its
basis in literary or philosophical allegories, it
would never have become a religion, because the
poetry of it would never have been interwoven

' with the figures and events of real life. No tomb,
no relic, no material miracle, no personal deriva-
tion of authority, would have existed to serve


THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 107

as tlie nucleus of devotion and the point of
junction between this world and the other. The
origin of Christian dogma lay in historic facts
and in doctrines literally meant by their authors.
It is one of the greatest possible illusions in these
matters to fancy that the meaning which we see in
parables and mysteries was the meaning they had
in the beginning, but which later misinterpretatior(
had obscured. On the contrary — as a glance at
any incipient religious movement now going on
will show us — the authors of doctrines, however
obvious it may be to every one else that these
doctrines have only a figurative validity, are the
first dupes to their own intuitions. This is no less
true of metaphysical theories than of spontaneous
superstitions : did their promulgator understand the
character of their justification he would give him-
self out for a simple poet, appeal only to cultivated i
minds, and never turn his energies to stimulating
private delusions, not to speak of public fanaticisms.
The best philosophers seldom perceive the poetic
merit of their systems. '

So among the ancients it was not an abstract
observation of Nature, with conscious allegory su-
pervening, that was the origin of mythology, but
the interpretation was spontaneous, the illusion
was radical, a consciousness of the god's presence
was the first impression produced by the phenom-
enon. Else, in this case too, poetry would never


108 POETRY AND EELIGION

have become superstition; what made it supersti-
tion was the initial incapacity in people to dis-
criminate the objects of imagination from those of
the understanding. The fancy thus attached its
images, without distinguishing their ideal locus,
to the visible world, and men became supersti-
tious uot because they had too much imagination,

MDut because they were not aware that they had
any.

In what sense, then, are we justified in saying
that religion expresses moral ideals ? In the sense
that moral significance, while not the source of
religions, is the criterion of their value and the
reason why they may deserve to endure. Far as
the conception of an allegory may be from the
minds of prophets, yet the prophecy can only take
root in the popular imagination if it recommends

\ itself to some human interest;- There must be some
correspondence between the doctrine announced or
the hopes set forth, and the natural demands of
the human spirit. Otherwise, although the new
faith might be preached, it would not be accepted.
The significance of religious doctrines has there-
fore been the condition of their spread, their main-
tenance, and their development, although not the
condition of their origin. In Darwinian language,
moral significance has been a spontaneous variation
of superstition, and this variation has insured its
survival as a religion. For religion differs from


THE POETEY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA 109

superstition not psychologically but morally, not
in its origin but in its worth. This worth, when
actually felt and appreciated,, becomes of course a
dynamic factor and contributes like other psycho-
logical elements to the evolution of events; but
being a logical harmony, a rational beauty, this
worth is only appreciable by a few minds, and
those the least primitive and the least capable of'
guiding popular movements. Reason is powerless
to found religions, although it is alone competent
to judge them. Good religions are therefore the
product of unconscious rationality, of imaginative
impulses fortunately moral.

Particularly does this appear in the early his-
tory of Christianity. Every shade of heresy, every
kind of mixture of Christian and other elements
was tried and found advocates ; but after a greater
or less success they all disappeared, leaving only
the Church standing. For the Church had known
how to combine those dogmas and practices in
which the imagination of the time, and to a great
extent of all times, might find fitting' expression.
Imaginative significance was the touchstone of
orthodoxy; tradition itself was tested by this
standard. By this standard the canon of Scripture
was fixed, so as neither to exclude the Old Testa-
ment, which the pure metaphysicians would have
rejected, nor to accept every gospel that circulated
under the name of an apostle, and which might


110 POETRY AND EELIGION

please a -wonder-loving and detail-loving piety.
By the same criterion the ritual was composed,
the dogma developed, the nature of Christ defined,
the sacraments and discipline of the Church regu-
lated. The result was a comprehensive system
where, under the shadow of a great epic, which
^expanded and interpreted the history of mankind
from the Creation to the Day of Doom, a place
was found for as many religious instincts and as
many religious traditions as possible ; while at the
same time the dialectic proficiency of an age that
inherited the discipline of Greek philosophy, intro-
duced into the system a great consistency and a
great metaphysical subtlety. Time mellowed and
expanded these dogmas, bringing them into rela-
tion with the needs of a multiform piety ; a justi-
fication was found both for asceticism and for a
virtuous naturalism, both for contemplation and
for action; and thus it became possible for the
Church to insinuate her sanctions and her spirit
into the motives of men, and to embody the religion
of many nations during many ages.

The Church's successes, however, were not all
legitimate; they were not everywhere due to a
real correspondence between her forms and the
ideal life of men. It was only the inhabitants of
the Grseco-Eoman world that were quite prepared
to understand her. When the sword, or the author-
ity of a higher worldly civilization, carried her


THE POETRY OE CHRISTIAN DOGMA 111

influence beyond the borders of the Eoman Empire
we may observe that her authority seldom proved^
stable. She was felt, by those peoples whose im-
aginative traditions and whose moral experience
she did not express, to be something alien and
artificial. The Teutonic races finally threw off
what they felt to be her yoke. If they recon-
structed their religion out of elements which she
had furnished, that was only because religion is
bound to be traditional, and they had been Chris-
tians for many hundred years. A wholly new
philosophy or poetry could not have taken im-
mediate root in their minds ; even the philosophy
which Germany has since produced, when the na-
tional spirit was reaching, so to speak, its majority,
hardly seems able to constitute an independent
religion, but takes shelter under some form of
Christianity, however much the spirit of that re-
ligion may be transformed.

At first, indeed, the new movement took the
Bible for its starting-point. So heterogeneous a
book, which was already habitually interpreted
in so many fanciful ways, was indeed an admi-
rable basis for the imagination to build upon.
The self-reliant and dreamy Teuton could spin
out of the Biblical chronicles and rhapsodies con-
victions after his own heart ; while his fixed per-
suasion that the Bible was the word of God, was
strengthened (not illegitimately) by his ability to


112 POBTEY AND RELIGION

make it express Ms own moral ideals. The in-
tensity of his religion was proportionate to the
degree in which he had made it the imaginative
rendering of his own character. .

Protestantism in its vital elements was thus a
perfectly new, a perfectly spontaneous religion.
The illusion that it was a return to primitive
Christianity was useful for controversial purposes
and helped to justify the iconoclastic passions of
the time ; but this illusion did not touch the true
essence of Protestantism, nor the secret of its legiti-
macy and power as a religion. This was its new
embodiment of human ideals in imaginative forms,
whereby those ideals became explicit and found a
remarkable expression in action. These ideals
were quite Teutonic and looked to inner sponta-
neity and outward prosperity; they were more
allied to those of the Hebrews than to those of
the early Christians, whose religion was all mira-
cles, asceticism, and withdrawal from the world.
1 Indeed we may say that the typical Protestant
I was himself his own church and made the selec-
Ition and interpretation of tradition according to
the demands of his personal spirit. What the
Fathers did for the Church in the fourth century,
the Reformers did for themselves in the sixteenth,
and have continued to do on the occasion of their
various appearances.
I If we judge this interpretation by poetic stand-


THE POETRY OF OHEISTIAN^ DOGMA 113

ards, we cannot resist the conclusion that the old
version was infinitely superior. The Protestant,
with his personal resources, was reduced to making
grotesquely and partially that translation of moral
life which the Fathers had made comprehensively
and beautifully, inspired as they were by all the
experience of antiquity and all the hopes of youth-
ful Christendom. Nevertheless, Protestantism has
the unmistakable character of a genuine religion,
a character which tradition passively accepted and
dogma, regarded as so much external truth, may
easily lose ; it is in correspondence with the actual
ideals and instincts of the believer; it is the self-
assertion of a living soul. Its meagreness and
eccentricity are simply evidences of its personal
basis. It is in full harmony with the practical
impulses it comes to sanction, and accordingly it
gains in efiB.ciency all that it loses in dignity and
truth.

The principle by which the Christian system had
developed, although reapplied by the Protestants to
their own inner life, was not understood by them in
its historical applications. They had little sym-
pathy with the spiritual needs and habits of that
Pagan society in which Christianity had grown up.
That society had found in Christianity a sort of
last love, a rejuvenating supersensible hope, and
I had bequeathed to the Gospel of Eedemption, for
lits better embodiment and ornament, all its own


114 POETRY AND EBLIGION

wealth of , art, philosophy, and devotion. This
embodiment of Christianity represented a civi-
lization through which the Teutonic races had
not passed and which they never could have pro-
duced; it appealed to a kind of imagination and
sentiment which was foreign to them. This em-
bodiment, accordingly, was the object of their first
and fiercest attack, really because it was unsympa-
thetic to their own temperament but ostensibly
because they could not find its basis in those
Hebraic elements of Christianity which make up
the greater bulk of the Bible. They did not value
the sublime aspiration of Christianity to be not
something Hebraic or Teutonic but something
Catholic and human ; and they blamed everything
which went beyond the accidental limits of their
own sympathies and the narrow scope of their own
experience.

Yet it was only by virtue of this complement
inherited from Paganism, or at least supplied by
the instincts and traditions on which Paganism
Jiad reposed, that Christianity could claim to
approach a humane universality or to achieve an
imaginative adequacy. The problem was to com-
pose, in the form of a cosmic epic, with metar
physical justifications and effectual starting-points
for moral action, the spiritual autobiography of
man. The central idea of this composition was
to be the idea of a Redemption. Around this were


THE POETRY OP CHRISTIAN DOGMA 115

to be gathered and moulded together elements
drawn from Hebrew tradition and scripture, others
furnished by Paganism, together with all that the
living imagination of the time could create. Nor
was it right or fitting to make a merely theoretical
or ethical synthesis. Doctrine must find its sen--'
sible echo in worship, in art, in the feasts and fasts
of the year. Only when thus permeating life and
expressing itself to every sense and faculty can a
religion be said to have reached completion ; only
then has the imagination exhausted its meaus of
utterance.

The great success which Christianity achieved in
this immense undertaking makes it, after classic
antiquity, the most important phase in the history
of mankind. It is clear, however, that this success
was not complete. That fallacy from which the
Pagan religion alone has been free, that irpStrov >lieu-
8os of all fanaticism, the natural but hopeless mis-
understanding of imagining that poetry in order to
be religion, in order to be the inspiration of life,
mu st first deny that it is poetry and deceive u s
about the facts with which we have to deal — this
misunderstanding has marred the work of the
Christian imagination and condemned it, if we
may trust appearances, to be transitory. Por
by this misunderstanding Christian doctrine was
brought into conflict with reality, of which it
pretends to prejudge the character, and also into


116 POETKY AND KELIGION

conflict with what might have been its own ele-
ments, with all excluded religious instincts and
imaginative ideals. Human life is always essen-
tially the same, and therefore a religion which, like
Christianity, seizes the essence of that life, ought
to be an eternal religion. But it may forfeit that
privilege by entangling itself with a particular
a ccount of matters of fact, m atters irrelevant to its
ideal significance, and further by intrenching itself,
by virtue of that entanglement, in an inadequate
regimen or a too narrow imaginative development,
thus putting its ideal authority in jeopardy by
opposing it to other intuitions and practices no
less religious than its own.

Can Christianity escape these perils ?, Can it
reform its claims, or can it overwhelm all op-
position and take the human heart once more by
storm ? The future alone can decide. The grteat-
est calamity, however, would be that which seems,
alas ! not unlikely to befall our immediate pos-
terity, namely, that while Christianity should be
discredited no other religion, more disillusioned
and not less inspired, should come to take its
place. Until the imagination should have time to
recover and to reassert its legitimate and kindly
power, the European races would then be re-
duced to confessing that while they had mastered
the "mechanical forces of Nature, both by science
and by the arts, they had become incapable of


THE POETRY OF CHEISTIAN DOGMA 117

mastering or understanding themselves, and that, ;
bewildered like the beasts by the revolutions of the
heavens and by their own irrational passions, they
could find no way of uttering the ideal meaning of '
their life.


PLATOKIC LOVE IN SOME ITALIAIf
POETS

When the fruits of philosophic reflection, con-
densed into some phrase, pass into the common
language of men, there does not and there cannot
accompany them any just appreciation of their
meaning or of the long experience and travail of
soul from which they have arisen. Few doctrines
have suffered more by popularization than the in-
tuitions of Plato. The public sees in Platonic
sayings little more than phrases employed by un-
practical minds to cloak the emptiness of their
yearnings. Finding these fragments of an obso-
lete speech put to bad uses, we are apt to ignore
and despise them, much as a modern peasant might'
despise the fragment of a frieze or a metope which
he found built into his cottage wall. It is not
only the works of plastic art that moulder and
disintegrate to furnish materials for the barbarous
masons of a later age : the great edifices of reason
also crumble, their plan is lost, and their frag-
ments, picked where they happen to lie, become
118


PLATONIC LOVE 119

the materials of a feebler thought. In common
speech we find such bits of ancient wisdom em-
bedded; they prove the intelligence of some an-
cestor of ours, but are no evidence of our own.
When used in ignorance of their meaning, they
become misplaced flourishes, lapses into mystery
in the businesslike plainness of our thought.

Yet there is one man, the archaeologist, to whom
nothing is so interesting as just these stones which
a practical builder would have rejected. He for-
gives the ignorance and barbarism that placed
them where they are; he is absorbed in studying
their sculptured surface and delighted if his fancy
can pass from them to the idea of the majestic
whole to which they once belonged. So in the
presence of a much-abused philosophic phrase,
we may be interested in reconstructing the ex-
perience which once gave it meaning and form.
Words are at least the tombs of ideas, and the
most conventional formulas of poets or theolo-
gians are still good subjects for the archaeologist
of passion. He may find a treasure there; or at
any rate he may hope to be rewarded for his
labour by the ideal restoration of some once beau-
tiful temple of Athena.

Something of this kind is what we may now
attempt to do with regard to one or two Platonic
ideas, ideas which under the often ironical title
of Platonic love, are iconstantly referred to and


120 POETRY AND RELIGION

seldom understood./ These ideas may be defined
I as the transformation of the appreciation of beau-
I tiful things into the worship of an ideal beauty
and the transformation of thp love of particular
persons into the love of God. J These mystical
phrases may acquire a new and more human
meaning if we understand, at least in part, how
they first came to be spoken. We shall then not
think of them merely as the reported sayings of
Plato or Plotinus, Porphyry or Proclus ; we shall
not learn them by rote, as the unhappy student
learns the enigmas, which, in the histories of
philosophy, represent all that survives of the doc-
trine of a Thales or a Pythagoras. We shall
have some notion of the ideas that once prompted
such speech.

And we shall be the better able to reconstruct
those conceptions inasmuch as the reflection by
which they are bred has recurred often in the
world — has recurred, very likely, in our own ex-
perience. We are often Platonists without know-
ing it. In some forfli or other Platonic ideas occur
in all poetry of passion when it is seasoned with
reflection. They are particularly characteristic of
some Italian poets, scattered from the thirteenth
to the sixteenth centuries. These poets had souls
naturally Platonic; even when they had heard
something of Plato they borrowed nothing from
him. They repeated his phrases, when they did


PLATONIC LOVE 121

sOj merely to throw the authority of an ancient
philosopher over the spontaneous suggestions of
their own minds. Their Platonism was all their j
own : it was Christian, mediaeval, and chivalroiis,
both in origin and expression. But it was all the
more genuine for being a reincarnation rather
than an imitation of the old wisdom.

Nothing, for example, could be a better object-'
lesson in Platonism than the well-known senti-
mental history of Dante. There is no essential
importance in the question whether Dante could
have read anything of Plato or come indirectly
under his influence. The Platonism of Dante, is,\
in any case, quite his own. It is the expression of
his inner experience moulded by the chivalry and
theology of his time. He tells us the story him-
self very quaintly in the " Vita Nuova."

At the age of nine he saw, at a wedding-feast in
Florence, Beatrice, then a child of seven, who be-
came, forthwith, the mistress of his thoughts. This
precocious passion ruled his imagination for life, so
that, when he brings to an end the account of the
emotions she aroused in him by her life and death,
he tells us that he determined to speak no more
about her until he should be able to do so more
worthily, and to say of her what had never been said
of any woman. In the « Divine Comedy," accord- 1
ingly, where he fulfils this promise, she appears 1
transfigured into a heavenly protectress and guide,


122 POETKY AND RELIGION

whose gentle womanhood fades into an imper-
sonation of theological wisdom. But this life-
long devotion of Dante to Beatrice was something
purely mental and poetical; he never ventured to
woo; he never once descended or sought to descend
from the sphere of silent and distant adoration;
his tenderness remained always tearful and dreamy,
like that of a supersensitive child.

Yet, while his love of Beatrice was thus constant
and religious, it was by no means exclusive. ■ Dante
took a wife as Beatrice herself had taken a husband ;
the temptations of youth, as well as the affection of
married life, seem to have existed beneath this ideal
love, not unrebuked by it, indeed, but certainly not
disturbing it. Should we be surprised at this
species of infidelity ? Should we regard it as proof
of the artificiality and hollowness of that so tran-
scendental passion, and smile, as people have done
in the case of Plato himself, at the thin disguise of
philosophy that covers the most vulgar frailties of
human nature ? Or, should we say, with others,
that Beatrice is a merely allegorical figure, and the
love she is said to inspire nothing but a symbol for
attachment to wisdom and virtue ? These are old
questions, and insoluble by any positive method,
since they cannot be answered by the facts but only
by our interpretation of them. Our solution can
have little historical value, but it will serve to test
our understanding of the metaphysics of feeling.


PLATONIC LOVE 123

To guide us in this delicate business we may I
appeal to a friend of Dante, Ms fellow-poet Guido
Cavaleanti, who will furnish us with another ex-
ample of this same sort of idealization, and this
same sort of inconstancy, expressed in a manner
that will repay analysis. Guido Cavaleanti had a
Beatrice of his own — something of the kind was
then expected of every gentle knight and poet —
and Guido's Beatrice was called Giovanna. Dante
seems to acknowledge the parity of his friend's
passion with his own by coupling the names of the
two ladies, Monna Vanna and Monna Bice, in one
or two of the sonnets he addresses to Guido. Now
it came to pass that Guido, in the fervour of his
devotion, at once chivalrous and religious, bethought
him of making a pilgrimage to the tomb of Saint
James the Apostle, at Compostela in Spain. Upon
this journey — a journey beguiled, no doubt, by
thoughts of the beautiful Giovanna he had left in
Florence — he halted in the city of Toulouse. But
at Toulouse, as chance would have it, there lived
a lovely lady by the name of Mandetta, with whom
it was impossible for the chivalrous pilgrim not to
fall in love ; (for chivalry is nothing but a fine em- -
blazoning of the original manly impulse to fight
every man and love every woman. ^ Now in an
interesting sonnet Guido describes the conflict of
these two affections, or perhaps we should rather
say, their union.


124 POETRY AND KELIQION

" There is a lady in Toulouse so fair,

So young, so gentle, and so chastely gay,
She doth a true and living likeness bear
In her sweet eyes to Love, whom I obey."

The word I have, to avoid confusion, here ren-
dered by "Love " is in the original "la Donna mia,"
" my Lady " ; so that we have our poet falling in
love with Mandetta on account of her striking re-
semblance to Giovanna. Is this inconstancy or
only a more delicate and indirect homage? We
shall see ; for Guido goes on to represent his soul,
according to his custom, as a being that dwells and
moves about in the chambers of his heart; and
speaking still of Mandetta, the lady of Toulouse,
he continues : —

" Within my heart my soul, when she appeared,
Was filled with longing and was fain to flee

Out of my heart to her, yet was af eared
To tell the lady who my Love might be.

She looked upon me with her quiet eyes,
And under their sweet ray my bosom burned.

Cheered by Love's image, that within them Ues."

So far we have still the familiar visible in the
new and making its power; Mandetta is still
nothing but a stimulus to reawaken the memory
of Giovanna. But before the end there is trouble.
The sting of the present attraction is felt in contrast
to the eternal ideal. There is a necessity of sac-
rifice, and he cries, as the lady turns away her
eyes : -^


PLATONIC LOVK 125

" Alas 1 they shot an arrow as she turned,
And with a death-wound from the piercing dart
My soul came sighing back into my heart."

Perhaps this merely means that the lady was
disdainful ; had she been otherwise the poet might
never have written sonnets about her, and surely
not sonnets in which her charms were reduced to
a Platonic reminiscence of a fairer ideal. But it is
this turning away of the face of love, this ephemeral
quality of its embodiments, that usually stimulates
the imagination to the construction of a super-
sensible ideal in which all those evaporated im-
pulses may meet again and rest in an adequate and
permanent object. So that while Guide's "death-
wound" was perhaps in reality nothing but the
rebuff offered him by a prospective mistress, yet
the sting of it, in a mind of Platonic habit, served
at once to enforce the distinction between the
ideal beauty, so full of sweetness and heavenly
charm, which had tempted the soul out of his
heart on its brief adventure, and the particular
and real object against which the soul was dashed,
and from which it returned bruised and troubled to
its inward solitude.

So the meditative Guido represents his experi-
ence: a new planet swam into his ken radiant
with every grace and virtue; yet^Ml. the magic
of that lady lay in her resemblance to the mysteri-
ous Giovanna, the double of Beatrice, the ideal


126 POETRY AND RELIGION

af the poet's imagination. The soul, at first, went
3ut eagerly to the new love as to an image and
embodiment of the old, biit was afraid, and justly,
bo mention the ideal in the presence of the reality.
There is always danger in doing that; it breaks
the spell and reduces us again to the old and
patient loyalty to the unseen. The present thing
being so like the ideal we unhesitatingly pursue it :
but we are quickly disappointed, and the soul re-
turns sighing and' mortally wounded, as the new
abject of passion fades away.

We may now understand somewhat better that
strange combination of loyalty and disloyalty which
we find in Dante. While the object of love is any
particular thing, it excludes all others ; but it in-
3ludes all others as soon as it becomes a general
ideal. All beauties attract by suggesting the ideal
md then fail to satisfy by not fulfilling it. While
Griovanna remained a woman, Guido, as his after
life plainly showed, had no difiiculty in forgetting
ler and in loving many others with a frank heart ;
3ut when Giovanna had become a name for the ab-
solute ideal, that sovereign mistress could never be
forgotten, and the thought of her subordinated every
particular attachment and called the soul away from
t. / Compared with the ideal, every human perfec-
;ion becomes a shadow and a deceit ; every mortal
passion leaves, as Keats has told us,

"A heart high-sorrowful and cloyed,


PLATONIC LOVE 127

Sucli is the nature of idealization. Like the
Venus of Apelles, in which all known beauties
were combined, th e ideal is the union of all we i,
prize in all creatures ; and the mind that has once
felt the irresistible compulsion to create this ideal
and to believe in it has become incapable of unre-
served love of anything else.) The absolute is a
jealous god ; it is a consuming fire that blasts the
affections upon which it feeds. For this reason
the soul of Guide, in his sonnet, is mortally-
wounded by the shaft of that beauty which has
awakened a vehement longing for perfection with-
out being able to satisfy it. All things become to
the worshipper of the ideal so many signs and
symbols of what he seeks; like the votary who,
kneeling now before one image apd now before
another, lets his incense float by all with a certain
abstracted impartiality, because his aspiration
mounts through them equally to the invisible God
they alike represent.

Another aspect of the same process is well de-
scribed by Shakespeare, in whom Italian influences
count for much, when he says to the person he has
chosen as the object of his idealization : —

" Thy bosom is endearfed with all hearts

Which I, by lacking, have supposed dead,
And there reigns love and all love's loving parts
And all those friends which I thought burifed.
How many a holy and obsequious tear
Hath dear religious love stolen from mine eye


128 POBTKY AND BELIGION

As interest for the dead, which now appear
But things removed, which hidden in thee lie.

Thou art the grave where buried love doth live
Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,

Who all their parts of me to thee did give :
That due of many now is thine alone.

Their images I loved I view in thee.

And thou, all they, hast all the all of me."

We need not, then, waste erudition in trying to
prove -whether Dante's Beatrice or Guido's Gio-
vanna or any one else who has been the subject
of the greater poetry of love, was a symbol or a
reality. To poets and philosophers real things
are themselves symbols. The child of seven
whom Dante saw at the Florentine feast was, if
you will, a reality. As such she is profoundly
unimportant. To say that Dante loved her then
and ever after is another way of saying that she
was a symbol to him. That is the way with child-
ish loves. Neither the conscious spell of the
senses nor the affinities of taste and character
can then be powerful, but the sense of loneliness
and the vague need of loving may easily conspire
with the innocence of the eyes to fix upon a
single image and to make it the imaginary goal
of all those instincts which as yet do not know
themselves.

When with time these instincts become explicit
and select their respective objects, if the inmost
hfeart still remains unsatisfied, as it must in all


PLATONIC LOVE 129

profound or imaginative natures, the name and
memory of that vague early love may well sub-
sist as a symbol for the perfect good yet unat-
tained. It is intelligible that as time goes on
that image, grown thus consciously symbolic,
should become interchangeable with the abstract
method of pursuing perfection — that Beatrice)
that is, should become the same as sacred the-
ology. Having recognized that she was to his
childish fancy what the ideals of religion were to
his mature imagination, Dante intentionally fused
the two, as every poet intentionally fuses the
general and the particular^Jihe— universaLand the
^^ ersonal. . Beatrice thenceforth appeared, as Plato
wished that our loves should, as a manifestation
of absolute beauty and as an avenue of divine
grace. Dante merely added his Christian humil-
ity and tenderness to the insight of the Pagan
philosopher.

The tendency to impersonality, we see, is essen-
tial to the ideal. It could not fulfil its functions
if it retained too many of the traits of any in-
dividual. A blind love, an unreasoning passion,
is therefore inconsistent with the Platonic spirit,
which is favourable rather to abstraction from per-
sons and to admiration of qualities. These may,
of course, be found in many individuals. Too
much subjection to another personality makes the
expression of our own impossible, and the ideal


130 POETRY AND RELIGION

-i§._jiq^ing but a proje(3iiDii-ja£_±]ie._deina]ids.--Qf
our imaginatioii. If the imagination is over-
powered by too stroiig a fascination, by the abso-
lute dominion of an alien influence, we form no
ideal at all. We must master a passion before
we can see its meaning.

Por this reason, among others, we find so little
Platonism in that poet in whom we might have
expected to find most — I mean in Petrarch. Pe-
i trarch is musical, ingenious, learned, and passion-
late, but he is weak. His art is greater than his
'thought. In the quality of his mind there is
nothing truly distinguished. The discipline of
his long and hopeless love brings him little wis-
dom, little consolation. He is lachrymose and
sentimental at the end as at the beginning, and
his best dream of heaven, expressed, it is true, in
entrancing verse, is only to hold his lady's hand
and hear her voice. Sometimes, indeed, he re-
peats what he must have read and heard so often,
and gives us his version of Plato in half a son-
net. Thus, for instance, speaking of his love for
.^Laura, he says in one place : —

" Hence comes the understanding of love's scope
That seeking her to perfect good aspires,
Accounting little what all flesh desires ;
And hence the spirit's happy pinions ope
In flight impetuous to the heaven's choirs,
Wherefore I walk already proud in hope."


PLATONIC LOVE 131

If we are looking, however, for more direct
expressions of the idealism of feeling, of love,
and the sense of beauty passing into religion, we
shall do well to turn to another Italian, not so
great a poet as Petrarch by any means, but a far
greater man — to Michael Angelo. Michael Angelo
justly regarded himself as essentially a sculptor,
and said even of painting that it was not his art ;
his verses are therefore both laboured and rough.
Yet they have been too much neglected, for they
breathe the same pathos of strength, the same
agony in hope, as his Titanic designs.

Like every Italian of culture in those days,
Michael Angelo was in the habit of addressing
little pieces to his friends, and of casting his
thoughts or his prayers into the mould of a son-
net or a madrigal. Verse has a greater natural-
ness and a wider range among the Latin peoples
than among the English; poetry and prose are
less differentiated. In French, Italian, and Span-
ish, as in Latin itself, elegance and neatness of
expression suffice for verse. The reader passes
without any sense of incongruity or anti-climax
from passion to reflection, from sentiment to satire,
from flights of fancy to homely details: the whole
has a certain human sincerity and intelligibility
which weld it together. As the Latin languages
are not composed of two diverse elements, as
English is of Latin and German, so the Latin


132 POETRY AND RELIGION

mind does not have two spheres of sentiment, one
vulgar and the other sublime. All changes are
variations on a single key, which is the key of
intelligence. We must not be surprised, therefore,
to find now a message to a friend, now an artistic
maxim, now a bit of dialectic, and now a confes-
sion of sin, taking the form of verse and filling out
the fourteen lines of a sonnet. On the contrary,
we must look to these familiar compositions for
the most genuine evidence of a man's daily
thoughts.

We find in Michael Angelo's poems a few recur-
ring ideas, or rather the varied expression of a
single half aesthetic, half religious creed. The
soul, he tells us in effect, is by nature made for
God and for the enjoyment of divine beauty. All
true beauty leads to the idea of perfection; the
effort toward perfection is the burden of all art,
which labours, therefore, with a superhuman and
insoluble problem. All love, also,- that does not lead
to the love of God and merge into that love, is a
long and hopeless torment ; while the light of love
is already the light of heaven, the fire of love is
already the fire of hell. These are the thoughts
that perpetually recur, varied now with a pathetic
reference to the poet's weariness and old age, now
with an almost despairing appeal for divine mercy,
often with a powerful and rugged description of
the pangs of love, and with a pious acceptance of


PLATONIC LOVE 133

its discipline. The whole is intense, exalted, and
tragic, haunted by something of that profound
terror, of that magnificent strength, which we
admire in the figures of the Sifbine Chapel, those
noble agonies of beings greater than any we find
in this world.

What, we may ask, is all this tragedy about?
What great sorrow, what great love, had Michael
Angelo or his giants that they writhe so supernat-
urally ? As those decorative youths are sprinkled
over the S^^tine vault, filled, we know not why,
with we know not what emotion, so these scraps
of verse, these sibylline leaves of Michael Angelo's,
give us no reason for their passion. They tell no
story ; there seems to have been no story to tell.
There is something impersonal and elusive about
the subject and occasion of these poems. Attempts
have been made to attribute them to discreditable
passions, as also to a sentimental love for Vittoria
Colonna. But the friendship with Vittoria Colonna
was an incident of Michael Angelo's mature years ;
some of the sonnets and madrigals are addressed
to her, but we cannot attribute to her influence
the passion and sorrow that seem to permeate
them all.

Perhaps there is less mystery in this than the
curious would have us see in it. Perhaps the love
and beauty, however base their primal incarnation,
are really, as they think themselves, aspirations


134 POETRY AND EBLIGIOK

toward the Most High. In the long studies and
weary journeys of the artist, in his mighty inspira-
tion, in his intense love of the structural beauty of
the human body, in his vicissitudes of fortune and
his artistic disappointments, in his exalted piety,
we may see quite enough explanation for the burden
of his soul. It is not necessary to find vulgar
causes for the extraordinary feelings of an extraor-
dinary man. It suffices that life wore this aspect
to him; that the great demands of his spirit so
expressed themselves in the presence of his world.
Here is a madrigal in which the Platonic theory
of beauty is clearly stated : —

" For faithful guide unto my labouring heart
Beauty was given me at birth,
To he my glass and lamp in either art.
Who thinketh otherwise misknows her worth,
For highest beauty only gives me light
To carve and paint aright.
Bash is the thought and vain
That maketh beauty from the senses grow.
She lifts to heaven hearts that truly know,
But eyes grown dim with pain
From mortal to immortal cannot go ,
Nor without grace of God look up again."

And here is a sonnet, called by Mr. Symonds
" the heavenly birth of love and beauty." I bor-
row in part from his translation : —

" My love's life comes not from this heart of mine.
The love wherewith I love thee hath no heart.


PLATONIC LOVE 136

Turned thither whither no fell thoughts incline
And erring human passion leaves no smart.
Loye, from God's bosom when our souls did part,
Made me pure eye to see, thee light to shine,
And I must needs, half mortal though thou art,
In spite of sorrow know thee all ditine.
As heat in fire, so must eternity
In heauty dwell ; through thee my soul's endeavour
Mounts to the pattern and the source of thee ;
And having found all heaven in thine eyes,
Beneath thy brows my burning spirit flies
There where I loved thee first to dwell for ever."

Sometlimg of this kind may also be found in I
the verses of Lorenzo de' Medici, who, like Michael
Angelo, was a poet only incidentally, and even
thought it necessary to apologize in a preface for
having written about love. Many of his composi-
tions are, indeed, trival enough, but his pipings
will not seem vain to the severest philosopher
when he finds them leading to strains like the
following, where the thought rises to the purest
sphere of tragedy and of religion : —

" As a lamp, burning through the waning night.
When the oil begins to faU that fed its fire
Plares up, and in its dying waxes bright
And mounts and spreads, the better to expire ;
So in this pilgrimage and earthly flight
The ancient hope is spent that fed desire.
And if there burn within a greater light
' Tis that the vigil's end approacheth nigher.
Hence thy last insult, Fortune, cannot move.
Nor death's inverted torches give alarm ;


136 POETBY AND KELIGION

I see the end of wrath and bitter moan.
My fair Medusa into sculptured stone
Turns me no more, my Siren cannot charm.
Heaven draws me up to its supernal love."

rrom such spontaneous meditation Lorenzo could
even pass to verses oflScially religious ; but in them
too, beneath the threadbare metaphors of the pious
muse and her mystical paradoxes, we may still
feel the austerity and firmness of reason. The
following stanzas, for instance, taken from his
" Laudi Spirituali," assume a sublime meaning if we
remember that the essence to which they are ad-
dressed, before being a celestial Monarch into
whose visible presence any accident might usher
us, was a general idea of what is good and an in-
transitive rational energy, indistinguishable from
the truth of things.

" let this wretched life within me die

That I may live in thee, my life indeed ;
In thee alone, where dwells eternity,

While hungry multitudes death's hunger feed.
I list within, and hark ! Death's stealthy tread 1
I look to thee, and nothing then is dead.

" Then eyes may see a light invisible

And ears may hear a voice without a sound, —
A voice and light not harsh, but tempered well,

Which the mind wakens when the sense is drowned,
Till, wrapped within herself, the soul have flown
To that last good which is her inmost own.

" When, sweet and beauteous Master, on that day.
Reviewing all my loves with aching heart,


PLATONIC LOVE 137

I take from each its bitter self away,
The remnant sliall be thou, their better part.
This perfect sweetness be his single store
Who seeks the good ; this faileth nevermore.

" A thirst unquenchable is not beguiled

By draught on draught of any running river
Whose fiery waters feed our pangs for ever,

But by a living fountain undefiled.
O sacred well, I seek thee and were fain
To drink ; so should I never thirst again."

Having before us these characteristic expressions \
of Platonic feeling, as it arose again in a Christian
age, divorced from the accidental setting which
Greek manners had given it, we may be better able
to understand its essence. It is nothing else than
the application to passion of that pursuit of some-
thing permanent in a world of change, of something
absolute in a world of relativity, which was the
essence of the Platonic philosophy. If we may
give rein to the imagination in a matter which
without imagination could not be understood at all,
we may fancy Plato trying to comprehend the
power which beauty exerted over his senses by
applying to the objects of love that profound met-
aphysical distinction which he had learned to make
in his dialectical studies — the distinction between
the appearance to sense and the reality envisaged
by the intellect, between the phenomenon and the
ideal. The whole natural world had come to seem
to him like a world of dreams. In dreams images


138 POETEY AND RELIGION

succeed one another without other meaning than
that which they derive from our strange power of
recognition — a power which enables us somehow,
among the most incongruous transformations and
surroundings, to find again the objects of our wak-
ing life, and to name those absurd and unmannerly
visions by the name of father or mother or by any
other familiar name. As these resemblances to
real things make up all the truth of our dream, and
these recognitions all its meaning, so Plato thought
that all the truth and meaning of earthly things
was the reference they contained to a heavenly
original. This heavenly original we remember and
recognize even among the distortions, disappear-
ances, and multiplications of its earthly copies.

This thought is easily applicable to the affec-
tions ; indeed, it is not impossible that it was the
natural transcendence of any deep glance into
beauty, and the lessons in disillusion and idealism
given by that natural metaphysician we call love,
that first gave Plato the key to his general system.
There is, at any rate, no sphere in which the super-
sensible is approached with so warm a feeling of
its reality, in which the phenomenon is so trans-
parent and so indifferent a symbol of something
perfect and divine beyond. In love and beauty, if
anywhere, even the common man thinks he has
visitations from a better world, approaches to a
lost happiness ; a happiness never tasted by us in


PLATONIC LOVE 139

this world, and yet so natural, so expected, that
we look for it at every turn of a corner, in every
new face ; we look for it with, so much confidence,
with so much depth of expectation, that we never
quite overcome our disappointment that it is not
found.

And it is not found, — no, never, — in spite of
what we may think when we are first in' love,
Plato knew this well from his experience. He
had had successful loves, or what the world calls
such, but he could not fancy that these successes
were more than provocations, more than hints of
what the true good is. To have mistaken them for
real happiness would have been to continue to
dream. It would have shown as little compre-
hension of the heart's experience as the idiot shows
of the experience of the senses when he is unable
to put together impressions of his eyes and hands
and to say, " Here is a table ; here is a stool." It
is by a parallel use of the understanding that we
put together the impressions of the heart and the
imagination and are able to say, " Here is abso-
lute beauty : here is God." The impressions them-
selves have no permanence, no intelligible essence.
As Plato said, they are never anything fixed but
are always either becoming or ceasing to be what
we think them. There must be, he tells us, an
eternal and clearly definable object of which the
visible appearances to lis are the manifold sem-


140 POETRY AND EBLIGION

blance; now by one trait now by another the
phantom before us lights up that vague and haunt-
\,ing idea, and makes us utter its name with a mo-
mentary sense of certitude and attainment.

Just so the individual beauties that charm our
attention and enchain the soul have only a transi-
tive existence; they are momentary visions, irre-
coverable moods. Their object is unstable; we never
can say what it is, it changes so quickly before our
eyes. What is it that a mother loves in her child ?
Perhaps the babe not yet born, or the babe that
grew long ago by her suffering and unrecognized
care ; perhaps the man to be or the youth that has
been. What does a man love in a woman ? The
girl that is yet, perhaps, to be his, or the wife
that once chose to give him her whole existence.
Where, among all these glimpses, is the true object
of love? It flies before us, it tempts us on, only
to escape and turn to mock us from a new quarter.
And yet nothing can concern us more or be more
real to us than this mysterious good, since the
pursuit of it gives our lives whatever they have
of true earnestness and meaning, and the approach
to it whatever they have of joy.

So far is this ideal, Plato would say, from being
an illusion, that it is the source of the world, the
power that keeps us in existence. But for it, we
should be dead. A profound indifference, an ini-
tial torpor, would have kept us from ever opening


PLATONIC LOVE 141

our eyes, and we should have no world of business
or pleasure, politics or science, to think about at
all. We, and the whole universe, exist only by
the passionate attempt to return to our perfection,
by the radical need of losing ourselves again in
God. That ineffable good is our natural posses-
sion ; all we honour in this life is but the partial
recovery of our birthright ; every delightful thing
is like a rift in the clouds through which we catch
a glimpse of our native heaven. If that heaven
seems so far away and the -idea of it so dim and
unreal, it.is because we are so far from perfect, so
much immersed in what is alien and destructive to
the soul.

Thus the history of our loves is the record of
our divine conversations, of our intercourse with
heaven. It matters very little whether this his-
tory seems to us tragic or not. In one sense, all
mortal loves are tragic because never is the crea-
ture we think we possess the true and final object
of our love ; this love must ultimately pass beyond
that particular apparition, which is itself continu-
ally passing away and shifting all its lines and
colours. As Heraclitus could never bathe twice in
the same river, because its water had flowed away,
go Plato could never look twice at the same face,
for it had become another. But on the other hand
the most unsuccessful passion cannot be a vain
thing. More, perhaps, than if it had found an


142 POETEY AND BELIGION

apparent satisfaction, it will reveal to us an ob-
ject of infinite worth, and the flight of the soul,
detached by it from the illusions of common life,
will be more straight and steady toward the ulti-
mate good.

Such, if we are not mistaken, is the lesson of
Plato's experience and also of that of the Italian
poets whom we have quoted. Is this experience
something normal? Is it the rational outcome of
our own lives ? That is a question which each
man must answer for himself. Our immediate
object will have been attained if we have made
more intelligible a tendency which is certainly
very common among men, and not among the men
least worthy of honour. It is the tendency to
make our experience of love rational, as scientific
thinking is a tendency to make rational our experi-
ence of the outer world. The theories of natural
science are creations of human reason; they change
with the growth of reason, and express the intel-
lectual impulses of each nation and age. Theories
about the highest good do the same; only being
less applicable in practice, less controllable by ex-
periment, they seldom attain the same distinctness
and articulation. But there is nothing authorita-
tive in those constructions of the intellect, nothing
coercive except in so far as our own experience and
reflection force us to accept them. Natural science
is persuasive because it embodies the momentum


PLATONIC LOVE 143

of common sense and of the practical arts; it
carries on their spontaneous processes by more
refined but essentially similar methods. Moral
science is persuasive under the same conditions,
but these conditions are not so generally found
in the minds of men. Their conscience is often
superstitious and perfunctory; their imagination
is usually either disordered or dull. There is little
momentum in their lives which the moralist can
rely upon to carry them onward toward rational
ideals. Deprived of this support his theories fall
to the ground ; they must seem, to every man
whose nature cannot elicit them from his own ex-
perience, empty verbiage and irrelevant dreams.

Nothing in the world of fact obliges us to agree
with Michael Angelo when he says that eternity
can no more be separated from beauty than heat
from fire. Beauty is a thing we experience, a
value we feel ; but eternity is something problem- '
atical. It might well happen that beauty should
exist for a while in our contemplation and that
eternity should have nothing to do with it or with
us. It might well happen that our affections, be-
ing the natural expression of our instincts in the
family and in the state, should bind us for a while
to the beings with whom life has associated us
— a father, a lover, a child — and that these affec-
tions should gradually fade with the decay of our
vitality, declining in the evening of life, and pass-


144 POETEY AND RELIGION

ing away when we surrender our breath, without
leading us to any single and supreme good, to any
eternal love. If, therefore, the thoughts and con-
solations we have been rehearsing have sounded,
to us extravagant or unnatural, we cannot justify
them by attempting to prove the actual existence
of their objects, by producing the absolute beauty
or by showing where and how we may come face to
face with God. We may well feel that beauty and
love are clear and good enough without any such
additional embodiments. We may take the world
as it is, without feigning another, and study actual
experience without postulating any that is hypo-
thetical. We can welcome beauty for the pleasure
it affords and love for the happiness it brings,
without asking that these things should receive
supernatural extensions.

But we should have studied Plato and his
kindred poets to little purpose if we thought that
by admitting all this we were rejecting more than
the mythical element that was sometimes mixed
with their ideal philosophy. Its essence is not
touched by any acknowledgment of what seems
true or probable in the realm of actual existence.
Nothing is more characteristic of the Platonic
mind than a complete indifference to the continu-
ance of experience and an exclusive interest in its
comprehension. If we wish to understand this
classic attitude of reason, all we need do is to let


PLATONIC LOVfi 145

reason herself instruct us. We do not need more
data, but more mind. If we take the sights and
the loves that our mortal limitations have allowed
of, and surrender ourselves unreservedly to their
natural eloquence ; if we say to the spirit that stirs
within them, " Be thou me, impetuous one " ; if we
become, as Michael Angelo says he was, all eyes
to see or all heart to feel, then the force of our
spiritual vitality, the momentum of our imagina-
tion, will carry us beyond ourselves, beyond an
interest in our personal existence or eventual emo-
tions, into the. presence of a divine beauty and
an eternal truth — things impossible to realize in
experience, although necessarily envisaged by
thought.

As the senses that perceive, in the act of per-
ceiving assert an absolute reality in their object,
as the mind that looks before and after believes
in the existence of a past and a future which
cannot now be experienced, so the imagination
and the heart behold, when they are left free
to expand and express themselves, an absolute
beauty and a perfect love. Intense contemplation
disentangles the ideal from the idol of sense, and a
purified will rests in it as in the true object of
worship. These are the oracles of reason, the
prophecies of those profounder spirits who in the
world of Nature are obedient unto death because
they belong intrinsically to a world where death is


146 POETRY AND KBLIGION

I impossible, and who can rise continually, by ab-
straction from personal sensibility, into identity
witli tbe eternal objects of rational life.

Such a religion must elude popular apprehension
until it is translated into myths and cosmological
dogmas. It is easier for men to fill out the life of
the spirit by supplementing the facts of experience
by other facts for which there is no evidence than
it is for them to master the given facts and turn
them to spiritual uses. Many can fight for a
doubtful fact when they cannot perform a difficult
idealization. They trust, as all men must, to what
they can see ; they believe in things as their facul-
ties represent things to them. By the same right,
however, the rationalizer of experience believes in
his visions ; he rests, like the meanest of us, in the
present object of his thought. So long as we live
at all we must trust in something, at least in the
coherence and permanence of the visible world and
in the value of the objects of our own desires. And
if we live nobly, we are under the same necessity of
believing in noble things. However unreal, there-
fore, these Platonic intuitions may seem to those of
us whose interests lie in other quarters, we may
rest assured that these very thoughts would domi-
nate our minds and these eternal companionships
would cheer our desolation, if we had wrestled as
manfully with the same passions and passed through
the transmuting fire of as great a love.


VI

THE ABSENCE OE KELIGION IN SHAKE-
SPEARE

We are accustomed to think of the universality
of Shakespeare as not the least of his glories. No
other poet has given so many-sided an expression
to human nature, or rendered so many passions and
moods with such an appropriate variety of style,
sentiment, and accent. If, therefore, we were asked
to select one monument of human civilization that
should survive to some future age, or be trans-
ported to another planet to bear witness to the
inhabitants there of what we have been upon earth,
we should probably choose the works of Shake-
speare. In them we recognize the truest portrait
and best memorial of man. Yet the archaeologists
of that future age, or the cosmographers of that
other part of the heavens, after conscientious study
of our Shakespearian autobiography, would miscon-
ceive our life in one important respect. They
would hardly understand that man had had a
religion.

There are, indeed, numerous exclamations and in-
147


148 POETEY Alft) BELIGION

vocations in Shakespeare which we, who have other
means of information, know to be evidences of cur-
rent religious ideas. Shakespeare adopts these, as
he adopts the rest of his vocabulary, from the soci-
ety about him. But he_ seldom or never gives them
their original value. AVhen lago says " 'sblood," a
commentator might add explanations which should
involve the whole philosophy of Christian devo-
tion ; but this Christian sentiment is not in lago's
mind, nor in Shakespeare's, any more than the vir-
tues of Heracles and his twelve labours are in the
mind of every slave and pander that cries "hercule"
in the pages of Plautus and Terence. V Oaths are
the fossils of piety, j The geologist recognizes in
them the relics of a once active devotion, but they
are now only counters and pebbles tossed about in
the unconscious play of expression. The lighter
and more constant their use, the less their mean-
ing.

Only one degree more inward than this survival
of a religious vocabulary in. profane speech is the
reference we often find in Shakespeare to religious
institutions and traditions. There are monks,
bishops, and cardinals; there is even mention of
saints, although none is ever presented to us in
person. The clergy, if they have any wisdom,
have an earthly one. Priaf Lawrence culls his
herbs like a more benevolent Medea ; and Cardinal
Wolsey flings away ambition with a profoundly


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 149

Pagan despair ; his robe and his integrity to heaven
are cold comfort to him. Juliet goes to shrift to
arrange her love affairs, and Ophelia should go to
a nunnery to forget hers. Even the chastity of
Isabella has little in it that would have been out
of place in Iphigenia. The metaphysical Hamlet
himself sees a "true ghost," but so far reverts to'
the positivism t hat underl ies_Shakespeare's think-
ing as to speak soon after of that "undiscovered
country from whose bourn no traveller returns."

There are only two or three short passages in the
plays, and one sonnet, in which true religious feel-
ing seems to break forth. The most beautiful of
these passages is that in " Richard II," which com-
memorates the death of Mowbray, Duke of Nor-
folk:—

"Many a time hath banished Norfolk fought
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Against black Pagans, Turks, and Saracens ;
And, toiled with works of war, retired himself
To Italy ; and there, at Venice, gave
His body to that pleasant country's earth,
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
Under whose colours he had fought so long."

This is tender and noble, and full of an indescrib-
able chivalry and pathos, yet even here we find the
spirit of war rather than that of religion, and a
deeper sense of Italy than of heaven. More un-


150 POBTBY AND BBLIGION

mixed is the piety of Henry V g,fter the battle of
Agincourt : —

"O God, thy arm was heie;
And not to us, but to tliy arm alone,
Asojibe we all I — When, without stratagem,
But In plain shock and even play of battle.
Was ever known so great and little loss.
On one part and on the other ? — Take it, God,
For it is none but thine. . . .
Come, go we in procession to the village,
And be it death proclaimfed through our host.
To boast of this, or take that praise from GrOd,
Which is his only. . . .

Do we all holy rites ;
Let there be sung Non nobis and Te Deum."

This passage is certainly a true expression of
religious feeling, and just the kind that we might
expect from a dramatist. Religion appears here
as a inanifestation of human nature and as an
expression of human passion. The passion, how-
ever, is not due to Shakespeare's imagination, but
is essentially historical : the poet has simply not
rejected, as he usually does, the religious element
in the situation he reproduces.^

1 " And so aboute foure of the clocke in the afternoone, the
Kynge when he saw no apparaunce of enemies, caused the
retreite to be blowen, and gathering his army toglther, gave
thankes to almightie god for so happy a victory, causing bis
prelates and chapleines to sing this psalm, In exitu Israeli
de Egipto, and commandyug every man to kneele downe
on the giounde at this verse ; Non nobis, domine, non nobis,
sed notnini tuo da gloriam. Which done, he caused Te Deum,


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 151

With this dramatic representation of piety we
may couple another, of a more intimate kind, from
the Sonnets : —

" Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
Fooled by these rebel powers that thee array.
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Fainting thy outward walls so costly gay ?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend ?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up tUy charge ? Is this thy body's end ?
Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss.
And let that pine to aggravate thy store ;
Buy terms divine by selling hours of dross,
Within be fed, without be rich no more :
Then shalt thou feed on death, that feeds on men.
And death once dead, there's no more dying then."

This sonnet contains more than a natural reli-
gious emotion inspired by a single event. It con-
tains reflection, and expresses a feeling not merely
dramatically proper but rationally just. A mind
that habitually ran into such thoughts would be
philosophically pious ; it would be spiritual. Thd
Sonnets, as a whole, are spiritual ; their passion is\
transmuted into discipline. Their love, which, ,
whatever its nominal object, is hardly anything but
love of beauty and youth in general, is made to
triumph over time by a metaphysical transforma-

with certain anthems, to be song, giving laud & praise to god,
and not boasting of his owne force or any humaine power."

HOLINSBEO.


152 POETRY AND KBLIGION


tion of tlie object into sometliing eternal. At first
tMs is the beauty of the race renewing itself by
generation, then it is the description of beauty in
the poet's verse, and finally it is the immortal soul
enriched by the contemplation of that beauty. This
noble theme is the more impressively rendered by
being contrasted with another, with a vulgar love
\ that by its nature refuses to be so transformed and
"^ transmuted. " Two loves," cries the poet, in a line
that gives us the essence of the whole, " Two loves
I have, — of comfort, and despair."

In all this depth of experience, however, there is
still wanting any religious image. The Sonnets are
spiritual, but, with the doubtful exception of the
/ one quoted above, they are not Christian. And, of
course, a poet of Shakespeare's time could not have
found any other mould than Christianity for his
religion. In our day, with our wide and conscien-
tious historical sympathies, it may be possible for
us to find in other rites and doctrines than those
of our ancestors an expression of some ultimate
truth. But for Shakespeare, in the matter of reli-
V gion, the choice lay between Christianity and noth-
i ing. He chose nothing ; he chose to leave his
1 heroes and himself in the presence of life and of
I death with no other philosophy than that which
ithe profane world can suggest and understand.

This^gositivism, we need hardly say, was not due
to any grossness or sluggishness in his imagination.


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 153

Shakespeare could be idealistic ■when he dreamed,
as he could be spiritual when he reflected. The
spectacle of life did not pass before his eyes as a
mere phantasmagoria. He seized upon its princi-
ples; he became wise. Nothing can exceed the
ripeness of his seasoned judgment, or the occa-
sional breadth, sadness, and terseness of his reflec-
tion. The author of " Hamlet " could not be without
metaph ysical aptitude ; " Macbeth " could not have
been written without a sort of sibylline inspiration,
or the Sonnets without something of the Platonic
mind. It is all the more remarkable, therefore,
that we should have to search through all the
works of Shakespeare to find half a dozen passages
that have so much as a religious sound, and that
even these passages, upon examination, should prove
not to be the expression of any deep religious con-
ception. If Shakespeare had been without meta-
physical capacity, or without moral maturity, we
could have explained his strange insensibility to
religion ; but as it is, we must marvel at his indif-
ference and ask ourselves what can be the causes
of it. For, even if we should not regard the ab\
sence of religion as an imperfection in his own
thought, we must admit it to be an incompletenesa
in his portrayal of the thought of others, gositiv- 1
ism may be a virtue in a philosopher, but it is a
vice in a dramatist, who has to render those hu-
man passions to which the religious .imagination


164 POETEY AND RELIGION

has always given a larger meaning and a richer
depth.

Those greatest poets by whose side we are accus-
tomed to put Shakespeare did not forego this ad-
vantage. They gave us man with his piety and
the world with its gods. Homer is the chief reposi-
tory of the Greek religion, and Dante the faithful
interpreter of the Catholic. Nature would have
been inconceivable to them without the super-
natural, or man without the influence and com-
panionship of the gods. These poets live in a
cosmos. In their minds, as in the mind of their
age, the fragments of experience have fallen to-
gether into a perfect picture, like the bits of glass in
a kaleidoscope. Their universe is a total. Eeason
and imagination have mastered it completely and
peopled it. No chaos remains beyond, or, if it
does, it is thought of with an involuntary shudder
that soon passes into a healthy indifference. They
have a theory of human life ; they see man in his
relations, surrounded by a kindred universe in
which he fills his allotted place. He knows the
meaning and issue of his life, and does not voyage
without a chart.

Shakespeare's world, on the contrary, is only the
world of human society. The cosmos eludes him ;
he does not seem to feel the need of framing that
idea. He depicts human life in all its richness
and variety, but leaves that life without a setting,


KELI6I0N IN SHAKESPEARE 155

and consequently -without a meaning. If we asked
him to tell us what is the significance of the
passion and beauty he had so vividly displayed,
and what is the outcome of it all, he could hardly
answer in any other words than those he puts into
the mouth of Macbeth : —

" To-mbrrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded' time ;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle I
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more : it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing."

How differently would Homer or Dante have
answered that question ! Their tragedy would
have been illumined by a sense of the divinity of
life and beauty, or by a sense of the sanctity of
suffering and death. Their faith had enveloped
the world of experience in a world of imagination,
in which the ideals of the reason, of the fancy, and
of the heart had a natural expression. They had
caught in the reality the hint of a lovelier fable, —
a fable in which that reality was completed and
idealized, and made at once vaster in its extent
and more intelligible in its principle. They had,
as it were, dramatized the universe, and endowed
it with the tragic unities. In contrast with such a


156 POETRY AND RELIGION

luminous philosophy and so well-digested an expe-
rience, the silence of Shakespeare and his philo-
sophical incoherence have something in them that
is still heathen; something > that makes us wonder
whether the northern mind, even in him, did not
remain morose and barbarous at its inmost core.

But before we allow ourselves such hasty and
general inferences, we may well stop to consider
whether there is not some simpler answer to our
question. An epic poet, we might say, naturally
deals with cosmic themes. He needs supernatural
machinery because he depicts the movement of
human affairs in their generality, as typified in the
figures of heroes whose function it is to embody or
to overcome elemental forces. Such a poet's world
is fabulous, because his inspiration is impersonal.
But the dramatist renders the concrete reality of
life. He has no need of a superhuman setting for
his pictures. Such a setting would destroy the
vitality of his creations. His plots should involve
only human actors and human motives : the deus
ex machina has always been regarded as an inter-
loper on his stage. The passions of man are his-
all-snf&cient material; he should weave his whole
fabric out of them.

To admit the truth of all this would not, how-
ever, solve our problem. The dramatist cannot
be expected to put cosmogonies on the boards.
Miracle-plays become dramatic only when they be-


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 157

come human. But the supernatural world, which
the playwright does not bring before the foot-
lights, may exist nevertheless in the minds of his
characters and of his audience. He may refer to
it, appeal to it, and imply it, in the actions and
in the sentiments he attributes to his heroes.
And if the comparison of Shakespeare witK
Homer or Dante on the score of religious iifr
spiration is invalidated by the fact that he is a\
dramatist while they are epic poets, a comparison \
may yet be instituted between Shakespeare and
other dramatists, from which his singular insensi-
bility to religion will as readily appear.

Greek tragedy, as we know, is dominated by the
idea of fate. Even when the gods do not appear
in person, or where the service or neglect of them
is not the moving cause of the whole play, — as
it is in the "Bacchse" and the "Hippolytus" of
Euripides, — still the deep conviction of the limits
and conditions of human happiness underlies the
fable. The will of man fulfils the decrees of
Heaven. The hero manifests a higher force than
his own, both in success and in failure. The
fates guide the willing and drag the unwilling.
There is no such fragmentary view of life as we
have in our romantic drama, where accidents make
the meaningless happiness or unhappiness of a
supersensitive adventurer. Life is seen whole,
although in miniature. Its boundaries and its


168 POETKY AND EELIGION

principles are studied more than its incidents.
The human, therefore, everywhere merges with
the divine. Our mortality, being sharply defined
and much insisted upon, draws the attention all
the more to that eternity of Nature and of law
in which it is embosomed. Nor is the fact of
superhuman control left for our reflection to dis-
cover; it is emphatically asserted in those oracles
on which so much of the action commonly turns.

When the Greek religion was eclipsed by the
Christian, the ancient way of conceiving the ultra-
human relations of human life became obsolete.
It was no longer possible to speak with sincerity
of the oracles and gods, of Nemesis and v^pn.
Yet for a long time it was not possible to speak
in any other terms. The new ideas were without
artistic definition, and literature was paralyzed.
' But in the course of ages, when the imagination
had had time and opportunity to develop a Chris-
tian art and a Christian philosophy, the dramatic
poets were ready to deal with the new themes.
Only their readiness in this respect surpassed
their ability, at least their ability to please those
who had any memory of the ancient perfection
of the arts.

The miracle-plays were the beginning. Their
crudity was extreme and their levity of the frank-
est ; but they had still, like the Greek plays, a re-
ligious excuse and a religious background. They


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 159

■were not without dramatic power, but their offences /
against taste and their demands upon faith were I
too great for them to survive the Kenaissance. |
Such plays as the "Polyeucte" of Corneille and
the "Devocion de la Cruz" of Calderon, with other
Spanish plays that might be mentioned, are ex-
amples of Christian dramas by poets of culturej
but as a whole we must say that Christianity,
while it succeeded in expressing itself in paintin
and in architecture, failed to express itself in any
adequate drama. Where Christianity was strong,
the drama either disappeared or became secular;
and it has never again dealt with cosmic themes ,
successfully, except in such hands as those of i
Goethe and Wagner, men who either neglected I
Christianity altogether or used it only as an in-
cidental ornament, having, as they say, transcended i
it in their philosophy.

The fact is, that art and reflection have never
been able to unite perfectly the two elements of
a civilization like ours, that draws its culture from
one source and its religion from another. Modern
taste has ever been, and still is, largely exotic,
largely a revolution in favour of something ancient
or foreign. The more cultivated a period has been, f
the more wholly it has reverted to antiquity fori
its inspiration. The existence of that completer
world has haunted all minds struggling for self-
expression, and interfered, perhaps, with the


160 POETRY AND RELIGION

natural development of their genius. The old art
which they could not disregard distracted them
from the new ideal, and prevented them from em-
bodying this ideal outwardly; while the same
ideal, retaining their inward allegiance, made their
revivals of ancient forms artificial and incomplete.
The strange idea could thus gain admittance that
art was not called to deal with everything; that
its sphere was the world of polite conventions.
The serious and the sacred things of life were to
be left unexpressed and inarticulate; while the
arts masqueraded. in the forms of a Pagan antiq-
uity, to which a triviality was at the same time
attributed which in fact it had not possessed.
< This unfortunate separation of experience and its
'; artistic expression betrayed itself in the inade-
' quacy of what was beautiful and the barbarism
! of what was sincere.

When such are the usual conditions of artistic
creation, we need not wonder that Shakespeare, a
poet of the Eenaissance, should have confined his
representation of life to its secular aspects, and
that his readers after him should rather have
marvelled at the variety of the things of which
he showed an understanding than have taken note
of the one thing he overlooked. To omit religion
was after all to omit what was not felt to be con-
genial to a poet's mind. The poet was to trace
for us the passionate and romantic embroideries


RELIGION IK SHAKESPEARE 161

of life; he was to be artful and humane, and
above all he was to be delightful. The beauty and
charm of things had nothing any longer to do
with those painful mysteries and contentions
which made the temper of the pious so acrid and
sad. In Shakespeare's time and country, to be
religious already began to mean to be Puritanical;
and in the divorce between the fulness of life
on the one hand and the depth and unity of faith
on the other, there could be no doubt to which
side a man of imaginative instincts would attach
himself. A world of passion and beauty without
a meaning must seem to him more interesting and
worthy than a world of empty principle and
dogma, meagre, fanatical, and false. It was be-
yond the power of synthesis possessed by that age
and nation to find a principle of all passion and a
religion of all life.

This power of synthesis is indeed so di£6.cult and
rare that the attempt to gain it is sometimes con-
demned as too philosophical, and as tending to
embarrass the critical eye and creative imagination
with futile theories. We might say, for instance,
that the absence of religion in Shakespeare was a
sign of his good sense ; that a healthy instinct kept
his attention within the sublunary world ; and that
he was in that respect superior to Homer and to
Dante. For, while they allowed their wisdom to
clothe itself in fanciful forms, he gave us his in its


162 POETRY AND RELIGION

immediate truth, so that he embodied what they
signified. The supernatural machinery of their
poems was, we might say, an accidental incum-
brance, a traditional means of expression, which
they only half understood, and which made their
representation of life indirect and partly unreal.
Shakespeare, on the other hand, had reached his
poetical majority and independence. He rendered
human experience no longer through symbols, but
by direct imaginative representation. What I have
treated as a limitation in him would, then, appear
as the maturity of his strength.

There is always a class of minds in whom the
'spectacle of history produces a certain apathy of
reason. They flatter themselves that they can
escape defeat by not attempting the highest tasks.
'We need not here stop to discuss what value as
truth a philosophical synthesis may hope to attain,
nor have we to protest against the aesthetic prefer-
ence for the sketch and the episode over a reasoned
and unified rendering of life. Suffice it to say that
the human race hitherto, whenever it has reached a
phase of comparatively high development and free-
dom, has formed a conception of its place in Nature,
no less than of the contents of its life; and that
this conception has been the occasion of religious
sentiments and practices ; and further, that every
art, whether literary or plastic, has drawn its
favourite themes from this religious sphere./ The


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 163

poetic imagination has not commonly stopped short
of the philosophical in representing a superhuman
environment of man.

Shakespeare, however, is remarkable among the
' greater poets for being without a philosophy and
■without a religion. In his drama there is no
fixed conception of any forces, natural or moral,
dominating and transcending our mortal energies.
Whether this characteristic be regarded as a merit
or as a defect, its presence cannot be denied, j
Those who think it wise or possible to refrain
from searching for general principles, and are
satisfied with the successive empirical appearance
of things, without any faith in their rational con-
tinuity or completeness, may well see in Shake-
speare their natural prophet. For he, too,. has been
satisfied with the successive description of various
passions and events. His world, like the earth be- 1
fore Columbus, extends in an indefinite plane which
he is not tempted to explore.

Those of us, however, who believe in circum-
navigation,(and who think that both human reason
and human imagination require a certain totality in
our views, and who feel that the most important
thing in life is the lesson of it, and its relation to
its own ideal,^ we can hardly find in Shakespeare
all that the highest poet could give. Fulness is not
necessarily wholeness, and the most profuse wealth
of characterization seems still inadequate as a


164 POETRY AND RELIGION

picture of experience, if this picture is not some-
how seen from above and reduced to a dramatic
unity, — to that unity of meaning that can suffuse
its endless details with something of dignity, sim-
plicity, and peace, "j This is the imaginative power
found in several poets we have mentioned, — the
power that gives certain passages in Lucretius also
their sublimity, as it gives sublimity to many
passages in the Bible.

For what is required for theoretic wholeness is
not this or that system but some system. Its value
is not the value of truth, but that of victorious
imagination. Unity of conception is an aesthetic
merit no less than a logical demand, j A fine
sense of the dignity and pathos of life cannot be
attained unless we conceive somehow its outcome
and its relations.; Without such a conception our
emotions cannot be steadfast and enlightened.
Without it the imagination cannot- fulfil its essen-
tial function or achieve its supreme success.
Shakespeare himself, had it not been for the time
and place in which he lived, when religion and
imagination blocked rather than helped each other,
would perhaps have allowed more of a cosmic back-
ground to appear behind his crowded scenes. If
the Christian in him was not the real man, at least
the Pagan would have spoken frankly. The mar
terial forces of Nature, or their vague embodiment
in some northern pantheon, would then have stood


RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE 165

behind his heroes. The various movements of
events would have appeared as incidents in a larger
drama to which they had at least some symbolic
relation. We should have been awed as well as
saddened, and purified as well as pleased, by being
made to feel the dependence of human accidents
upon cosmic forces and their fated evolution. Then
we should not have been able to say that Shake-
speare was without a religion. For the effort of
religion, says Goethe, is to adjust us to the inevit-
able ; each religion in its way strives to bring about
this consummation.


VII
THE POETRY OF BAEBAEISM


It is an observation at first sight melancholy
but in the end, perhaps, enlightening, that the ear-
liest poets are the most ideal, and that primitive
ages furnish the most heroic characters and have
the clearest vision of a perfect life. The Homeric
times must have been full of ignorance and suffer-
ing. In those little barbaric towns, in those camps
and farms, in those shipyards, there ^usj have
been much insecurity and superstition. That age
was singularly poor in all that concerns the con-
venience of life and the entertainment of the mind
with arts and sciences. Yet it had a sense iofl
civilization. That machinery of life which men/
were beginning to devise appealed to them asl
poetical; they knew its ultimate justification ana
studied its incipient processes with delight. The\
poetry of that simple and ignorant age was, ac-
cordingly, the sweetest and sanest that the world
has known; the most faultless in taste, and the
most even and lofty in inspiration. Without lackA
166 )


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 167

ing variety and homeliness, it bathed all thing^
human in the golden light of morning; it clothed
sorrow in a kind of majesty, instinct with both
self-control and heroic frankness. Nowhere else
can we find so noble a rendering of human nature,
so spontaneous a delight in life, so uncompromising
a dedication to beauty, and such a gift of seeing
-beauty in everything. Homer, the first of poets,
was also the best and the most poetical.

Jrom this beginning, if we look down the history
of Occidental literature, wejee the power of ideali-
zation steadily decline. For while it finds here
and there, as in Dante, a more^spiritual theme and
a subtler and riper intellect, it pays for that advan-
tage by a more than equivalent loss in breadth,
sanity, and happy vigour. And if ever imagina-
tion bursts out with a greater potency, as in Shake-
speare (who excels the patriarch of poetry in depth
of passion and vividness of characterization, and in
those exquisite bubblings of poetry and humour in
which English genius is at its best), yet Shake-
speare also pays the price by a notable.lfi^iii-.ta&te,
in sustained inspiration, in consecration, and in
rationality. There is more or less rubbish in his
greatest works. When we come down to our own
day we find poets of hardly less natural endow-
ment (for in endowment all ages are perhaps alike)
and with vastly richer sources of inspiration; for
they have many arts and literatures behind them,


168 POETEY AND EELIGION

with the spectacle of a varied and agitated society,
a world which is the living microcosm of its own
history and presents in one picture many races,
arts, and religions. Our poets have more wonder-
ful tragedies of the imagination to depict than had
Homer, whose world was innocent of any essential
defeat, or Dante, who believed in the world's defin-
itive redemption. Or, if perhaps their inspiration
is comic, they have the pageant of mediaeval man-
ners, with its picturesque artifices and passionate
fancies, and the long comedy of modern social rev-
olutions, so illusory in their aims and so productive
in their aimlessness. They have, moreover, the
new and marvellous conception which natural sci-
ence has given us of the world and of the condi--
tions of human progress.

'" With all these lessons of experience behind ~
them, however, we find^f our contemporary poets
incapable of any high wisdom, incapable of any
imaginative rendering of human life and its mean-
ing. Our poets are things of shreds and patches f"
they give us episodes and studies, a sketch of
this curiosity, a glimpse of that romance; they ■
have no total vision, no grasp of the whole reality,
and consequently no capacity for a sane and steady
idealizaMon^jThe_ comparatively barbarous ages
i had a poetry of the ideal; they had visions of
I beauty, order, and perfection. This age of material
\elaboration has no sense for those things. Its


THE POETEY OF BARBARISM 169

, fancy is retrospective, "whimsioal, and flickering; '
its ideals, when it has any, are negative and par-
tiei; its moral strength is a blind and miscella-
neous vehemence. Its poetry, in a -word, is the

1 poetry of barbarism.

This poetry should be viewed in relation to the
general moral crisis and imaginative disintegration
of which it gives a verbal echo ; then we shall avoid
the injustice of passing it over as insignificant,
no less than the imbecility of hailing it as essen-
tially glorious and successful. We must remember
that the imagination of our race has been subject
to a double discipline. It has been formed partly
in the school of classtcJitgiature and polity, and
partly in the schodl of Christian piety. This duality
of inspiration, this contradiction between the two
accepted methods of rationalizing the world, has
been a chief source of that incoherence, that roman-
tic indistinctness and imperfection, which largely
characterize the products of the modern arts. A
man cannot serve Jascojmasters ; yet the conditions
have not been such as to allow him wholly to
despise the one or wholly to obey the other. To
be wholly Pagan is impossible after the dissolution
of that civilization which had seemed universal,
and that empire which had believed itself eternal.
To be wholly Christian is impossible for a similar
reason, now that the illusion and cohesion of Chris-
tian ages is lost, and for the further reason that


170 POETRY AND RELIGION /

. /

Christianity was itself fundamentally eclectic. Be-
fore it could succeed and dominate men even for a
time, it was obliged to adjust itself to reality, to
incorporate many elements of Pagan wisdom, and to
accommodate itself to many habits and passions at
variance with its own ideal.

In these latter times, with the prodigious growth
of material life in elaboration and of mental life in
diffusion, there has supervened upon this old dual-
ism a new faith injaan,'.g„absolute__power, a kind
of return to the inexperience and self-assurance
of youth. This new inspiration has made many
minds indifferent to the two traditional disci-
plines ; neither is seriously accepted by them, for
the reason, excellent from their own point of view,
that nd discipline whatever is needed. The mem-
ory^ of ancient disillusions has faded with time.
Ignorance of the past has bred contempt for the
lessbTis"which the past might teach. Men . prefer
to repeat the old experiment without knowing that
they repeat it. '

I say advisedly ignorance of the past, in spite of
the unprecedented historical erudition of our time ;
for life is an art not to be learned by observation,
and the most minute and comprehensive studies do
not teach us what the spirit of man should have
learned by its long living. We study the past as a
dead object, as a ruin, not as an authority and as
an experiment. One "reason why history was less


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 171

interesting to former ages was that they were less
conscious of separation from the past. The per-
spective of time was less clear because the synthe-
sis of experience was more complete. The mind
dees not easily discriminate the successive phases
Vof an action in which it is still engaged^" does
not arrange in a temporal series the elements of a
single perception, but posits them all together as
constituting a permanent and real object. Human
nature and the life of the world were real and
stable objects to the apprehension of our fore-
fathers ; the actors changed, but not the characters
or the play. Men were then less studious ofi
derivations because th'ey were more conscious of
i dentitie s. They thought o f all reality as in a
se nse contemporary , and in considering the maxims
of a philosopher or the style of a poet, they were
not primarily concerned with settling his date and
describing his environment. The standard by which i
they judged was eternal ; the environment in which
man found himself did not seem to them subject of I
any essential change. ~^

To us the picturesque element in history is
more striking because we feel ourselves the chil-
dren of our own age only, a n age which bein g
i tself singular and revolutionarv , tends to read
itso wn cha ractfirJ ptp the past , and to regard all
other periods as no less fragmentary and effer-
vescent than itself. The changing and the per-


172 POETRY AND EBLIGION

manent elements are, indeed, everywhere present,
and the bias of the observer may emphasize the
one or the other as it will: the only question is
whether we find the significance of things in their
variations or in their similarities.

Now the habit of regarding the past as effete
and as merely a stepping-stone to something pres-
ent or future, is unfavourable to any true appre-
hension of that element in the past which was
vital and which remains eternal. It is a habit of
thought that destroys the sense of the moral iden-
tity of all ages, by virtue of its very insistence on
the mechanical derivation of one age from another.
[Existences that cause one another exclude one an-
lother: each is alien to the rest inasmuch as it
is the product of new and different conditions.
Ideas that cause nothing unite all things by giv-
ing them a common point of reference and a single
standard of value.

The classic and the Christian systems were both
systems of ideas, attempts to seize the eternal
morphology of reality and describe~its~ unchang-
ing constitution. The imagination was summoned
thereby to contemplate the highest objects, and the
essence of things being thus described, their in-
significant variations could retain little impor-
tance and the study of these variations might well
seem superficial. Mechanical science, the science of
I causes, was accordingly neglected, while the science


THE POETET OF BARBARISM 173

of values, with the arts that express these values,
was exclusively pursued. T he reverse has now
occurred and the spirit of life, innocent of any
rationalizing discipline and deprived of an au-
thoritative and adequate method of expression, has
relapsed into miscellaneous and shallow exuber-
•ance. Eeligion and art have become short-winded.
They have forgotten the old maxim that we should
copy in order to be copied and r emember in orde r
to be remembered. It is true that the multiplicity
of these incompetent efforts seems to many a com-
pensation for their ill success, or even a ground
for asserting their absolute superiority. Incompe-
tence, when it flatters the passions, can always
find a greater incompetence to approve of it. In-
deed, some people would have regarded the Tower
of Babel as the best academy of eloquence on
account of the variety of oratorical methods pre-
vailing there.

It is thus that the imagination of our time has
relapsed into barbarism. But discipline of the
heart and fancy is "always so rare a thing that
the neglect of it need not be supposed to involv e
any very t errible or obvious loss . The triumphs
of reason have been few and partial at any time,
and perfect works of art are almost unknovm.
The failure of art and reason, because their prin-
ciple is ignored, is therefore hardly more conspicu-
ous than it was when their principle, although


174 POBTEY AND EBLIGION

perhaps acknowledged, was misunderstood or dis-
obeyed. Indeed, to one who fixes his eye on the
ideal goal, the greatest art often seems the, great-
est failure, because it alone reminds him of what
it should have been. Trivial stimulations coming
from vulgar objects, on the contrary, by making us
forget altogether the possibility of a deep satisfac- <
tion, often succeed in interesting and in winning
applause. The pleasure they give us is so brief 1
and superficial' that the wave of essential disap-
pointment which would ultimately drown it has
not time to rise from the heart.
"^ The poetry of barbarism is not without its charm.
It can play with sense and passion the more readily
and freely in that it does not aspire to subordinate
them to a clear thought or a tenable attitude of the
will. It can impart the transitive emotions which
it expresses ; it can find many partial harmonies of
mood and fancy; it can, by virtue of its red-hot
irrationality, utter wilder cries, surrender itself and
us to more absolute passion, and heap up a more in-
discriminate wealth of images than belong to poets
of seasoned experience or of heavenly inspirationT^
Irrational stimulation may tire us in the end, but
it excites us in the beginning; and how many, con-
ventional poets, tender and prolix, have there not
been, who tire us now without ever having excited
anybody? The power to stimulate is the beginH
ning of greatness, and when the barbarous poet


THE POETRY OF BAKBABISM 175

''Sas genms, as he well may have, he stimulates all
the more powerfully on account of the crudity of
his methods and the recklessness of his emotions.
The defects of such art — tjack^pl-jii&t-in&tion, ab*
sence of _beauty^ _con|usipn__of _ Weag,_ incapacity!
permanently to please — will hardly be felt by the
contemporary public, if once its attention is ar-
xestedjjfor no poet is so undisciplined that he
will not find many readers, if he finds readers at

, all, less disciplined than himself.

These considerations may perhaps be best en-
forced by applying them to two writers of great
influence over the present generation who seem to
illustrate them on different planes — Robert Brown-
ing and " ^alt Whitm an. They are both analytici
poets — pdfets who seek to reveal and express the ^
elemental as opposed to the conventional ; but the
dissolution has progressed much farther in Whitman <
than in Browning, doubtless because Whitman be- J
gan at a much lower stage of moral and intellec-^
tual organizationj^or the good will to be radical
was present in botl^ The elements to which
Browning reduces ^^rience are still passions.
chg jacter s, persons;! Whitman carries the disinte-

j^ration further and tnows nothing but moods and

Iparticular imagesr~7The world of Browning is a
*VTOrld of history with civilization for its setting
andTvith'the conventionalpassions for its motive
forces. The world of Whitman is innocent of


176 POETRY AND RELIGION

these things , and contaigs only far simpler and
more chaotic elements,^* him the barbarism is
much more pronounced; it is, indeed, avowed, and
the "barbaric yawp" is. sent "over the roofs of
the world " in full consciousness of its inarticulate
character ; ^ut in Browning the barbarism is no
less realH?^ugh disguised by^ literary and scien-
tific language, since the passions of civilized life
with which he deals are treated as so many " bar-
baric yawps," complex indeed in their conditions,
puffings of an intricate engine, but aimless in their
vehemence and mere( ebullitions of lustiness in ad-
venturous and profoundly ungoverned souls.^

Irrationality on this level is vie^yed by Browning
with the same satisfaction with which, on a lower
level, it is viewed by Whitman ; and the admirers
of each hail it as the secret of a new poetry which
pierces to the quick and awakens the imagination
to a new and genuine vitality. It is in the re-
bellion against discipline, in the abandonment of
the ideals of classic and Cbrigtian tradition, that
-this rejuvenation is found.J|Both poets represent,
therefore, and are admired lor representing, what
may be called the poetry of barbarism in the most
accurate and descriptive sense of this word. IFor*
th e barb a rian is the man who regards h i g , ipa.s^na
as their own epoius f^ fr,r ]]^,]y<^- who does not dn-
mMti cate them eit h^Jayi-UBdeEstaBdinff-theij:- cause
or by conceiving thei r ideal gnaL Hp is the man


THE POETEY OP BAB.BAEISM 177

who does not know his derivations nor perceive [
his tendencies, but who merely feels and acts, vain- 1
ing in his life its force and its filling, but being '
careless of its purpose and its form. His delight
is in abundance and vehemence ; his art, like his
life, shows an exclusiverespect for quantity an^
splendour of materialsJI His scorn for what is
poorer and weiaker than himself is only surpassed
by his ignorance of what is higher.


WALT WHITMAN

The works of Walt Whitman offer an extreme
illustration of this phase of genius, both by their
form and by their substance. It was the singu-
larity of his literary form — the challenge it threw
to the conventions of verse and of language — that
first gave Whitman notoriety : but this notoriety has
become fame, because those incapacities and sole-
cisms which glare at us from his pages are only
the obverse of a profound inspiration and of a
genuine courage. Even the idiosyncrasies of his
style have a side which is not mere peversity or
vaffeotation ; the order of his words, the processi on
of his images, reproduce the method of a rich, spo n-
t aneous, absolutely lazy fancy. In most poets
such a natural order is modified by various gov-
erning motives — the thought, the metrical form.


178 POETRY AND KELIGION

the echo of other poems in the memory. By Walt
Whitman these conventional influences are reso-
lutely banished. We find the swarms of men and
objects rendered as they might strike the retina in
a sort of waking dream. It is the most sincere
possible confession of the lowest — .1 mean the
most primitive — type of perception. All ancient
poets are sophisticated in comparison and give
proof of longer intellectual and moral training.
Walt Whitman has gone back to the innocent
style of Adam, when the animals filed before him
one by one and he called each of them by its name.
In fact, the influences to which Walt Whitman
was subject were as favourable as possible to the
imaginary experiment of beginning the world over
again. ^Liberali gm _ and transcendentalism both .
harboured some illusions on that score ; and they
were in the air which our poet breathed. Moreover
he breathed this air in America, where the newness
of the material environment made it easier to
ignore the fatal antiquity of human nature. When
he afterward became aware that there was or had
been a world with a history, he studied that world
with curiosity and spoke of it not without a certain
shrewdness. But he still regarded it as a foreign
world and imagined, as not a few Americans have
done, that his own world was a fresh creation,
not amenable to the same laws as the old. The
difference in the conditions blinded him, in his


THE POETKY OF BAKBAEISM 179

merely sensuous apprehension, to the identity of
the principles.

His parents were farmers in central Long Island
and his early years were spent in that district.
The family seems to have been not too prosperous
and somewhat nomadic ; Whitman himself drifted
through boyhood without much guidance. We
find him now at school, now helping the labourers
at the farms, now wandering along the beaches of
Long Island, finally at Brooklyn working in an
apparently desultory way as a printer and some-
times as a writer for a local newspaper. He must
have read or heard something, at this early period,
of the English classics ; his style often betrays the
deep effect made upon him by the grandiloquence
of the Bible, of Shakespeare, and of Milton. But
I his chief interest, if we may trust his account, was
[already in his own sensations. The aspects of
/ Nature, the forms and habits of animals, the sights
of cities, the movement and talk of common people,
were his constant delight. His mind was flooded
with these images, keenly felt and afterward to be
vividly rendered with bold strokes of realism and
imagination.

Many poets have had this faculty to seize the
elementary aspects of things, but none has had
it so exclusively; with Whitman the, surface is
absolutely all and the underlying structure is
without interest and almost without existence.


-f-


L'


180 POETEY AND RELIGION

He had had no education and his natural de-
light in imbibing sensations had not been trained
to the uses of practical or theoretical intelligence.
He basked in the sunshine of perception and
wallowed in the stream Of his own sensibility^ as
later at Camden in the shallows of his favourite
brook. Even during the civil war, when he heard
the drum-taps so clearly, he could only gaze at the
picturesque and terrible aspects of the struggle, "'
and linger among the wounded day after day with
a canine devotion ; he could not be aroused either
to clear thought or to positive action. So also in
his poems ; a miJ^JiplieitsLQf images pass.before him
and he yields diimself to eachlin turn with absolute r
j passivity. The world has no inside ; it is a phan- 4
! tasmagoria of continuous visions, vivid, impressive,
\ but monotonous and hard to distinguish in memory,
llike the waves of the sea or the decorations of some
^barbarous temple, sublime only by the infinite ag-
(gregation of parts.

This abundance of detail without organization, ^
this wealth of perception without intelligence and
of imagination without taste, makes the singular-
ity of Whitman's genius. Full of sympathy and
receptivity, with a wonderful gift df graphic
characterization and an occasional rare grandeur
of diction, he fills us with a sense of the individu-
ality and the universality of what he describes —
it is a drop in itself yet a drop in the ocean.


THE POETRY OF BABBAEISM 181

The absence of any principle of selection or of
a sustained style enables him to render aspects
of things and of emotion which would have eluded
a trained writer. He is, therefore, interesting even
where he is grotesque or perverse. He has accom-
plished, by the sacrifice of almost every other good
quality, something never so well done before.
He has approached comraon lifewithout bring-
ingTn his_min4 any highei.aJiaftdard. by which to
.criticise, it ; he has seen it, noti in contjast jsaijh
an ideal, but as the expression _offOTces_aiore
indeterminate and elementary than itself; and the
vulgar, lirthis"6^mie setting, has appeared to him
sublime.

There is clearly some analogy between a mass of
images without structure"* and the notion of an
absolute, democracy. Whitman, inclined by his
genius and habits to see life without relief or organ-
ization, believed that his inclination in this respect
corresponded with the spirit of his age and coun-
try, and that Nature and society, at least in th6
United States, were constituted after the fashion
of his own mind. Being the poet of the average
man, he wished all men to be specimens of that
average, and being the poet of a fluid Nature, he
believed that Nature was or should be a formless
flux. This personal bias of Whitman's was further
encouraged by the actual absence of distinction in
his immediate environment. Surrounded by ugly


182 POETRY AND KELIGION

things and common people, he felt himself happy,
ecstatic, overflowing with a kind of patriarchal
love. He accordingly came to think that there was
a spirit of the New World which he embodied, and
" - which was in complete opposition to that of the
rOld, and that a literature upon novel principles was
needed to express and strengthen this American
spirit.

Democracy was not to be merely a constitu-
tional device for the better government of given
nations, not merely a movement for the material
improvement of the lot of the poorer classes. It
^ was to be a social and a moral democracy and to
involve an actual equality among all men. What-
ever kept them apart and made it impossible for
them to be messmates together was to be discarded.
The literature of democracy was to ignore all ex-
traordinary gifts of genius or virtue, all distinction
drawn even from great passions or romantic adven-
tures. In Whitman's works, in which this new
literature is foreshadowed, there is accordingly not
a single character nor a single story. His only
' [ hero is M^^lf, the " single separate person," en-
; dowed with the primary impulses, with health, and
' with sensitiveness to the elementary aspects of
Nature. The perfect man of the future, the pro-
lific begetter of other perfect men, is to work with
his hands, chanting the poems of some future Walt,
some ideally democratic bard. Women are to have


THE POETRY OF BAEBAEISM 183

as nearly as possible the. same character as men:
the emphasis is to pass from family life and local
ties to the friendship of comrades and the general
brotherhood of man. Men are to be vigorous, com-
fortable, sentimental, and irresponsible.

This dream is, of course, unrealized and unreal-
izable, in America as elsewhere. Undeniably there
are in America many suggestions of such a societj'-
and such a national character. But the growing
complexity and fixity of institutions necessarily
tends to obscure these traits of a primitive and
crude democracy. What Whitman seized upon as
the promise of the future was in reality the sur-
vival of the past. He sings the song of pioneers,
but it is in the nature of the pioneer that the
greater his success the quicker must be his trans-
formation into something different. When Whit-
man made the initial and amorphous phase of
society his ideal, he became the prophet of a lost
cause. That cause was lost, not merely when
wealth and intelligence began to take shape in the
American Commonwealth, but it was lost at the
very foundation of the world, when those laws of
evolution were established which Whitman, like
Eousseau, failed to understand. If we may trust
Mr. Herbert Spencer, these laws involve a passage
from the homogeneous to the heterogeneous, and
a constant progress at once in differentiation and
in organization — all, in a word, that Whitman sys-


184 POETRY AND EBLIGION

tematically deprecated or ignored. He is surely
not the spokesman of the tendencies of his country,
although he describes some aspects of its past and
present condition : nor does he appeal to those whom
he describes, but rather to the dilettanti he despises.
He is regarded as representative chiefly by foreign-
ers, who look for some grotesque expression of the
genius of so young and prodigious a people.

Whitman, it is true, loved and comprehended
men; but this love and comprehension had the
same limits as his love and comprehension of
Nature. He observed truly and responded to his
observation with genuine and pervasive emotion.
A great gregariousness, an innocent tolerance of
moral weakness, a genuine admiration for bodily
health and strength, made him bubble over with
affection for the generic human creature. Inca-
pable of an ideal passion, he was. full of the milk's
human kindness. Yet, for all his "acquaintance
witE~The-'ways^ and thoughts of the common man
of his choice, he did not truly understand him.
Por to understand people is to go much deeper
than they go themselves; to penetrate to their
characters and disentangle their inmost ideals.
Whitman's insight into man did not go beyond a
sensuou s sympathy ; it consisted in a vicarious
satisfaction in their pleasures, and an instinctive
love of their persons. It never approached a
scientific or imaginative knowledge of their hearts.


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 185

Therefore Whitman failed radically in Ms
dearest ambition: he can never be a poet of the
people. For the people, like the early races whose
poetry was ideal, are natural believers in perfection.
They have no doubts about the absolute desirability
of wealth and learning and power, none about the
worth of pure goodness and pure love. Their
chosen poets, if they have any, will be always those
who have known how to paint these ideals in lively
even if in gaudy colours. Nothing is farther from /
the common people than the corrupt desire to bet-
primitive. They instinctively look toward a more'
exalted life, which they imagine to be full of dis-
tinction and pleasure, and the idea of that brighter
existence fills them with hope or with envy or with
humble admiration.

If the people are ever won over to hostility
to such ideals, it is only because they are cheated
by demagogues who tell thean that if all the
flowers of civilization were destroyed its fruits
would become more abundant. A greater share
of happiness, people think, would fall to their
lot could they destroy everything beyond their
own possible possessions. But they are made
thus envious and ignoble only by a deception:
what they really desire is an ideal good for them-
selves which they are told they may secure by de-
priving others of their preeminence. Their hope
is always to enjoy perfect satisfaction themselves ;


186 POETRY AND RELIGIOK

and therefore a poet who loveji JJie~pictii*esque
aspects of labour „an^_. 7^gj3XU!^_Jtill_hardly _be
the poet of^e poor. He may have described their
figure and occupation, in neither of which they are/
much interested ; he will not have read their souls.
They will prefer to him any seatimejjial,. story-teller,
any sensational dramatist, any moralizing poe^; for
they are hero-worshippers by temperament, and are
too wise or too unfortunate to be much enamoured
of themselves or of the conditions of their existence.
Fortunately, the political theory that makes
Whitman's principle of literary prophecy and
criticism does not always inspire his chants, nor
is it presented, even in his prose works, quite
bare and unadorned. In " Democratic Vistas " we
find it clothed with something of the same poetic
passion and lighted up with the same flashes of
intuition which we admire in the poems. Even
there the temperament is finer than the ideas and
the poet wiser than the thinker. His ultimate
appeal is really to something more primitive and
general than any social aspirations, to something
more elementary than an ideal of any kind. He
speaks to 'those minds and to those moods in which
sengualitTg^is_touch ed with mysticis m. When the
intellect is in abeyance, when we would "turn and
live with the animals, they are so placid and self-
contained," when we are weary of conscience and
of ambition, and would yield ourselves for a while


THE POETRY OF BAEBAEISM 187

to the dream of sense, Walt Whitman is a wel-
come companion. The images he arouses in us,
fresh, full of light and healbh and of a kind of
frankness and beauty, are prized all the more at
such a time because they are not choice, but drawn
perhaps from a hideous and sordid environment.
For this circumstance makes them a better means
of escape from convention and from that fatigue
and despair which lurk not far beneath the sur-
face of conventional life. In casting off with
self-assurance and a sense of fresh vitality the
distinctions of tradition and reason a man may
feel, as he sinks back comfortably to a lower level
of sense and instinct, that he is returning to
Nature or escaping into the infinite. MysticisroT]
makes us proud and happy to renounce_the_work (^
of intelligence, both in thought and. in life, and
persuades us that we become divine by remaining
imperfectly human. Walt Whitman gives a new
expression to this ancient and multiform tendency.
He feels his own cosmic justification and he would
lend the Sanction of his inspiration to all loafers
and holiday-makers. He would be the congenial
patron of farmers and factory hands in their crude
pleasures and pieties, as Pan was the patron of
the shepherds of Arcadia:' for he is sure that in
spite of his hairiness and animality, the gods will
acknowledge him as one of themselves and smile
upon him from the serenity of Olympus.


188 POETBY A2SD BBLIGION

in

ROBERT BROWNING

If we would do justice to Browning's work as a
human document, and at the same time perceive its^
relation to the rational ideals of the imagination
and to that poetry which passes into religion, we
must keep, as in the case of Whitman, two things
,in mind. One is the ge nuin engsg- olJbe achiev e-
ment, the sterti^^^qTmlity'^f the v is ion and iasBJra - i
tiogj these are their own justification when we
approach them from below and regard them as
manifesting a more direct or impassioned grasp
of experience than is given to mildly blatant,
convention-ridden minds. The other thing to re-
member is the short distance to^whoch^ibis-eonipre-
'^hension is carried, its failure to approach any *
finalit y, or to achieve a recognition even of the
traditional ideals of poetry and religion.

In the case of Walt Whitman such a failure will
be generally felt ; it is obvious that both his music
and his philosophy are those of a barbarian, nay,
almost of a savage. Accordingly there is need of
dwelling rather on the veracity and simple dignity
of his thought and artj on their expression of an
order of ideas latent in all better experience. But
in the case of Browning it is the success that is
obvious to most people. Apart from a certain


THE POETRY OP BAEBAKISM 189

•Superficial grotesqueness to whicli we are soon
accustomed, he easily arouses and engages the
reader b^^the pit hiness of his pl ua.se. the.JiteloBre'
of his passion, the^vigoui-oiHbisTQoral jMgmentp
the liveliness of his historiealfencj; y It is obvious
that we are in the preseMe of a ^eat writer, of"^
a great imaginative forccjjof a master in the ex-
-^ression of emotion/^What is perhaps not so obvi- >
ous, but no less true, is that we are in the presence!
^f a bari^jic_genius, of a truncated imaginati on, of
Jia thought and an art inchoate and ill-digested, of a/
ti^yolcanic eruption that tosses itself quite blinily)
and ineffectually into the sky. /

The points of comparison by which this becomes
clear are perhaps not in every one's mind, although
they are merely the elements of traditional culture,
aesthetic and moral. Yet even without reference to"
ultimate ideals, one may notice in Browning many
superficial signs of that deepest of all failures,
^failure in rationalit y and the mdifferenne to__
^fection. Such a sign is the "fetgiet-style, weig]
^without nobility, pointed without naturalness o:
Viecision.. Another sign is the "realism" of the
/personages, who, quite like men and women
actual life, are always displaying traits of char-
acter and never attaining chaSacter as
Other hints might be found in the structure
the poems, where the dramatic substance does not
achieve a dramatic form ; in the metaphysical dis-


a wnele.
ucture ^


\^\(k yUL


190 POETET AND BELIGION

cussion, with its confused prolixity and absence
of result; in the moral ideal, where all energies
figure without their ultimate purposes ; in the
religion, which breaks off the expression of this
life in the middle, and finds in that suspense an
argument for immortality. In all this, and much
more that mighj; be recalled, a persori coming to
Browning with the habits of a cultivated mind
,/might see evidence of some profound incapacity in
the poet ; but more careful reflection is necessary
to understand the nature of this incapacity, its
cause, and the peculiar accent which its presence
gives to those ideas and impulses which Browning
stimulates in us.

There is the more reason for developing this

criticism (which might seem needlessly hostile and

which time and posterity will doubtless make in

their own quiet and decisive fashion) in that

Browning did not keep within the sphere of

^ /"drama and analysis, where he was strong, but

I allowed his own temperament and opinions to

•j xitiate his represefrt^tion oriTfepsothat'he some-

j times turned the expression of a violent passion

Mpto the last word of what he thought a religion.

^He had a didactic vein, a habit of judging the

! spectacle he evoked and of loading the passions he

''^depicted with his visible sympathy or scorn.

Now a chief support of Browning's popularity is
that he is, for many, an initiator into the deeper


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 191

mysteries of passion, a means of escaping from the
moral poverty of their own lives and of feeling the
rhythm and compulsion of the general striving.
yHe figures, therefore, distinctly as a prophet, as a
bearer of glad tidings, and it is easy for those who
hail him as such to imagine that, knowing the
labour of life so well, he must know something
also of its fruits, and that in. giving us the feeling
of existsnee7-iW"isr aIs6"~giving''{S' its~meaning.
There is serious danger* that aT mind gathering
from his pages the raw materials of truth, the un-
threshed harvest of reality, may take him for a
philosopher, for a rationalizer of what he describes.
Awa^ningm^^^;^e^instaken,Jox-£nlightenment,
and the galvanizing of torpid sensations and im-
pulses for wisdom.

Against such fatuity reason should raise her
voice. The vital and historic forces that produce
illusions of this sort in large groups of men are
indeed beyor^d the control of criticism. The ideas
of passion are more vivid than those of memory,
until they become memories in turn. They must
be allowed to fight out their desperate battle
against the laws of Nature and reason. But it
is worth while in the meantime, for the sake of the
truth and of a just philosophy, to meet the varying
though perpetual charlalanisiji of the world with a
steady protest. As soon as Browning is proposed
to us as a leader, as soon as we are asked to be


192 POETRY AND RELIGI03S-

not the occasional patrons of his art, but the pupils
of his philosophy, we have a right to express the
radical dissatisfaction which we must feel, if we
are rational, with his whole attitude and temper
of mind.

The great dramatists have seldom dealt with
perfectly virtuous characters. The great poets
have seldom represented mythologies that would
bear scientific criticism. But by an instinct which
constituted their greatness they have cast these
mixed materials furnished by life into forms con-
genial to the specific principles of their art, and
by this transformation they have made acceptable
in the aesthetic sphere things that in the sphere
of reality were evil or imperfect: in a word,
their works have been beautiful as works of art.
Or, if their genius exceeded that of the technical
poet and rose to prophetic intuition, they have
known how to create ideal characters, not pos-
sessed, perhaps, of every virtue accidentally needed
in this world, but possessed of what is ideally
better, of internal greatness and perfection. They
have also known how to select and reconstruct
their mythology so as to make it a true interpreta-
tion of moral life. When we read the maxims of
lago, Palstaff, or Hamlet, we are delighted if the
thought strikes us as true, but we are not less de-
lighted if it strikes us as false. These characters
are not presented to us in order to enlarge our


THE POETKY OF BAEBAEISM 193

capacities of passion nor in order to justify them-
selves as processes of redemption; they are there,
clothed in poetry and imbedded in plot, to entertain
us with their imaginable feelings agoLtihgjr^nterest-
^in-g- errors. ^^^tie^poetTwitEout being especially a
philosopher, stands/ by virtue of his superlative
genius on the plane Tsf-universal reason, far above >
the passionate experience which he overlooks and\
on which he reflects; and he raises us for the '
moment to his own level, to send us back again, if
not better endowed for practical life, at least not

unacquainted with speculatioiO ■^

^'-With Browning the case ig^ssentially different.
When his heroes are blinded by passion and warped
by circumstance, as they almost always are, he
\does not describe the fact froBQjh£v^tage-groun.d„_
/of thejjitellect and invite us' to look at it from that
Vpoint of view. On ^Ee"conteary, his art is all self-
/ expression or satire. For the most part his hero,
like Whitman's, is Ijimself j not appearing, as in i
the case of the American bard, in puris naturalibus/
L but masked in all sorts of historical and romantic
moery. Sometimes, however, the personage, like
Guido in " The Ring and the Book" or the " frus-
trate ghosts " of other poems, is merely a Marsyas,
shown flayed and quivering to the greater glory
of the poet's ideal Apollo. The impulsive utter-
ances and the crudities of most of the speakers
are passionately adopted by the poet as his own.


194 POETBY AND BBLIGION .

He thus perverts what might have been a triumph
of imagination into a failure of reason.

This circumstance has much to do with the fact
that Browning, in spite of his extraordinary gift

''for expressing emotion, hafe hardly produced works
purely and- unconditionally delightful. They not

' only portrav pas sion, which is interesting, but they
betray it, which is odious. His art was still in the
service of the will. He had not attained, in study^
ing the beauty of things, that detachment of the \
phenomenon, thatjove of the foxm for its. own sake,
which is fhe secret of contemplative satisfaction./
-Therefore, the lamentable accidents of his person-^
ality and opinions, in themselves no worse than
those of other mortals, passed into his art. He^
did not seek to elude them : he had no free specu-
lative faculty to dominate them by. Or, to put
the same thing differently, he was too much ijj
earnest in his fictions, he threw himSelf too unre-/


servedly into his creations. HTsmiaginationTTike ^
the imagination we have in dreams, was merely a
! vent for personal preocc upations . His art was ir
spired by purposes less simple and universal than
the ends of imagination itself. His play of mind
consequently could not be free or pure. The cre-
ative impulse could not reach its goal or manifest
in any notable degree its own organic ideal.

We may illustrate these assertions by consider-
ing Browning's treatment of the passion of love,


THE POETEY OF BAKBAKISM 195

a passion to wMch he gives great prominence and
ia which he finds the highest significance.
^Love is depicted by Browning with Jruth^- witlT
vehemence, and with the constant conviction that ^
it is the supFefii'ething in life. The great variety <^
'of occasions in whlch'TTUppears in his pages and
'the different degrees of elaboration it receives,
leave it always of the same quality — the quality v
of passion. Tj-^bvpt pinVa intn__sens ualityj in
spite^ of its frequent extreme crudeness, it is al-
ways, in Browning's hands, a passion of the im-
agination, it is always love. On the other hand
it never rises into contem plation : mingled as it
may be with friendship, with religion, or with
various forms of natural tenderness, it always
remains a passion; it always remains a personal
impulse, a hypnotization, with another person for
its object or its cause. Kept within these limits
it is represented, in a series of powerful sketches,
which are for most readers the gems of the Brown-
ing gallery, as the last word of experience, the
highest phase of human life.

r

" The woman yonder, there's no use in life
But just to obtain her ! Heap earth's woes in one
And bear them — make a pile of all earth's joys
And spurn them, as they help or help not this ;
Only, obtain her 1 "

" When I do come, she will apeak not, she will stand.
Either hand


196 POETRY AND RELIGION

On my shoulder, give her eyes the first embrace

Of my face,
Ere we rush, ere we extinguish sight and speech

Each on each. . . .
O heart, blood that freezes, blood that burns !

Earth's returns
For whole centuries of folly, noise, and sin—

Shut them in —
With their triumphs and their follies, and the rest.

Love is best."

In the piece called "In a Gondola" the lady says

to her lover: —

"Heart to heart
And lips to lips ! Yet once more, ere we part,
Cl^sp me and make me thine, as mine thou art."

And jhe, after being surprised and stabbed in her
arms, replies : —

" It was ordained to be so, sweet 1 — and best
Comes now, beneath thine eyes, upon thy breast:
Still kiss me ! Care not for the cowards ; care
Only to put aside thy beauteous hair
My blood will hurt ! The Three I do not scorn
To death, because they never lived, but I
Have lived indeed, and so — (yet one more kiss) —
can die."

We are not allowed to regard these expressions
as the cries of souls blinded by the agony of pas-
sion and lust. Browning unmistakably adopts them
as expressing his own highest intuitions. He so
much admires the strength of this weakness that
he does not admit that it is a weakness at all. It


THE POETRY OP BAKBAEISM 197

is with tlie strut of self-satisfaction, with the sen-
sation, almost, of muscular Christianity, that he
boasts of it through the mouth of one of his heroes,
who is explaining to his mistress the motive of his
faithful services as a minister of the queen : —

" She^Jhinks there was more cause
In love of power, high fame, pure loyalty ?
Perhaps she fancies men wear out their lives
Chasing such shades. . . .
I worked because I want you with my soul."

Eeaders of the fifth chapter of this volume
need not be reminded here of the contrast which
this method of understanding love offers to that
adopted by the real masters of passion and imagi-
nation. They began with that crude emotion with j
which Browning ends; they lived it down, they
exalted it by though t, they extracted the pure gold
of it in a long purgation of discipline and suffering.
The fierce paroxysm which for him is heaven, was
for them the proof that heaven cannot be foimd on
earth, that the value of experience is not iii_exBgr
rience itsel f b ut in t he ideals w hich i t reveals. The,
intense, voluminous ^emotion, the sudden, over
whelming self-surrender in which he rests was fo:
them the starting-point of a life of rational wor-
ship, of an austere and iE^ejsonal— religion, by
which the fire of love, kmdied for a mom ent by the
sight of some creakire, was put, as it were, into a
censer, to burn incense ^ef ore. ^e very .image of the


198 POETRY AND BELIGIOJST

I Highest Good. Thus love ceased to be a passion
and became the energji_sf--Cflaism.plation : it dif-
I fused over the universe, natural and ideal, that
light of tenderness and that faculty of worshi p
•which the passion of love often is first to quicken
i in a man's breast. •

} Of this art, recommended by Plato and practised
I in the Christian Church by all adepts of the spirit-
{ ual life, Browning knew absolutely nothing. About
the object of love he h'ad no misgivings. What
could the object be except somebody. or other ? The
important thing was to love intensely and to love
often. He remained in the phenomenal sphere:
yiie was a lover of experience; the ideal did not'^
exist for him. No conception could be farther 3
from his thought than the essential conception of _
any rational philosophy, namely, that feeling is to
be treated as raw materialfoj; thought, and that
the (Jestiny of emotion is to pass into objects which
shall contain all its value while losing all its form-
ie^ness. This transformation of sense and emo-
tion into objects agreeable to the intellect, into
clear ideas and beautiful things, is the natural work
of reason ; when it has been accomplished very im-
perfectly, or not at all, we have a barbarous mind,
,a mind full of chaotic sensations, objectless passions, /
[and undigested ideas. Such a mind Browning's
as, to a degree remarkable in one with so rich a
.eritage of civilization.


THE POETRY OF BAEBAKISM 199

The nineteenth century, as we have already said,
has nourished the hope of abolishing the past as a
force while it studies it as an object; and Brown-
ing, with his fondness for a historical stage setting
and for the gossip of history, rebelled equally
against the Pagan and the Christian discipline.
The " Soul " which he trusted in was the barbarous
soul, the " Spontaneous Me " of his half-brother
Whitman. It was a restless personal impulse, con-
scious of obscure depths within itself which it fan-
cied to be infinite, and of a certain vague sympathy
with wind and cloud and with the universal muta-
tion. It was the soul that might have animated
AttUa and Alaric when they came down into Italy,
a soul not incurious of the tawdriness and corrup-
tion of the strange civilization it beheld, but inca^
pable of understanding its original spirit; a soul
maintaining in the presence of that noble, unappre-
ciated ruin all its own lordliness and energy, and
all its native vulgarity.

Browning, who had not had the education tra-
ditional in his own country, used to say that Italy
had been his university. But it was a school for
which he was ill prepared, and he did not sit
under its best teachers. For the superficial fer-
ment, the worldly passions, and the crimes of the
Italian Eenaissance he had a keen interest and
intelligence. But Italy has been always a civil-
ized country, and beneath the trappings and


200 POETRY AND EELIGION

suits of civilization which at that particular time
it flaunted so gayly, it preserved a civilized heart

^to which Browning's insight could never penetratey^
There subsisted in the best minds a trained ima^
ination and a cogent ideal of virtue. Italy had a
religion, and that religion permeated all its life,
and was the background without which even its
secular art and secular passions would not be truly
intelligible. The most commanding and represen-
tative, the deepest and most appealing of Italian

_natures are permeated with this religious inspira-
tion. A Saint Francis, a Dante, a Michael Angelo,

/breathe hardly anything else. Yet for Browning

/these men and what they represented may be said
not to have existed. He saw, he studied, and he

^painted a decapitated Italy. His vision could not

Nmount so high as her head.

/'One of the elements of that higher tradition
which Browning was not prepared to imbibe was

■ the idealization of love. The passion he repre-

' sents is lava hot from the crater, in no way moulded,
smelted, or refined. He had no thought of subju-
gating impulses into the harmony of reason. He

v^idrfiot master lileT&ut was mastered by it. Accord-
ingly the love, he describes has no wings ; it issues
in nothing. His lovers "extinguish sight and
speech, each on each " ; sense, as he says elsewhere,
drowning soul. The man in the gondola may well
boast that he can die ; it is the only thing he can


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 201

properly do. Death is the only solution of a love
that is tied to its individual object and inseparable
from the alloy of passion and illusion within itself.
Browning's hero, because he has loved intensely,
says that he has lived; he would be right, if the
sign^^cance of life were_tfiJj£_iaeas«*edJaxJiie interfl
sity of th e feeling it contained, and_if__intelligenceK
weia.,Mt ^^|5ilgh«sF?oi«j2£,._vitality. IBiit ha'd^
that heroKnown how to love better and had he
had enough spirit to dominate his love, he might
perhaps have been able to carry away the better
part of it and to say that he could not die ; for one
half of himself and of his love would have been
dead already and the other half would have been
eternal, having fed —

" On death, that feeds on men ;
. And death once dead, there's no more dying then."

The irrationality of the passions which Browning
glorifies, making them the crown of life, is so gross
that at times he cannot help perceiving it.

" How perplexed
Grows belief ! Well, this cold clay clod

Was man's heart :
Crumble it, and what comes next ? Is it God? "

Yes, he will tell us. These passions and follies,
however desperate in themselves and however vain
for the individual, are excellent as parts of the
dispensation of Providence : —


202 POETET AND KELIGION

"Be hate that fruit or love that fruit,

It forwards the general deed of man,

And each of the many helps to recruit

The life of the race by a general filan.

Each living his own to boot."

If we doubt, then, the value of our own expe-
rience, even perhaps of our experience of love, we
may appeal to the interdependence of goods and
evils in the world to assure ourselves that, in
view of its consequences elsewhere, this experience
was great and important after all. We need not
stop to consider this supposed solution, which
bristles with contradictions; it would not satisfy
Browning himself, if he did not back it up with
something more to his purpose, something nearer
to warm and transitive feeling. The compensation
for our defeats, the answer to our doubts, is not
to be found merely in a proof of the essential
necessity and perfection of the universe; that
would be cold comfort, especially to so uncontem-
plative a mind. Ifo : that answer, and compensBr
tion are to come very soon and very vividly to
every private bosom. There is another life, a
series of other lives, for this to happen in. Death
will come, and —

" I shall thereupon

Take rest, ere I be gone
Once more on my adventure brave and new,

Fearless and unperplexed.

When I wage battle next,
What weapons to select, what armour to endue."


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 203

"For sudden the worst turns the best to the brave,

The black minute's at end,
And the element's rage, the flend-voioes that rave

Sh9,ll dwindle, shall blend,
Shall change, shall become first a peace out of pain.

Then a light, then thy breast,
O thou soul of my soul ! I shall clasp thee again

And with God be the rest ! "

Into this conception of continued life Browning
has put, as a collection of further passages might
easily show, all the items furnished by fancy or tra-
dition which at the moment satisfied his imagination
— new adventures, reunion with friends, and even,
after a severe strain and for a short while, a little
peace and quiet. The gist of the matter is that we
are to live indefinitely, that all our faults can be
turned to good, all our unfinished business settled,
and that therefore there is time for anything we
like in this world and for all we need in the other.
It is in spirit the direct opposite of the philosophic
maxim of regarding the end, of taking care to leave
a finished life and a perfect character behind us.
It is the opposite, also, of the religious memento mori,
of the warning that the time is short before we go
to our account. A ppnrdiTi.gtn 'Rirftwnin g, there is- at>
account: we have ^an itifinite credit. With an
unconscious and characteristic mixture of heathen
instinct with Christian doctrine, he thinks of the
other world as heaven, but of the life to be led ,
there as of the life of Nature.


204 POETRY AND RELIGION

Aristotle observes that we do not think the busi-
ness of life -worthy of the gods, to whom we can
only attribute contemplation ; if Browning had ha(K
the idea of perfecting and rationalizing this life'
rather than of continuing it indefinitely, he would
have followed Aristotle and the Church in thisi
matter. But he had no idea of anything eternal ;\
and so he gave, as he would probably have said,y
a filling to the empty Christian immortality ^M
making every man busy in it about many things.)
And to the irrational man, to the boy, it is no
unpleasant idea to have an infinite number of days
to live through, an infinite number of dinners to
eat, with an infinity of fresh fights and new love-
affairs, and no end of last rides together.

But it is a mere euphemism to call this pfiipet-
ual_vagEaacy a development of the soul. A devel- ^
opment means the unfolding of a definite nature,
the gradual manifestation of a known idea. A
series of phases, like the successive leaps of a
water-fall, is no development. And Browning has
no idea of an intelligible good which the phases of
•life might approach and with reference to which
they might constitute a progress. His notion is
simply that the game of life, ^^__exlulaxatiQn_af_-
action, ia.^nexhaiistible. You may set up your
tenpins again after you have bowled them over,
and you may keep up the sport for ever. The
point is to bring them down as often as pos-


THE POETEY OF BARBARISM 205

sible with a master-stroke and a big bang. That
will tend to invigorate in you that self-confidence
which in this system passes for faith. But it is
unmeaning to call such an exercise heaven, or to
talk of being "with God" in such a life, in any
sense in which we are not with God already and
under all circumstances. Our destiny would rather
be, as Browning himself expresses it in a phrase
which Attila or Alaric might have composed,
" bound dizzily to the wheel of change to slake the
thirst of God."

Such an optimism and such a doctrine of immor-
tality can give no justification to experience which
it does not already have in its detached parts. In-
deed, those dogmas are not the basis of Browning's
attitude, not conditions of his satisfaction in
living, but rather overflowings of that satisfaction.
The present life is presumably a fair average of the
whole series of " adventures brave and new " which
fall to each man's share; were it not found de-
lightful in itself, there would be no motive for
imagining and asserting that it is reproduced in
infinitum. So too if we did not think that the evil
in experience is actually utilized and visibly swal-
lowed up in its good effects, we should hardly
venture to think that God could have regarded as
a good something which has evil for its condition
and which is for that reason profoundly sad and
equivocal. But Browning's philosophy of life and


206 POETRY AND KBLIGION

habit of imagination do not require the support of
any metaphysical theory. His temperament is per-
fectly self-sufficient and primary; what doctrines v
he has are suggested by it and are too loose to give

,it more than a hesitant expression ; they are quite
powerless to give it any justification which it
might lack on its face.

It is the temperament, then, that speaks ; we
may brush aside as unsubstantial, and even as dis-
torting, the web of arguments and theories which
it has spun out of itself. And what does the
temperament say? That life is an adYenturg. jmt
a disciplin e ;. that the ex ercise of en er gy is _the_
abs olute good , irrespective of motives or of conse-
quences. These are the maxims of a frank bar-
barism ; nothing could express better the lust of
life, the dogg ed unwillingn ess to learn from expmr .
ence, the contemp^for rationality, the carelessn^
aiBout"pSrIectiwi, the admiration for niere^ f orce,jji
wEoh'barbarismTalways betoj§,.itsfilf. The vague
religion which seeks to justify this attitude is really

_only another outburst of the same irrational impulse.

In Browning this religion takes the name of

Christianity, and identifies itself with one or two

" Christian ideas arbitrarily selected ; but at heart it
has far more affinity to the worship of Thor or of

_Odin than to the religion of the Cross. The zest
of life becomes a cosmic emotion; we lump the
whole together and cry, " Hurrah for the Uni-


THE POETRY OF BARBARISM 207

verse ! " A faith, which, is thus a pure matter of
lustiness and inebriation rises and falls, attracts or
repels, with the ebb and flow of the mood from
which it springs. It is invincible because unseiz-
able ; it is as safe from refutation as it is rebellious ,
to embodiment. But it cannot enlighten or correct
the passions on which it feeds. Like a servile
priest, it flatters them in the came of Heaven. It
cloaks irrationality in sanctimony; and its admi-
ration for every bluff folly, being thus justified
by a theory, becomes a positive fanaticism, eager
to defend any wayward impulse.

Such barbarism of temper and thought could
hardly, in a man of Browning's independence and
spontaneity, be without its counterpart in his art.
When a man's personal jriligign is passive,, as
Shakespeare's seems" to haive been, and is adopted
^without question or particular interest from the
society around him, we may not observe any an-
alogy between it and the free creations of that
man's mind. Not so when the religion is cre-
ated afresh by the private imagination ; it is then
merely one among many personal works of art,
and will naturally bear a family likeness to the
others. The same individual temperament, with .
its limitations and its bias, will appear in the art ,
which has appeared in the religion. And such
is the case with Browning. His limitatiras. as a
poet are the counterpart_of his limitations as a


/.


208 POETKY AND EELIGION

moraUst^ a5.d_theologiaai-V oiily ^ ^^^ po^t they
are not so regrettable. Philosophy aad religion
are nothing if not ultimate; it is their business
to deal with general principles and final aims.
Now it is in the conception of things-iundamental
and WtinrSteTEaFBrowning_is weak ; he is strong
ia-the conception of things immediate. The pulse
"of the emotion, the bobbing up of the thought, the
streaming of the reverie — these he can note down
with picturesque force or imagine with admirable
fecundity.
Yet the limits of such excellence are narrow.


for no man can safely go far without the guidance

of reason. Hi? _long. poems have no structure/

— for that name cannot be given to the singu-

I lar mechanical division of " The Ring and the *
Book." Even his short poems have no complete-lS
ness, no limpidity. v^ They are little torsos made i
broken so as to stimulate the reader to the resto- ■
ration of their missing legs and arms. What is
admirable in them is pregnancy of phrase, vivid-»(
ness of passion and sentiment, heaped-up scraps

"of observation, occasional flashes of light, occa-
sional beauties of versification, — all like

" the quiok sharp scratch
And blue spurt of a lighted match."

\ There is never anything largely composed in the
spirit of pure beauty, nothing devotedly finished,


THE POETEY OP BARBAEISM 209

nothing simple and truly just. The poet's mind
_^6annot reach equilibrium; at best he oscillates
between opposed extravagances; his final word
is still a boutade, still an explosion. He has no •
/Sustained nobility of style. He affects with the
reader a confidential and vulgar manner, so as to
be more sincere and to feel more at home. Even
in the poems where the effort at impersonality is
most successful, the dramatic disguise is usually
thrown off in a preface, epilogue or parenthesis.
The author likes to remind us of himself by some
confidential wink or genial poke in the ribs, by
some little interlarded sneer. We get in these
tricks of manner a taste of that essential vul-
garity, that indifference to purity and distinction,
which is latent but pervasive in all the products
of this mind. The- same disdain of perfection
wMch. appears in his ethics appears here in his i
verse, and impairs its beauty by allowing it to '
remain too often obscure, affected, and grotesque, i
Such a correspondence is natural : for the same |
powers of conception and expression are needed I
in fiction, which, if turned to reflection, would
produce a good philosophy. Reason is necessary
to the perception of high ' beauty. Discipline is
indispensable to art. Work from which these
qualities are absent must be barbaric ; it can have
no ideal form and must appeal to us only through
the sensuousness and profusion of its materials.


210 POBTKY AND RELIGION

We are invited by it to lapse into a miscellane-
ous appreciativeness, into a subservience to every
detached impression. And yet, if we would only
reflect even on these disordered beauties, we should
see that the principle by which they delight us
is a principle by which an ideal, an image of per-
fection, is inevitably evoked. We can have no
pleasure or pain, nor any preference whatsoever,
without implicitly setting up a standard of excel-
lence, an ideal of what would satisfy us there. To
make these implicit ideals explicit, to catch their
hint, to work out their theme, and express clearly
to ourselves and to the world what they are de-
manding in the place of the actual — that is the
labour of reason and-Ahe task of genius. The two
cannot be divided. \Clarification of ideas and dis-
entanglement of values are as essential to aesthetic
( activity as to intelligence. A failure of reason is '
_ a failure of art and tasteTN ^' " ~~^~

The limits of Browning's art, like the limits of
Whitman's, can therefore be understood by consid-~"
ering his mfental habit. Both poets had powerful^
ima|inations, but the type of their imaginations (
was lew. In Whitman imagination was limited to
marshaJling^^ensatiQ^in siufrle file; the embroia*^
eries he made around that central line were simple
and insignificant. His energy was concentrated
on that somewhat animal form of contemplation,
of which, for the rest, he was a great, perhaps an


THE POETEY OF BARBARISM 211

unequalled master. Browning rose above that
level; with him sensation is usually in the back-
ground ; he is not particularly a poet of the- senses ,
or of ocular_vision. His favourite subject-matteM
is rather the stream^ofJbDJight-and. feeling ivQ
the mind; he is the poet pf soliloquy. Naturef
and life as they really are,^ rather "than as they
may appear to the ignorant and passionate -particP^
pant in them, lie beyond his range. Even in his
best dramas, like "A Blot in the 'Scutcheon" or
" Colombe's Birthday," the interest remains in the
experience of. the several persons as they explain
it to us. The same is the case in "The Eing and
the Book," the conception of which, in twelve
monstrous soliloquies, is a striking evidence of the
poet's predilection for this form.

The method is, to peaetrate-by- syjapathy rather
than to portray bjjntelligence. The most authori- '
tative insight is not the poet's or the spectator's,
aroused and enlightened by the spectacle, but the
various heroes' own, in their moment of intensest
passion. We therefore miss the tragic relief and"
exaltation, and come away instead with the uncom-
fortable feeling that an obstinate folly is appar-
ently the most glorious and choiceworthy thing in
the world. This is evidently the poet's own illusion,^
and those who do not happen to share it must feel
that if life were really as irrational as he thinks
it, it would be not only profoundly discouraging.


I


212 POETKY AND RELIGION

which it often is, but profoundly disgusting, which
it surely is not; for at least it reveals the ideal
_which it fails to attain.

This ideal Browning never disentangles. Tor
\ him the crude experience is the only end, the
I endless struggle the only ideal, and the perturbed
V^oul" the only organon of truth. The arrest
of his intelligence at this point, before it hafr-
envisaged any rational object, explains the arrest,
of his dramatic art at soliloquy. His immersion
i'n theJEeriinrn>f-5elfd3flnsci^^ prevents him

/from dramatizing the real relations -of- men and
ithe^' tMiifetfigarto-- 0B.e--aii'oEher, to Nature, and to
d6stinyr"!For in order "to do so he would have
~liad to view his characters froaiL_above (as Cer-
irantes did, for instance), and to see them not
merely as they appeared to themselves, but as
they appear to reason. This higher attitude, how-
ever, was not only-lseyond Browning's scope, it was
positively contrary to his inspiration. Had he
reached it, he would no longer have seen the uni-
verse through the "Soul," but through the intel-
lect, and he would not have been able to cry, "How
the world is made for each one of us ! " On the
contrary, the "Soul" would have figured only in
its true conditions, in all its ignorance and depend-
ence, and also in its essential teachableness, a point
against which Browning's barbaric wilfulness par-
ticularly rebelled. Rooted in his persuasion that


THE POETRY OF BAEBAEISM 213

the soul is esseatially omnipotent and that to live
hard can never be to live wrong, he remained fas-
cinated by the march and method of self-conscious-
ness, and never allowed himself to be weaned from
that romantic fatuity by the energy of rational
imagination, which prompts us not to regard our
ideas as mere filling of a dream, but rather to build
on them the conception of permanent objects and
overruling principles, such as Nature, society, and
the other ideals of reason. A full-grown imagina-
tion deals with these things,^ which do not obey the
laws of psychological progression, and cannot; be
described by the methods of soliloquy.

We thus see that Browning's sphere, though
more subtle and complex than Whitman's, was
still elementary. It lay far below the spheres
of social and historical reality in which Shake-
speare moved; far below the comprehensive and
cosmic sphere of every gi-eat epic poet. Browning i
did not even reach the intellectual plane of such
contemporary poets as Tennyson and Matthew Ar-
nold, who, whatever may be thoiight of their
powers, did not study consciousness for itself, but
for the sake of its meaning and of the objects
which it revealed. Cxhe best things that come
into a man's consciousness are the things that take
him out of it^the rational things that are independ-
ent of his personal perception and of his personal
existence. These he approaches with his reason, and


214 POETEY AND EELIGION

they, in the same measure, endow him with their
immortality. But precisely these things — the
objects of science and of the constructive imagina-
tion — Browning always saw askance, in the out-
skirts of his field of vision, for his eye was fixed
and riveted on the soliloquizing Soul. And this
Soul being, to his apprehension, irrational, did not
give itself over to those permanent objects which
might otherwise have occupied it, but ruminated
on its own accidental emotions, on its love-affairs,
and on its -hopes of going on so ruminating for
ever.

The pathology of the human mind — for the
normal, too, is pathological when it is not referred
to the ideal — the pathology of the human mind
is a very interesting subject, demanding great gifts
and great ingenuity in its treatment. Browning
ministers to this interest, and possesses this in-
genuity and these gifts. More than any other
poet he keeps a kind of speculation alive in the
now large body of sentimental, eager-minded peo-
ple, who no longer can find in a definite religion a
form and language for their imaginative life. That
this service is greatly appreciated speaks well for
the ineradicable tendency in man to study himself
and his destiny. We do not deny the achievement
when we point out its nature and limitations. It
does not cease to be something because it is taken
to be more than it is.


THE POBTKY OF BAKBAEISM 215

In every imaginative sphere the nineteenth cen-
tury has been an era of chaos, as it has been an era
of order and growing organization in the spheres
of science and of industry. An ancient doctrine of
the philosophers asserts that to chaos the world
must ultimately return. And what is perhaps true
of the cycles of cosmic change is certainly true of
the revolutions of culture. Nothing lasts for ever :
languages, arts, and religions disintegrate with time.
Yet the perfecting of such forms is the only cri-
terion of progress; the destruction of them the
chief evidence of decay. Perhaps fate intends
that we should have, in our imaginative decadence,
the consolation of fancying that we are still pro-
gressing, and that the disintegration of religion
and the arts is bringing us nearer to the proto-
plasm of sensation and passion. If energy and
actuality are all that we care for, chaos is as good
as order, and barbarism as good as discipline —
better, perhaps, since impulse is not then restrained
within any bounds of reason or beauty. But if the
powers of the human mind are at any time ade-
quate to the task of digesting experience, clearness
and order inevitably supervene. The moulds of
thought are imposed upon Nature, and the convic-
tion of a definite truth arises together with the
vision of a supreme perfection. It is only at such
periods that the human animal vindicates his title
of rational. If such an epoch should return, people


216 POETRY AND BBLIGION

will no doubt retrace our present gropings with
interest and see in them gradual approaches to
their own achievement. Whitman and Browning
might well figure then as representatives of our
time. For the merit of being representative can-
not be denied them. The mind of our age, like
theirs, iS choked with materials, emotional, and
inconclusive. They merely aggravate our charac-
teristics, and their success with us is due partly to
their own absolute strength and partly to our
common weakness. If once, however, this imagi-
native weakness could be overcome, and a form
found for the crude matter of experience, men
might look back from the height of a new religion
and a new poetry upon the present troubles of the
spirit; and perhaps even these things might then
be pleasant to remember.


vni

EMEESON

Those who knew Emerson, or who stood so near
to his time and to his circle that they caught some
echo of his personal influence, did not judge him
merely as a poet or philosopher, nor identify his
efficacy with that of his writings. His friends and
neighbours, the congregations he preached to in his
younger days, the audiences that afterward lis-
tened to his lectures, all agreed in a veneration
for his person which had nothing to do with their
understanding or acceptance of his opinions. They
flocked to him and listened to his word, not so
much for the sake of its absolute meaning as for
the at mosphere of candour, purity, a.nd serenity
that hung about it, as a bout a sort of sacred mu sic.
They f elt themselves in the presence of a rare and
be autiful spirit, who was in commTinion yQ£ h. a
hi gher world, More than the truth his teaching
might express, they valued the sense it gave them
of a truth that was inexpressible. They became
aware, if we may say so, of the ultrarviolet rays of
his spectrum, of the inaudible highest notes of his
gamut, too pure and thin for common ears.
217


218 POETRY AND BELIGION

This effect was by no means due to the possession
on the part of Emerson of the secret of the uni-
verse, or even of a definite conception of ultimate
truth. He was not a prophet who had once for all
climbed his Sinai or his Tabor, and having there
beheld the transfigured reality, descended again to
make authoritative report of it to the world. Far
from it. At bottom he had nn rlnp.fTinft a.f. g.11
The deeper he went and the more he tr\ 9A to
grapple witb landa mental concep tir)Ti,.<j, t.lip -n-pg^ioT.
I an d more elusive t^^j bspfiimp in hiit hands. Did
he know what he meant by Spirit or the "Over-
Soul " ? C ould he sa y what he understood by th e
ter ms, so co nstantly on his lips^ Nature, Tja.Wf fto d,
Benefit, or Beauty? He could not, and the g on-
s ciousness of that incapacity was s " livply wit.liiTi
hi m that he never attempted to give articulation ,. to
his philosophy. His finer instinct kept him from
doing that violence to his inspiration.

TJie source of his power lay not in his doctrine,
but in his temperament, and the rare quality of his
wisdom was due less to his reason than to his imag-
ination. |T^,p.a1ity elnrlpfl Ti^T n f he had neither diliA l
gence nor consta,ncY enough to Tna.stp.r a.nd posse^s|
it:jji ut his mind w as o pen tn p''^ r^^"^""rrhip infln
ences, from whatever quarter thev might blow; th e
lessons of science and the hints of poetry worked
themselves out in him to a free and personal reli-
gion. He differed from the plodding many, not in


EMEESON 219

kngffiiag_illfiia. His grasp was not particularly!
firm, he was far from being, like a Plato or an
Aristotle, past master in the art and the science
of life. But his mind was endowed with unusu al
pla sticity, with unusual spontaneity and liberty o f

m Oyement= - it wp.a a. fairylanrl nf fTirvngTiti' in<3. ^

f ancies^ He was like a young god making experi-
ments in creation: he blotched the work, and
always began again on a new and better plan.
Every day he said, " Let there be light," and every
day the light was new. His sun, like that of
Heraclitus, was different every morning.

What seemed, then, to the more earnest and less
critical of his hearers a revelation from above was in
truth rather an insurrection from beneath, a shak-
ing loose from convention, a disintegration of the
normal categories of reason in favour of various im- '
aginative principles, on which the* world might have
been built, if it had been built differently. This gift
of revolutionary thinking allowed new aspects, hints
of wider laws, premonitions of unthought-of funda-
mental unities to spring constantly into view. But
such visions were necessarily fleeting, because the
human mind had long before settled its grammar,
and discovered, after much groping and many
defeats, the general forms in which experience will
allow itself to be stated. These general forms
are the principles of common sense and positive


220 POETKY AND BELIGION

science, no less imaginative in their origin than
those notions which we now call transcendental,
but grown prosaic, like the metaphors of common
speech, by dint of repetition.

Yet authority, even of this rational kind, sat
lightly upon Emerson. To reject tradition a nd
thi nk as one might have thought if no ma n had
ever existed before was indeed the aspiration of the
Tr anscendentalists, and although Emerson hard ly
regarded himself as a member of that school, he
l argely shared its teadeh6y and passed loF its
spokesman. Without protesting against tradition,
he smilingly eluded it in his thoughts, untamable
in their quiet irresponsibility. He fled to his
woods or to his "pleached garden," to be the cr e-
ator of hi s own worlds in solitude and freedom .
No wonder that he brought thence to the tightly
conventional minds of his contemporaries a breath
as if from paradise. His simplicity in novelty, hi s
profundity , his ingenuous ardour m^st have seemed
/ to them something heavenly, and they may be ex-
cused if they thought they detected inspiration
even in his occasional thin paradoxes and guile-
less whims. T hey were stifled with conscience and
he broug ht them a breath of Nature; they w ere
surteite d with shallow controversies and he gav e
' them poetic truth.

Ima gination ind ap rl is big giTigln tTipTno As a
preacher might under every text enforce the same


BMEESON 221

lessons of the gospel, so Emerson traces in eve ry
sp here the same spiritual laws of p.ypftrii^p p.ft —
compen sation^ continuity, the self-R-gprfissirm of the
So u! in the forms of N ature and of society, nntil hIb
final ly recognizes herself in her own work and s ees
it s beneficence am Lijeajity. His constant refrain
is the omnipotence of imaginative thought; its
power first to make the world, then to understand J
it, and finally to rise above it. All ISTature is an
embodiment of our native fancy, all history a drama
in Wfuch the innate possibilities of the spirit are
enacted and realized. AVhile the confiict of life
and the shocks of experience seem to bring us face
to face with an alien and overwhelming power, re-
flection can humanize and rationalize that power
by conceiving its laws; and with this recognitio n
of the rationality of all things comes the sen se of
their beauty a nd order. The destruction which
Nature seems to prepare for our special hopes is
thus seen to be the victory of our impersonal inter-
ests. To awaken in us this spiritual insight, aiTi
elevation of mind which is at once an act of com- i
prehension and of worship, to substitute it fori
lower passions and more servile forms of intelli- j
gence — that is Emerson's constant effort. AllJ
his resources of illustration, observation, and rheto-
ric are used to deepen and clarify this sort of
wisdom.
Such thought is essentially the same that is


222 POETRY AND EBLIGION

found in the German romantic or idealistic phi-
losophers, with whom Emerson's aflBnity is remark-
able, all the more as he seems to have borrowed
little or nothing from their works. The critics of
human nature, in the eighteenth century, had
shown how much men's ideas depend on their pre-
dispositions, on the character of their senses and
the habits of their intelligence. Seizing upon this
thought and exaggerating it, the romantic philoso-
phers attributed to the spirit of man the omnipo-
tence which had belonged to God, and felt that in
this way they were reasserting the supremacy of
mind over matter and establishing it upon a safe
and rational basis.

The Germans were great system-makers, and
Emerson cannot rival them in the sustained effort
of thought by which they sought to reinterpret
every sphere of being according to their chosen
principles. But he surpassed them in an instinc-
tive sense of what he was doing. He never rep -
vAgantf^rl h^a pnatry ^.fi s cience, uo r countenanc(>d
f>.o f/^,■m^^|jf^p r.f o nnw cof.<i <-,T^p||, fjli ould uurse the

Rfirisft_nf a. priva.f^R and mystfirinns innmina.t.inn^ arirl

r elirfit th e fa.ffntR nf paaam^ a nd prejuHicfi- He
never tried to seek out and defend the universal
implications of his ideas, and never wrote the book
he had once planned on the law of compensation,
foreseeing, we may well believe, the sophistries in
which he would have been directly involved. He


BMEESON 223

fortunately pr eferred a fresh statement on a fa eshl
s ubject . A suggestion once given, the spirit once
aroused to speculation, a glimpse once gained of
so me ideal harmon y, he chose to descend again to
common sense and to touch the earth for a moment \
before another flight. -The faculty of idealizati on V
was it self what he va^l ued. Philosophy for him j
was rather a moral energy flowering into sprightli- i
ness of thought than a body of serious and defen- I
sible doctrines. In practising transcendental spec- *
ulation only in this poetic and sporadic fashion,
Emerson retained its true value and avoided its
greatest danger. He secured the freedom and fer- \
tility of his thought and did not allow one concep- {
tion of law or one hint of harmony to sterilize the i
mind and prevent the subsequent birth within it
of other ideas, no less just and imposing than their
predecessors. For we are not dealing at all in such ;
a philosophy with matters of fact or with such
verifiable truths as exclude their .opposites. We
are dealing only with imagination, with the art of
conception, and with the various forms in which
reflection, like a poet, may compose and recompose
human experience.

A certain disquiet mingled, however, in the minds
of Emerson's contemporaries with the admiration
they felt for his purity and genius. They saw that he
had forsaken the doctrines of the Church; and they
were not sure whether he held quite unequivocally


224 POETEY AND EBLIGION

any doctrine whatever. We may not all of us share
the concern for orthodoxy which usually caused
this puzzled alarm : we may understand that it was
not Emerson's vocation to be definite and dogmatic
in religion any more than in philosophy. Yet that
disquiet will not, even for us, wholly disappear.
It is produced by a defect which naturally accom-
panies imagination in all but the greatest minds.
I mean disorganization. Emerson not only con-
ceived things in new ways, but he seemed to think
the new ways might cancel and supersede the old.
His imagination was to invalidate the understand-
ing. That inspiration which should come to fulfil
seemed too often to come to destroy. If he was able
so constantly to stimulate us to fresh thoughts, was
it not because he demolished the labour of long
ages of reflection ? Was not the startling effect of
much of his writing due to its contradiction to tra-
dition and to common sense ?

So long as he- is a poet and in the enjoyment of
his poetic license, we can blame this play of mind
only by a misunderstanding. It is possible to
think otherwise than as common sense thinks;
there are other categories beside those of science.
When we employ them we enlarge our lives. We
add to the world of fact any number of worlds of
the imagination in which human nature and the
eternal relations of ideas may be nobly expressed.
So far our imaginative fertility is only a benefit :


EMERSOK 226

it surrounds us with the congenial and necessary
radiation of art and religion. It manifests our
moral vitality in the bosom of Nature.

But s ometime fi ima.p'JTigt.inTi invades thp. fifh^T? "^^
un derstanding and seems to discredit its indispens a-
b le wo rk. Common sense, we are allowed to infer,
is a shallow affair: true insight changes all that.
When so applied, poetic activity is not an unmixed
good. It loosens our hold on fact and confuses our
intelligence, so that we forget that intelligence has
itself every prerogative of imagination, and has
besides the sanction of practical validity. "We
are made to believe that since the iinderstanding
is something human and conditioned, something
which might have begn differe&t, as the senses
might have been different, and which we may yet,
so to speak, get behind — therefore the understand-
ing ought to be abandoned. We long for higher
faculties, neglecting those we have, we yearn for
intuition, closing our eyes upon experience. We
become mystical.

Mysticism, as we have said, is the surrender of a
category of thought because we divine its relativity.
As every new category, however, must share this
reproach, the mystic is obliged in the end to give
them all up, the poetic and moral categories no
less than the physical, so that the end of his
purification is the atrophy of his whole nature,
the emptying of his whole heart and mind to make


226 POETRY AND RELIGION

room, as lie thinks, for God. By attacking the
authority of the understanding as the orgauon of
knowledge, by substituting itself for it as the
herald of a deeper truth, the imagination thus
prepares its own destruction. For if the under-
standing is rejected because it cannot grasp the
absolute, the imagination and all*^ works — art,
dogma, worship — must presently be rejected for
the same reason. Common sense and poetry must
both go by the board, and conscience must follow
after : for all these are human and relative. Mys-
ticism will be satisfied only with the absolute, and
as the absolute, by its very definition, is not repre-
sentable by any specific faculty, it must be ap-
proached through the abandonment of all. The
lights of life must be extinguished that the light of
the absolute may shine, and the possession of every-
thing in general must be secured by the surrender
of everything in particular.

f The same difiidence, however, the same constant
renewal of sincerity which kept Emerson's flights
of imagination near to exjjerience, kept his mys-
ticism also within bounds/ A certain mystical
tendency is pervasive with him, but there are only
one or two subjects on which he dwells with enough
constancy and energy of attention to make his mys-
tical treatment of them pronounced. One of these
is the question of the unity of all minds in the
■ single soul of the universe, which is the same in all


EMEESON

creatures ; another is the question of evil and of its
evaporation in the universal harmony of things.
Both these ideas suggest themselves at certain
turns in every man's experience, and might receive
a rational formulation. But they are intricate sub-
jects, obscured by many emotional prejudices, so
that the labouSf, impartiality, and precision which
would be needed to elucidate them are to be looked
for in scholastic rather than in inspired thinkers,
and in Emerson least of all. Before these prob-
lems he is alternately ingenuous and rhapsodical,
and in both moods equally helpless. Individuals
no doubt exist, he says to himself. But, ah ! Na-
poleon is in every schoolboy. In every squatter
in the western prairies we shall find an owner —

" Of Caesar's hand and Plato's brain,
Of Lord Christ's heart, and Shakespeare's strain."

But how? we may ask. Potentially? Is it be-
cause any mind, were it given the right body and
the right experience, were it made over,' in a word,
into another mind, would resemble that other mind
to the point of identity ? Or is it that our souls
are already so largely similar that we are subject
to many kindred promptings and share many ideals
unrealizable in our particular circumstances ? But
then we should simply be saying that if what
makes men different were removed, men would be
indistinguishable, or that, in so far as they are now


228 POETRY AND RELIGION

alike, they can understand one another by summon-
ing up their respective experiences in the fancy.
There would be no mysticism in that, but at the
same time, alas, no eloquence, no paradox, and, if
we must say the word, no nonsense.

On the question of evil, Emerson's position is of
the same kind. There is evil, of course, he tells us.
Ilxperience is sad. There is a crack in everything
that God has made. But, ah! the laws of the
universe are sacred and beneficent. Without them
nothing good could arise. All things, then, are in
their right places and the universe is perfect above
our querulous tears. Perfect ? we may ask. But
perfect from what point of view, in reference to
what ideal ? To its own ? To that of a man who
renouncing himself and all naturally dear to him,
ignoring the injustice, suffering, and impotence in
the world, allows his will and his conscience to be
hypnotized by the spectacle of a necessary evolu-
tion, and lulled into cruelty by the pomp and music
of a tragic show? In that case the evil is not
explained, it is forgotten ; it is not cured, but con-
doned. We have surrendered the category of the
better and the worse, the deepest foundation of
life and reason ; we have become mystics on the
one subject on which, above all others, we ought to
be men.

Two forces may be said to have carried Emerson
in this mystical direction; one, that freedom of


EMBKSON 229

his imagination which we have already noted, and
which kept him from the fear of self-contradiction ;
the other the habit of worship inherited from his
clerical ancestors and enforced by his religious edu-
cation. The spirit of conformity, the unction, the
loyalty even unto death inspired by the religion of
Jehovah, were dispositions acquired by too long a
discipline and rooted in too many forms of speech,
of thought, and of worship for a man like Emerson,
who had felt their full force, ever to be able to lose
them. The evolutions of his abstract opinions left
that habit unchanged. Unless we keep this cir-
cumstance in mind, we shall not be able to under-
stand the kind of elation and sacred joy, so charac-
teristic of his eloquence, with which he propounds
laws of Nature and aspects of experience which,
viewed in themselves, afford but an equivocal
support to moral enthusiasm. An optimism so
persistent and unclouded as his will seem at vari-
ance with the description he himself gives of human
life, a description coloured by a poetic idealism,
but hardly by an optimistic bias.

We must remember, therefore, that this opti-
mism is a pious tradition, originally justified by
the belief in a personal God and in a providential
government of affairs for the ultimate and positive
good of the elect, and that the habit of worship
survived in Emerson as an instinct after those posi-
tive beliefs had faded into a recognition of " spirit-


230 POETKT AND RELIGION

ual laws." We must remember that Calvinism had
known how to combine an awestruck devotion to
the Supreme Being with no very roseate picture
of the destinies of mankind, and for more than
two hundred years had been breeding in the stock
from which Emerson came a willingness to be, as
the phrase is, " damned for the glory of God."

What wonder, then, that when, for the former in-
exorable dispensation of Providence, Emerson sub-
stituted his general spiritual and natural laws, he
should not have felt the spirit of worship fail within
him ? On the contrary, his thought moved in the
presence of moral harmonies which seemed to him
truer, more beautiful, and more beneficent than
those of the old theology. An independent philos-
opher would not have seen in those harmonies an
object of worship or a sufiicient basis for optimism.
But he was not an independent philosopher, in spite
of his belief in independence. He inherited the
problems and the preoccupations of the theology
from which he started, being in this respect like
the German idealists, who, with all their pretence of
absolute metaphysics, were in reality only giving
^lusive and abstract forms to traditional theology.
Emerson, too, was not primarily a philosopher,
but a Puritan mystic with a poetic fancy and a
gift for observation and epigram, and he saw in the
laws of Nature, idealized by his imagination, only
a more intelligible form of the divinity he had


EMEESON 231

always recognized and adored. His was not a\
philosophy passing into a religion, but a peligion
expressing itself as a philosophy and veiled, as at
its setting it descended the heavens, in various tints,
of poetry and science.

If we ask ourselves what was Emerson's relation
to the scientific and religious movements of his
time, and what place he may claim in the history
of opinion, we must answer thai.^£_hfilaiiged_EfiEjt

littl e to t he past, vfiry littlfi t n tho prpcj^vf^ ^^^
almost wholly <^f» t.Tiat: g.hgt.|-fi|if| gpTioTo infn vtrhifVk


mv stical or philosophic aa piraiti"" ^"^ "'"■^■"'^ a 1
few men in all a ^ep . The religious tradition in J
which he was reared was that of Puritanism, but
of a Puritanism which, retaining its moral intensity
and metaphysical abstraction, had minimized its
doctrinal expression and become Unitarian. Emer-
son was indeed the Psyche of Puritanism, "the
latest-born and fairest vision far" of all that
"faded hierarchy." A Puritan whose .i:fili| df|pi
:Sj^^^^jOfilg^ a poet whose only pleasure was!
thought, he showed in his life and personality the |
meagreness, the constraint, the frigid and conscious
consecration which belonged to his clerical ances-
tors, while his inmost impersonal spirit ranged
abroad over the fields of history and Nature,
gathering what ideas it might, and singing its little
snatches of inspired song.
The traditional element was thus rather an ex-


232 POBTEY AND RELIGION

ternal and unessential contribution to Emerson's
mind ; he had the professional tinge, the decorum,
the distinction of an old-fashioned divine ; he had
also the habit of writing sermons, and he had the
national pride and hope of a religious people that
felt itself providentially chosen to establish a free
and godly commonwealth in a new world. For
the rest, he separated himself from the ancient
creed of the community with a sense rather of
relief than of regret. A literal belief in Christian
doctrines repelled him as unspiritual, as manifest-
ing no understanding of the meaning which, as
allegories, those doctrines might have to a philo-
sophic and poetical spirit. Although as a clergy-
man he was at first in the habit of referring to
the Bible and its lessons as to a supreme authority,
he had no instinctive sympathy with the inspira-
tion of either the Old or the New Testament; in
Hafiz or Plutarch, in Plato or Shakespeare, he
found more congenial stuff.

While he thus preferred to withdraw, without
rancour and without contempt, from the aiicient
fellowship of the church, he assumed an attitude
hardly less cool and deprecatory toward the en-
thusiasms of the new era. The national ideal of
democracy and freedom had his entire sympathy ;
he allowed himself to be drawn into the movement
against slavery; he took a curious and smiling
interest in the discoveries of natural science and


BMEESON 233

in the material progress of the age. But he could
go no farther. His contemplative nature, his reli-
gious training, his dispersed reading, made him
stand aside from the life of the world, even -while
he studied it with benevolent attention. His heart
•was fixed on eternal things, and he was in no
sense a prophet for his age or country. He be-
longed by nature to that mystical company of
devout souls that recognize no particular home
and are dispersed throughout history, although
not without intercommunication. He felt his
affinity to the Hindoos and the Persians, to the
Platonists and the Stoics. Like them he re-
mains "a friend and aider of those who would
live in the spirit." If not a star of the first
magnitude, he is certainly a fixed star in the
firmament of philosophy. Alone as yet among
Americans, he may be said to have won a place
there, if not by the originality of his thought, at
least by the ioriginality and beauty of the expr es-
sioiy'IieL ^arveyto thoughts that are old and imt)ep sh-
able. " V '


IX

A EELIGION OF DISILLUSION

Man has henceforth this cause of pride : that he has be-
thought himself of justice in a universe without justice, and
has put justice there. — Jean Lahoe.

The break-up of traditional systems and tlie
disappearance of a recognized authority from the
religious world have naturally led to many at-
tempts at philosophic reconstruction. Most of
these are timid compromises, which leave first
principles untouched and contain in a veiled form
all the old contradictions. Others are advertise-
ments of some personal notion, some fresh discov-
ery, proposed as a panacea and as an equivalent
for all the heritage of human wisdom. A few
thinkers, however, inspired by more comprehen-
sive sympathies, and at the same time free from
preconceptions, have come nearer to the funda-
mental elements of the problem and have given
out suggestions which, even if not satisfactory in
their actual form, are helpful and interesting in
their tendency. Such a thinker is the contempo-
rary French poet, Jean Labor, who, in a volume
234


A RELIGION OF DISILLTTSION 235

of thoughts entitled " La gloire du ndant," has gath-
ered together three philosophical points of view,
we might almost say three religions, and combined
their issues in a way which may now seem again
new, but which in reality is as old as wisdom.

The form is literary and the outcome in a sense
negative; there is no attempt to put new wine
into old bottles, no apologetic tone, no unction.
Experience is consulted afresh, without preoccu-
pation as to the results of reflection ; and if these
results are religious, it is because any reasoned
appreciation of life is bound to be a religion, even
if no conventionally religious elements are im-
ported into the problem. In fact, those prophets
who have said that the Sabbath was made for man
and who have given moral functions to historic al
religion, as well as those philosophers who have*
best understood its nature, have seemed irreligious
to their contemporaries, because they have looked
upon religion as an interpretation of reality, not
as a quasi-reality existing by itself and vouched
for merely by tradition and miracle. Eeligion is
an imaginative echo of things natural and moral :
and if this echo is to be well attuned, our ear
must first be attentive to the natural sounds of
which, in religion, we are to develop the har-
mony.

It is, therefore, not an objection to Jean Lah.or'sl
competence to gather for us the elements of a


236 POETEY AND EELIGION

religion that lie is a poet rather than a theologian
and an observer rather than a philosopher, or that
he presents his intuitions without technical ap-
paratus in a series of highly coloured epigrams
and little pictures. On the contrary, such sim-
plicity and directness are an advantage when, as
in this case, the guiding inspiration is religious.
It is religious because, on the one hand, it is im-.
ajyTativft : we are asking ourselves e verywh ere
what Nature says to us and what we are to say
in reply; and on the other hand, because it is
Jrationalj ^'^d these messages and reactions are to be
/unified into a single science and a single morality.
The logical scheme of the system is not made ex-
plicit: there is no argumentation and no answers are
offered to the objections that might naturally sug-
.gest themselves. But the sayings are so arranged
and made so to progress in tone and subject that
a system of philosophy is clearly implied in them ;
and the essence of this system is at times briefly
expressed.

All, as it behooves a poet, is the transcript
of personal experienc e. We must not look for
the inclusion of elements, however important in
themselves, which the author has not found in
his own life. The omissions are in this case
as characteristic as the inclusions. We look
in vain, for instance, for any appreciation of
Christianity or of all that side of human nature


A RELIGION OF DISILLUSION 237

and experience on which faith in Christianity \
rests; we hear nothing of love and its ideal sug-
gestions, nothing of the aspiration to immortal-
ity, nothing of the whole transcendental attitude
toward experience. These are grave omissions.
They may seem to condemn Jean Lahor, if not as
a general philosopher, at least as a representative
of an age in which religious thought has so largely
centred about these very questions. But our cen-
tury has been an age of confusion; and a man
who at its end wishes to attain some coherence of
life and mind, must begin by letting drop much
that the age has held in solution. It is by not
being an average that a man may become a guide.
Only by manifesting the direction of change and
embodying that change in his own person can he
ybe a sign of progress. It remains for time to
show whether what survives in a given man has
fortune on its side and contains the inward ele-
ments of vitality. The presumption in this case,
when we abstract from our personal prejudices,
will seem to be wholly in favour of our author.

The three influences to which he has yielded
and which have moulded his mind are the pan-
theisT p , of the "HinilnnR. our contemporar y natural
scieacfi^ and the ideal_of Greek civilization. These
three elements might at first sight seem incongru-
ous, and the principle of selection by which they are
preferred above all others might seem as hard to


238 POETRY AND RELIGION

find as the principle of union by which they are to
be welded into one philosophy. But a little study
of these maxims and of the autobiographical sketch
which precedes them will, I think, enable us to
discover both the principles we miss. The selec-
tion of the three influences in question is due to the
poetical temperament and scientific tastes of the
author, to an individual disposition and to studies
which drew him successively to these different
sources of instruction. The principle of synthesis,
or rather, we should perhaps say, of subordination,
by which these various habits of thought are com-
bined in one philosophy, is a moral prin ciple. It
"^ s a native power to conceive the ideal and a nati ve""
loyalty to t he ideal when once conceiv ed. This
ihoral enthusiasm is in no sense vapid or sentimen-
tal; it hardly comes to the surface in any direct
or enthusiastic expression ; but it is betrayed and
proved to be sincere, now by a passionate pessi-
mism about the natural world, now in^ detailed and
practical demands for a better state of society. A
genial individuality and a well-reasoned form of
pessimism are, then, the two factors in the devel-
opment of this interesting thinker, the two keys
to the apparently contradictory afiSnities of his
mind.

Our author, as we have said, is a poet, and even
if his verses seem at times a little thin and rhetori-
cal, they prove abundantly what is evident also in


A RELIGION OF DISILLUSION 239

his prose, namely, that he has keen sensations, that
images impress themselves upon him with force,
and that any scene whose elements are gorgeous
and picturesque or which is weighted with tragic
emotion, holds his attention and awakens in him
the impulse to literary expression. But this plastic
impulse is not powerful, or finds in the environ-
ment insufficient support. Great art and great
creative achievements are rare in the world, and
come for the most part only in those moments and
in those places where an unusual concentration of
me ntal energy and the fr iction of many kind red
mi nds allow the scattered sparks of inspiration t o
mer6;e and to leap into flame . We need not
wonder, therefore, that the aesthetic sensibility of
our author is greater than his artistic success. Of
which of our contemporaries might we not say the
same thing? Jean Lahor's attention is analytic;
he is absorbed by his model, he does not absorb it
and master it by his art. He has not enough vigour
and determination of thought to create eternal
forms out of the swift hints of perception. He
watches rather passively the flight 6f his ideas,
conscious of their vivacity, of their beauty, but
most of all, alas ! of their flight. His last word as
an observer, his message as a poet, is that all
things are illusion. They fade, they pass into one
another, the place thereof knows them no more.
Nothing of them remains, absolutely nothing, save i


240 POETKY AND RELIGION

the universal indeterminate force that breeds and
devours them perpetually.

A mind thus gifted and thus limited would -natu-
rally feel its afB.nity to Oriental pantheism as soon
as that phase of thought and feeling came within
the radius of its vision. Jean Lahor seems early
to have felt an attraction toward the speculation
of the East, and his prolonged study of that litera-
ture could of course only intensify the natural bent
of his mind, and give his thought a more pro-
nounced pantheistic colouring. Had he been wholly
absorbed, however, in such mystical contemplation,
we should have had little to study in him that was
new ; only one more case of sensibility and fancy
overpowering a timid intellect, one more gifted
nature arrested at the stage of bewilderment.
I But as Jean Lahor is only a pseudonym for the
|man, so the sympathy with India which that name
indicates is only one phase of the thinker. Our
poet pursued the study of medicine ; he realized in
the concrete the orderly complexities of natural law
and the sordid realities of human life. The vague,
sensuous enthusiasm with which he had followed
the flux of images in his fancy was now sobered by
an accurate knowledge of the miseries, the defeats,
the shames that lie beneath. His poetic sense of
illusion was deepened into a moral sense of wrong.
The same keenness of perception, the same power of
graphic expression, which had made him dwell on


A RELIGION OF DISILLUSION 241

the luxuriance of Nature now made Mm paint the
/Irony and brutality of life. There is here and there
a touch of bitterness and exaggeration in the satire,
as if the man of science felt a personal resentment
against a world that had so cheated the poet.

Yet the two descriptions are far from inconsist-
ent; we have merely learned to understand as a
process and to conceive as an inner experience what
before we had admired as a spectacle. A scien-
tific view has come to give definition and coherence
to phenomena which a poetical pantheism merely
saluted as they passed and disappeared into the
primordial darkness, or, if you like, into the pri-
mordial light. The two systems differ in tone and
in method, but not in result. Natural science, lika
pantheism, presents us with a universal flux, ini
which something, we known not what, moves, wei
know not why, we know not whither. The method!
of this transformation may be more or less accu-
rately described, the general sense of continuity
and necessity may find a more or less specific ex-
pression in the various fields of experience; yet the
outcome is still the same whirligig. We find our-
selves in either case confronted by the same gloire]
du niant, by a nothing that lives and that is beauti-
ful in its nothingness.

These two elements in Jean Labor's philosophy,
the Oriental and the scientific, would thus tend alike
to represent man with his intelligence as the pro-


242 POETRY AND RELIGION


/L


auct and the captive of an irrational engine called
the universe. Many a man accepts this solution
and reconciles himself as best he can to the truth
as it appears to him. What is there, he may say,
so dreadful in mutability ? What so intolerable in
ultimate ignorance? We know what we need to
know, and things last, perhaps, as long as they
deserve to last. So, once convinced that his
naturalistic philosophy is final, a man will silence
the demands of his own reason and call them chi-
merical. There is nothing to which men, while they
have food and drink, cannot reconcile themselves.
They will put up with present suffering, with the
certainty of death, with solitude, with shame, with
wrong, with the expectation of eternal damnation.
In the face of such things, they can not only be
happy for the moment, but solemnly thank God
for having brought them into existence. Habit
. is stronger than reason, and the respect for fact
stronger than the respect for the ideal ; nor woiild
the ideal and reason ever prevail did they not make
up in persistence what they lack in momentary
energy.
j It would have been easy, therefore, for Jean
I Lahor, as for the rest of us, to remain in the
naturalistic world, had he had only poetical intui-
tion, or only scientific training, or only both. But
there was also in him a third and a moral element,
an impulse toward ideal creation, a spark of Prome-


A EELIGIOK OF DISILLUSION 243

thean fire. He felt a genuine admiration for that
humane courage which made the Greeks, for all
their clear consciousness of fate, hopeful without
illusions and independent without rebellion. In
the bosom of the intractable infinite he still dis-
tinguished the work of human reason — the cosmos
of society, character, and art — like a Noah's ark
floating in the Deluge. His im agi nation had suc-
cumbe d to the dream _of_^a.6"se; his art had not
attempted _the task of im posing a meaning or an
i mmorta l form upon Nature: but his conscience
and his political instinct had held out against the
fascinations of Maya. The Greek asserted himself 1
.here against the barbarian, the moralist against the I
naturalist.. Nor was this a merely accidental addi-
tion or an inconsistency. It was the explicit ex-
pression of that creative reason which had all along <
chafed under the dominio n of brute faefr and of
perpetual illusionr'T^ire same moral energy which
had made him a pessimist in the presence of Nature
made him an idealist at the threshold of life.

Eor why should the natural world ever come to
be called a world of illusion? To call the vivid
objects of sense illusory is to compare them to
their disadvantage with something else which we
conceive as more worthy of the title of reality.
This deepe r reality must be something ideal, som e-
t Viitig permanent, something conceived by the in-
tellect, and which only a man having faith in the


244 POETRY AND BELIGION

i ntellect could prefer to the objects of sense or
I fancy - The Hindoos that our author thinks so
much akin to himself would hardly understand
this rational bias of his thought, this foregone
I dissatisfaction with a world of infinite change and
^ indefinite structure. They would accept as a natu-
ral fact that perpetual flux which he emphasizes
as a paradox and laments as a calamity. In spite
of his studied immersion in sensuous illusion, he
V^is still a native of the sphere of intelligible things,
and it is only the difficulty of finding the perma-
nent beings which he is inclined to look for and
in the presence of which he could alone rest, that
makes him linger with tragic self-consciousness
in the region of fleeting shadows. Accprdingly we
need not be surprised by the somewhat forced and
pessimistic note of a pantheism which is really
exotic, and we may be prepared to find the plastic
mind asserting itself ultimately against that sys-
tem. So Jean Labor, after the groups of thoughts
which he puts under the title of "L'orient" and
" Le ciel du Nord," adds another group under the
title of " Cosmos."

It would require a philosophical treatise of
greater pretentions than the little book before
us to explain fully how this cosmos can arise out
of the chaos of mechanical forces, and how the
life and the work of reason can be superposed
upon the life of sense and imagination. Our


!


A RELIGION OF DISILLUSION 246

author's vision, fixed as it is on concrete images
and expressed in detached epigrams, does not
always extend to the philosophical relations of
his thoughts. Yet he offers, perhaps uncon-
sciously, an admirable variation of that revolu-
tion of thought which is associated with the name
of Kant. He proposes to us as the work of human
intelligence what is commonly believed to be the
work of God. The universe , apart from us. is a
chaos, but it may be made a cosmos by our effor ts
and in our own minds . The laws of events, apart
from us, are inhuman and irrational, but in the
sphere of human activity they may be dominated
by reason. We are a part of the blind energy
behind Nature, but by virtue of that energy we im^
pose our purposes on the part of Nature which we
constitute or control. We can turn from the
stupefying contemplation of an alien universe to
the building of our own house, knowing that, alien
as it is, that universe has chanced to blow its
energy also into our will and to allow itself to
be partially dominated by our intelligence. Our
mere existence and the modicum of success we
/iave attained in society, science, and art are the
living proofs of this human power. The exercise
of this power is the task appointed for us by the
indomitable promptings of our own spirit, a task
in which we need not labour without hope.
For as the various plants and animals have


246 POBTEY AND BELIGION

found foothold and room to grow, maintaining for
long periods the life congenial to them, so the
human race may be able to achieve something like
its perfection and its ideal, maintaining for an
indefinite time all that it values, not by virtue of
an alleged intentional protection of Providence,
but by its own watchful art and exceptional good
fortune. The ideal is itself a function of the
reality and cannot therefore be altogether out of
harmony with the conditions of its own birth
and persistence. Civilization is precarious, but
it need not be short-lived. Its inception is already
a proof that there exists an equilibrium of forces
which is favourable to its existence; and there
is no reason to suppose this equilibrium to be less
stable than that which keeps the planets revolving
in their orbits. There is no impossibility, there-
fore, in the hope that the human will may have
time to understand itself, and, having understood
itself, to realize the objects of its rational desire.

We see that the "Cosmos" here invoked is
not , inconsistent with the " Kothingness " before
described. It is a triumnh amifi ilhisimis, an ord er
within tm!am,%, qloire du niant. This hint of a
reconciliation between the practical optimism nat-
ural to an active being, and the speculative pes-
simism inevitable to an intelligent one, is happier
than the muddled solutions of the same problem
with which current philosophies have made us fa-


A RELIGION OF DISILLUSION 247

miliar. The philosophy suggested by Jean Lahor
is that of Spinoza, if we subtract from the latter
its mystical optimism, and add a broad apprecia-
tion of human culture. Man cannot attain his
happiness by conforming to that which is hostile^
to himself ; he can thus attain only his dissolu- ,
tion. But by using what is hostile to himself for I
his own ends, as far as his energy extends, he can]
■make an oasis for himself in Nature, and being at]
peace with himself, be at peace also with her.

Such a view has some relation to the real condi-
tions of human life and progress. What is called
the higher optimism, on the contrary, commonly
consists in recounting all the evils of existence
with a radiant countenance, and telling us that
they are all divine ministers of some glorious con- w
summation; but what this consummation is never
appears, and we are reduced in practice to a mere
glorification of impulse. We are simply invited
to accept the conditions of life as they are, and
to find in incidental successes a compensation for
incidental or — as we should say if we were sin-
cere — for essential failures. Such an optimism
impairs by a kind of philosophic Nature-worship
that moral loyalty which ^nsists in giving the
highest honour to the hi^hest^ not to the stronges t,
things. It substitutes, as pantheism must, the
study of tendencies for the study of ends, and the
dignity of success for the dignity of justice.


248 POETEY AND RELIGION

This moral confusion our author avoids by his
greater sincerity. He has understood how funda-
mentally that man is a dupe who does not begin by
settling his accounts with Despair. There is no
safety in lies ; there is no safety even in " postu-
lates." Let the worst of the truth appear, and
when it has once seen the light, let it not be im-
mediately wrapped up again in the swaddling
/clothes of an equivocal rhetoric. In such a dis-
ingenuous course there is both temerity and cow-
ardice : temerity in throwing away the opportunity,
always afforded by the recognition of fact, of culti-
vating the real faculties of human nature ; coward-
ice in not being willing to face with patience and
dignity the situation in which fate appears to have
put us. That Nature is immense, that her laws
are mechanical, th at the existence and well-be ing
of man upon earth are, from the point of view of
the universe, an indifferent incident, — all this is
in the first place to be clearly recognized. It is
the lesson which both poetic contemplation and
practical science had taught Jean Labor.

Had he stopped to subject his opinion to meta-
physical criticism, he would not, I think, have found
reason to change it. To subjectify the universe is
not to improve it, much less to dissolve it. The
space I call my idea has all the properties of the
space I called my environment; it has the same inev-
itable presence and the same fundamental validity.


A EELIGION OF DISILLtTSION 249

Because it is a law of our intelligence that two and
two make four, and the implications of that law
may be traced by abstract thought, the world
which is subject to that arithmetical principle is
not made more amenable to our higher demands
than if it had been arithmetical of its own sweet
will. It ii not made docile by being called our

•^creature. Indeed, what is less docile to us than
ourselves ? what less subject to our correction than
the foundations of our own being ? So when the
Kantian philosophy teaches us to look upon the
enveloping universe as a figment of the under-
standing and on its laws as results of mental
synthesis and inference, we are still pursued by
the inevitable presence of that figment and con-
fronted involuntarily by that result. Nay, the
conditipns of our thought, like the predispositions
of our characters, are the most fatal and inexorable
of our limitations.

Why the world is as it is, whether of itself
or by refraction in the medium of our intellect,
is not a question that affects the practical mor-
alist. What concerns him is that the laws of
the world, whatever their origin, are fixed and
unchangeable conditions of our happiness. We

/cannot change the world) even if we boast to have
made it ; we must m any case learn to live with it,
whether it be our parent or our child. To veil its
character with euphemisms or to supply its defects


250 POETRY AND EELIGIOK

with superstitious assumptions is a course unworthy
of a brave man and abhorrent to a prudent one.
What we should do is to make a modest inven-
tory of our possessions and a just estimate of our
powers in order to apply both, with what strength
we have, to the realization of our ideals in society,
in art, and in science. These will constitute our
/Cosmos. In building it — for there is none other
that builds it for us — we shall be carrying on the
work of the only race that has yet seriously at-
tempted to live rationally, the race to which we
owe the name and the idea of a Cosmos, as well as
the beginnings of its realization. We shall then
be making that rare advance in wisdom which con-
sists in abandoning our illusions the better to attain
our ideals.


X


THE ELEMENTS AND FUNCTION OF
POETRY

If a critic, in despair of giving a serious defi-
nition of poetry, should be satisfied with saying
that poetry is metrical discourse, he ■would no \
doubt be giving an inadequate account of the '
matter, yet not one of which he need be ashamed
or which he should regard as superficial. Although
a poem be not made by counting of syllables upon
the fingers, yet "numbers" is the most poetical
synonym we have for verse, and "measure" the
most significant equivalent for beauty, for good-
ness, and perhaps even for truth. Those early and
profound philosophers, the followers of Pythagoras,
saw the essence of all things in number, and it
was by weight, measure, and number, as we read
in the Bible, that the Creator first brought Nature
out of the void. Every human architect must do
likewise with his edifice ; he must mould his bricks
or hew his stones into symmetrical solids and lay
them over one another in regular strata, like a
poet's lines.

251


252 POETKY AND RELIGION

! Measure is a condition of perfection, for per-
fection requires that order should be pervasive,
that not only the whole before us should have
a form, but that every part in turn should have a
form of its own, and that those parts should be
coordinated among themselves as the whole is
coordinated with the other parts of some greater
cosmos. Leibnitz lighted in his speculations upon
a conception of organic nature which may be false
as a fact, but which is excellent as an ideal; he
tells us that the difference between living and dead
matter, between animals and machines, is that the
former are composed of parts that are themselves
organic, every portion of the body being itself a
machine, and every portion of that machine still

■A. machine, and so ad infinitum,; whereas, in arti-
ficial badies the organization is not in this manner
infinitely deep . Fine Art, in this as in all things,
imitates the method of NataceLansLffiH^s its most
beautiful^ wpj.ka^ut_o f m aterials .that. .are. Jhsm:!.
sQllgg. bfia,uti£i.il. So that even if the difference be-
tween verse and prose consisted only in measure,
that difference would already be analogous to that
between jewels and clay. '

The stuff of language is words, and the sensuous
material of words is sound ; if language therefore
is to be made perfect, its materials must be made
beautiful by being themselves subjected to a meas-
ure, and endowed with a form. It is true that


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 253

language is a symbol for intelligence rather than
a stimulus to sense, and accordingly the beauties
of discourse which commonly attract attention are
merely the beauties of the objects and ideas signi-
fied; yet the symbols have a sensible reality of
their own, a euphony which appeals to our senses
if we keep them open. The tongue will choose
those forms of utterance which have a natural
grace as mere sound and sensation; the mem-
ory wUl retain these catches, and they will pass
and repass through the mind until they become
types of instinctive speech and standards of pleas-
ing expression.

The highest form of such euphony is song ; the
singing voice gives to the sounds it utters the thrill
of tonality, — a thrill itself dependent, as we know,
on the numerical proportions of the vibrations that
it includes. But this kind of euphony and sensu-
ous beauty, the deepest that sounds can have, we
have almost wholly surrendered in our speech. Our
intelligence has become complex, and language, to
express our thoughts, must commonly be more
rapid, copious, and abstract than is compatible with
singing. Music at the same time has become com-
plex also, and when united with words, at one time
disfigures them in the elaboration of its melody,
and at another overpowers them in the volume of
its sound. So that the art of singing is now in the
same plight as that of sculpture, — an abstract and


254 POETRY AND RELIGION

conventional tiling surviving by force of tradition
and of an innate but now impotent impulse, whicli
under simpler conditions would work itself out into
the proper forms of those arts. The truest kind of
euphony is thus denied to our poetry. If any
verses are still set to music, they are commonly the
worst only, chosen for the purpose by musicians of
specialized sensibility and inferior intelligence, whoj
seem to be attracted only by tawdry effects of
rhetoric and sentiment.

When song is given up, there still remains in
speech a certain sensuous quality, due to the nature
and order of the vowels and consonants that, com-
pose the sounds. This kind of euphony is\ not
neglected by the more dulcet poets, and is now so
studied in some quarters that I have heard it main-
tained by a critic of relative authority that the
beauty of poetry consists entirely in the frequent
utterance of the sound of " j " and " sh," and the
consequent copious flow of saliva in the mouth,
But even if saliva is not the whole essence o:
poetry, there is an unmistakable and fundamental'
diversity of effect in the various vocalization of
different poets, which becomes all the more evident
when we compare those who use different languages.
One man's speech, or one nation's, is compact,
crowded with consonants, rugged, broken with
emphatic beats ; another man's, or nation's, is open,
tripping, rapid, and even. So Byron, mingling in


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 255

his boyish fashion burlesque with exquisite senti-
ment, contrasts English with Italian speech : —

" I love the language, that soft bastard Latin
Which melts like kisses from a female mouth
And sounds as if it should he writ on satin
With syllables which breathe of the sweet South,
And gentle liquids gliding all so pat in
That not a single accent seems uncouth,
Like our harsh Northern whistling, grunting guttural
Which we're obliged to hiss and spit and sputter all."

And yet these contrasts, strong when we com-
pare extreme cases, fade^rom our consciousness in
the Actual use of a mother-tongue. The function
makes us unconscious of the instrument, all the
more as it is an indispensable and almost invaria-
ble one. The sense of euphony accordingly attaches
itself rather to another and more variable quality ;
the tune, or measure, or rhythm of speech. The
elementary sounds are prescribed by the language
we use, and the selection we may m^ke among those
sounds is limited ; but the arrangement of words is
still undetermined, and by casting our speech into
the moulds of metre and rhyme we can give it a
heightened power, apart from its significance. A
tolerable definition of poetry, on its formal side,
might be found in this: that poetry is speech in
which the instrument cou nts as well as_the mean-
ing — poetry is speech for its own sake_and for its
own sweetness . As common windows are intended


256 POETRY AND RELIGION

only to admit the light, but painted windows also
to dye it, and to be an object of attention in them-
selves as well as a cause of visibility in other things,
so, while the purest prose is a mere vehicle of
thought, verse, like stained glass, arrests attention
in its own intricacies, confuses it in its own glories,
and is even at times allowed to darken and puzzle
in the hope of casting over us a supernatural spell.
Long passages in Shelley's "Revolt of Islam"
and Keats' "Endymion" are poetical in this sense;
the reader gathers, probably, no definite meaning,
but is conscious of a poetic medium, of speech
euphonious and measured, and redolent of a kind
of objectless passion which is little more than the
sensation of the movement and sensuous richness
of the lines. Such poetry is not great ; it has, in
fact, a tedious vacuity, and is unworthy of a mature v
mind; but it is poetical, and could be produced
only by a legitimate child of the Muse. It belongs
to an apprenticeship, but in this case the appren-
ticeship of genius. It bears that relation to great
poems which scales and aimless warblings bear to
great singing — they test the essential endowment
and fineness of the organ which is to be employed
in the art. Without this sensuous background and
ingrained predisposition to beauty, no art can reach
the deepest and most exquisite effects; and even
without an intelligible superstructure these sensu-
ous qualities suffice to give that thrill of exaltation,


THE ELEMENTS OP POETRY 257

that suggestion of an ideal world, wliicli we feel in
the presence of any true beauty.

The sensuous beauty of words and their utter-
ance in measure suffice, therefore, for poetry of one
sort — where these are there is something unmis-
takably poetical, although the whole of poetry, or
the best of poetry, be not yet there. Indeed, in
such works as " The Revolt of Islam " or " Endym-
ion " there is already more than mere metre and
sound ; there is the colour and choice of words, the
fanciful, rich, or exquisite juxtaposition of phrases.
The vocabulary and the texture of the style are
precious ; affected, perhaps, but at any rate refined.

This quality, which is that almost exclusively |
exploited by the Symbolist, we may call euphu- '
ism — the choice of coloured words and rare and
elliptical phrases. If great poets are like archi-
tects and sculptors, the euphuists are like gold-
smiths and jewellers; their work is filigree in
precious metals, encrusted with glowing stones.
Now euphuism contributes not a little to the poetic
effect of the tirades of Keats and Shelley ; if we I
wish to see the power of versification without eu-
phuism we may turn to the tirades of Pope, where
metre and euphony are displayed alone, and we
have the outline or skeleton of poetry without the
filling.

" In spite of pride, in erring reason's spite,
One trutli is clear, Wliatever is, is right;"


258 POETRY AND KELIGION

We should hesitate to say that such writing was
truly poetical ; so that some euphuism would seem
to be necessary as well as metre, to the formal
essence of poetry.

An example of this sort, however, takes iis out
of the merely verbal into the imaginative region;
the reason that Pope is hardly poetical to us is not
that he is i nharmoniou s, — not a defect of eimhon v.
— but that he is too intellectual and has an exces s
of mentality . It is easier for words to be poetical
without any thought, when they are felt merely as
sensuous and musical, than for them to remain so
when they convey an abstract notion, — especially
if that notion be a tart and frigid sophism, like
that of the couplet just quoted. The pyrotechnics
of the intellect then take the place of the glow of
sense, and the artifice of thought chills the pleasure
we might have taken in the grace of expression.

If poetry in its higher reaches is more philosophi-
cal than history, because it presents the memorable
^ types of men and things apart from unmeaning cir-
cumstances, so in its primary substance and texture
poetry is more philosophical than prose because it
is nearer to our immediate experience. Poetry
breaks up the trite conceptions designated by cur-
rent words into the sensuous qualities out of which
those conceptions were originally put together.
We name what we conceive and believe in, not
what we see ; things, not images 5 souls, not voices


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 269

and silhouettes. This naming, with the whole edu-
cation of the senses which it accompanies, sub-
serves the uses of life ; in order to thread our way-
through the labyrinth of objects which assault us,
we must make a great selection in our sensuous ex-
perience ; half of what we see and hear we must
pass over as insignificant, while we piece out the
other half with such an ideal complement as is
necessary to turn it into a fixed and well-ordered
world. This labour of perception and understand-
ing, this spelling of the material meaning of expe-
rience is enshrined in our work-a-day language and
ideas ; ideas which are literally poetic in the sense
that they are " made " (for every conception in an
adult mind is a fiction), but which are at the same
time prosaic because they are made economically,
by abstraction, and for use.

When the child of poetic genius, who has learned
this intellectual and utilitarian language in the cra-
dle, goes afield and gathers for himself the aspects
of Nature, he begins to encumber his mind with
the many living impressions which the intellect
rejected, and which the language of the intellect
can hardly convey; he labours with his nameless
burden of perception, and wastes himself in aim-
less impulses of emotion and revery, until finally
the method of some art offers a vent to his inspira-
tion, or to such part of it as can survive the test of
time and the discipline of expression.


260 POETRY AKD EELIGION

The poet retains by nature the innocence of the
eye, or recovers it easily; he disintegrates the fic-
tions of common perception into their sensuous
elements, gathers these together again into chance

I groups as the accidents of his environment or the
affinities of his temperament may conjoin them;
and this wealth of sensation and this freedom of
fancy, which make an extraordinary ferment in his
ignorant heart, presently bubble over into some
kind of utterance.

The fulness and sensuousness of such effusions
bring them nearer to our actual perceptions than
common discourse could come ; yet they may easily
seem remote, overloaded, and obscure to those accus-
tomed to think entirely in symbols, and never to be
interrupted in the algebraic rapidity of their think-
ing by a moment's pause and examination of- heart,
nor ever to plunge for a moment into that torrent
of sensation and imagery over which the bridge of
prosaic associations habitually carries us safe and
dry to some conventional act. How slight that
bridge commonly is, how much an affair of trestles
and wire, we can hardly conceive until we have
trained ourselves to an extreme sharpness of intro-
spection. But psychologists have discovered, what
laymen generally will confess, that we hurry by
the procession of our mental images as we do by \/
the traffic of the street, intent on business, gladly
forgetting the noise and movement of the scene.


THE ELEMENTS OF POETEY 261

and looking only for the corner we would turn or
the door we would enter. Yet in our alertest
moment the d epths of the soul are still dreaming :
the real world stands drawn in bare outline against
a background of chaos and unrest. Our logical
thoughts dominate experience only as the paral-
lels and meridians make a checker-board of the
sea. They guide our voyage without controlliiig
the waves^which toss f or ever in spite of our ability
to.ride^ over :^fiSjtQ.ouE_cl!asen ends. 1 Sanity is a
madness put to good uses ; waking life is a dream
controlled, f

Out of the neglected riches of this dream the
poet fetches his wares. He dips into the chaos
that underlies the rational shell of the world and
brings up some superfluous image, some emotion
dropped by the way, and reattaches it to the
present object; he reinstates things unnecessary,
he emphasizes things ignored, he paints in again
into the landscape the tints_wliic h the intellect has
al lowed to fade fro m it. If he seems sometimes
to obscure a fact, it is only because he is restoring
an experience. We may observe this process in
the simplest cases. When Ossian, mentioning the
sun, says it is round as the shield of his fathers,
the expression is poetical. Why ? Because he
has added to the word sun, in itself suflcient and
unequivocal, other words, unnecessary for practical
clearness, but serving to restore the individuality


262 POETEY AND RELIGION

of his perception and its associations in his mind.
There is no square sun with which the sun he is
speaking of could be confused ; to stop and call it
round is a luxury, a halting in the sensation for
the love of its form. And to go on to tell us, what
is wholly impertinent, that the shield of his fathers
was round also, is to invite us to follow the chance
wanderings of his fancy, to give us a little glimpse
of the stuf&ng of his own brain, or, we might
almost say, to turn over the pattern of his em-
broidery and show us the lopse threads hanging
out on the wrong side. Such an escapade disturbs
and interrupts the true vision of the object, and
a great poet, rising to a perfect conception of the
sun and forgetting himself, would have disdained
to make it ; but it has a romantic and pathological
interest, it restores an experience, and is in that
measure poetical. We have been made to halt at
the sensation, and to penetrate for a moment into
its background of dream.

But it is not only thoughts or images that the
poet draws in this way from the store of his ex-
perience, to clothe the bare.iorm of conventional
objects: he often adds to these objects a more
subtle ornament, drawn from the same source.
/ Por the first element which the intellect rejects
in formihg its ideas of things is the emotion
#hich'ac^ompanies the perception; and this emo-
tion ii thi4first thing the poet restores. He stops


THE ELEMENTS OP POETRY 263

at the image, because he stops to enjoy. He
wanders into the by-paths of association because the
by-paths are delightful. The love of beauty which
made him give measure and cadence to his words,
the love of harmony which made him rhyme them,
reappear in his imagination and make him select
there also the material that is itself beautiful, or
capable of assuming beautiful forms. The link
that binds together the ideas, sometimes so wide
apart, which his wit assimilates, is most often the
link of emotion; they have in common some ele-
^ ment of beauty or of horror.
I The poet's art is to a great extent the art of inten-
lisifying emotions by assembling the scattered objects
,that naturally arouse them. He sees the affinities
of things by seeing their common affinities with pas
sion. As the guiding principle of practical think
ing is some interest, so that only what is pertinent
to that interest is selected by' the attention; as
the guiding principle of scientific thinking is some
connection of things in time or space, or some
identity of law ; so in poetic thinking the guiding
principle is often a mood or a quality of senti-
ment. By this union of disparate things having
a common overtone of feeling, the feeling is itself
evoked in all its strength ; nay, it is often created
for the first time, much as by a new mixture of
old pigments Perugino could produce the unprece-
dented limpidity of his colour, or Titian the un-


264 POETRY AND EELIGION

precedented glow of Ms. Poets can thus arouse
sentiments finer than any which they have known,
and in the act of composition become discoverers
of new realms of delightfulness and grief. Ex- I
pression is a misleading term which suggests that
something previously known is rendered or imi-
tated ; whereas the expression is itself an original
fact, the values of which are then referred to the
thing expressed, much as the honours of a Chinese
mandarin are attributed retroactively to ' his par-
ents. So the charm which a poet, by his art of
combining images and shades of emotion, casts over
a scene or an action, isi attached to the principal
actor in it, who gets the benefit of the setting
furnished him by a well-stocked mind.

The poet is himself subject to this illusion, and
a great part of what is called poetry, although by
no means the best part of it, consists in this sort
of idealization by proxy. We dye the world of
our own colour ; by a pathetic fallacy, by a false
projection of sentiment, we soak Nature with our
own feeling, and then celebrate her tender sym-
pathy with our moral being. This aberration, as
we see in the case of Wordsworth, is not incon-
sistent with a high development of both the facul-
ties which it confuses, — I mean vision and feeling.
On the contrary, vision and feeling, when most
abundant and original, most easily present them-
selves in this undivided form. There would be


THE ELEMENTS OP POBTEY 265

heed of a force of intellect which poets rarely
possess to rationalize their inspiration without di-
minishing its Tolume: and if, as is commonly the
case, the energy of the dream and the passion in
them is greater than that of the reason, and they
cannot attain true propriety and supreme beauty
in their -works, they can, nevertheless, fill them with
lovely images and a fine moral spirit.

The pouring forth of both perceptive and emo-
tional elements in their mixed and indiscriminate
form gives to this kind of imagination the direct-
ness and truth which sensuous poetry possesses
on a lower level. The, outer world bathed in
the hues of human feeling, the inner world ex-
pressed in the forms of things, — that is the
primitive condition of both before intelligence
and the prosaic classification of objects have ab-
stracted them and assigned them to their respec-
tive spheres. Such identifications, on which a
certain kind of metaphysics prides itself also,
are not discoveries of profound genius; they are
exactly like the observation of Ossian that the
sun is round and that the shield of his fathers
was round too; they are disintegrations of con-
ventional objects, so that the original associates
of our perceptions reappear ; then the thing and
the emotion which chanced to be simultaneous
are said to be one, and we return, unless a better
principle of organization is substituted for the


266 POBTEY AND RELIGION

principle abandoned, to tlie chaos of a passive
animal consciousness, where all is mixed together,
projected together, and felt as an unutterable
•whole.

, The pathetic fallacy is a return to that early-
habit of thought by which our ancestors peopled
the world with benevolent and malevolent spirits ;
what they felt in the presence of objects they
took to be a part of the objects themselves. In
returning to this natural confusion, poetry does
us a service in that she recalls and consecrates
those phases of our experience which, as useless
to the understanding of material reality, we are
in danger of forgetting altogether. Therein is
her vitality, for she pierces to the quick and
shakes us out of our servile speech and imagina-
tive poverty ; she remiiida_]3g_of_^ll.jffe have felt,
she invitfig _us even t ojjreaja^-a-itttJp.j tr> rmTPo the
wonderful spontaneous creations which at every
waking moment we are snufflng^out in our' brain.
And the indulgence is no mere momentary pleas-
ure; much ofj±a,^exuberance_^ings afterward to
oui ideas; we see the mOTe_jfld::fggrT^Impre
for thaL^ercise ; we are capable of finding greater
entertainmenF in the common aspects of Nature
and life. When the veil of convention is once
removed from our eyes by the poet, we are better
able to dominate any particular experience and, as
it were, to change its scale, now losing ourselves


THE ELEMENTS OF POETEY 267

in its infinitesimal texture, now in its infinite
ramifications.

If the function of poetry, however, did not go '
beyond this recovery of sensuous and imaginative
freedom, at the expense of disrupting our useful
habits of thought, we might be grateful to it for
occasionally relieving ou r numbness, but we sliould
have to acLmit tJiaT it was nothing but a relaxation;/

tha t spiritual discipline was not to be gain eij fjLV"\

it in any degree, bnt ..jaiiaL Jse soue ^ht l yl^Qjfe inl
that 'intellectual system that builds the science 1
of Nature with the categories of prose. So oon- '
ceived, poetry would deserve the judgment passed
by Plato on all the arts of flattery and entertain-
ment ; it might be crowned as delightful, but must
be either banished altogether as mgigtrieious or
at least confined to a few forni^ and occasions
where it might do little harm. The judgment of
Plato has been generally condemned by philoso-
phers, although it is eminently rational, and justi-
fied by the simplest principles of morals. It has
been adopted instead, although unwittingly, by
the practical and secular part of mankind, who
look upon artists and poets as inefBcieut and brain-
sick people under whose spell it would be a serious
calamity to fall, ali^bough they may be called in on
feast days as an ornament and luxury togethery
with the cooks, hairdressers, and florists. .

Several circumstances, however, might suggest \


268 POBTEY AND EELIGION

to US the possibility that the gre*atest function of
poetry may be still to find. Plato, while condemn-
ing Homer, was a kind of poet himself ; his quarrel
with the followers of the Muse was not a quarrel
with the goddess ; and the good people of Philistia,
distrustful as they may be of profane art, pay
undoubting honour to religion, which is a kind of
poetry as much removed from their sphere as the
midnight revels upon Mount Citheron, which, to
be sure, were also religious in their inspiration.
Why, we may ask, these apparent inconsistencies ?
Why do our practical men make room for religion
in the background of their world ? Why did
! Plato, after banishing^ the poets, poetize the uni-
verse in his prose? \Because th e ab straction by
which t he world of science and of practice J s
dra wn out of our experience, is too violent to
s atisfy even the thoughtless and v ulgar ; the
ideality of the machine we call Ifature, the cou-
ventionality of the drama we call the world, are too
glaring not to be somehow perceived by all. Each
must sometimes fall back upon the soul ; he must
challenge this apparition with the thought of death ;
he must ask himself for the mainspring and value
of his life. He will then remember his stifled
loves; he will feel that only .his illusions have
ever given him a sense of reality, only his passions
the hope and the vision of peace. He will read
himself through and almost gather a meaning from


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 269

his experience ; at least he -will half believe that
all he has been dealing with was a dream and a
symbol, and raise his eyes toward the truth be-
yond. >

Thi^ plastic moment of the mind, when we be-
come aware of the artificiality and inadequacy of
what common sense perceives, is the true moment
of poetic opportunity, — an opportunity, we may
hasten to confess, which is generally missed. The
strain of attention, the concentration and focussing
of thought on the unfamiliar immediacy of things,
usually brings about nothing but confusion. We
are dazed, we are filled with a sense of unutterable
things, luminous yet indistinguishable, many yet
I one. Instead of rising to imagination, we sink into
mysticism.

To accomplish a mystical disintegration is not
the function of any art ; if any art seems to accom-
plish it, the effect is only incidental, being involved,
perhaps, in the process of constructing the proper
object of that art, as we might cut down trees and
dig them up by the roots to lay the foundations of
a temple. For every art looks to the building
of somethin g. And .just because the world built
by com mon sense and natural science is an inad
equate world (a skeleton which n eeds the fiUing_ o
sensation" before lii carTlive), therefore the momen
I when we realize its inadequacy is the moment wher
Ithe higher arts find their opportunity. When the


ot


270 POBTEY AND EBLIGION

world is shattered to bits they can come and " build

it, nearer to the heart's desire."

'■ The great function of poetry, which we have not


jk


t directly mentioned, is precisely this : to repair
to the material of experience, seizing hold of the
reality of sensation and fancy beneath the surface
of conventional ideas, and then out of that living
but indefinite material to build new structures,
richer, finer, fitter to the primary tendencies of our
nature, truer to the ultimate possibilities of the
soul. Our descent into the elements of our being
is then justified by our subsequent freer ascent
toward its goal; we revert to sense only to find
food for reason ; we destroy conventions only to
construct ideals.

Such analysis for the sake of creation is the
essence of all great poetry. Science and com-
mon sense are 'themselves in their way poets
of no mean order, since they take the material
•of experience and make out of it a clear, sym-
metrical, and beautiful world ; the very propriety
of this art, however, has made it common. Its
figures have become mere rhetoric and its metar
phors prose. Yet, even as it is, a scientific and
mathematical vision has a higher beauty than the
irrational poetry of sensation and impulse, which
^merely tickles the brain, like liquor, and plays upon
ur random, imaginative lusts. The imagination of
a great poet, on the contrary, is as orderly as that


t


THE BLEMEN'fS OF POETRY 271

of an astronomer, and as large; he has the natu-
ralist's patience, the naturalist's love of detail and
eye trained to see fine gradations and essential
lines ; he knows no hurry ; he has no pose, no sense
of originality; he finds his effects in his subject,
and his subject in his inevitable world. Eesem-
bling the naturalist in all this, he differs from him
in the balance of his interests; the poet has the
concreter mind; his visible world wears all its
colours and retains its indwelling passion and life.
Instead of studying in experience its calculable
elements, he studies its moral values, its beauty,
the openings it offers to the soul : and the cosmos
he constructs is accordingly an ideal theatre for the
spirit in which its noblest potential drama is
enacted and its destiny resolved.

This supreme function of poetry is only the con- '
summation of the method by which words and
imagery are transformed into verse. As verse
breaks up the prosaic order of syllables and sub-
jects them to a recognizable and pleasing measure,
so poetry breaks up the whole prosaic picture of
experience to introduce into it a rhythm more con-
genial and intelligible to the mind. And in both
these cases the operation is essentially the same as
that by which, in an intermediate sphere, the
images rejected by practical thought, and the emo-
tions ignored by it, are so marshalled as to fill the
mind with a truer and intenser consciousness of its


272 POETRY AND RELIGION

memorable experience. The poetry of fancy, of
observation, and of passion moves on this inter-
mediate level ; the poetry of mere sound and virtu-
osity is confined to the lower sphere; and the
highest is reserved for the poetry of the creative
reason. But one principle is present throughout, —
the principle of Beauty, — the art of assimilating
phenomena, whether words, images, emotions, or
systems of ideas, to the deeper innate cravings of
the mind.

Let us now dwell a little on this higher function
of poetry and try to distinguish some of its
phases.

The creation of characters is what many of us
might at first be tempted to regard as the supreme
triumph of the imagination. If we abstract, how-
ever, from our personal tastes and look at the
matter in its human and logical relations, we shall
see, I think, that the construction of characters is
not the ultimate task of poetic fiction. A character
can never be exhaustive of our materials: for it
exists by its idiosyncrasy, by its contrast with
other natures, by its development of one side, and
one side only, of our native capacities. It is, there-
fore, not by characterization as such that the ulti-
mate message can be rendered. The poet can put
only a part of himself into any of his heroes, but
he must put the whole into his noblest work. A
character is accordingly only a fragmentary unity ;


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 273

fragmentary in respect to its origin, — since it is
conceived by enlargement, so to speak;, of a part of
our own being to the exclusion of the rest, — and
fragmentary in respect to the object it presents,
since a character must live in an environment and
be appreciated by contrast and by the sense of
derivation. Not the character, but its effects and
causes, is the truly interesting thing. Thus in
master poets, like Homer and Dante, the char-
acters, although -well drawn, are subordinate to
the total movement and meaning of the scene.
There is indeed something pitiful, something comic,
in any comprehended soul ; souls, like other things,
are only definable by their limitations. We feel in-
stinctively that it would be insulting to speak of
any man to his face as we should speak of him in
his absence, even if what we say is in the way
of praise : for absent he is a character understood,
but present he is a force respected.

In the construction of ideal characters, then, the
imagination is busy with material, — particular
actions and thoughts, — which suggest their uni-
fication in persons ; but the characters thus con-
ceived can hardly be adequate to the profusion of
our observations, nor exhaustive, when all person-
alities are taken together, of the interest of our
lives. Characters are initially imbedded in life,
as the gods themselves are originally imbedded
in Nature. Poetry must, therefore, to render all


274 POETKY AND KELIGION

reality, render also the background of its figures,
and the events that condition their acts. We
must place them in that indispensable environ-
ment which the landscape furnishes to the eye and
the social medium to the emotions.

The visible landscape is not a proper object for
poetry. Its elements, and especially the emotional
stimulation which it gives, may be suggested or ex-
pressed in verse ; but landscape is not thereby rep-
resented in its proper form ; it appears only as an
element and associate of moral unities. Painting,
architecture, and gardening, with the art of stage
setting, have the visible landscape for their object,
and to those arts we may leave it. But there is a
sort of landscape larger than the visible, which es-
capes the synthesis of the eye ; it is present to that
topographical sense by which we always live in the
consciousness that there is a sea, that there are
mountains, that the sky is above us, even when we
do not see it, and that the tribes of men, with their
different degrees of blamelessness, are scattered
over the broad-backed earth. This cosmic land-
scape poetry alone can render, and it is no small
part of the art to awaken the sense of it at the
right moment, so that the object that occupies
the centre of vision may be seen in its true lights,
coloured by its wider associations, and dignified by
its felt affinities to things permanent and great.
As the Italian masters were wont not to paint their


/


THE ELEMENTS OF POETKY 275

groups of saints about the Virgin without enlarging
the canvas, so as to render a broad piece of sky,
some mountains and rivers, and nearer, perhaps,
some decorative pile; so the poet of larger mind
envelops his characters in the atmosphere of Nature
and history, and keeps us constantly aware of the
world in which they move.

The distinction of a poet — the dignity and
humanity of his thought — can be measured by
nothing, perhaps, so well as by the diameter of the
world in which he lives; if he is supreme, his
vision, like Dante's, always stretches to the stars.
And Virgil, a supreme poet sometimes unjustly
belittled, shows us the same thing in another form ;
his landscape is the Roman universe, his theme the
sacred springs of Eoman greatness in piety, con-
stancy, and law. He has not written a line in for:_
getfulness that he was a Roman ; he loves country
life and its labours because he sees in it the origin
and bulwark of civic greatness ; he honours tradition
because it gives perspective and momentum to the
history that ensues ; he invokes the gods, because
they are symbols of the physical and moral forces
by which Rome struggled to dominion.

Almost every classic poet has the topographical!
sense ; he swarms with proper names and allusions
to history and fable ; if an epithet is to be thrown
in anywhere to fill up the measure of a line, he
chooses instinctively an appellation of place or


276 POETRY AND RELIGION

family ; his wine is not red, but Samian ; his gorges
are not deep, but are the gorges of HsBmus ; his
songs are not sweet, but Pierian. We may deride
their practice as conventional, but they could far
more justly deride ours as insignificant. Conven-
tions do not arise without some reason, and genius
will know how to rise above them by a fresh ap-
preciation of their rightness, and will feel no
temptation to overturn them in favour of per-
sonal whimsies. The ancients found poetry not
so much in sensible accidents as in essential forms
and noble associations ; and this fact marks very
clearly their superior education. They dominated
the world as we no longer dominate it, and lived, as
we are too distracted to live, in the presence of the
rational and the important.

A physical and historical background, however,
is of little moment to the poet in comparison with
that other environment of his characters, — the
dramatic situations in which they are involved.
The substance of poetry is, after all, emotion ; and
if the intellectual emotion of comprehension and
the mimetic one of impersonation are massive,
they are not so intense as the appetites and other
transitive emotions of life; the passions are the
chief basis of all interests, even the most ideal,
and the passions are seldom brought into play
except by the contact of man with man. The
various forms of love and hate are only possible


THE ELEMENTS OF POETKY 277

in society, and to imagine occasions in which these
feelings may manifest all their inward vitality is
the poet's function, — one in which he follows the
fancy of every child, who puffs himself out in his
day-dreams into an endless variety of heroes and
lovers. The thrilling adventures which he craves
demand an appropriate theatre; the glorious emo-
tions with which he bubbles over must at all haz-
ards find or feign their correlative objects.

But the passions are naturally blind, and the
poverty of the imagination^* when left alone, is
absolute. The passions may ferment as they will,
they never can breed an idea out of their own
energy. This idea must be furnished by the
senses, by outward experience, else the hunger
of the soul will gnaw its own emptiness for ever.
Where the seed of sensation has once fallen, how-
ever, the growth, variations, and exuberance of
fancy may be unlimited. Only we still observe
(as in the child, in dreams, and in the poetry of
ignorant or mystical poets) that the intensity of
inwardly generated visions does not involve any
real increase ill their scope or dignity. The inex-
perienced mind remains a thin mind, no matter
how much its vapours may be heated and blown
about by natural passion. It was a capital error
in Fichte and Schopenhauer to assign essential
fertility to the will in the creation of ideas. They
mistook, as human nature will do, even when at


278 POBTEY AND EELIGION

times it professes pessimism, an ideal for a real-
ity : and because they saw how much the will
clings to its objects, how it selects and magnifies
them, they imagined that it could breed them out
of itself. A man who thinks clearly will see that
such self-determination of a will is inconceivable,
since what has no external relation and no diver-
sity of structure cannot of itself acquire diversity
of functions. Such inconceivability, of course, need
not seem a great objection to a man of impassioned
inspiration; he may even claim a certain consist-
ency in positing, on the strength of his preference,
the inconceivable to be a truth.

The alleged fertility of the will is, however, dis-
proved by experience, from which metaphysics must
in the end draw its analogies and plausibility.
The passions discover, they do not create, their
occasions ; a fact which is patent when we observe
how they seize upon what objects they find, and
how reversible, contingent, and transferable the
emotions are in respect to their objects. A doll
will be loved instead of a child, a child instead of
a lover, God instead of everything. The differen-
tiation of the passions, as far as consciousness is
concerned, depends on the variety of the objects
of experience, — that is, on the differentiation of
the senses and of the environment which stimu-
lates them.

When the "infinite" spirit enters the human


THE BLEMEKTS OF POETRY 279

body, it is determined to certain limited forms
of life by tbe organs -whicli it wears; and its
blank potentiality becomes actual in thought and
deed, according to the for:kines and relations of
its organism. The ripeness of the passions may
thus precede the information of the mind and
lead to groping in by-paths without issue ; a phe-
nomenon which appears not only in the obscure
individual whose abnormalities the world ignores,
but also in the starved, half-educated genius that
poiirs the whole fire of his soul into trivial arts
or grotesque superstitions. The hysterical forms
of music and religion are the refuge of an ideal-
ism that has lost its way ; the waste and failures
of life flow largely in those channels. The carnal
temptations of youth are incidents of the same
maladaptation, when passions assert themselves
before the conventional order of society can allow
them physical satisfaction, and long before philos-
ophy or religion can hope to transform them into
fuel for its own sacrificial flames.

Hence flows the greatest opportunity of fiction.
We have, in a sense, an infinite will ; but we have
a limited experience, an experience sadly inadequate
to exercise that will either in its purity or its
strength. To give form to our capacities nothing
is required but the appropriate occasion; this the
poet, studying the world, will construct for us out
of the materials of his observations. He will in-


280 POETEY AND EELIGION

volve US in scenes which lia beyond the narrow
lane of our daily ploddings; he will place us in
the presence of important events, that we may feel
our spirit rise momentarily to the height of his
great argument. The possibilities of love or glory,
of intrigue and perplexity, will be opened up be-
fore us ; if he gives us a good plot, we can readily
furnish the characters, because each of them will be
the realization of some stunted potential self of
our own. It is by the plot, then, that the char-
acters will be vivified, because it is by the plot that
our own character will be expanded into its latent
possibilities.

The description of an alien character can serve
this purpose only very imperfectly ; but the presen-
tation of the circumstances in which that character
manifests itself will make description unneces-
sary, since our instinct will supply all that is requi-
site for the impersonation. Thus it seems that
Aristotle was justified in making the plot the chief
element in fiction: for it is by virtue of the plot
that the characters live, or, rather, that we live in
them, and by virtue of the plot accordingly that
our soul rises to that imaginative activity by which
we tend at once to escape from the personal life
and to realize its ideal. This idealization is, of
course, partial and merely relative to the particular
adventure in which we imagine ourselves engaged.
But in some single direction our will finds self-


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 281

expression, and understands itself; runs through
the career which it ignorantly coveted, and gathers
the fruits and the lesson of that enterprise.

This is the essence of tragedy : the sense of the
finished life, of the will fulfilled and enlightened :
that purging of the mind so much debated upon,
which relieves us of pent-up energies, transfers our
feelings to a greater object, and thus justifies and
entertains our dumb passions, detaching them at
the same time for a moment from their accidental
occasions in our earthly life. An episode, however
lurid, is not a tragedy in this nobler sense, because
it does not work itself out to the end ; it pleases
without satisfying, or shocks without enlightening.
This enlightenment, I need hardly say, is not a
matter of theory or of moral maxims ; the enlight-
enment by which tragedy is made sublime is a
glimpse into the ultimate destinies of our will.
This discovery need not be an ethical gain — Mac-
beth and Othello attain it as much as Brutus and
Hamlet — it may serve to accentuate despair, or
cruelty, or indifference, or merely to fill the imagi-
nation for a moment without much affecting the
permanent tone of the mind. But without such a
glimpse of the goal of a passion the passion has not
been adequately read, and the fiction has served to
amuse us without really enlarging the frontiers of
our ideal experience. Memory and emotion have
been played upon, but imagination has not brought
anything new to the light.


282 POETRY AND RELIGION

The dramatic situation, however, gives us the
environment of a single passion, of life in one of
its particular phases ; and although a passion, like
Romeo's love, may seem to devour the whole soul,
and its fortunes may seem to be identical with those
of the man, yet much of the man, and the best part
of him, goes by the board in such a simplification.
If Leonardo da Vinci, for example, had met in
his youth with Romeo's fate, his end would have
been no more ideally tragic than if he had died at
eighteen of a fever ; we should be touched rather
by the pathos of what he had missed, than by the
sublimity of what he had experienced. A passion
like Romeo's, compared with the ideal scope of
human thought and emotion, is a thin dream, a
pathological crisis.

Accordingly Aristophanes, remembering the orig-
inal religious and political functions of tragedy,
blushes to see upon the boards a woman in love.
And we should readily agree with him, but for two
reasons, — one, that we abstract too much, in our
demands upon art, from nobility of mind, and from
the thought of totality and proportion; the other,
that we have learned to look for a symbolic meaning
in detached episodes, and to accept the incidental
emotions they cause, because of their violence and
our absorption in them, as in some sense sacra-
mental and representative of the whole. Thus the
picture of an unmeaning passion, of a crime with-


THE ELEMENTS OF POETRY 283

out an issue, does not appear to our romantic appre-
hension as tlie sorry farce it is, but rather as a true
tragedy. Some have lost even the capacity to con-
ceive of a true tragedy, because they have no idea
of a cosmic order, of general laws of life, or of an
impersonal religion. They measure the profundity
of feeling by its intensity, not by its justifying
relations ; and in the radical disintegration of their
spirit, the more they are devoured the more they
fancy themselves fed. But the majority of us
retain some sense of a meaning in our joys and
sorrows, and even if we cannot pierce to their ulti-
mate object, we feel that what absorbs us here and
now has a merely borrowed or deputed power ; that
it is a symbol and foretaste of all reality speaking
to the whole soul. At the same time our intelli-
gence is too confused to give us any picture of
that reality, and our will too feeble to marshal our
disorganized loves into a religion consistent with
itself and harmonious with the comprehended uni-
verse. A rational ideal eludes us, and we are the
more inclined to plunge into mysticism.

Nevertheless, the function of poetry, like that of
science, can only be fulfilled by the conception of
harmonies that become clearer as they grow richer.
As the chance note that comes to be supported by
a melody becomes in that melody determinate and
necessary, and as the melody, when woven into a
harmony, is explicated in that harmony and fixed


284 POETRY AND RELIGION

beyond recall ; so the single emotion, the fortuitous
dream, launched by the poet into the world of
recognizable and immortal forms, looks in that
world for its ideal supports and affinities. It
must find them or else be blown back among the
ghosts. The highest ideality is the comprehension
of the real. Poetry is not at its best when it
depicts a further possible experience, but when
it initiates us, by feigning something which as an
experience is impossible, into the meaning of the
experience which we have actually had.

The highest example of this kind of poetry is
religion ; and although disfigured and misunderstood
by the simplicity of men who believe in it without
being capable of that imaginative interpretation
of life in which its truth consists, yet this religion
is even then often beneficent, because it colours life
harmoniously with the ideal. Religion may falsely
represent the ideal as a reality, but we must re-
member that the ideal, if not so represented, would
be despised by the majority of men, who cannot
understand that the value of things is moral, and
I who therefore attribute to what is moral a natural
i existence, thinking thus to vindicate its importance
land value. But^.vahjS-.li£S.ia. meaning, not in sub-
staneei in the ideal. siii.ci..things.-app:j®gli^not.in.
the energy which, they embody.
I The highest poetry, then, is not that of the
I versifiers, but that of the prophets, or of such poets


THE ELEMENTS OP POETRY 285

as interpret verbally the visions -which the pjsophets
have rendered in action and sentiment rather than
in adequate words. That the intuitions of religion
are poetical, and that in such intuitions poetry/
has its ultimate function, are truths of which both j
religion and poetry become more conscious the more
they advance in refinement and profunSity. A
crude and superficial theology may confuse God
with the thunder, the mountains, the heavenly
bodies, or the whole universe ; but when we pass
from these easy identifications to a religion that
has taken root in history and in the hearts of men,
and has come to flower, we find its objects and its
dogmas purely ideal, transparent expressions of
moral experience and perfect counterparts of
human needs. The evidence of historyor of ihe
senses is left far behind and nfivOT^tnmight'of;
the evidence of the heart, the value of the idea,
are alone regarded.

Take, for instance, the doctrine of transubstantia-
tion. A metaphor here is the basis of a dogma,
because the dogma rises to the same subtle region
as the metaphor, and gathers its sap from the same
soil of emotion. Religion has here rediscovered its
affinity with poetry, and in insisting on the truth
of its mystery it unconsciously vindicates the ideal-
ity of its truth. Under the accidents of bread and
wine lies, says the dogma, the substance of Christ's
body, blood, and divinity. What is that but to


286 POETKY AND RELIGION

treat facts as an appearance, and their ideal import
as a reality ? And to do this is the very essence
of poetry, for which everything visible is a sacra-
ment — an outward sign of that inward grace for
which the soul is thirsting.

In this same manner, where poetry rises from its
elementary and detached expressions in rhythm,
euphuism, characterization, and story-telling, and
comes to the consciousness of its highest func-
tion, that of portraying the ideals of experience
and destiny, then the poet becomes aware that
he is essentially a prophet, and either devotes
himself, like Homer or Dante, to the loving ex-
pression of the religion that exists, or like Lucre-
tius or Wordsworth, to the heralding of one which
he believes to be possible. Such poets are aware
of their highest mission ; others, whatever the
energy of their genius, have not conceived their
ultimate function as poets. They have been will-
ing to leave their world ugly as a whole, after stuf-
fing it with a sufficient profusion of beauties. Their
contemporaries, their fellow-countrymen for' many
generations, may not perceive this defect, because
they are naturally even less able than the poet
himself to understand the necessity of so large a
harmony. If he is short-sighted, they are blind,
and his poetic world may seem to them sublime in
its significance, because it may suggest some par-
tial lifting of their daily burdens and some partial
idealization of their incoherent thoughts.


THE ELEMENTS OF POBTKY 287

Such insensibility to the highest poetry is no more
extraordinary than the corresponding indifference to
the highest religion; nobility and excellence, how-
ever, are not dependent on the suffrage of half-baked
men, but on the original disposition of the clay and
the potter; I mean on the conditions of the art and
the ideal capacities of human nature. Just as a
note is better than a noise because, its beats being
regular, the ear and brain can react with pleasure
on that regularity, so all the stages of harmony are
better than the confusion out of which they come,
because the soul that perceives that harmony wel-
comes it as the fufilment of her natural ends. The
Pythagoreans were therefore right when they made
number the essence of the knowable world, and
Plato was right when he said harmony was the
first condition of the highest good. The good man
is a poet whose syllables are deeds and make a
harmony in Nature. Th e poet is a rebnilder— n f
the imagination, to make a harmony in that . And
he is not a complete poet if his whole imagination
is not attuned and his whole experience composed
into a single symphony.

For his complete equipment, then, it is necessary,
in the first place, that he sing; that his voice be
pure and well pitched, and that his numbers flow ;
then, at a higher stage, his images must fit with
one another ; he must be euphuistic, colouring his
thoughts with many reflected lights of memory and


288 POETRY AND RELIGION

suggestion, so that their harmony may be rich and
profound; again, at a higher stage, he must be
sensuous and free, that is, he must build' up his
■world with the primary elements of experience, not
with the conventions of common sense or intelli-
gence ; he must draw the whole soul into his har-
monies, even if in doing so he disintegrates the
partial systematizations of experience made by ab-
stract science in the categories of prose. But finally,
this disintegration must not leave the poet weltering
in a chaos of sense and passion ; it must be merely
the ploughing of the ground before a new harvest,
the kneading of the clay before the modelling of
a more perfect form. The expression of emotion
should be rationalized by derivation from char-
acter and by reference to the real objects that
arouse it — to Nature, to history, and to the uni-
verse of truth ; the experience imagined should be
conceived as a destiny, governed by principles, and
issuing ia the discipline and enlightenment of the
will. In this way alone can poetry become an
interpretation of life and not merely an irrelevant
excursion into the realm of fancy, multiplying our
images without purpose, and distracting us from
our business without spiritual gain. •

If we may then define poetry, not in the formal
sense of giving the minimum of what may be called
by that name, but in the ideal sense of determining
the goal which it approaches and the achievement


THE ELEMENTS OP POETRY 289

in which all its principles would be fulfilled, wd
may say that poetry is metrical and euphuistic dis'
course, expressing thought which is both sensuous
and ideal.

Such is poetry as a literary form ; but if we drop
the limitation to verbal expression, and think of
poetry as that subtle fire and inward light which
seems at times to shine through the world and
to touch the images in our minds with ineffable
beauty, then poetry is a momentary harmony in
the soul amid stagnation or conflict, — a glimpse
of the divine and an ineitation to a religious,
life. i

Religion is poetry become the guide of life,
poetry substituted for science or supervening upon
it as an approach to the highest reality. Poetry
is religion allowed to drift, left without points of
application in conduct and without an expression
in worship and dogma; it is religion without prac-
tical efficacy and without metaphysical illusion.
The ground of this abstractness of poetry, how-
ever, is usually only its narrow scope ; a poet who
plays with an idea for half an hour, or constructs
a character to which he gives no profound moral
significance, forgets his own thought, or remembers
it only as a fiction of his leisure, because he has
not dug his well deep enough to tap the subterra-
neous springs of his own life. But when the poet
enlarges his theatre and puts into his rhapsodies


i;yU POETRY AND KBLIGION

bhe true visions of his people and of his sqiil, Ms
poetry is the consecration of his deepest conTic-
bions, and contains the whole truth of his religion.
What the religion of the vulgar adds to the poet's
is simply the inertia of their limited apprehension,
which takes literally what he meant ideally, and
degrades into a false extension of this world on its
own level what in his mind was a true interpre-
tation of it upon a moral plane.

This higher plane is the sphere of significant
imagination, of relevant fiction, of idealism become
bhe interpretation of the reality it leaves behind.
Poetry raised to its highest power is then identical
with religion grasped in its inmost truth ; at their
point of union both reach their utmost purity and
beneficence, for then poetry loses its frivolity and
ceases to demoralize) while religion surrenders its
illusions and ceases to deceive.
