The Life of Reason, Vol. III: Reason in Religion (George Santayana, 1905)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/lifeofreasonorph03sant_0). Vol. III: Santayana's naturalistic reading of religion — poetry and myth made literal at our peril.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  UNIVERSITY


OF  ILLINOIS


LIBRARY

191

Sa56

V.3  '  ■*  '
cop.  3


/  %


Return  this  book  on  or  before  the
Latest  Date  stamped  below.  A
charge  is  made  on  all  overdue
books.

U.  of  I.  Library

sep  in

t

|

AUG  9’37

%

JAN25  '38

APR  $  n

fm

MAY  11  is

48

MW20

1348

ESG1  62  He

V'

J

mi  22  1954

HAR  3  0  IS

9324-S

r


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2018  with  funding  from

University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign  Alternates


https://archive.org/details/lifeofreasonorph03sant_0


BY  GEORGE  SANTAYANA


The  Life  of  Reason:  or  the  Phases  of
Human  Progress

I.  Introduction  and  Reason  in  Common  Sense

II.  Reason  in  Society

III.  Reason  in  Religion

IV.  Reason  in  Art

V.  Reason  in  Science

The  Sense  of  Beauty
Interpretations  of  Poetry  and  Religion
A  Hermit  of  Carmel  and  Other  Poems
Winds  of  Doctrine

Character  and  Opinion  in  the  United
States

Little  Essays  Drawn  from  the  Works  of
George  Santayana.  By  Logan  Pearsall
Smith,  with  the  collaboration  of  the  Author.
i2mo.


CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


(

.


■


'


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


OR  THE

PHASES  OF  HUMAN  PROGRESS


BY

GEORGE  SANTAYANA


REASON  IN  RELIGION


rj  yap  vov  eve pycia  £<*>rj


NEW  YORK

CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS

1922


Copyright,  1905,  by
CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America


Published  October,  1905


\  *5  \


I


CONTENTS


REASON  IN  RELIGION


yj  CHAPTER  I

HOW  RELIGION  MAY  BE  AN  EMBODIMENT  OF  REASON

Religion  is  certainly  significant,  but  not  literally  true. —
All  religion  is  positive  and  particular. — It  aims  at  the  Life
of  Reason,  but  largely  fails  to  attain  it. — Its  approach
imaginative. — When  its  poetic  method  is  denied  its  value
is  jeopardised. — It  precedes  science  rather  than  hinders
it. — It  is  merely  symbolic  and  thoroughly  human.

Pages  3-14

CHAPTER  II

RATIONAL  ELEMENTS  IN  SUPERSTITION

Felt  causes  not  necessary  causes. — Mechanism  and
dialectic  ulterior  principles. — Early  selection  of  categories.
— Tentative  rational  worlds. — Superstition  a  rudimentary
philosophy. — A  miracle,  though  unexpected,  more  in¬
telligible  than  a  regular  process. — Superstitions  come  of
haste  to  understand. — Inattention  suffers  them  to  spread.
— Genius  may  use  them  to  convey  an  inarticulate  wisdom.

Pages  15-27


CHAPTER  III

MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER

Fear  created  the  gods. — Need  also  contributed. — The
real  evidences  of  God's  existence. — Practice  precedes
theory  in  religion. — Pathetic,  tentative  nature  of  religious
practices. — Meanness  and  envy  in  the  gods,  suggesting
sacrifice. — Ritualistic  arts. — Thank-offerings. — The  sac¬
rifice  of  a  contrite  heart. — Prayer  is  not  utilitarian  in
essence. — Its  supposed  efficacy  magical. — Theological

v


5201 80


VI


CONTENTS


puzzles. — A  real  efficacy  would  be  mechanical. — True  uses
of  prayer. — It  clarifies  the  ideal. — It  reconciles  to  the  in¬
evitable. — It  fosters  spiritual  life  by  conceiving  it  in  its
perfection. — Discipline  and  contemplation  are  their  own
reward . Pages  28-48


CHAPTER  IV

MYTHOLOGY

Status  of  fable  in  the  mind. — It  requires  genius. — It
only  half  deceives. — Its  interpretative  essence. — Contrast
with  science. — Importance  of  the  moral  factor. — Its  sub¬
mergence. — Myth  justifies  magic. — Myths  might  be  meta¬
physical. — They  appear  ready  made,  like  parts  of  the  social
fabric. — They  perplex  the  conscience. — Incipient  myth  in
the  Vedas. — Natural  suggestions  soon  exhausted. — They
will  be  carried  out  in  abstract  fancy. — They  may  become
moral  ideals. — The  Sun-god  moralised. — The  leaven  of
religion  is  moral  idealism . Pages  49-68


CHAPTER  V

THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION

Phases  of  Hebraism. — Israel's  tribal  monotheism. —
Problems  involved. — The  prophets  put  new  wine  in  old
bottles. — Inspiration  and  authority. — Beginnings  of  the
Church. — Bigotry  turned  into  a  principle. — Penance  ac¬
cepted. — Christianity  combines  optimism  and  asceticism.
— Reason  smothered  between  the  two. — Religion  made  an
institution . Pages  69-82


CHAPTER  VI

THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC

The  essence  of  the  good  not  adventitious  but  expressive.
— A  universal  religion  must  interpret  the  whole  world. —
Double  appeal  of  Christianity. — -Hebrew  metaphors  be¬
come  Greek  myths. — Hebrew  philosophy  of  history  identi¬
fied  with  Platonic  cosmology. — The  resulting  orthodox
system. — The  brief  drama  of  things. — Mythology  is  a
language  and  must  be  understood  to  convey  something
by  symbols . Pages  83-98


CONTENTS


Vll


CHAPTER  VII

PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  INFUSED  INTO

CHRISTIANITY

Need  of  paganising  Christianity. — Catholic  piety  more
human  than  the  liturgy. — Natural  pieties. — Refuge  taken
in  the  supernatural. — The  episodes  of  life  consecrated
mystically. — Paganism  chastened,  Hebraism  liberalised. —
The  system  post-rational  and  founded  on  despair. — Ex¬
ternal  conversion  of  the  barbarians. — Expression  of  the
northern  genius  within  Catholicism. — Internal  discrepan¬
cies  between  the  two. — Tradition  and  instinct  at  odds  in
Protestantism. — The  Protestant  spirit  remote  from  that
of  the  gospel. — Obstacles  to  humanism. — The  Reforma¬
tion  and  counter-reformation. — Protestantism  an  expres¬
sion  of  character. — It  has  the  spirit  of  life  and  of  courage,
but  the  voice  of  inexperience. — Its  emancipation  from
Christianity . Pages  99-126


CHAPTER  VIII

CONFLICT  OF  MYTHOLOGY  WITH  MORAL  TRUTH

Myth  should  dissolve  with  the  advance  of  science. —
But  myth  is  confused  with  the  moral  values  it  expresses. —
Neo-Platonic  revision. — It  made  mythical  entities  of  ab¬
stractions. — Hypostasis  ruins  ideals. — The  Stoic  revision.
— The  ideal  surrendered  before  the  physical. — Parallel
movements  in  Christianity. — Hebraism,  if  philosophical,
must  be  pantheistic. — Pantheism,  even  when  psychic,
ignores  ideals. — Truly  divine  action  limited  to  what  makes
for  the  good. — Need  of  an  opposing  principle. — The  stand¬
ard  of  value  is  human. — Hope  for  happiness  makes  belief
in  God . Pages  127-147


CHAPTER  IX

THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE

Suspense  between  hope  and  disillusion. — Superficial
solution. — But  from  what  shall  we  be  redeemed? — Typical
attitude  of  St.  Augustine. — He  achieves  Platonism. — He
identifies  it  with  Christianity. — God  the  good. — Primary
and  secondary  religion. — Ambiguous  efficacy  of  the  good


CONTENTS


•  •  •

Vlll

in  Plato. — Ambiguous  goodness  of  the  creator  in  Job. —
The  Manicheans. — All  things  good  by  nature. — The  doc¬
trine  of  creation  demands  that  of  the  fall. — Original  sin. —
Forced  abandonment  of  the  ideal. — The  problem  among
the  Protestants. — Pantheism  accepted. — Plainer  scorn  for
the  ideal. — The  price  of  mythology  is  superstition.

Pages  148-177


CHAPTER  X

PIETY

The  core  of  religion  not  theoretical. — Loyalty  to  the
sources  of  our  being. — The  pious  ^Eneas. — An  ideal  back¬
ground  required. — Piety  accepts  natural  conditions  and
present  tasks. — The  leadership  of  instinct  is  normal. — Em¬
bodiment  essential  to  spirit. — Piety  to  the  gods  takes  form
from  current  ideals. — The  religion  of  humanity. — Cosmic
piety . Pages  178-192


CHAPTER  XI

SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS

To  be  spiritual  is  to  live  in  view  of  the  ideal. — Spirit¬
uality  natural. — Primitive  consciousness  may  be  spiritual.
— Spirit  crossed  by  instrumentalities. — One  foe  of  the
spirit  is  worldliness. — The  case  for  and  against  pleasure. —
Upshot  of  worldly  wisdom. — Two  supposed  escapes  from
vanity :  fanaticism  and  mysticism. — Both  are  irrational. —
Is  there  a  third  course? — Yes,  for  experience  has  intrinsic,
inalienable  values. — For  these  the  religious  imagination
must  supply  an  ideal  standard . Pages  193-213


CHAPTER  XII

CHARITY

Possible  tyranny  of  reason. — Everything  has  its  rights. —
Primary  and  secondary  morality. — Uncharitable  pagan
justice  is  not  just. — The  doom  of  ancient  republics. —
Rational  charity. — Its  limits. — Its  mythical  supports. —
There  is  intelligence  in  charity. — Buddhist  and  Christian
forms  of  it. — Apparent  division  of  the  spiritual  and  the
natural . Pages  214-228


CONTENTS


IX


CHAPTER  XIII

THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE

The  length  of  life  a  subject  for  natural  science. — “  Psy¬
chical”  phenomena. — Hypertrophes  of  sense. — These  possi¬
bilities  affect  physical  existence  only. — Moral  grounds  for
the  doctrine. — The  necessary  assumption  of  a  future. —
An  assumption  no  evidence. — A  solipsistic  argument. —
Absoluteness  and  immortality  transferred  to  the  gods. —
Or  to  a  divine  principle  in  all  beings. — In  neither  case  is
the  individual  immortal. — Possible  forms  of  survival. —
Arguments  from  retribution  and  need  of  opportunity.
— Ignoble  temper  of  both. — False  optimistic  postulate  in¬
volved. — Transition  to  ideality . Pages  229-250


CHAPTER  XIV

IDEAL  IMMORTALITY

Olympian  immortality  the  first  ideal. — Its  indirect
attainment  by  reproduction. — Moral  acceptance  of  this
compromise. — Even  vicarious  immortality  intrinsically
impossible. — Intellectual  victory  over  change. — The  glory
of  it. — Reason  makes  man’s  divinity  and  his  immortality.
— It  is  the  locus  of  all  truths. — Epicurean  immortality,
through  the  truth  of  existence. — Logical  immortality,
through  objects  of  thought. — Ethical  immortality,  through
types  of  excellence . Pages  251-273


CHAPTER  XV

CONCLUSION

The  failure  of  magic  and  of  mythology. — Their  imagin¬
ative  value. — Piety  and  spirituality  justified. — Mysticism
a  primordial  state  of  feeling. — It  may  recur  at  any  stage
of  culture. — Form  gives  substance  its  life  and  value.

Pages  274-279


REASON  IN  RELIGION


*t


CHAPTER  I


HOW  RELIGION  MAY  BE  AN  EMBODIMENT  OF

REASON

Experience  has  repeatedly  confirmed  that  wen-
known  maxim  of  Bacon’s,  that  “  a  little  philoso-
Reiigion  phy  hiclineth  man’s  mind  to  atheism,
certainly  but  depth  in  philosophy  bringeth  men’s
significant  ^bids  about  to  religion.”  In  every  age

the  most  comprehensive  thinkers  have  found  in
the  religion  of  their  time  and  country  something
they  could  accept,  interpreting  and  illustrating
that  religion  so  as  to  give  it  depth  and  universal
application.  Even  the  heretics  and  atheists,  if
they  have  had  profundity,  turn  out  after  a  while
to  be  forerunners  of  some  new  orthodoxy.  What
they  rebel  against  is  a  religion  alien  to  their  na¬
ture;  they  are  atheists  only  by  accident,  and  rela¬
tively  to  a  convention  which  inwardly  offends  them,
but  they  yearn  mightily  in  their  own  souls  after  the
religious  acceptance  of  a  world  interpreted  in  their
own  fashion.  So  it  appears  in  the  end  that  their
atheism  and  loud  protestation  were  in  fact  the
hastier  part  of  their  thought,  since  what  embold¬
ened  them  to  deny  the  poor  world’s  faith  was  that
they  were  too  impatient  to  understand  it.  Indeed,

3


4


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


the  enlightenment  common  to  young  wits  and
worm-eaten  old  satirists,  who  plume  themselves
on  detecting  the  scientific  ineptitude  of  religion
— something  which  the  blindest  half  see — is  not
nearly  enlightened  enough:  it  points  to  notorious
facts  incompatible  with  religious  tenets  literally
taken,  but  it  leaves  unexplored  the  habits  of
thought  from  which  those  tenets  sprang,  their
original  meaning,  and  their  true  function.  Such
studies  would  bring  the  sceptic  face  to  face  with
the  mystery  and  pathos  of  mortal  existence.  They
would  make  him  understand  why  religion  is  so
profoundly  moving  and  in  a  sense  so  profoundly
just.  There  must  needs  be  something  humane  and
necessary  in  an  influence  that  has  become  the  most
general  sanction  of  virtue,  the  chief  occasion  for
art  and  philosophy,  and  the  source,  perhaps,  of
the  best  human  happiness.  If  nothing,  as  Hooker
said,  is  “  so  malapert  as  a  splenetic  religion/5  a
sour  irreligion  is  almost  as  perverse.

At  the  same  time,  when  Bacon  penned  the  sage
epigram  we  have  quoted  he  forgot  to  add  that
the  God  to  whom  depth  in  philosophy  brings  back
men’s  minds  is  far  from  being  the  same  from  whom

But  not  a  little  philosophy  estranges  them.  It
literally  true.  W01I](j  pitiful  indeed  if  mature  re¬
flection  bred  no  better  conceptions  than  those
which  have  drifted  down  the  muddy  stream  of
time,  where  tradition  and  passion  have  jumbled
everything  together.  Traditional  conceptions,
when  they  axe  felicitous,  may  be  adopted  by  the


RELIGION  AND  REASON


5


poet,  but  they  must  be  purified  by  the  moralist
and  disintegrated  by  the  philosopher.  Each  re¬
ligion,  so  dear  to  those  whose  life  it  sanctifies,  and
fulfilling  so  necessary  a  function  in  the  society
that  has  adopted  it,  necessarily  contradicts  every
other  religion,  and  probably  contradicts  itself.
What  religion  a  man  shall  have  is  a  historical  acci¬
dent,  quite  as  much  as  what  language  he  shall
speak.  In  the  rare  circumstances  where  a  choice
is  possible,  he  may,  with  some  difficulty,  make  an
exchange;  but  even  then  he  is  only  adopting  a
new  convention  which  may  be  more  agreeable  to
his  personal  temper  but  which  is  essentially  as
arbitrary  as  the  old.

j

The  attempt  to  speak  without  speaking  any  par¬
ticular  language  is  not  more  hopeless  than  the
ah  religion  attempt  to  have  a  religion  that  shall
and°SltiVe  ^e  no  religi°n  in  particular.  A  couri-
particuiar.  er*s  or  a  dragoman’s  speech  may  indeed
be  often  unusual  and  drawn  from  disparate  sources,
not  without  some  mixture  of  personal  originality;
but  that  private  jargon  will  have  a  meaning  only
because  of  its  analogy  to  one  or  more  conventional
languages  and  its  obvious  derivation  from  them.
So  travellers  from  one  religion  to  another,  people
who  have  lost  their  spiritual  nationality,  may  often
retain  a  neutral  and  confused  residuum  of  belief,
which  they  may  egregiously  regard  as  the  essence
of  all  religion,  so  little  may  they  remember  the
graciousness  and  naturalness  of  that  ancestral  ac¬
cent  which  a  perfect  religion  should  have.  Yet  a


6


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


moment’s  probing  of  the  conceptions  surviving  in
such  minds  will  show  them  to  be  nothing  but  ves¬
tiges  of  old  beliefs,  creases  which  thought,  even
if  emptied  of  all  dogmatic  tenets,  has  not  been
able  to  smooth  away  at  its  first  unfolding.  Later
generations,  if  they  have  any  religion  at  all,  will
be  found  either  to  revert  to  ancient  authority,  or
to  attach  themselves  spontaneously  to  something
wholly  novel  and  immensely  positive,  to  some  faith
promulgated  by  a  fresh  genius  and  passionately
embraced  by  a  converted  people.  Thus  every  liv¬
ing  and  healthy  religion  has  a  marked  idiosyncrasy.
Its  power  consists  in  its  special  and  surprising  mes¬
sage  and  in  the  bias  which  that  revelation  gives
to  life.  The  vistas  it  opens  and  the  mysteries  it
I  propounds  are  another  world  to  live  in;  and  an-
'  other  world  to  live  in — whether  we  expect  ever  to
pass  wholly  into  it  or  no — is  what  we  mean  by
having  a  religion.

What  relation,  then,  does  this  great  business  of
the  soul,  which  we  call  religion,  bear  to  the  Life
T.  .  of  Reason?  That  the  relation  between

it  aims  at

the  Life  of  the  two  is  close  seems  clear  from  sev-
Reason.  era[  circumstances.C  The  Life  of  Rea¬
son  is  the  seat  of  all  ultimate  values.  Now  the
history  of  mankind  will  show  us  that  whenever
spirits  at  once  lofty  and  intense  have  seemed  to
attain  the  highest  joys,  they  have  envisaged  and
attained  them  in  religion.  Religion  would  there¬
fore  seem  to  be  a  vehicle  or  a  factor  in  rational
life,  since  the  ends  of  rational  life  are  attained


RELIGION  AND  REASON


7


,  \

by  it,2'  Moreover,  the  Life  of  Reason  is  an  ideal
to  which  everything  in  the  world  should  be  sub-  !
ordinated;  it  establishes  lines  of  moral  cleavage
everywhere  and  makes  right  eternally  different
from  wrong.  Religion  does  the  same  thing.  It
makes  absolute  moral  decisions.  It  sanctions,  uni¬
fies,  and  transforms  ethics.** Religion  thus  exercises
a  function  of  the  Life  of  Reason.  4  And  a  further

V  1

function  which  is  common  to  both  is  that  of  eman¬
cipating  man  from  his  personal  limitations.  In
different  ways  religions  promise  to  transfer  the
soul  to  better  conditions.  A  supematurally  fa¬
voured  kingdom  is  to  be  established  for  posterity
upon  earth,  or  for  all  the  faithful  in  heaven,  or
the  soul  is  to  be  freed  by  repeated  purgations  from
all  taint  and  sorrow,  or  it  is  to  be  lost  in  the  abso¬
lute,  or  it  is  to  become  an  influence  and  an  object
of  adoration  in  the  places  it  once  haunted  or  wher¬
ever  the  activities  it  once  loved  may  be  carried
on  by  future  generations  of  its  kindred.  Now  rea¬
son  in  its  way  lays  before  us  all  these  possibilities:
it  points  to  common  objects,  political  and  intel¬
lectual,  in  which  an  individual  may  lose  what  is
mortal  and  accidental  in  himself  and  immortalise  i
what  is  rational  and  human;  it  teaches  us  how
sweet  and  fortunate  death  may  be  to  those  whose
spirit  can  still  live  in  their  country  and  in  their
ideas;  it  reveals  the  radiating  effects  of  action  and
the  eternal  objects  of  thought.

Yet  the  difference  in  tone  and  language  must
strike  us,  so  soon  as  it  is  philosophy  that  speaks.


8


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


That  change  should  remind  ns  that  even  if  the
function  of  religion  and  that  of  reason  coincide,
this  function  is  performed  in  the  two  cases  by  very
different  organs.  Religions  are  many,  reason  one.
Religion  consists  of  conscious  ideas,  hopes,  enthu¬
siasms,  and  objects  of  worship;  it  operates  by  grace
and  flourishes  by  prayer.  Reason,  on  the  other
hand,  is  a  mere  principle  or  potential  order,  on
which,  indeed,  we  may  come  to  reflect,  but  which
exists  in  us  ideally  only,  without  variation  or  stress
of  any  kind.  We  conform  or  do  not  conform  to
it;  it  does  not  urge  or  chide  us,  nor  call  for  any
emotions  on  our  part  other  than  those  naturally
aroused  by  the  various  objects  which  it  unfolds
in  their  true  nature  and  proportion.  Religion
brings  some  order  into  life  by  weighting  it  with
new  materials.  Reason  adds  to  the  natural  mate¬
rials  only  the  perfect  order  which  it  introduces
into  them.  Rationality  is  nothing  but  a  form,  an
ideal  constitution  which  experience  may  more  or
:  less  embody.  Religion  is  a  part  of  experience  it¬
self,  a  mass  of  sentiments  and  ideas.  The  one  is
an  inviolate  principle,  the  other  a  changing  and
struggling  force.  And  yet  this  struggling  and
changing  force  of  religion  seems  to  direct  man
toward  something  eternal.  It  seems  to  make  for
an  ultimate  harmony  within  the  soul  and  for  an
ultimate  harmony  between  the  soul  and  all  the
soul  depends  upon.  So  that  religion,  in  its  in¬
tent,  is  a  more  conscious  and  direct  pursuit  of  the
Life  of  Reason  than  is  society,  science,  or  art.  For


RELIGION  AND  REASON


9


fails  to
attain  it


these  approach  and  fill  out  the  ideal  life  tentatively
and  piecemeal,  hardly  regarding  the  goal  or  caring
for  the  ultimate  justification  of  their  instinctive
aims.  Religion  also  has  an  instinctive  and  blind
side,  and  bubbles  up  in  all  manner  of  chance  prac¬
tices  and  intuitions;  soon,  however,  it  feels  its  way
toward  the  heart  of  things,  and,  from  whatever
quarter  it  may  come,  veers  in  the  direction  of  the
ultimate.

Nevertheless,  we  must  confess  that  this  religious
pursuit  of  the  Life  of  Reason  has  been  singularly

But  largely  abortive.  Those  within  the  pale  of
each  religion  may  prevail  upon  them¬
selves  to  express  satisfaction  with  its
results,  thanks  to  a  fond  partiality  in  reading  the
past  and  generous  draughts  of  hope  for  the  future;
but  any  one  regarding  the  various  religions  at  once
and  comparing  their  achievements  with  what  rea¬
son  requires,  must  feel  how  terrible  is  the  disap¬
pointment  which  they  have  one  and  all  prepared
for  mankind.  Their  chief  anxiety  has  been  to
offer  imaginary  remedies  for  mortal  ills,  some'  of
which  are  incurable  essentially,  while  others  might
have  been  really  cured  by  well-directed  effort.  The
Greek  oracles,  for  instance,  pretended  to  heal  our
natural  ignorance,  which  has  its  appropriate
though  difficult  cure,  while  the  Christian  vision
of  heaven  pretended  to  be  an  antidote  to  our  nat¬
ural  death,  the  inevitable  correlate  of  birth  and
of  a  changing  and  conditioned  existence.  By
methods  of  this  sort  little  can  be  done  for  the


I


10


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


real  betterment  of  life.  To  confuse  intelligence
and  dislocate  sentiment  by  gratuitous  fictions  is  a
short-sighted  way  of  pursuing  happiness.  Nature
is  soon  avenged.  An  unhealthy  exaltation  and  a
one-sided  morality  have  to  be  followed  by  regret¬
table  reactions.  When  these  come,  the  real  rewards
of  life  may  seem  vain  to  a  relaxed  vitality,  and  the
very  name  of  virtue  may  irritate  young  spirits
untrained  in  any  natural  excellence.  Thus  relig¬
ion  too  often  debauches  the  morality  it  comes  to
sanction,  and  impedes  the  science  it  ought  to  fulfil.

What  is  the  secret  of  this  ineptitude?  Why  does
religion,  so  near  to  rationality  in  its  purpose,  fall
so  far  short  of  it  in  its  texture  and  in  its  results?
its  approach  The  answer  is  easy:  Religion  pursues
imaginative,  rationality  through  the  imagination.

When  it  explains  events  or  assigns  causes,  it  is  an
imaginative  substitute  for  science.  When  it  gives
precepts,  insinuates  ideals,  or  remoulds  aspiration,
it  is  an  imaginative  substitute  for  wisdom — I  mean
for  the  deliberate  and  impartial  pursuit  of  all  good.
The  conditions  and  the  aims  of  life  are  both  repre¬
sented  in  religion  poetically,  but  this  poetry  tends
to  arrogate  to  itself  literal  truth  and  moral  author¬
ity,  neither  of  which  it  possesses.  Hence  the  depth
and  importance  of  religion  become  intelligible  no
less  than  its  contradictions  and  practical  disasters.
Its  object  is  the  same  as  that  of  reason,  but  its
method  is  to  proceed  by  intuition  and  by  unchecked
poetical  conceits.  These  are  repeated  and  vulgar-
1  ised  in  proportion  to  their  original  fineness  and


RELIGION  AND  REASON


11


significance,  till  they  pass  for  reports  of  objective
truth  and  come  to  constitute  a  world  of  faith,
superposed  upon  the  world  of  experience  and  re¬
garded  as  materially  enveloping  it,  if  not  in  space
at  least  in  time  and  in  existence.  (The  only  truth
of  religion  comes  from  its  interpretation  of  life,
from  its  symbolic  rendering  of  that  moral  experi¬
ence  which  it  springs  out  of  and  which  it  seeks
to  elucidate.  Its  falsehood  comes  from  the  in¬
sidious  misunderstanding  which  clings  to  it,  to  the
effect  that  these  poetic  conceptions  are  not  merely
representations  of  experience  &s  it  is  or  should  be,
but  are  rather  information  about  experience  or
reality  elsewhere — an  experience  and  reality  which,
strangely  enough,  supply  just  the  defects  be¬
trayed  by  reality  and  experience  here.

Thus  religion  has  the  same  original  relation  to
life  that  poetry  has;  only  poetry,  which  never  pre¬
tends  to  literal  validity,  adds  a  pure  value  to  exist¬
ence,  the  value  of  a  liberal  imaginative  exercise.
The  poetic  value  of  religion  would  initially  be
greater  than  that  of  poetry  itself,  because  religion
deals  with  higher  and  more  practical  themes,  with
sides  of  life  which  are  in  greater  need  of  some  im¬
aginative  touch  and  ideal  interpretation  than  are
those  pleasant  or  pompous  things  which  ordinary
When  its  poetry  dwells  upon.  But  this  initial
poetic  method  a(Jvantage  is  neutralised  in  part  by

value  is  the  abuse  to  which  religion  is  subject,
jeopardised,  whenever  its  symbolic  rightness  is

taken  for  scientific  truth.  Like  poetry,  it  improves


i


12


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


the  world  only  by  imagining  it  improved,  but  not
content  with  making  this  addition  to  the  mind’s
furniture — an  addition  which  might  be  useful  and
ennobling — it  thinks  to  confer  a  more  radical  bene¬
fit  by  persuading  mankind  that,  in  spite  of  appear¬
ances,  the  world  is  really  such  as  that  rather  arbi¬
trary  idealisation  has  painted  it.  This  spurious
satisfaction  is  naturally  the  prelude  to  many  a  dis¬
appointment,  and  the  soul  has  infinite  trouble  to
emerge  again  from  the  artificial  problems  and  sen¬
timents  into  which  it  is  thus  plunged.  The  value
of  religion  becomes  equivocal.  Religion  remains
an  imaginative  achievement,  a  symbolic  represen¬
tation  of  moral  reality  which  may  have  a  most  im¬
portant  function  in  vitalising  the  mind  and  in
transmitting,  by  way  of  parables,  the  lessons  of
experience.  But  it  becomes  at  the  same  time  a
continuous  incidental  deception;  and  this  decep¬
tion,  in  proportion  as  it  is  strenuously  denied  to
be  such,  can  work  indefinite  harm  in  the  world
and  in  the  conscience.

On  the  whole,  however,  religion  should  not  be
conceived  as  having  taken  the  place  of  anything
it  precedes  better,  but  rather  as  having  come  to
than  relieve  situations  which,  but  for  its

hinders  it.  presence,  would  have  been  infinitely
worse.  In  the  thick  of  active  life,  or  in  the
monotony  of  practical  slavery,  there  is  more  need
to  stimulate  fancy  than  to  control  it.  Natural
instinct  is  not  much  disturbed  in  the  human
brain  by  what  may  happen  in  that  thin  superstra-


RELIGION  AND  REASON


13


turn  of  ideas  which  commonly  overlays  it.  We  must
not  blame  religion  for  preventing  the  development
of  a  moral  and  natural  science  which  at  any  rate
would  seldom  have  appeared ;  we  must  rather  thank
it  for  the  sensibility,  the  reverence,  the  speculative
insight  which  it  has  introduced  into  the  world.

We  may  therefore  proceed  to  analyse  the  signifi¬
cance  and  the  function  which  religion  has  had  at
it  is  merely  its  different  stages,  and,  without  dis-

thoroughly  guismg  or  in  the  least  condoning  its
human.  confusion  with  literal  truth,  we  may
allow  ourselves  to  enter  as  sympathetically  as  pos¬
sible  into  its  various  conceptions  and  emotions.
They  have  made  up  the  inner  life  of  many  sages,
and  of  all  those  who  without  great  genius  or  learn¬
ing  have  lived  steadfastly  in  the  spirit.  The  feel¬
ing  of  reverence  should  itself  be  treated  with  rev¬
erence,  although  not  at  a  sacrifice  of  truth,  with
which  alone,  in  the  end,  reverence  is  compatible.
Nor  have  we  any  reason  to  be  intolerant  of  the
partialities  and  contradictions  which  religions  dis¬
play.  Were  we  dealing  with  a  science,  such  con¬
tradictions  would  have  to  be  instantly  solved  and
removed;  but  when  we  are  concerned  with  the
poetic  interpretation  of  experience,  contradiction
means  only  variety,  and  variety  means  spontaneity,
wealth  of  resource,  and  a  nearer  approach  to  total
adequacy.

If  we  hope  to  gain  any  understanding  of  these
matters  we  must  begin  by  taking  them  out  of  that
heated  and  fanatical  atmosphere  in  which  the  He-


14


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


brew  tradition  has  enveloped  them.  The  Jews  had
no  philosophy,  and  when  their  national  traditions
came  to  he  theoretically  explicated  and  justified,
they  were  made  to  issue  in  a  puerile  scholasticism
and  a  rabid  intolerance.  The  question  of  mono¬
theism,  for  instance,  was  a  terrible  question  to  the
Jews.  Idolatry  did  not  consist  in  worshipping  a
god  who,  not  being  ideal,  might  be  unworthy  of
worship,  but  rather  in  recognising  other  gods  than
the  one  worshipped  in  Jerusalem.  To  the  Greeks,
on  the  contrary,  whose  philosophy  was  enlightened
and  ingenuous,  monotheism  and  polytheism  seemed
perfectly  innocent  and  compatible.  To  say  God
or  the  gods  was  only  to  use  different  expressions
for  the  same  influence,  now  viewed  in  its  abstract
unity  and  correlation  writh  all  existence,  now
viewed  in  its  various  manifestations  in  moral  life,
in  nature,  or  in  history.  So  that  what  in  Plato,
Aristotle,  and  the  Stoics  meets  us  at  every  step —
the  combination  of  monotheism  with  polytheism —
is  no  contradiction,  but  merely  an  intelligent  vari¬
ation  of  phrase  to  indicate  various  aspects  or  func¬
tions  in  physical  and  moral  things.  When  religion
appears  to  us  in  this  light  its  contradictions  and
controversies  lose  all  their  bitterness.  Each  doc¬
trine  will  simply  represent  the  moral  plane  on
which  they  live  who  have  devised  or  adopted  it.
Religions  will  thus  be  better  or  worse,  never  true
or  false.  We  shall  be  able  to  lend  ourselves  to
each  in  turn,  and  seek  to  draw  from  it  the  secret
of  its  inspiration.


CHAPTER  II


RATIONAL  ELEMENTS  IN  SUPERSTITION


We  need  not  impose  upon  ourselves  the  endless
and  repulsive  task  of  describing  all  the  supersti¬
tions  that  have  existed  in  the  world.  In  his  im¬
potence  and  laziness  the  natural  man  unites  any
notion  with  any  other  in  a  loose  causal  relation.
A  single  instance  of  juxtaposition,  nay,  the  mere
notion  and  dream  of  such  a  combination,  will  suf¬
fice  to  arouse  fear  or  to  prompt  experimental  action.

When  philosophers  have  objected  to  Hume’s  ac¬
count  of  causation  that  he  gave  no  sufficient  basis

Felt  causes  for  the  necessary  influence  of  cause  on
not  necessary  effect,  they  have  indulged  in  a  highly
causes.  artificial  supposition.  They  have  as¬
sumed  that  people  actually  regard  causes  as  neces¬
sary.  They  suppose  that  before  we  can  feel  the
interdependence  of  two  things  in  experience  we
must  have  an  unshakable  conviction  that  their
connection  is  necessary  and  universal.  But  causa¬
tion  in  such  an  absolute  sense  is  no  category  of
practical  thinking.  It  appears,  if  at  all,  only  in
dialectic,  in  ideal  applications  of  given  laws  to
cases  artificially  simplified,  where  the  terms  are  so
defined  that  their  operation  upon  one  another  is

15


16


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


involved  in  the  notion  of  them.  So  if  we  say  that
an  unsupported  weight  must  fall  to  the  ground,
we  have  included  in  the  word  “  weight  ”  the  notion
of  a  downward  strain.  The  proposition  is  really
trifling  and  identical.  It  merely  announces  that
things  which  tend  to  fall  to  the  ground  tend  to
fall  to  the  ground,  and  that  heavy  things  are  heavy.
So,  when  we  have  called  a  thing  a  cause,  we  have
defined  it  as  that  which  involves  an  effect,  and  if
the  effect  did  not  follow,  the  title  of  cause  would
no  longer  belong  to  the  antecedent.  But  the  ne¬
cessity  of  this  sequence  is  merely  verbal.  We  have
never,  in  the  presence  of  the  antecedent,  the  assur¬
ance  that  the  title  of  cause  will  accrue  to  it.  Our
expectation  is  empirical,  and  we  feel  and  assert
nothing  in  respect  to  the  necessity  of  the  expected
sequence.

A  cause,  in  real  life,  means  a  justifying  circum¬
stance.  We  are  absolutely  without  insight  into  the
machinery  of  causation,  notably  in  the  commonest
cases,  like  that  of  generation,  nutrition,  or  the
\  operation  of  mind  on  matter.  But  we  are  familiar
with  the  more  notable  superficial  conditions  in  each
case,  and  the  appearance  in  part  of  any  usual  phe¬
nomenon  makes  us  look  for  the  rest  of  it.  We  do
not  ordinarily  expect  virgins  to  bear  children  nor
prophets  to  be  fed  by  ravens  nor  prayers  to  re¬
move  mountains;  but  we  may  believe  any  of  these
things  at  the  merest  suggestion  of  fancy  or  report,
without  any  warrant  from  experience,  so  loose  is
the  bond  and  so  external  the  relation  between


REASON  IN  SUPERSTITION


17


the  terms  most  constantly  associated.  A  quite
unprecedented  occurrence  will  seem  natural  and
intelligible  enough  if  it  falls  in  happily  with  the
current  of  our  thoughts.  Interesting  and  sig¬
nificant  events,  however,  are  so  rare  and  so  de¬
pendent  on  mechanical  conditions  irrelevant  to
their  value,  that  we  come  at  last  to  wonder  at  their
6elf -justified  appearance  apart  from  that  cumbrous
natural  machinery,  and  to  call  them  marvels,  mira¬
cles,  and  things  to  gape  at.  We  come  to  adopt
scientific  hypotheses,  at  least  in  certain  provinces
Mechanism  of  our  thought,  and  we  lose  our  primi-

ulterior  tlve  openness  and  simplicity  of  mind,
principles.  Then,  with  an  unjustified  haste,  we  as¬
sert  that  miracles  are  impossible,  i.e.,  that  nothing
interesting  and  fundamentally  natural  can  happen
unless  all  the  usual,  though  adventitious,  mise-en-
scene  has  been  prepared  behind  the  curtain.

The  philosopher  may  eventually  discover  that
such  machinery  is  really  needed  and  that  even  the
actors  themselves  have  a  mechanism  within  them,
so  that  not  only  their  smiles  and  magnificent  ges¬
tures,  but  their  heated  fancy  itself  and  their  con¬
ception  of  their  roles  are  but  outer  effects  and
dramatic  illusions  produced  by  the  natural  stage-
carpentry  in  their  brains.  Yet  such  eventual  scien¬
tific  conclusions  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  tenta¬
tive  first  notions  of  men  when  they  begin  to  experi¬
ment  in  the  art  of  living.  As  the  seeds  of  lower
animals  have  to  be  innumerable,  so  that  in  a  chance
environment  a  few  may  grow  to  maturity,  so  the


18


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


seeds  of  rational  thinking,  the  first  categories  of
reflection,  have  to  be  multitudinous,  in  order  that
some  lucky  principle  of  synthesis  may  somewhere
come  to  light  and  find  successful  application.  Sci-
ence,  which  thinks  to  make  belief  in  miracles  im¬
possible,  is  itself  belief  in  miracles — in  the  miracle6
best  authenticated  by  history  and  by  daily  life.

When  men  begin  to  understand  things,  when
they  begin  to  reflect  and  to  plan,  they  divide  the
Early  selection  world  into  the  hateful  and  the  delight-
of  categories.  fui^  the  avoidable  and  the  attainable.

And  in  feeling  their  way  toward  wdiat  attracts
them,  or  in  escaping  what  they  fear,  they  at  first
follow  passively  the  lead  of  instinct:  they  watch
themselves  live,  or  rather  sink  without  reserve  into
their  living;  their  reactions  are  as  little  foreseen
and  as  naturally  accepted  as  their  surroundings.
Their  ideas  are  incidents  in  their  perpetual  oscil¬
lation  between  apathy  and  passion.  The  stream
of  animal  life  leaves  behind  a  little  sediment  of
knowledge,  the  sand  of  that  auriferous  river;  a  few
grains  of  experience  remain  to  mark  the  path  trav¬
ersed  by  the  flood.  These  residual  ideas  and  pre¬
monitions,  these  first  categories  of  thought,  are  of
any  and  every  sort.  All  the  contents  of  the  mind
and  all  the  threads  of  relation  that  weave  its  ele¬
ments  together  are  alike  fitted,  for  all  we  can  then
see,  to  give  the  clue  to  the  labyrinth  in  which  we
find  ourselves  wandering.

There  is  prima  facie  no  ground  for  not  trying  to
apply  to  experience  such  categories,  for  instance,


REASON  IN  SUPERSTITION


19


as  that  of  personal  omnipotence,  as  if  everything
were  necessarily  arranged  as  we  may  command  or
require.  On  this  principle  children  often  seem  to
conceive  a  world  in  which  they  are  astonished  not
to  find  themselves  living.  Or  we  may  try  aesthetic
categories  and  allow  our  reproductive  imagination
— by  which  memory  is  fed — to  bring  under  the
unity  of  apperception  only  what  can  fall  within  it
harmoniously,  completely,  and  delightfully.  Such
an  understanding,  impervious  to  anything  but  the
beautiful,  might  be  a  fine  thing  in  itself,  but  would
not  chronicle  the  fortunes  of  that  organism  to
which  it  was  attached.  It  would  yield  an  experi¬
ence — doubtless  a  highly  interesting  and  elaborate
experience — but  one  which  could  never  serve  as  an
index  to  successful  action.  It  would  totally  fail
to  represent  its  conditions,  and  consequently  would
imply  nothing  about  its  continued  existence.  It
would  be  an  experience  irrelevant  to  conduct,  no
part,  therefore,  of  a  Life  of  Eeason,  but  a  kind
of  lovely  vapid  music  or  parasitic  dream.

Now  such  dreams  are  in  fact  among  the  first
and  most  absorbing  formations  in  the  human  mind.
If  we  could  penetrate  into  animal  consciousness
we  should  not  improbably  find  that  what  there  ac¬
companies  instinctive  motions  is  a  wholly  irrele¬
vant  fancy,  whose  flaring  up  and  subsidence  no
doubt  coincide  with  the  presence  of  objects  inter¬
esting  to  the  organism  and  causing  marked  reac¬
tions  within  it ;  yet  this  fancy  may  in  no  way  rep¬
resent  the  nature  of  surrounding  objects  nor  the


20


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


eventual  results,  for  the  animal's  consciousness,  of
its  own  present  experience.

The  unlimited  number  of  possible  categories,
their  arbitrariness  and  spontaneity,  may,  however,

Tentative  have  ^is  inconvenience,  that  the  cate-
rationai  gories  may  he  irrelevant  to  one  another

worlds.  no  jegg  than  to  the  natural  life  they

ought  to  express.  The  experience  they  respect¬
ively  synthesise  may  therefore  be  no  single  experi¬
ence.  One  pictured  world  may  succeed  another  in
the  sphere  of  sensibility,  while  the  body  whose
sensibility  they  compose  moves  in  a  single  and
constant  physical  cosmos.  Each  little  mental
universe  may  be  intermittent,  or,  if  any  part
of  it  endures  while  a  new  group  of  ideas  comes
upon  the  stage,  there  may  arise  contradictions,  dis¬
cords,  and  a  sense  of  lurking  absurdity  which  will
tend  to  disrupt  thought  logically  at  the  same  time
that  the  processes  of  nutrition  and  the  oncoming
of  new  dreams  tend  to  supplant  it  mechanically.
Such  drifting  categories  have  no  mutual  authority.
They  replace  but  do  not  dominate  one  another,
and  the  general  conditions  of  life — by  conceiving
which  life  itself  might  be  surveyed — remain  en¬
tirely  unrepresented.

What  we  mean,  indeed,  by  the  natural  world
in  which  the  conditions  of  consciousness  are  found
and  in  reference  to  which  mind  and  its  purposes
can  attain  practical  efficacy,  is  simply  the  world
constructed  by  categories  found  to  yield  a  constant,
sufficient,  and  consistent  object.  Having  attained


REASON  IN  SUPERSTITION


21


this  conception,  we  justly  call  it  the  truth  and
measure  the  intellectual  value  of  all  other  construc¬
tions  by  their  affinity  to  that  rational  vision.

Such  a  rational  vision  has  not  yet  been  attained
By  mankind,  hut  it  would  be  absurd  to  say  that
because  we  have  not  fully  nor  even  proximately
attained  it,  we  have  not  gained  any  conception
whatever  of  a  reliable  and  intelligible  world.  The
modicum  of  rationality  achieved  in  the  sciences
gives  us  a  hint  of  a  perfect  rationality  which,  if
unattainable  in  practice,  is  not  inconceivable  in
idea.  So,  in  still  more  inchoate  moments  of  re¬
flection,  our  ancestors  nursed  even  more  isolated,
less  compatible,  less  adequate  conceptions  than
those  which  leave  our  philosophers  still  unsatisfied.
The  categories  they  employed  dominated  smaller
regions  of  experience  than  do  the  categories  of
history  and  natural  science;  they  had  far  less  ap¬
plicability  to  the  conduct  of  affairs  and  to  the
happy  direction  of  life  as  a  whole.  Yet  they  did
yield  vision  and  flashes  of  insight.  They  lighted
men  a  step  ahead  in  the  dark  places  of  their  ca¬
reers,  and  gave  them  at  certain  junctures  a  sense
of  creative  power  and  moral  freedom.  So  that  the
necessity  of  abandoning  one  category  in  order  to
use  a  better  need  not  induce  us  to  deny  that  the
worse  category  could  draw  the  outlines  of  a  sort  of
world  and  furnish  men  with  an  approach  to  wis¬
dom.  If  our  ancestors,  by  such  means,  could  not
dominate  life  as  a  whole,  neither  can  we,  in  spite
of  all  progress.  If  literal  truth  or  final  applicabil-


22


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ity  cannot  be  claimed  for  their  thought,  who  knows
how  many  and  how  profound  the  revolutions  might
be  which  our  own  thought  would  have  to  suffer  if
new  fields  of  perception  or  new  powers  of  synthesis
were  added  to  our  endowment?

We  sometimes  speak  as  if  superstition  or  belief
in  the  miraculous  was  disbelief  in  law  and  was

Superstition  a  inspired  by  a  desire  to  disorganise  ex-
rudimentary  perience  and  defeat  intelligence.  No
philosophy,  supposition  could  be  more  erroneous.

|  Every  superstition  is  a  little  science,  inspired  by

1  the  desire  to  understand,  to  foresee,  or  to  control

|  the  real  world.  No  doubt  its  hypothesis  is  chimer¬
ical,  arbitrary,  and  founded  on  a  confusion  of  effi¬
cient  causes  with  ideal  results.  But  the  same  is
true  of  many  a  renowned  philosophy.  To  appeal
to  what  we  call  the  supernatural  is  really  to  rest
in  the  imaginatively  obvious,  in  what  we  ought  to
call  the  natural,  if  natural  meant  easy  to  conceive
and  originally  plausible.  Moral  and  individual
forces  are  more  easily  intelligible  than  mechanical
universal  laws.  The  former  domesticate  events  in
the  mind  more  readily  and  more  completely  than
the  latter.  A  miracle  is  so  far  from  being  a  con¬
tradiction  to  the  causal  principle  which  the  mind
actually  applies  in  its  spontaneous  observations  that
it  is  primarily  a  better  illustration  of  that  principle
than  an  event  happening  in  the  ordinary  course  of
nature.  For  the  ground  of  the  miracle  is  imme¬
diately  intelligible;  we  see 'the  mercy  or  the  desire
to  vindicate  authority,  or  the  intention  of  some


REASON  IN  SUPERSTITION


23


other  sort  that  inspired  it.  A  mechanical  law,  on
the  contrary,  is  only  a  record  of  the  customary  but
reasonless  order  of  things.  A  merely  inexplicable
event,  manifesting  no  significant  purpose,  would
be  no  miracle.  What  surprises  us  in  the  miracle
is  that,  contrary  to  what  is  usually  the  case,  we  can

A  miracle  See  a  Iea^  an^  3US^  groun(l  f°r  it.  Thus,
though  unex-  if  the  water  of  Lourdes,  bottled  and

inteUij^Me rC  so^  by  chemists,  cured  all  diseases,
than  a  regu-  there  would  be  no  miracle,  but  only
lar  process.  a  new  scientific  discovery.  In  such  a

case,  we  should  no  more  know  why  we  were  cured
than  we  now  know  why  we  were  created.  But  if
each  believer  in  taking  the  water  thinks  the  effect
morally  conditioned,  if  he  interprets  the  result,
should  it  be  favourable,  as  an  answer  to  his  faith
and  prayers,  then  the  cure  becomes  miraculous  be¬
cause  it  becomes  intelligible  and  manifests  the  obe¬
dience  of  nature  to  the  exigencies  of  spirit.  Were
there  no  known  ground  for  such  a  scientific  anom¬
aly,  were  it  a  meaningless  irregularity  in  events,
we  should  not  call  it  a  miracle,  but  an  accident,
and  it  would  have  no  relation  to  religion.

What  establishes  superstitions  is  haste  to  under¬
stand,  rash  confidence  in  the  moral  intelligibility
of  things.  It  turns  out  in  the  end,  as  we  have
laboriously  discovered,  that  understanding  has  to
be  circuitous  and  cannot  fulfil  its  function  until
it  applies  mechanical  categories  to  existence.  A
thorough  philosophy  will  become  aware  that  moral
intelligibility  can  only  be  an  incidental  ornament


l  I


24


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


\


and  partial  harmony  in  the  world.  For  moral  sig¬
nificance  is  relative  to  particular  interests  and  to
natures  having  a  constitutional  and  definite  bias,
and  having  consequently  special  preferences  which
it  is  chimerical  to  expect  the  rest  of  the  world  to
be  determined  by.  The  attempt  to  subsume  the
natural  order  under  the  moral  is  like  attempts  to
establish  a  government  of  the  parent  by  the  child —
something  children  are  not  averse  to.  But  such
Superstitions  follies  are  the  follies  of  an  intelligent

haste  to  and  eager  creature,  restless  m  a  world
understand,  it  cannot  at  once  master  and  compre¬
hend.  They  are  the  errors  of  reason,  wanderings
in  the  by-paths  of  philosophy,  not  due  to  lack  of
intelligence  or  of  faith  in  law,  but  rather  to  a  pre¬
mature  vivacity  in  catching  at  laws,  a  vivacity  mis¬
led  by  inadequate  information.  The  hunger  for
facile  wisdom  is  the  root  of  all  false  philosophy.
The  mind’s  reactions  anticipate  in  such  cases  its
sufficient  nourishment;  it  has  not  yet  matured  un¬
der  the  rays  of  experience,  so  that  both  materials
and  guidance  are  lacking  for  its  precocious  organ¬
ising  force.  Superstitious  minds  are  penetrating
and  narrow,  deep  and  ignorant.  They  apply  the
higher  categories  before  the  lower — an  inversion
which  in  all  spheres  produces  the  worst  and  most
pathetic  disorganisation,  because  the  lower  func¬
tions  are  then  deranged  and  the  higher  contam¬
inated.  Poetry  anticipates  science,  on  which  it
ought  to  follow,  and  imagination  rushes  in  to  in¬
tercept  memory,  on  which  it  ought  to  feed.  Hence


REASON  IN  SUPERSTITION


25


superstition  and  the  magical  function  of  religion;
hence  the  deceptions  men  fall  into  by  cogitating
on  things  they  are  ignorant  of  and  arrogating  to
themselves  powers  which  they  have  never  learned
to  exercise.


It  is  now  generally  acknowledged  that  workers
of  miracles,  prophets,  soothsayers,  and  inspired  or

inattention  divinely  appointed  men  may,  like  meta-
suffers  them  physicians,  be  quite  sincere  and  fully  be-
to  spread.  Reve  they  possess  the  powers  which  they

pretend  to  display.  In  the  case  of  the  more  intelli¬
gent,  however,  this  sincerity  was  seldom  complete,
but  mixed  with  a  certain  pitying  or  scornful  ac¬
commodation  to  the  vulgar  mind.  Something  un¬
usual  might  actually  have  happened,  in  which  case
the  reference  of  it  to  the  will  that  welcomed  it
(without,  of  course,  being  able  to  command  it  un¬
conditionally)  might  well  seem  reasonable.  Or
something  normal  might  have  been  interpreted
fancifully,  but  to  the  greater  glory  of  God  and
edification  of  the  faithful;  in  which  case  the  inci¬
dental  error  might  be  allowed  to  pass  unchallenged
out  of  respect  for  the  essential  truths  thus  fortified
in  pious  minds.  The  power  of  habit  and  conven¬
tion,  by  which  the  most  crying  inconsistencies  and
hypocrisies  are  soon  put  to  sleep,  would  facilitate
these  accommodations  and  render  them  soon  in¬
stinctive;  while  the  world  at  large,  entirely  hyp¬
notised  by  the  ceremonious  event  and  its  imagina¬
tive  echoes,  could  never  come  to  close  quarters  with'


26


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


the  facts  at  all,  but  could  view  them  only  through
accepted  preconceptions.  Thus  elaborate  machin¬
ery  can  arise  and  long  endure  for  the  magical  ser¬
vice  of  man’s  interests.  How  deeply  rooted  such
conventions  are,  how  natural  it  is  that  they  should
have  dominated  even  civilised  society,  may  best  be
understood  if  we  consider  the  remnants  of  such
habits  in  our  midst — not  among  gypsies  or  profes¬
sional  wonder-workers  but  among  reflecting  men.

Some  men  of  action,  like  Caesar  and  Napoleon,
are  said  to  have  been  superstitious  about  their  own
Genius  may  destiny.  The  phenomenon,  if  true,
use  them  to  w0-q1^  be  intelligible.  They  were  mas-

convey  an  0  J

inarticulate  terful  men,  men  who  in  a  remarkable
wisdom.  degree  possessed  in  their  consciousness
the  sign  and  sanction  of  what  was  happening  in
the  world.  This  endowment,  which  made  them
dominate  their  contemporaries,  could  also  reveal
the  sources  and  conditions  of  their  own  will.  They
might  easily  come  to  feel  that  it  was  destiny — the
total  movement  of  things — th&t  inspired,  crowned,
and  ruined  them.  But  as  they  could  feel  this  only
instinctively,  not  by  a  systematic  view  of  all  the
forces  in  play,  they  would  attach  their  voluminous
sense  of  fatality  to  some  chance  external  indication
or  to  some  ephemeral  impulse  within  themselves;
so  that  what  was  essentially  a  profound  but  in¬
articulate  science  might  express  itself  in  the  guise
of  a  superstition.

In  like  manner  Socrates’  Demon  (if  not  actually
a  playful  fable  by  which  the  sage  expressed  the


REASON  IN  SUPERSTITION


27


negative  stress  of  conscience,  the  “  thou  shalt  not  ”
of  all  awe-inspiring  precepts)  might  be  a  symbol
for  latent  wisdom.  Socrates  turned  a  trick,  played
upon  him  by  his  senses,  into  a  message  from  heav¬
en.  He  taught  a  feeble  voice — senseless  like  all
ghostly  voices — to  sanction  precepts  dictated  by
the  truly  divine  element  within  himself.  It  was
characteristic  of  his  modest  piety  to  look  for  some
external  sign  to  support  reason;  his  philosophy  was
so  human,  and  man  is  obviously  so  small  a  part  of
the  world,  that  he  could  reasonably  subordinate
reason  at  certain  junctures.  Its  abdication,  how¬
ever,  was  half  playful,  for  he  could  always  find
excellent  grounds  for  what  the  demon  commanded.

In  much  the  same  manner  the  priests  at  Delphi,
when  they  were  prudent,  made  of  the  Pythia’s  rav¬
ings  oracles  not  without  elevation  of  tone  and  with
an  obvious  political  tendency.  Occasions  for  super¬
stition  which  baser  minds  would  have  turned  to
sheer  lunacy  or  silly  fears  or  necromantic  clap¬
trap  were  seized  by  these  nobler  natures  for  a  good
purpose.  A  benevolent  man,  not  inclined  to  scep¬
ticism,  can  always  argue  that  the  gods  must  have
commanded  what  he  himself  knows  to  be  right;
and  he  thinks  it  religion  on  his  part  to  interpret
the  oracle  accordingly,  or  even  to  prompt  it.  In
such  ways  the  most  arbitrary  superstitions  take  a
moral  colour  in  a  moral  mind;  something  which
can  come  about  all  the  more  easily  since  the  roots
of  reason  and  superstition  are  intertwined  in  the
mind,  and  society  has  always  expressed  and  culti¬
vated  them  together.


i


i


I


CHAPTEE  III


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER

That  fear  first  created  the  gods  is  perhaps  as
true  as  anything  so  brief  could  be  on  so  great
Fear  created  a  subject.  To  recognise  an  external
the  gods.  power  it  is  requisite  that  we  should
find  the  inner  stream  and  tendency  of  life  some¬
how  checked  or  disturbed;  if  all  went  well  and
acceptably,  we  should  attribute  divinity  only  to
ourselves.  The  external  is  therefore  evil  rather
than  good  to  early  apprehension — a  sentiment
which  still  survives  in  respect  to  matter;  for  it
takes  reflection  to  conceive  that  external  forces
form  a  necessary  environment,  creating  as  well  as
limiting  us,  and  offering  us  as  many  opportunities
as  rebuffs.  The  first  things  which  a  man  learns
to  distinguish  and  respect  are  things  with  a  will
of  their  own,  things  which  resist  his  casual  de¬
mands;  and  so  the  first  sentiment  with  which  he
confronts  reality  is  a  certain  animosity,  which
becomes  cruelty  toward  the  weak  and  fear  and
fawning  before  the  powerful.  Toward  men  and
animals  and  the  docile  parts  of  nature  these  senti¬
ments  soon  become  defined  accurately,  represent¬
ing  the  exact  degree  of  friendliness  or  use  which

28


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  29


we  discover  in  these  beings;  and  it  is  in  practical
terms,  expressing  this  relation  to  our  interests,  that
we  define  their  characters.  Much  remains  over,
however,  which  we  cannot  easily  define,  indomit¬
able,  ambiguous  regions  of  nature  and  conscious¬
ness  which  we  know  not  how  to  face;  yet  we  can¬
not  ignore  them,  since  it  is  thence  that  comes  what
is  most  momentous  in  our  fortunes — luck,  disease,
tempest,  death,  victory.  Thence  come  also  cer¬
tain  mysterious  visitations  to  the  inner  mind — ■
dreams,  apparitions,  warnings.  To  perceive  these
things  is  not  always  easy,  nor  is  it  easy  to  in¬
terpret  them,  while  the  great  changes  in  nature
which,  perhaps,  they  forebode  may  indeed  be
watched  but  cannot  be  met  intelligently,  much
less  prevented.  The  feeling  with  which  primitive
man  walks  the  earth  must  accordingly  be,  for  the
most  part,  apprehension;  and  what  he  meets,  be¬
yond  the  well-conned  ways  of  his  tribe  and  habi¬
tat,  can  be  nothing  but  formidable  spirits.

Impotence,  however,  has  a  more  positive  side.
If  the  lightning  and  thunder,  startling  us  in
Need  also  our  peace,  suddenly  reveal  unwelcome
contributed,  powers  before  which  we  must  tremble,

hunger,  on  the  contrary,  will  torment  us  with  float¬
ing  ideas,  intermittent  impulses  to  act,  suggesting
things  which  would  be  wholly  delightful  if  only
we  could  find  them,  but  which  it  becomes  intolera¬
ble  to  remain  without.  In  this  case  our  fear,  if  we
still  choose  to  call  it  so,  would  be  lest  our  cravings
should  remain  unsatisfied,  or  rather  fear  has  given


30


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


place  to  need;  we  recognise  our  dependence  on
external  powers  not  because  they  threaten  but
because  they  forsake  us.

Obvious  considerations  like  these  furnish  the
proof  of  God’s  existence,  not  as  philosophers  have
The  real  tried  to  express  it  after  the  fact  and  in
StS8  relation  to  mythical  conceptions  of  God
existence.  already  current,  but  as  mankind  orig¬
inally  perceived  it,  and  (where  religion  is  spon¬
taneous)  perceives  it  still.  There  is  such  an  order
in  experience  that  we  find  our  desires  doubly  de¬
pendent  on  something  which,  because  it  disregards
our  will,  we  call  an  external  power.  Sometimes  it
overwhelms  us  with  scourges  and  wonders,  so  that
we  must  marvel  at  it  and  fear;  sometimes  it  re¬
moves,  or  after  removing  restores,  a  support  nec¬
essary  to  our  existence  and  happiness,  so  that  we
must  cling  to  it,  hope  for  it,  and  love  it.  What¬
ever  is  serious  in  religion,  whatever  is  bound  up
with  morality  and  fate,  is  contained  in  those  plain
experiences  of  dependence  and  of  affinity  to  that
on  which  we  depend.  The  rest  is  poetry,  or  myth¬
ical  philosophy,  in  which  definitions  not  warranted
in  the  end  by  experience  are  given  to  that  power
which  experience  reveals.  To  reject  such  arbitrary
definitions  is  called  atheism  by  those  who  frame
them;  but  a  man  who  studies  for  himself  the  omi¬
nous  and  the  friendly  aspects  of  reality  and  gives
them  the  truest  and  most  adequate  expression  he
can  is  repeating  what  the  founders  of  religion  did
in  the  beginning.  He  is  their  companion  and  fol-


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  31


lower  more  truly  than  are  the  apologists  for  sec¬
ond-hand  conceptions  which  these  apologists  them¬
selves  have  never  compared  with  the  facts,  and
which  they  prize  chiefly  for  misrepresenting  actual
experience  and  giving  it  imaginary  extensions.

Religion  is  not  essentially  an  imposture,  though
it  might  seem  so  if  we  consider  it  as  its  defend¬
ers  present  it  to  us  rather  than  as  its  discover¬
ers  and  original  spokesmen  uttered  it  in  the
presence  of  nature  and  face  to  face  with  un¬
sophisticated  men.  Religion  is  an  interpreta¬
tion  of  experience,  honestly  made,  and  made  in
view  of  man’s  happiness  and  its  empirical  condi¬
tions.  That  this  interpretation  is  poetical  goes
without  saying,  since  natural  and  moral  science,
even  to-day,  are  inadequate  for  the  task.  But  the
mythical  form  into  which  men  cast  their  wisdom
was  not  chosen  by  them  because  they  preferred  to
be  imaginative;  it  was  not  embraced,  as  its  survi¬
vals  are  now  defended,  out  of  sentimental  attach¬
ment  to  grandiloquent  but  inaccurate  thoughts.
Mythical  forms  were  adopted  because  none  other
were  available,  nor  could  the  primitive  mind  dis¬
criminate  at  all  between  the  mythical  and  the  sci¬
entific.  Whether  it  is  the  myth  or  the  wisdom  it
expresses  that  we  call  religion  is  a  matter  of  words.
Certain  it  is  that  the  wisdom  is  alone  what  gives
the  myth  its  dignity,  and  what  originally  suggested
it.  God’s  majesty  lies  in  his  operation,  not  in  his
definition  or  his  image.

Fear  and  need,  then,  bring  us  into  the  presence


32


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


of  external  powers,  conceived  mythically,  whose

Practice  pre-  essential  character  is  to  be  now  terri-
cedes  theory  ble,  now  auspicious.  The  influence  is
m  religion.  reaj  anfi  fiirectly  felt;  the  gods’  func¬
tion  is  unmistakable  and  momentous,  while  their
name  and  form,  the  fabulous  beings  to  which  that
felt  influence  is  imputed,  vary  with  the  resources
of  the  worshipper’s  mind  and  his  poetic  habits.
The  work  of  expression,  the  creation  of  a  fabulous
environment  to  derive  experience  from,  is  not,
however,  the  first  or  most  pressing  operation  em¬
ploying  the  religious  mind.  Its  first  business  is
rather  the  work  of  propitiation;  before  we  stop  to
contemplate  the  deity  we  hasten  to  appease  it,
to  welcome  it,  or  to  get  out  of  its  way.  Cult  pre¬
cedes  fable  and  helps  to  frame  it,  because  the  feel¬
ing  of  need  or  fear  is  a  practical  feeling,  and  the
ideas  it  may  awaken  are  only  incidental  to  the
reactions  it  prompts.  Worship  is  therefore  ear¬
lier  and  nearer  to  the  roots  of  religion  than
dogma  is.

At  the  same  time,  since  those  reactions  which  are
directly  efficacious  go  to  form  arts  and  industrial
Pathetic,  habits,  and  eventually  put  before  us  the
tentative  world  of  science  and  common-sense,

religious  religious  practice  and  thought  are  con-
practices.  fined  to  the  sphere  in  which  direct  ma¬
nipulation  of  things  is  impossible.  Cultus  is  always
distinguishable  from  industry,  even  when  the  wor¬
shipper’s  motives  are  most  sordid  and  his  notions
most  material;  for  in  religious  operations  the


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  33


changes  worked  or  expected  can  never  he  traced
consecutively.  There  is  a  break,  often  a  complete
diversity-and  disproportion,  between  effort  and  re¬
sult.  ,  Religion  is  a  form  of  rational  living  more  em¬
pirical,  looser,  more  primitive  than  artJ  Man’s  con¬
sciousness^^  in  nature,  nearer

to  a  vegetative  union  with  the  general  life;  it  be¬
moans  division  and  celebrates  harmony  with  a
more  passive  and  lyrical  wonder.  The  element  of
action  proper  to  religion  is  extremely  arbitrary,
and  we  are  often  at  a  loss  to  see  in  what  way  the
acts  recommended  conduce  at  all  to  the  result
foretold.

As  theoretical  superstition  stops  at  any  cause,
so  practical  superstition  seizes  on  any  means.  |Re-
ligion  arises  under  high  pressure:  in  the  last  ex¬
tremity,  every  one  appeal^  to  GocL|  But  in  the
last  extremity  all  known  methods  of  action  have
proved  futile;  when  resources  are  exhausted  and
ideas  fail,  if  there  is  still  vitality  in  the  will  it
sends  a  supreme  appeal  to  the  supernatural.  This
appeal  is  necessarily  made  in  the  dark:  it  is  the
appeal  of  a  conscious  impotence,  of  an  avowed  per¬
plexity.  What  a  man  in  such  a  case  may  come
to  do  to  propitiate  the  deity,  or  to  produce  by
magic  a  result  he.  cannot  produce  by  art,  will  ob¬
viously  be  some  random  action.  He  will  be  driven
back  to  the  place  where  instinct  and  reason  begin.
His  movement  will  be  absolutely  experimental,  al¬
together  spontaneous.  He  will  have  no  reason  for
what  he  does,  save  that  he  must  do  something.


34


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


What  he  will  do,  however,  will  not  he  very  orig¬
inal;  a  die  must  fall  on  some  one  of  its  six  faces,
shake  it  as  much  as  you  please.  WTien  Don
Quixote,  seeking  to  do  good  absolutely  at  a  ven¬
ture,  let  the  reins  drop  on  Rocinante’s  neck,  the
poor  beast  very  naturally  followed  the  highway;
and  a  man  wondering  what  will  please  heaven  can
ultimately  light  on  nothing  but  what  might  please
himself.  It  is  pathetic  to  observe  how  lowly  the
motives  are  that  religion,  even  the  highest,  attrib¬
utes  to  the  deity,  and  from  what  a  hard-pressed
and  bitter  existence  they  have  been  drawn.  To
be  given  the  best  morsel,  to  be  remembered,  to  be
praised,  to  be  obeyed  blindly  and  punctiliously —
Meanness  these  have  been  thought  points  of  hon-
and  envy  in  our  wjth  the  gods,  for  which  they

the  gods,  &  ,  J

suggesting

sacrifice.  ments  on  the  most  exorbitant  scale.
Indeed,  the  widespread  practice  of  sacrifice,  like
all  mutilations  and  penances,  suggests  an  even
meaner  jealousy  and  malice  in  the  gods;  for  the
disciplinary  functions  which  these  things  may  have
were  not  aimed  at  in  the  beginning,  and  would
not  have  associated  them  particularly  with  relig¬
ion.  In  setting  aside  the  fat  for  the  gods*  pleas¬
ure,  in  sacrificing  the  first-born,  in  a  thousand
other  cruel  ceremonies,  the  idea  apparently  was
that  an  envious  onlooker,  lurking  unseen,  might
poison  the  whole,  or  revenge  himself  for  not  hav¬
ing  enjoyed  it,  unless  a  part — possibly  sufficient
for  his  hunger — were  surrendered  to  him  volun-


would  dispense  favours  and  punish-


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  35


tarily.  This  onlooker  was  a  veritable  demon,
treated  as  a  man  treats  a  robber  to  whom  he
yields  his  purse  that  his  life  may  be  spared.

To  call  the  gods  envious  has  a  certain  symbolic
truth,  in  that  earthly  fortunes  are  actually  pre¬
carious;  and  such  an  observation  might  inspire
detachment  from  material  things  and  a  kind  of
philosophy.  But  what  at  first  inspires  sacrifice
is  a  literal  envy  imputed  to  the  gods,  a  spirit  of
vengeance  and  petty  ill-will;  so  that  they  grudge
a  man  even  the  good  things  which  they  cannot
enjoy  themselves.  If  the  god  is  a  tyrant,  the
votary  will  be  a  tax-payer  surrendering  his  tithes
to  secure  immunity  from  further  levies  or  from
attack  by  other  potentates.  God  and  man  will
be  natural  enemies,  living  in  a  sort  of  politic
peace.

Sacrifices  are  far  from  having  merely  this  sinis¬
ter  meaning.  Once  inaugurated  they  suggest  fur-
Rituaiistic  ther  ideas,  and  from  the  beginning  they
arts*  had  happier  associations.  The  sacrifice

was  incidental  to  a  feast,  and  the  plenty  it  was
to  render  safe  existed  already.  What  was  a  bribe,
offered  in  the  spirit  of  barter,  to  see  if  the  envious
power  could  not  be  mollified  by  something  less  than
the  total  ruin  of  his  victims,  could  easily  become  a
genial  distribution  of  what  custom  assigned  to  each:
so  much  to  the  chief,  so  much  to  the  god,  so  much
to  the  husbandman.  There  is  a  certain  open¬
ness,  and  as  it  were  the  form  of  justice,  in  giving
each  what  is  conventionally  his  due,  however  little


36


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


he  may  really  deserve  it.  In  religions  observances
this  sentiment  plays  an  important  part,  and  men
find  satisfaction  in  fulfilling  in  a  seemly  manner
what  is  prescribed;  and  since  they  know  little  about
the  ground  or  meaning  of  what  they  do,  they  feel
content  and  safe  if  at  least  they  have  done  it
properly.  Sacrifices  are  often  performed  in  this
spirit;  and  when  a  beautiful  order  and  religious
calm  have  come  to  dignify  the  performance,  the
mind,  having  meantime  very  little  to  occupy  it,
may  embroider  on  the  given  theme.  It  is  then
that  fable,  and  new  religious  sentiments  suggested
by  fable,  appear  prominently  on  the  scene.

In  agricultural  rites,  for  instance,  sacrifice  will
naturally  be  offered  to  the  deity  presiding  over
Thank-  germination;  that  is  the  deity  that

offerings.  might,  perhaps,  withdraw  his  favour

with  disastrous  results.  He  commonly  proves,
however,  a  kindly  and  responsive  being,  and  in
offering  to  him  a  few  sheaves  of  corn,  some  barley-
cakes,  or  a  libation  from  the  vintage,  the  public
is  grateful  rather  than  calculating;  the  sacrifice
has  become  an  act  of  thanksgiving.  So  in  Chris¬
tian  devotion  (which  often  follows  primitive  im¬
pulses  and  repeats  the  dialectic  of  paganism  in  a
more  speculative  region)  the  redemption  did  not
remain  merely  expiatory.  It  was  not  merely  a  debt
to  be  paid  off  and  a  certain  quantum  of  suffer¬
ing  to  be  endured  which  had  induced  the  Son  of
God  to  become  man  and  to  take  up  his  cross.  It
was,  so  the  subtler  theologians  declared,  an  act  of


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  37


affection  as  much  as  of  pity;  and  the  spell  of  the
doctrine  over  the  human  heart  lay  in  feeling  that
God  wished  to  assimilate  himself  to  man,  rather
than  simply  from  above  to  declare  him  forgiven ;  so
that  the  incarnation  was  in  effect  a  rehabilitation
of  man,  a  redemption  in  itself,  and  a  forgiveness.
Men  like  to  think  that  God  has  sat  at  their  table
and  walked  among  them  in  disguise.  The  idea  is
flattering;  it  suggests  that  the  courtesy  may  some
day  be  returned,  and  for  those  who  can  look  so
deep  it  expresses  pointedly  the  philosophic  truth
of  the  matter.  For  are  not  the  gods,  too,  in  eternal
travail  after  their  ideal,  and  is  not  man  a  part  of
the  world,  and  his  art  a  portion  of  the  divine  wis¬
dom?  If  the  incarnation  was  a  virtual  redemp¬
tion,  the  truest  incarnation  was  the  laborious  crea¬
tion  itself.

If  sacrifice,  in  its  more  amiable  aspect,  can  be¬
come  thanksgiving  and  an  expression  of  profitable
_  _  dependence,  it  can  suffer  an  even  nobler

The  sacrifice  r  7

of  a  contrite  transformation  while  retaining  all  its
heart  austerity.  Renunciation  is  the  corner¬
stone  of  wisdom,  the  condition  of  all  genuine
achievement.  The  gods,  in  asking  for  a  sacrifice,
may  invite  us  to  give  up  not  a  part  of  our  food
or  of  our  liberty  but  the  foolish  and  inordinate
part  of  our  wills.  The  sacrifice  may  be  dictated
to  us  not  by  a  jealous  enemy  needing  to  be  paci¬
fied  but  by  a  far-seeing  friend,  wishing  we  may
not  be  deceived.  If  what  we  are  commanded  to
surrender  is  only  what  is  doing  us  harm,  the  god


38


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


demanding  the  sacrifice  is  our  own  ideal.  He  has
no  interests  in  the  case  other  than  our  own;  he
is  no  part  of  the  environment;  he  is  the  goal  that
determines  for  us  how  we  should  proceed  in  order
to  realise  as  far  as  possible  our  inmost  aspirations.
When  religion  reaches  this  phase  it  has  become
thoroughly  moral.  It  has  ceased  to  represent  or
misrepresent  material  conditions,  and  has  learned
to  embody  spiritual  goods.

Sacrifice  is  a  rite,  and  rites  can  seldom  be  made
to  embody  ideas  exclusively  moral.  Something
dramatic  or  mystical  will  cling  to  the  performance,
and,  even  when  the  effect  of  it  is  to  purify,  it  will
bring  about  an  emotional  catharsis  rather  than  a
moral  improvement.  The  mass  is  a  ritual  sacrifice,
and  the  communion  is  a  part  of  it,  having  the
closest  resemblance  to  what  sacrifices  have  always
been.  Among  the  devout  these  ceremonies,  and
the  lyric  emotions  they  awaken,  have  a  quite  visible
influence;  but  the  spell  is  mystic,  the  god  soon
recedes,  and  it  would  be  purely  fanciful  to  main¬
tain  that  any  permanent  moral  effect  comes  from
such  an  exercise.  The  Church  has  felt  as  much
and  introduced  the  confession,  where  a  man  may
really  be  asked  to  consider  what  sacrifices  he
should  make  for  his  part,  and  in  what  practical
direction  he  should  imagine  himself  to  be  drawn
by  the  vague  Dionysiac  influences  to  which  the
ritual  subjects  him.

As  sacrifice  expresses  fear,  prayer  expresses
need.  Common-sense  thinks  of  language  as  some-


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  39


thing  meant  to  be  understood  by  another  and  to
produce  changes  in  his  disposition  and  behaviour,

Prayer  is  not  but  language  has  pre-rational  uses,  of
A  utilitarian  which  poetry  and  prayer  are  perhaps
1  messence*  the  chief.  A  man  overcome  by  pas¬
sion  assumes  dramatic  attitudes  surely  not  in¬
tended  to  be  watched  and  interpreted;  like  tears,
gestures  may  touch  an  observer’s  heart,  but  they
do  not  come  for  that  purpose.  So  the  fund  of
words  and  phrases  latent  in  the  mind  flow  out  un¬
der  stress  of  emotion;  they  flow  because  they  be¬
long  to  the  situation,  because  they  fill  out  and
complete  a  perception  absorbing  the  mind;  they
do  not  flow  primarily  to  be  listened  to.  The  in¬
stinct  to  pray  is  one  of  the  chief  avenues  to  the


deity,  ancfthe  form- prayer  takes  helps  immensely
to  define  the  power  it  is  addressed  to;  indeed,  it
is  in  the  act  of  praying  that  men  formulate  to
themselves  what  God  must  be,  and  tell  him  at  great
length  what  they  believe  and  what  they  expect
of  him.  The  initial  forms  of  prayer  are  not  so
absurd  as  the  somewhat  rationalised  forms  of  it.
Unlike  sacrifice,  prayer  seems  to  be  justified  by
ihTessence  and  to  be  degraded  by  the  transforma¬
tions  it  suffers  in  reflection,  when  men  try  to  find
a  place  for  it  in  their  cosmic  economy;  for  its
essence  is  poetical,  expressive,  contemplative,  and
it  grows  more  and  more  nonsensical  the  more  peo¬
ple  insist  on  making  it  a  prosaic,  commercial  ex¬
change  of  views  between  two  interlocutors.

Prayer  is  a  soliloquy;  but  being  a  soliloquy  ex-


40


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


pressing  need,  and  being  furthermore,  like  sacri¬
fice,  a  desperate  expedient  which  men  fly  to  in
their  impotence,  it  looks  for  an  effect:  to  cry  aloud,
to  make  vows,  to  contrast  eloquently  the  given
with  the  ideal  situation,  is  certainly  as  likely  a
way  of  bringing  about  a  change  for  the  better  as
it  would  be  to  chastise  one’s  self  severely,  or  to  de¬
stroy  what  one  loves  best,  or  to  perform  acts  alto¬
gether  trivial  and  arbitrary.  Prayer  also  is  magic,
and  as  such  it  is  expected  to  do  work.  The  an¬
swer  looked  for,  or  one  which  may  be  accepted
instead,  very  often  ensues;  and  it  is  then  that
mythology  begins  to  enter  in  and  seeks  to  explain
by  what  machinery  of  divine  passions  and  pur¬
poses  that  answering  effect  was  produced.


Magic  is  in  a  certain  sense  the  mother  of  art,  art
being  the  magic  that  succeeds  and  can  establish  it¬


self.  For  this  very  reason  mere  magic
is  never  appealed  to  when  art  has  been
found,  and  no  unsophisticated  man


Its  supposed

efficacy

magical.


prays  to  have  that  done  for  him  which  he  knows
how  to  do  for  himself.  When  his  art  fails,  if  his
necessity  still  presses,  he  appeals  to  magic,  and  he
prays  when  he  no  longer  can  control  the  event,
provided  this  event  is  momentous  to  him.  Prayer
is  not  a  substitute  for  work;  it  is  a  desperate  effort
to  work  further  and  to  be  efficient  beyond  the
range  of  one’s  powers.  It  is  not  the  lazy  who  are
most  inclined  to  prayer;  those  pray  most  who  care
most,  and  who,  having  worked  hard,  find  it  intol¬
erable  to  be  defeated.


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  41


No  chapter  in  theology  is  more  unhappy  than
that  in  which  a  material  efficacy  is  assigned  to
Theological  prayer.  In  the  first  place  the  facts  con-
puzzles.  tradict  the  notion  that  curses  can  bring
evil  or  blessings  can  cure;  and  it  is  not  observed
that  the  most  orthodox  and  hard-praying  army
wins  the  most  battles.  The  facts,  however,  are
often  against  theology,  which  has  to  rely  on  dia¬
lectical  refinements  to  explain  them  away;  but  un¬
fortunately  in  this  instance  dialectic  is  no  less
hostile  than  experience.  God  must  know  our  ne¬
cessities  before  we  ask  and,  if  he  is  good,  must
already  have  decided  what  he  would  do  for  us.
Prayer,  like  every  other  act,  becomes  in  a  provi¬
dential  world  altogether  perfunctory  and  histri¬
onic;  we  are  compelled  to  go  through  it,  it  is  set
down  for  us  in  the  play,  but  it  lacks  altogether
that  moral  value  which  we  assign  to  it.  When
our  prayers  fail,  it  must  be  better  than  if  they
had  succeeded,  so  that  prayer,  with  all  free  prefer¬
ence  whatsoever,  becomes  an  absurdity.  The  trou¬
ble  is  much  deeper  than  that  which  so  many  people
find  in  determinism.  A  physical  predetermination,
in  making  all  things  necessary,  leaves  all  values
entire,  and  my  preferences,  though  they  cannot
be  efficacious  unless  they  express  preformed  natural
forces,  are  not  invalidated  ideally.  It  is  still  true
that  the  world  would  have  been  better  to  all  eter¬
nity  if  my  will  also  could  have  been  fulfilled.  A
providential  optimism,  on  the  contrary,  not  merely
predetermines  events  but  discounts  values;  and  it


42


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


reduces  every  mortal  aspiration,  every  pang  of  con¬
science,  every  wish  that  things  should  be  better
than  they  are,  to  a  blind  impertinence,  nay,  to  a
sacrilege.  Thus,  you  may  not  pray  that  God’s
kingdom  may  come,  but  only — what  is  not  a  prayer
but  a  dogma — that  it  has  come  already.  The
mythology  that  pretends  to  justify  prayer  by  giv¬
ing  it  a  material  efficacy  misunderstands  prayer
completely  and  makes  it  ridiculous,  for  it  turns
away  from  the  heart,  which  prayer  expresses  pa¬
thetically,  to  a  fabulous  cosmos  where  aspirations
have  been  turned  into  things  and  have  thereby
stifled  their  own  voices.

The  situation  would  not  be  improved  if  we  sur¬
rendered  that  mystical  optimism,  and  maintained
Areal  that  prayer  might  really  attract  super-

would  be  human  torces  to  our  aid  by  giving  them
mechanical,  a  signal  without  which  they  would  not
have  been  able  to  reach  us.  If  experience  lent
itself  to  such  a  theory  there  would  be  nothing  in
it  more  impossible  than  in  ordinary  telepathy;
prayer  would  then  be  an  art  like  conversation,  and
the  exact  personages  and  interests  would  be  dis¬
coverable  to  which  we  might  appeal.  A  celestial
diplomacy  might  then  be  established  not  very  un¬
like  primitive  religions.  Religion  would  have  re¬
verted  to  industry  and  science,  to  which  the  grosser
spirits  that  take  refuge  under  it  have  always
wished  to  assimilate  it.  But  is  it  really  the  office
of  religion  to  work  upon  external  powers  and  ex¬
tract  from  them  certain  calculable  effects?  Is  it


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  43


an  art,  like  empiric  medicine,  and  merely  a  dubi¬
ous  and  mystic  industry?  If  so,  it  exists  only  by
imperfection;  were  it  better  developed  it  would
coincide  with  those  material  and  social  arts  with
which  it  is  identical  in  essence.  Successful  relig¬
ion,  like  successful  magic,  would  have  passed  into
the  art  of  exploiting  the  world.

What  successful  religion  really  should  pass  into
is  contemplation,  ideality,  poetry,  in  the  sense  in
True  uses  which  poetry  includes  all  imaginative
of  prayer.  moral  life.  That  this  is  what  religion

looks  to  is  very  clear  in  prayer  and  in  the  efficacy
which  prayer  consistently  can  have.  Injrational  \
prayer  the  soul  may  be  said  to  accomplish  three  \
things  important  to  its  welfare:  it  withdraws  with-  |
in  itself  and  defines  its  good,  it  Accommodates  itself
to  destiny,  and  it  grows  like  the  ideal  which  it
conceives.

If  prayer  springs  from  need  it  will  naturally
dwell  on  what  would  satisfy  that  necessity;  some-
it  clarifies  times,  indeed,  it  does  nothing  else  but
the  ideal.  articulate  and  eulogise  what  is  most

wanted  and  prized.  This  object  will  often  be  par¬
ticular,  and  so  it  should  be,  since  Socrates’  prayer
“  for  the  best  ”  would  be  perfunctory  and  vapid
indeed  in  a  man  whose  life  had  not  been  spent,
like  Socrates’,  in  defining  what  the  best  was.  Yet
any  particular  good  lies  in  a  field  of  relations;  it
has  associates  and  implications,  so  that  the  mind
dwelling  on  it  and  invoking  its  presence  will  natu¬
rally  be  enticed  also  into  its  background,  and  will


44


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


wander  there,  perhaps  to  come  upon  greater  goods,
or  upon  evils  which  the  coveted  good  would  make
inevitable.  An  earnest  consideration,  therefore,  of
anything  desired  is  apt  to  enlarge  and  generalise
aspiration  till  it  embraces  an  ideal  life;  for  from
almost  any  starting-point  the  limits  and  contours
of  mortal  happiness  are  soon  descried.  Prayer,
inspired  by  a  pressing  need,  already  relieves  its
importunity  by  merging  it  in  the  general  need  of
the  spirit  and  of  mankind.  It  therefore  calms  the
passions  in  expressing  them,  like  all  idealisation,
and  tends  to  make  the  will  conformable  with  rea¬
son  and  justice.

A  comprehensive  ideal,  however,  is  harder  to
realise  than  a  particular  one:  the  rain  wished  for

It  reconciles  may  the  death  feare(l  may  he

to  the  averted,  but  the  kingdom  of  heaven

inevitable.  (Joes  no{.  come>  jg  jn  ^he  very  eg.

sence  of  prayer  to  regard  a  denial  as  possible.
There  would  be  no  sense  in  defining  and  begging
for  the  better  thing  if  that  better  thing  had  at
any  rate  to  be.  The  possibility  of  defeat  is  one
of  the  circumstances  with  which  meditation  must
square  the  ideal;  seeing  that  my  prayer  may  not
be  granted,  what  in  that  case  should  I  pray  for
next?  Now  the  order  of  nature  is  in  many  re¬
spects  well  known,  and  it  is  clear  that  all  realisable
ideals  must  not  transgress  certain  bounds.  The
practical  ideal,  that  which  under  the  circumstances
it  is  best  to  aim  at  and  pray  for,  will  not  rebel
against  destiny.  Conformity  is  an  element  in  all


[MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  45


religion  and  submission  in  all  prayer;  not  because
what  must  be  is  best,  but  because  the  best  that
may  be  pursued  rationally  lies  within  the  possible,
and  can  be  hatched  only  in  the  general  womb  of
being.  The  prayer,  “  Thy  will  be  done,”  if  it  is
to  remain  a  prayer,  must  not  be  degraded  from
its  original  meaning,  which  was  that  an  unfulfilled
ideal  should  be  fulfilled;  it  expressed  aspiration
after  the  best,  not  willingness  to  be  satisfied  with
anything.  Yet  the  inevitable  must  be  accepted,
and  it  is  easier  to  change  the  human  will  than
the  laws  of  nature.  To  wean  the  mind  from  ex¬
travagant  desires  and  teach  it  to  find  excellence  in
what  life  affords,  when  life  is  made  as  worthy  as
possible,  is  a  part  of  wisdom  and  religion.  Prayer,
by  confronting  the  ideal  with  experience  and  fate,
tends  to  render  that  ideal  humble,  practical,  and
efficacious.

A  sense  for  human  limitations,  however,  has  its
foil  in  the  ideal  of  deity,  which  is  nothing  but
it  fosters  the  ideal  of  man  freed  from  those  lim-
spirituai  life  Rations  which  a  humble  and  wise  man

by  conceiving  ^

it  in  its  accepts  f or  himself,  but  which  a  spir-  »
perfection.  itual  man  never  ceases  to  feel  as  limita¬
tions.  Man,  for  instance,  is  mortal,  and  his  whole
animal  and  social  economy  is  built  on  that  fact,
so  that  his  practical  ideal  must  start  on  that  basis,
and  make  the  best  of  it;  but  immortality  is  essen¬
tially  better,  and  the  eternal  is  in  many  ways  con¬
stantly  present  to  a  noble  mind;  the  gods  there¬
fore  are  immortal,  and  to  speak  their  language  in


46


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


prayer  is  to  learn  to  see  all  things  as  they  do  and
as  reason  must,  under  the  form  of  eternity.  The
gods  are  furthermore  no  respecters  of  persons;  they
are  just,  for  it  is  man’s  ideal  to  be  so.  Prayer,
since  it  addresses  deity,  will  in  the  end  blush  to
be  selfish  and  partial;  the  majesty  of  the  divine
mind  envisaged  and  consulted  will  tend  to  pass
into  the  human  mind.

This  use  of  prayer  has  not  been  conspicuous  in
Christian  times,  because,  instead  of  assimilating
the  temporal  to  the  eternal,  men  have  assimilated
the  eternal  to  the  temporal,  being  perturbed  fa¬
natics  in  religion  rather  than  poets  and  idealists.
Pagan  devotion,  on  the  other  hand,  was  full  of
this  calmer  spirit.  The  gods,  being  frankly
natural,  could  be  truly  ideal.  They  embodied  what
was  fairest  in  life  and  loved  men  who  resembled
them,  so  that  it  was  delightful  and  ennobling  to
see  their  images  everywhere,  and  to  keep  their
names  and  story  perpetually  in  mind.  They  did
not  by  their  influence  alienate  man  from  his  appro¬
priate  happiness,  but  they  perfected  it  by  their
presence.  Peopling  all  places,  changing  their  forms
as  all  living  things  must  according  to  place  and
circumstance,  they  showed  how  all  kinds  of  being,
if  perfect  in  their  kind,  might  be  perfectly  good.
They  asked  for  a  reverence  consistent  with  reason,
and  exercised  prerogatives  that  left  man  free.
Their  worship  was  a  perpetual  lesson  in  humanity,
moderation,  and  beauty.  Something  pre-rational
and  monstrous  often  peeped  out  behind  their


MAGIC,  SACRIFICE,  AND  PRAYER  47


serenity,  as  it  does  beneath  the  human  soul,  and
there  was  certainly  no  lack  of  wildness  and  mystic
horror  in  their  apparitions.  The  ideal  must  needs
betray  those  elemental  forces  on  which,  after  all,
it  rests;  but  reason  exists  to  exorcise  their  madness
and  win  them  over  to  a  steady  expression  of  them-
■  selves  and  of  the  good.

Prayer,  in  fine,  though  it  accomplishes  nothing
material,  constitutes  something  spiritual.  It  will
not  bring  rain,  but  until  rain  comes  it
and  contem-  may  cultivate  hope  and  resignation  and

plation  are  , ,  ,  .  »

their  own  may  prepare  the  heart  for  any  issue,

reward.  opening  up  a  vista  in  which  human

prosperity  will  appear  in  its  conditioned  existence
and  conditional  value.  A  candle  wasting  itself
before  an  image  will  prevent  no  misfortune,  but
it  may  bear  witness  to  some  silent  hope  or  relieve
some  sorrow  by  expressing  it;  it  may  soften  a  little
the  bitter  sense  of  impotence  which  would  con¬
sume  a  mind  aware  of  physical  dependence  but  not
of  spiritual  dominion.  Worship,  supplication,  re¬
liance  on  the  gods,  express  both  these  things  in
an  appropriate  parable.  Physical  impotence  is  ex¬
pressed  by  man’s  appeal  for  help;  moral  dominion
by  belief  in  God’s  omnipotence.  This  belief  may
afterwards  seem  to  be  contradicted  by  events.  It
would  be  so  in  truth  if  God’s  omnipotence  stood
for  a  material  magical  control  of  events  by  the
values  they  were  to  generate.  But  the  believer
knows  in  his  heart,  in  spite  of  the  confused  ex¬
planations  he  may  give  of  his  feelings,  that  a  ma-


48


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


terial  efficacy  is  not  the  test  of  his  faith.  His  faith
will  survive  any  outward  disappointment.  In  fact,
it  will  grow  by  that  discipline  and  not  become  truly
religious  until  it  ceases  to  he  a  foolish  expectation
of  improbable  things  and  rises  on  stepping-stones
of  its  material  disappointments  into  a  spiritual
peace.  What  would  sacrifice  he  hut  a  risky  invest¬
ment  if  it  did  not  redeem  us  from  the  love  of
those  things  which  it  asks  us  to  surrender?  What
would  be  the  miserable  fruit  of  an  appeal  to  God
which,  after  bringing  us  face  to  face  with  him,  left
us  still  immersed  in  what  we  could  have  enjoyed
without  him?|§The  real  use  and  excuse  for  magic
is  this,  that  by  enticing  us,  in  the  service  of  natural
lusts,  into  a  region  above  natural  instrumental-
ities,  it  accustoms  us  to  that  rarer  atmosphere,  so
that  we  may  learn  to  breathe  it  for  its  own  sake.
By  the  time  we  discover  the  mechanical  futility
of  religion  we  may  have  begun  to  blush  at  the
thought  of  using  religion  mechanically;  for  what
should  be  the  end  of  life  if  friendship  with  the
gods  is  a  means  only?  WTien  thaumaturgy  is
discredited,  the  childish  desire  to  work  miracles
may  itself  have  passed  away.  Before  we  weary
of  the  attempt  to  hide  and  piece  out  our  mortality,
our  concomitant  immortality  may  have  dawned
upon  us.  While  we  are  waiting  for  the  command
to  take  up  our  bed  and  walk  we  may  hear  a  voice
saying:  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.


CHAPTER  IY


MYTHOLOGY

Primitive  thought  has  the  form  of  poetry  and  ^
the  function  of  prose.  Being  thought,  it  distin-
status  of  guishes  objects  from  the  experience  that
fable  in  the  reveals  them  and  it  aspires  to  know

n  *  things  as  they  are;  but  being  poetical,

it  attributes  to  those  objects  all  the  qualities  which
the  experience  of  them  contains,  and  builds  them
out  imaginatively  in  all  directions,  without  dis¬
tinguishing  what  is  constant  and  efficacious  in
them.  This  primitive  habit  of  thought  survives
in  mythology,  which  is  an  observation  of  things
encumbered  with  all  they  can  suggest  to  a  dramatic
fancy.  It  is  neither  conscious  poetry  nor  valid
science,  but  the  common  root  and  raw  material
of  both.  Free  poetry  is  a  thing  which  early  man
is  too  poor  to  indulge  in;  his  wide-open  eyes  are
too  intently  watching  this  ominous  and  treacher¬
ous  world.  For  pure  science  he  has  not  enough
experience,  no  adequate  power  to  analyse,  remem¬
ber,  and  abstract;  his  soul  is  too  hurried  and  con¬
fused,  too  thick  with  phantoms,  to  follow  abstemi¬
ously  the  practical  threads  through  the  labyrinth.
His  view  of  things  is  immensely  overloaded ;  what

49


50


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


he  gives  out  for  description  is  more  than  half  solilo¬
quy;  hut  his  expression  of  experience  is  for  that
very  reason  adequate  and  quite  sincere.  Belief,
which  we  have  come  to  associate  with  religion,  be¬
longs  really  to  science;  myths  are  not  believed  in,
they  are  conceived  and  understood.  To  demand
^belief  for  an  idea  is  already  to  contrast  interpreta¬
tion  with  knowledge;  it  is  to  assert  that  that  idea
has  scientific  truth.  Mythology  cannot  flourish  in
that  dialectical  air;  it  belongs  to  a  deeper  and
more  ingenuous  level  of  thought,  when  men  pored
on  the  world  with  intense  indiscriminate  interest,
accepting  and  recording  the  mind’s  vegetation  no
less  than  that  observable  in  things,  and  mixing
the  two  developments  together  in  one  wayward
drama.

A  good  mythology  cannot  be  produced  without
much  culture  and  intelligence.  Stupidity  is  not
it  requires  poetical.  Nor  is  mythology  essential-
genius.  ly  a  half-way  house  between  animal

vagueness  in  the  soul  and  scientific  knowledge.
It  is  conceivable  that  some  race,  not  so  dream-
ful  as  ours,  should  never  have  been  tempted  to
use  psychic  and  passionate  categories  in  read¬
ing  nature,  but  from  the  first  should  have  kept
its  observations  sensuous  and  pure,  elaborating
them  only  on  their  own  plane,  mathematically
and  dialectically.  Such  a  race,  however,  could
hardly  have  had  lyric  or  dramatic  genius,  and  even
in  natural  science,  which  requires  imagination,
they  might  never  have  accomplished  anything.


MYTHOLOGY


51


The  Hebrews,  denying  themselves  a  rich  myth¬
ology,  remained  without  science  and  plastic  art;
the  Chinese,  who  seem  to  have  attained  legality
and  domestic  arts  and  a  tutored  sentiment  without
passing  through  such  imaginative  tempests  as  have
harassed  us,  remain  at  the  same  time  without  a
serious  science  or  philosophy.  The  Greeks,  on  the
contrary,  precisely  the  people  with  the  richest  and
most  irresponsible  myths,  first  conceived  the  cos¬
mos  scientifically,  and  first  wrote  rational  history
and  philosophy.  So  true  it  is  that  vitality  in  any
mental  function  is  favourable  to  vitality  in  the
whole  mind.  Illusions  incident  to  mythology  are
not  dangerous  in  the  end,  because  illusion  finds  in
experience  a  natural  though  painful  cure.  Ex¬
travagant  error  is  unstable,  unless  it  be  harmless
and  confined  to  a  limbo  remote  from  all  applica¬
tions;  if  it  touches  experience  it  is  stimulating  and
brief,  while  the  equipoise  of  dulness  may  easily
render  dulness  eternal.  A  developed  mythology
shows  that  man  has  taken  a  deep  and  active  in¬
terest  both  in  the  world  and  in  himself,  and  has
tried  to  link  the  two,  and  interpret  the  one  by  the
other.  Myth  is  therefore  a  natural  prologue  to
philosophy,  since  the  love  of  ideas  is  the  root  of
both.  Both  are  made  up  of  things  admirable  to
consider.

Nor  is  the  illusion  involved  in  fabulous  think-
it  only  half  in g  always  so  complete  and  opaque  as
deceives.  convention  would  represent  it.  In  tak¬
ing  fable  for  fact,  good  sense  and  practice  sel-


52


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


dom  keep  pace  with  dogma.  There  is  always  a  race
of  pedants  whose  function  it  is  to  materialise  every¬
thing  ideal,  but  the  great  world,  half  shrewdly,
half  doggedly,  manages  to  escape  their  contagion.
Language  may  be  entirely  permeated  with  myth,
since  the  affinities  of  language  have  much  to  do
with  men  gliding  into  such  thoughts;  yet  the  dif¬
ference  between  language  itself  and  what  it  ex¬
presses  is  not  so  easily  obliterated.  In  spite  of
^yerbal  traditions,  people  seldom  take  a  myth  in
the  same  sense  in  which  they  would  take  an  em¬
pirical  truth.  All  the  doctrines  that  have  flour¬
ished  in  the  world  about  immortality  have  hardly
affected  men’s  natural  sentiment  in  the  face  of
death,  a  sentiment  which  those  doctrines,  if  taken
seriously,  ought  wholly  to  reverse.  Men  almost
universally  have  acknowledged  a  Providence,  but
that  fact  has  had  no  force  to  destroy  natural  aver¬
sions  and  fears  in  the  presence  of  events;  and  yet,
if  Providence  had  ever  been  really  trusted,  those
preferences  would  all  have  lapsed,  being  seen  to
be  blind,  rebellious,  and  blasphemous.  Prayer,
v&mong  sane  people,  has  never  superseded  practical
efforts  to  secure  the  desired  end;  a  proof  that  the
sphere  of  expression  was  never  really  confused  with
that  of  reality.  Indeed,  such  a  confusion,  if  it  had
passed  from  theory  to  practice,  would  have  changed
mythology  into  madness.  With  rare  exceptions
this  declension  has  not  occurred  and  myths  have
been  taken  with  a  grain  of  salt  which  not  only
made  them  digestible,  but  heightened  their  savour.


MYTHOLOGY


53


It  is  always  by  its  applicability  to  things
known,  not  by  its  revelation  of  things  unknown
and  irrelevant,  that  a  myth  at  its  birth  appeals
to  mankind.  When  it  has  lost  its  symbolic  value
and  sunk  to  the  level  of  merely  false  information,
only  an  inert  and  stupid  tradition  can  keep  it
above  water.  Parables  justify  themselves  but  dog-  i
mas  call  for  an  apologist.  The  genial  offspring  of  I
prophets  and  poets  then  has  to  be  kept  alive  arti¬
ficially  by  professional  doctors.  A  thing  bom  of
fancy,  moulded  to  express  universal  experience  and
its  veritable  issues,  has  to  be  hedged  about  by  mis¬
representation,  sophistry,  and  party  spirit.  The
very  apologies  and  unintelligent  proofs  offered  in
its  defence  in  a  way  confess  its  unreality,  since
they  all  strain  to  paint  in  more  plausible  colours
what  is  felt  to  be  in  itself  extravagant  and  in¬
credible.

Yet  if  the  myth  was  originally  accepted  it  could
not  be  for  this  falsity  plainly  written  on  its  face;

Its  it  was  accepted  because  it  was  under-  /

interpretative  stood,  because  it  was  seen  to  express  v
essence.  reality  in  an  eloquent  metaphor.  Its

function  was  to  show  up  some  phase  of  experi-  v
ence  in  its  totality  and  moral  issue,  as  in  a
map  we  reduce  everything  geographically  in  order
to  overlook  it  better  in  its  true  relations.  Had
those  symbols  for  a  moment  descended  to  the  plane
of  reality  they  would  have  lost  their  meaning  and
dignity;  they  would  tell  us  merely  that  they  them¬
selves  existed  bodily,  which  would  be  false,  while


54


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


about  the  real  configuration  of  life  they  would  no
longer  tell  us  anything.  Such  an  error,  if  carried
through  to  the  end,  would  nullify  all  experience
and  arrest  all  life.  Men  would  be  reacting  on
expressions  and  meeting  with  nothing  to  express.
They  would  all  be  like  word-eating  philosophers
or  children  learning  the  catechism.

4  {The  true  function  of  mythical  ideas  is  to  pre¬
sent  and  interpret  events  in  terms  relative  to  spirit.
Things  have  uses  in  respect  to  the  will  which  are
direct  and  obvious,  while  the  inner  machinery  of
these  same  things  is  intricate  and  obscure.  We
therefore  conceive  things  roughly  and  superficially
by  their  eventual  practical  functions  and  assign  to
them,  in  our  game,  some  counterpart  of  the  inter¬
est  they  affect  in  us.  This  counterpart,  to  our
thinking,  constitutes  their  inward  character  and
soul.  So  conceived,  soul  and  character  are  purely
mythical,  being  arrived  at  by  dramatising  events
according  to  our  own  fancy  and  interest.  Such
ideas  may  be  adequate  in  their  way  if  they  cover
all  the  uses  we  may  eventually  find  in  the  objects
they  transcribe  for  us  dramatically.  But  the  most
adequate  mythology  is  mythology  still;  it  does  not,
like  science,  set  things  before  us  in  the  very  terms
they  will  wear  when  they  are  gradually  revealed
to  experience.  Myth  is  expression,  it  is  not
prophecy.  For  this  reason  myth  is  something  on
which  the  mind  rests;  it  is  an  ideal  interpretation
in  which  the  phenomena  are  digested  and  trans¬
muted  into  human  energy,  into  imaginative  tissue.


MYTHOLOGY


55


Scientific  formulas,  on  the  contrary,  cry  aloud
for  retranslation  into  perceptual  terms;  they  are
Contrast  like  tight-ropes,  on  which  a  man  may
with  science.  wajk  but  on  which  he  cannot  stand

still.  These  unstable  symbols  lead,  however,  to
real  facts  and  define  their  experimental  relations;
while  the  mind  reposing  contentedly  in  a  myth
needs  to  have  all  observation  and  experience  be¬
hind  it,  for  it  will  not  be  driven  to  gather  more.
The  perfect  and  stable  myth  would  rest  on  a  com¬
plete  survey  and  _steady„ f hauling  of  all  interests
really  affectingthe  one  from  whose  point  of  view
the  myth  was  framed*  Then  each  physical  or  po¬
litical  unit  would  he  endowed  with  a  character
really  corresponding  to  all  its  influence  on  the
thinker.  This  symbol  would  render  the  diffuse
natural  existences  which  it  represented  in  an  elo¬
quent  figure;  and  since  this  figure  would  not  mis¬
lead  practically  it  might  he  called  true.  But  truth,
in  a  myth,  means  a  sterling  quality  and  standard
excellence,  not  a  literal  or  logical  truth.  It  will
not,  save  by  a  singular  accident,  represent  their
proper  internal  being,  as  a  forthright  unselfish  in¬
tellect  would  wish  to  know  it.  It  will  translate  into
the  language  of  a  private  passion  the  smiles  and
frowns  which  that  passion  meets  with  in  the  world.

\There  are  accordingly  two  factors  in  mythology^

importance  a  moral  consciousness  and  a  correspond-
of  the  moral  ing  poetic  conception  of  things.  Both
factor.  factors  are  variable,  and  variations  in
the  first,  if  more  hidden,  are  no  less  important


56


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


than  variations  in  the  second.  Had  fable  started
with  a  clear  perception  of  human  values,  it  would
have  gained  immensely  in  significance,  because  its
pictures,  however  wrong  the  external  notions  they
built  upon,  would  have  shown  what,  in  the  world
so  conceived,  would  have  been  the  ideals  and  prizes
of  life.  Thus  Dante’s  bad  cosmography  and  worse
history  do  not  detract  from  the  spiritual  penetra¬
tion  of  his  thought,  though  they  detract  from  its
direct  applicability.  Had  nature  and  destiny  been
what  Dante  imagined,  his  conception  of  the  values
involved  would  have  been  perfect,  for  the  moral
philosophy  he  brought  into  play  was  Aristotelian
and  rational.  So  his  poem  contains  a  false  in¬
stance  or  imaginary  rehearsal  of  true  wisdom.  It
describes  the  Life  of  Reason  in  a  fantastic  world.
We  need  only  change  man’s  situation  to  that  in
which  he  actually  finds  himself,  and  let  the  soul,
fathomed  and  chastened  as  Dante  left  it,  ask
questions  and  draw  answers  from  this  steadier
dream.

Myth  travels  among  the  people,  and  in  their
hands  its  poetic  factor  tends  to  predominate.  It
its  is  easier  to  carry  on  the  dialectic  or

submergence.  <jrama  proper  to  a  fable  than  to  con¬
front  it  again  with  the  facts  and  give  them  a  fresh
and  more  genial  interpretation.  The  poet  makes
the  fable;  the  sophist  carries  it  on.  Therefore  his¬
torians  and  theologians  discuss  chiefly  the  various
forms  which  mythical  beings  have  received,  and
the  internal  logical  or  moral  implications  of  those


MYTHOLOGY


57


hypostases.  They  would  do  better  to  attend  in¬
stead  to  the  moral  factor.  However  interesting  a
fable  may  be  in  itself,  its  religious  value  lies  wholly
in  its  revealing  some  function  which  nature  has
in  human  life.  Not  the  beauty  of  the  god  makes
him  adorable,  but  his  dispensing  benefits  and
graces.  Side  by  side  with  Apollo  (a  god  having
moral  functions  and  consequently  inspiring  a  fer¬
vent  cult  and  tending  himself  to  assume  a  moral
character)  there  may  be  a  Helios  or  a  Phaethon,
poetic  figures  expressing  just  as  well  the  sun’s
physical  operation,  and  no  less  capable,  if  the  theo¬
logian  took  hold  of  them,  of  suggesting  psycholog¬
ical  problems.  The  moral  factor,  however,  was  not
found  in  these  minor  deities.  Only  a  verbal  and
sensuous  poetry  had  been  employed  in  defining
them;  the  needs  and  hopes  of  mankind  had  been
ignored.  Apollo,  on  the  contrary,  in  personifying
the  sun,  had  embodied  also  the  sun’s  relations  to
human  welfare.  The  vitality,  the  healing,  the  en¬
lightenment,  the  lyric  joy  flowing  into  man’s  heart
from  that  highest  source  of  his  physical  being  are
all  beautifully  represented  in  the  god’s  figure  and
fable.  The  religion  of  Apollo  is  therefore  a  true
religion,  as  religions  may  be  true:  the  mythology
which  created  the  god  rested  on  a  deep,  observant
sense  for  moral  values,  and  drew  a  vivid,  if  partial,
picture  of  the  ideal,  attaching  it  significantly  to  its
natural  ground.

The  first  functioAj^  mythology  is  to  justify
magic.  The  weak  hopeTon  which  superstition


58


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


hangs,  the  gambler’s  instinct  which  divines  in
phenomena  a  magic  solicitude  for  human  for-
Myth  justifies  tunes,  can  scarcely  be  articulated  with-
maglc#  out  seeking  to  cover  and  justify  itself
by  some  fable.  A  magic  function  is  most  readily
conceived  and  defined  by  attributing  to  the  object
intentions  hostile  or  favourable  to  men,  together
with  human  habits  of  passion  and  discourse.  For
lack  of  resources  and  observations,  reason  is  sel¬
dom  able  to  discredit  magic  altogether.  Reason¬
able  men  are  forced,  therefore,  in  order  to  find
some  satisfaction,  to  make  magic  as  intelligible  as
possible  by  assimilating  it  to  such  laws  of  human
action  as  may  be  already  mastered  and  familiar.
Magic  is  thus  reduced  to  a  sort  of  system,  regulated
by  principles  of  its  own  and  naturalised,  as  it  were,
in  the  commonwealth  of  science.

Such  an  avowed  and  defended  magic  usually
takes  one  of  two  forms.  ^When  the  miracle  is  in-
Myths  terpreted  dramatically,  by  analogy  to
might  be  human  life,  we  have  mythology;  when
metaphysical,  -g  interpreted  rationalistically,  by

analogy  to  current  logic  or  natural  science,  we
have  metaphysics  or  theosophy  v  The  metaphysical
sort  of  superstition  has  never  taken  deep  root  in
the  western  world.  Pythagorean  mysteries  and
hypnotisations,  although  periodically  fashionable,
have  soon  shrivelled  in  our  too  salubrious  and
biting  air.  Even  such  charming  exotics  as  Plato’s
myths  have  not  been  able  to  flourish  without
changing  their  nature  and  passing  into  ordinary


MYTHOLOGY


59


dramatic  mythology — into  a  magic  system  in  which
all  the  forces,  once  terms  in  moral  experience,  be¬
came  personal  angels  and  demons.  Similarly  with
the  Christian  sacraments:  these  magic  rites,  had
they  been  established  in  India  among  a  people
theosophically  minded,  might  have  furnished  cues
to  high  transcendental  mysteries.  Baptism  might
have  been  interpreted  as  a  symbol  for  the  purged
and  abolished  will,  and  Communion  as  a  symbol
for  the  escape  from  personality.  But  European
races,  though  credulous  enough,  are  naturally  posi¬
tivistic,  so  that,  when  they  were  called  upon  to
elucidate  their  ceremonial  mysteries,  what  they  lit
upon  was  no  metaphysical  symbolism  but  a  mate¬
rial  and  historical  drama.  Communion  became  a
sentimental  interview  between  the  devout  soul
and  the  person  of  Christ;  baptism  became  the  legal
execution  of  a  mythical  contract  once  entered  into
between  the  first  and  second  persons  of  the  Trin¬
ity.  Thus,  instead  of  a  metaphysical  interpreta¬
tion,  the  extant  magic  received  its  needful  justifi¬
cation  through  myths.

When  mythology  first  appears  in  western  litera¬
ture  it  already  possesses  a  highly  articulate  form.

The  gods  are  distinct  personalities,  with
attributes  and  histories  which  it  is
hard  to  divine  the  source  of  and  which
suggest  no  obvious  rational  interpre¬
tation.  The  historian  is  therefore  in  the  same
position  as  a  child  who  inherits  a  great  religion.


They  appear
ready  made,
like  parts  of
the  social
fabric.


60


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


The  gods  and  their  doings  are  prima  facie  facts
in  his  world  like  any  other  facts,  objective  beings
that  convention  puts  him  in  the  presence  of  and
with  which  he  begins  by  having  social  relations.
He  envisages  them  with  respect  and  obedience,  or
with  careless  defiance,  long  before  he  thinks  of
questioning  or  proving  their  existence.  The  at¬
titude  he  assumes  towards  them  makes  them  in  the
first  instance  factors  in  his  moral  world.  Much
subsequent  scepticism  and  rationalising  philosophy
will  not  avail  to  efface  the  vestiges  of  that  early
communion  with  familiar  gods.  It  is  hard  to  re¬
duce  to  objects  of  science  what  are  essentially  fac¬
tors  in  moral  intercourse.  All  thoughts  on  religion
remain  accordingly  coloured  with  passion,  and  are
felt  to  be,  above  all,  a  test  of  loyalty  and  an  index
to  virtue.  The  more  derivative,  unfathomable,  and
opaque  is  the  prevalent  idea  of  the  gods,  the  harder
it  is  for  a  rational  feeling  to  establish  itself  in
their  regard.  Sometimes  the  most  complete  his¬
torical  enlightenment  will  not  suffice  to  dispel  the
shadow  which  their  moral  externality  casts  over
the  mind.  In  vain  do  we  discard  their  fable  and
the  thin  proofs  of  their  existence  when,  in  spite
of  ourselves,  we  still  live  in  their  presence.

This  pathetic  phenomenon  is  characteristic  of
religious  minds  that  have  outgrown  their  tradi-

They  perplex  tional  faith  without  being  able  to  re¬
state  the  natural  grounds  and  moral
values  of  that  somehow  precious  sys¬
tem  in  which  they  no  longer  believe.  The  dead


the  con¬
science.


MYTHOLOGY


61


gods,  in  such  cases,  leave  ghosts  behind  them,  be¬
cause  the  moral  forces  which  the  gods  once  ex¬
pressed,  and  which,  of  course,  remain,  remain  in¬
articulate;  and  therefore,  in  their  dumbness,  these
moral  forces  persistently  suggest  their  only  known
but  now  discredited  symbols.  To  regain  moral
freedom — without  which  knowledge  cannot  be  put
to  its  rational  use  in  the  government  of  life — we
must  rediscover  the  origin  of  the  gods,  reduce  them
analytically  to  their  natural  and  moral  constitu¬
ents,  and  then  proceed  to  rearrange  those  mate¬
rials,  without  any  quantitative  loss,  in  forms  ap¬
propriate  to  a  maturer  reflection.

Of  the  innumerable  and  rather  monotonous
mythologies  that  have  flourished  in  the  world,  only
the  Graeco-Roman  and  the  Christian  need  concern
us  here,  since  they  are  by  far  the  best  known  to
us  and  the  best  defined  in  themselves,  as  well  as
the  only  two  likely  to  have  any  continued  influence
on  the  western  mind.  Both  these  systems  pre¬
suppose  a  long  prior  development.  The  gods  of
Greece  and  of  Israel  have  a  full-blown  character
when  we  first  meet  them  in  literature.  In  both
cases,  however,  we  are  fortunate  in  being  able  to
trace  somewhat  further  back  the  history  of
mythology,  and  do  not  depend  merely  on  philo¬
sophic  analysis  to  reach  the  elements  which  we
seek.

In  the  Vedic  hymns  there  survives  the  record
of  a  religion  remarkably  like  the  Greek  in  spirit,


62


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


but  less  dramatic  and  articulate  in  form.  The
gods  of  the  Vedas  are  unmistakably  natural  ele-

indpient  nients.  Vulcan  is  there  nothing  but  fire,
myth  in  the  Jupiter  nothing  but  the  sky.  This  pa-
Vedas*  triarchal  people,  fresh  from  the  high¬
lands,  had  not  yet  been  infected  with  the  manias
and  diseases  of  the  jungle.  It  lived  simply,  ration¬
ally,  piously,  loving  all  natural  joys  and  delighted
with  all  the  instruments  of  a  rude  but  pure  civil¬
isation.  It  saluted  without  servility  the  forces  of
nature  which  ministered  to  its  needs.  It  burst
into  song  in  the  presence  of  the  magnificent  pano¬
rama  spread  out  before  it — day-sky  and  night-sky,
dawn  and  gloaming,  clouds,  thunder  and  rain,
rivers,  cattle  and  horses,  grain,  fruit,  fire,  and  wine.
Nor  were  the  social  sanctities  neglected.  Com¬
memoration  was  made  of  the  stages  of  mortal  life,
of  the  bonds  of  love  and  kinship,  of  peace,  of  bat¬
tle,  and  of  mourning  for  the  dead.  By  a  very  in¬
telligible  figure  and  analogy  the  winds  became
shepherds,  the  clouds  flocks,  the  day  a  conqueror,
the  dawn  a  maid,  the  night  a  wise  sibyl  and  mys¬
terious  consort  of  heaven.  These  personifications
were  tentative  and  vague,  and  the  consequent
mythology  was  a  system  of  rhetoric  rather  than
of  theology.  The  various  gods  had  interchange¬
able  attributes,  and,  by  a  voluntary  confusion,
quite  in  the  manner  of  later  Hindu  poetry,  each
became  on  occasion  any  or  all  of  the  others.

Here  the  Indian  pantheistic  vertigo  begins  to
appear.  Many  dark  superstitions,  no  doubt,  bub-


MYTHOLOGY


63


bled  up  in  the  torrent  of  that  plastic  reverie;  for
this  people,  clean  and  natural  as  on  the  whole
it  appears,  cannot  have  been  without  a  long  and
ignoble  ancestry.  The  Greeks  themselves,  heirs
to  kindred  general  traditions,  retained  some  child¬
ish  and  obscene  practices  in  their  worship.  But
such  hobgoblins  naturally  vanish  under  a  clear  and
beneficent  sun  and  are  scattered  by  healthy  mount¬
ain  breezes.  A  cheerful  people  knows  how  to  take
them  lightly,  play  with  them,  laugh  at  them,  and
turn  them  again  into  figures  of  speech.  Among
the  early  speakers  of  Sanskrit,  even  more  than
among  the  Greeks,  the  national  religion  seems  to
have  been  nothing  but  a  poetic  naturalism.

Such  a  mythology,  however,  is  exceedingly  plas¬
tic  and  unstable.  If  the  poet  is  observant  and  re¬
news  his  impressions,  his  myths  will  become  more
and  more  accurate  descriptions  of  the  facts,  and
his  hypotheses  about  phenomena  will  tend  to  be
expressed  more  and  more  in  terms  of  the  phenom¬
ena  themselves;  that  is,  will  tend  to  become  scien¬
tific.  If,  on  the  contrary  and  as  usually  happens,
the  inner  suggestions  and  fertility  of  his  fables
absorb  his  interest,  and  he  neglects  to  consult  his
external  perceptions  any  further,  or  even  forgets
that  any  such  perceptions  originally  inspired  the
myth,  he  will  tend  to  become  a  dramatic  poet,
guided  henceforth  in  his  fictions  only  by  his  knowl¬
edge  and  love  of  human  life.

When  we  transport  ourselves  in  fancy  to  patri¬
archal  epochs  and  Arcadian  scenes,  we  can  well


64


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


feel  the  inevitable  tendency  of  the  mind  to  myth¬
ologise  and  give  its  myths  a  more  and  more  dra-

Naturai  sug-  matic  character.  The  phenomena  of
gestions  soon  nature,  unintelligible  rationally  but  un¬
exhausted.  mensely  impressive,  must  somehow  be

described  and  digested.  But  while  they  compel
attention  they  do  not,  after  a  while,  enlarge  ex¬
perience.  Husbandmen’s  lore  is  profound,  prac¬
tical,  poetic,  superstitious,  but  it  is  singularly
stagnant.  The  cycle  of  natural  changes  goes  its
perpetual  round  and  the  ploughman’s  mind,  caught
in  that  narrow  vortex,  plods  and  plods  after  the
seasons.  Apart  from  an  occasional  flood,  drought,
or  pestilence,  nothing  breaks  his  laborious  torpor.
The  most  cursory  inspection  of  field  and  sky  yields
him  information  enough  for  his  needs.  Practical
knowledge  with  him  is  all  instinct  and  tradition.
His  mythology  can  for  that  very  reason  ride  on
nature  with  a  looser  rein.  If  at  the  same  time,
however,  his  circumstances  are  auspicious  and  he
feels  practically  secure,  he  will  have  much  leisure
They  win  be  to  ripen  inwardly  and  to  think.  He
carried  out  hasten  to  unfold  in  meditation

in  abstract

fancy.  the  abstract  potentialities  of  his  mind.

His  social  and  ideal  passions,  his  aptitude  for  art
and  fancy,  will  arouse  within  him  a  far  keener  and
more  varied  experience  than  his  outer  life  can
supply.  Yet  all  his  fortunes  continue  to  be  de¬
termined  by  external  circumstances  and  to  have
for  their  theatre  this  given  and  uncontrollable
world.  Some  conception  of  nature  and  the  gods


MYTHOLOGY


65


— that  is,  in  his  case,  some  mythology — must
therefore  remain  before  him  always  and  stand  in
his  mind  for  the  real  forces  controlling  experi¬
ence.

His  moral  powers  and  interests  have  meantime
notably  developed.  His  sense  for  social  relations
has  grown  clear  and  full  in  proportion  as  his  ob¬
servation  of  nature  has  sunk  into  dull  routine.
Consequently,  the  myths  by  which  reality  is  repre¬
sented  lose,  so  to  speak,  their  birthright  and  first
nationality.  They  pass  under  the  empire  of  ab¬
stract  cogitation  and  spontaneous  fancy.  They  be¬
come  naturalised  in  the  mind.  The  poet  cuts  loose
from  nature  and  works  out  instead  whatever  hints
of  human  character  or  romantic  story  the  myth
already  supplies.  Analogies  drawn  from  moral  and
passionate  experience  replace  the  further  portrai¬
ture  of  outer  facts.  Human  tastes,  habits,  and
dreams  enter  the  fable,  expanding  it  into  some
little  drama,  or  some  mystic  anagram  of  mortal
life.  While  in  the  beginning  the  sacred  poet  had
transcribed  nothing  but  joyous  perceptions  and
familiar  industrial  or  martial  actions,  he  now  in¬
troduces  intrigue,  ingenious  adventures,  and  heroic
passions.

When  we  turn  from  the  theology  of  the  Vedas
to  that  of  Homer  we  see  this  revolution  already
They  may  accomplished.  The  new  significance  of
become  mythology  has  obscured  the  old,  and
moral  ideals.  wjia^-  was  a  Symb0i  for  material  facts

has  become  a  drama,  an  apologue,  and  an  ideal.


66


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


!  Thus  one  function  of  mythology  has  been  nothing
less  than  to  carry  religion  over  from  superstition
into  wisdom,  from  an  excuse  and  apology  for  magic
into  an  ideal  representation  of  moral  goods.  In
his  impotence  and  sore  need  a  man  appeals  to
magic;  this  appeal  he  justifies  by  imagining  a  pur¬
pose  and  a  god  behind  the  natural  agency.  But
after  his  accounts  with  the  phenomena  are  settled
by  his  own  labour  and  patience,  he  continues  to
be  fascinated  by  the  invisible  spirit  he  has  evoked.
He  cherishes  this  image;  it  becomes  his  companion,
his  plastic  and  unaccountable  witness  and  refuge
in  all  the  exigencies  of  life.  Dwelling  in  the  mind
continually,  the  deity  becomes  acclimated  there;
the  worship  it  receives  endows  it  with  whatever
powers  and  ideal  faculties  are  most  feared  or  hon¬
oured  by  its  votary.  Now  the  thunder  and  the
pestilence  which  were  once  its  essence  come  to  be
regarded  as  its  disguises  and  its  foils.  Faith  comes
to  consist  in  disregarding  what  it  was  once  religion
to  regard,  namely,  the  ways  of  fortune  and  the
I  conditions  of  earthly  happiness.  Thus  the  imag¬
ination  sets  up  its  ideals  over  against  the  world
that  occasioned  them,  and  mythology,  instead  of
cheating  men  with  false  and  magic  aids  to  action,
moralises  them  by  presenting  an  ideal  standard
for  action  and  a  perfect  object  for  contemplation.

If  we  consider  again,  for  instance,  Apollo’s  vari-
The  sun-god  ous  attributes  and  the  endless  myths
moralised.  connected  with  his  name,  we  shall  find

him  changing  his  essence  and  forgetting  to  be  the


MYTHOLOGY


67


material  sun  in  order  to  become  the  light  of  a
cultivated  spirit.  At  first  he  is  the  sky’s  child,
and  has  the  moon  for  twin  sister.  His  mother  is
an  impersonation  of  darkness  and  mystery.  He
travels  yearly  from  the  hyperborean  regions
toward  the  south,  and  daily  he  traverses  the  firma¬
ment  in  a  chariot.  He  sleeps  in  a  sea-nymph’s
bosom  or  rises  from  the  dawn’s  couch.  In  all  this
we  see  clearly  a  scarcely  figurative  description  of
the  material  sun  and  its  motions.  A  quasi-scien-
tific  fancy  spins  these  fables  almost  inevitably  to
fill  the  vacuum  not  yet  occupied  by  astronomy.
Such  myths  are  indeed  compacted  out  of  wonders,
not  indeed  to  add  wonder  to  them  (for  the  original
and  greatest  marvel  persists  always  in  the  sky),
but  to  entertain  us  with  pleasant  consideration  of
them  and  with  their  assimilation  to  our  own  fine
feats.  This  assimilation  is  unavoidable  in  a  poet
ignorant  of  physics,  whom  human  life  must  supply
with  all  his  vocabulary  and  similes.  Fortunately
in  this  need  of  introducing  romance  into  phe¬
nomena  lies  the  leaven  that  is  to  leaven  the  lump,
the  subtle  influence  that  is  to  moralise  religion.
For  presently  Apollo  becomes  a  slayer  of  monsters
(a  function  no  god  can  perform  until  he  has
ceased  to  be  a  monster  himself),  he  becomes  the
lovely  and  valorous  champion  of  humanity,  the
giver  of  prophecy,  of  music,  of  lyric  song,  even
the  patron  of  medicine  and  gymnastics.

What  a  humane  and  rational  transformation!
The  spirit  of  Socrates  was  older  than  the  man  and


68


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


had  long  been  at  work  in  the  Greeks.  Interest  had
been  transferred  from  nature  to  art,  from  the
The  leaven  sources  to  the  fruits  of  life.  We  in
femoral011  these  days  are  accustomed  as  a  mat-
ideaiism.  ter  of  course  to  associate  religion  with
ideal  interests.  Our  piety,  unlike  our  barbarous
pantheistic  theology,  has  long  lost  sight  of  its  rudi¬
mentary  material  object,  and  habituated  us  to  the
worship  of  human  sanctity  and  human  love.  We
have  need  all  the  more  to  remember  how  slowly
and  reluctantly  religion  has  suffered  spiritualisa¬
tion,  how  imperfectly  as  yet  its  superstitious  ori¬
gin  has  been  outgrown.  We  have  need  to  retrace
with  the  greatest  attention  the  steps  by  which  a
moral  value  has  been  insinuated  into  what  would
otherwise  be  nothing  but  a  medley  of  magic  rites
and  poetic  physics.  It  is  this  submerged  idealism
which  alone,  in  an  age  that  should  have  finally
learned  how  to  operate  in  nature  and  how  to  con¬
ceive  her  processes,  could  still  win  for  religion  a
philosopher’s  attention  or  a  legislator’s  mercy.


i


3


CHAPTER  Y


v\


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


As  the  Vedas  offer  a  glimpse  into  the  antece¬
dents  of  Greek  mythology,  so  Hebrew  studies  open
Phases  of  UP  vistas  into  the  antecedents  of  Chris-
Hebraism.  tian  dogma.  Christianity  in  its  Patris¬
tic  form  was  an  adaptation  of  Hebrew  religion  to
the  Graeco- Roman  world,  and  later,  in  the  Protes¬
tant  movement,  a  readaptation  of  the  same  to  what
we  may  call  the  Teutonic  spirit.  In  the  first  adap¬
tation,  Hebrew  positivism  was  wonderfully  refined,
transformed  into  a  religion  of  redemption,  and
endowed  with  a  semi-pagan  mythology,  a  pseudo-
Platonic  metaphysics,  and  a  quasi-Roman  organ¬
isation.  In  the  second  adaptation,  Christianity  re¬
ceived  a  new  basis  and  standard  in  the  spontaneous
faith  of  the  individual;  and,  as  the  traditions  thus
undermined  in  principle  gradually  dropped  away,
it  was  reduced  by  the  German  theologians  to  a
romantic  and  mystical  pantheism.  Throughout  its
transformations,  however,  Christianity  remains  in¬
debted  to  the  Jews  not  only  for  its  founder,  but
for  the  nucleus  of  its  dogma,  cult,  and  ethical  doc¬
trine.  If  the  religion  of  the  Jews,  therefore,  should
disclose  its  origin,  the  origin  of  Christianity  would
also  be  manifest.


69


70


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Now  the  Bible,  when  critically  studied,  clearly
reveals  the  source,  if  not  of  the  earliest  religion
of  Israel,  at  least  of  those  elements  in  later  Jewish
faith  which  have  descended  to  us  and  formed  the
kernel  of  Christian  revelation.  The  earlier  He¬
brews,  as  their  own  records  depict  them,  had  a
mythology  and  cultus  extremely  like  that  of  other
Semitic  peoples.  It  was  natural  religion — I  mean
that  religion  which  naturally  expresses  the  imag¬
inative  life  of  a  nation  according  to  the  concep¬
tions  there  current  about  the  natural  world  and
to  the  interest  then  uppermost  in  men’s  hearts.
It  was  a  religion  without  a  creed  or  scripture  or
founder  or  clergy.  It  consisted  in  local  rites,  in
lunar  feasts,  in  soothsayings  and  oracles,  in  legends
about  divine  apparitions  commemorated  in  the
spots  they  had  made  holy.  These  spots,  as  in  all
the  rest  of  the  world,  were  tombs,  wells,  great  trees,
and,  above  all,  the  tops  of  mountains.

A  wandering  tribe,  at  once  oppressed  and  ag¬
gressive,  as  Israel  evidently  was  from  the  begin-
israei’s  ning,  is  conscious  of  nothing  so  much

ftib&i  as  of  its  tribal  unity.  To  protect  the

monotheism.  j*i  *  i  •  1  1 1  •

tribe  is  accordingly  the  chiet  tunction
of  its  god.  Whatever  character  Jehovah  may  orig¬
inally  have  had,  whether  a  storm-god  of  Sinai  or
of  Ararat,  or  a  sacred  bull,  or  each  of  these  by
affinity  and  confusion  with  the  other,  when  the
Israelites  had  once  adopted  him  as  their  god  they
could  see  nothing  essential  in  him  but  his  power
to  protect  them  in  the  lands  they  had  conquered.


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


71


To  this  exclusive  devotion  of  Jehovah  to  Israel,
Israel  responded  by  a  devotion  to  J ehovah  no  less
exclusive.  They  neglected,  when  at  home,  the
worship  of  every  other  divinity,  and  later  even
while  travelling  abroad;  and  they  tended  to  deny
altogether,  first  the  comparable  power  and  finally
even  the  existence  of  other  gods.

Israel  was  a  small  people  overshadowed  by  great
empires,  and  its  political  situation  was  always
Problems  highly  precarious.  After  a  brief  period
involved.  0f  comparative  vigour  under  David  and
Solomon  (a  period  afterward  idealised  with  that
oriental  imagination  which,  creating  so  few  glories,
dreams  of  so  many)  they  declined  visibly  toward
an  inevitable  absorption  by  their  neighbours.  But,
according  to  the  significance  which  religion  then
had  in  Israel,  the  ruin  of  the  state  would  have
put  Jehovah’s  honour  and  power  in  jeopardy.
The  nation  and  its  god  were  like  body  and  soul;
it  occurred  to  no  one  as  yet  to  imagine  that  the
one  could  survive  the  other.  A  few  sceptical  and
unpatriotic  minds,  despairing  of  the  republic,
might  turn  to  the  worship  of  Baal  or  of  the  stars
invoked  by  the  Assyrians,  hoping  thus  to  save
themselves  and  their  private  fortunes  by  a  timely
change  of  allegiance.  But  the  true  Jew  had  a
vehement  and  unshakable  spirit.  He  could  not
allow  the  waywardness  of  events  to  upset  his  con¬
victions  or  the  cherished  habits  of  his  soul.  Ac¬
cordingly  he  bethought  himself  of  a  new  way  of
explaining  and  meeting  the  imminent  catastrophe.


72


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


The  prophets,  for  to  them  the  revolution  in  ques¬
tion  was  due,  conceived  that  the  cause  of  Israel's
misfortunes  might  be  not  Jehovah's  weakness  but
his  wrath — a  wrath  kindled  against  the  immoral¬
ity,  lukewarmness,  and  infidelity  of  the  people.
Repentance  and  a  change  of  life,  together  with  a
purification  of  the  cultus,  would  bring  back  pros¬
perity.  It  was  too  late,  perhaps,  to  rescue  the
whole  state.  But  a  remnant  might  be  saved  like
a  brand  from  the  burning,  to  be  the  nucleus  of
a  great  restoration,  the  seed  of  a  mighty  people
that  should  live  for  ever  in  godliness  and  plenty.
Jehovah's  power  would  thus  be  vindicated,  even
if  Israel  were  ruined;  nay,  his  power  would  be  mag¬
nified  beyond  anything  formerly  conceived,  since
now  the  great  powers  of  Asia  would  be  represented
as  his  instruments  in  the  chastisement  of  his
people.

These  views,  if  we  regarded  them  from  the
standpoint  common  in  theology  as  attempts  to  re-

rrhe  prophets  express  the  primitive  faith,  would  have
put  new  wine  to  be  condemned  as  absolutely  heret-

m  old  bottles*  •  i  t  •  -r>  •  ■  i  i  •

ical  and  spurious.  But  the  prophets
were  not  interpreting  documents  or  traditions;
they  were  publishing  their  own  political  experi¬
ence.  They  were  themselves  inspired.  They  saw
the  identity  of  virtue  and  happiness,  the  depend¬
ence  of  success  upon  conduct.  This  new  truth
they  announced  in  traditional  language  by  saying
that  Jehovah's  favour  was  to  be  won  only  by  right¬
eousness  and  that  vice  and  folly  alienated  his  good-


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


73


will.  Their  moral  insight  was  genuine;  yet  by
virtue  of  the  mythical  expression  they  could  not
well  avoid  and  in  respect  to  the  old  orthodoxy,
their  doctrine  was  a  subterfuge,  the  first  of  those
after-thoughts  and  ingenious  reinterpretations  by
which  faith  is  continually  forced  to  cover  up  its
initial  blunders.  For  the  Jews  had  believed  that
with  such  a  God  they  were  safe  in  any  case;  but
now  they  were  told  that,  to  retain  his  protection,
they  must  practice  just  those  virtues  by  which  the
heathen  also  might  have  been  made  prosperous  and
great.  It  was  a  true  doctrine,  and  highly  salu¬
tary,  but  we  need  not  wonder  that  before  being
venerated  the  prophets  were  stoned.

The  ideal  of  this  new  prophetic  religion  was  still
wholly  material  and  political.  The  virtues,  empha¬
sised  and  made  the  chief  mark  of  a  religious  life,
were  recommended  merely  as  magic  means  to  pro¬
pitiate  the  deity,  and  consequently  to  insure  pub¬
lic  prosperity.  The  thought  that  virtue  is  a  natu¬
ral  excellence,  the  ideal  expression  of  human  life,
could  not  be  expected  to  impress  those  vehement
barbarians  any  more  than  it  has  impressed  their
myriad  descendants  and  disciples,  Jewish,  Chris¬
tian,  or  Moslem.  Yet  superstitious  as  the  new
faith  still  remained,  and  magical  as  was  the  efficacy
it  attributed  to  virtue,  the  fact  that  virtue  rather
than  burnt  offerings  was  now  endowed  with  mi¬
raculous  influence  and  declared  to  win  the  favour
of  heaven,  proved  two  things  most  creditable  to  *
the  prophets:  in  the  first  place,  they  themselves


74


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


loved  virtue,  else  they  would  hardly  have  imagined
that  Jehovah  loved  it,  or  have  believed  it  to  be
the  only  path  to  happiness;  and  in  the  second  place,
they  saw  that  public  events  depend  on  men's  char¬
acter  and  conduct,  not  on  omens,  sacrifices,  or  in¬
tercessions.  There  was  accordingly  a  sense  for
both  moral  and  political  philosophy  in  these  in¬
spired  orators.  By  assigning  a  magic  value  to
morality  they  gave  a  moral  value  to  religion.  The
immediate  aim  of  this  morality — to  propitiate  Je¬
hovah — was  indeed  imaginary,  and  its  ultimate  aim
— to  restore  the  kingdom  of  Israel — was  worldly;
yet  that  imaginary  aim  covered,  in  the  form  of  a
myth,  a  sincere  consecration  to  the  ideal,  while  the
worldly  purpose  led  to  an  almost  scientific  concep¬
tion  of  the  principles  and  movement  of  earthly
things.

To  this  transformation  in  the  spirit  of  the  law,
another  almost  as  important  corresponded  in  the

inspiration  letter.  Scripture  was  codified,  pro-
claimed,  and  given  out  formally  to  he
authority.  inspired  by  Jehovah  and  written  by

Moses.  That  all  traditions,  legends,  and  rites  were
inspired  and  sacred  was  a  matter  of  course  in  an¬
tiquity.  Nature  was  full  of  gods,  and  the  mind,
with  its  unaccountable  dreams  and  powers,  could
not  be  without  them.  Its  inventions  could  not
be  less  oracular  than  the  thunder  or  the  flight  of
birds.  Israel,  like  every  other  nation,  thought  its
traditions  divine.  These  traditions,  however,  had
always  been  living  and  elastic;  the  prophets  them-


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


75


selves  gave  proof  that  inspiration  was  still  a  vital
and  human  thing.  It  is  all  the  more  remarkable,
therefore,  that  while  the  prophets  were  preparing
their  campaign,  under  pressure  of  the  same  threat¬
ened  annihilation,  the  same  puritanical  party
should  have  edited  a  new  code  of  laws  and  at¬
tributed  it  retroactively  to  Moses.  While  the
prophet’s  lips  were  being  touched  by  the  coal  of
fire,  the  priests  and  king  in  their  conclave  were
establishing  the  Bible  and  the  Church.  It  is  easy
to  suspect,  from  the  accounts  we  have,  that  a  pious
fraud  was  perpetrated  on  this  occasion;  but  per¬
haps  the  finding  of  a  forgotten  book  of  the  Law  and
its  proclamation  by  J osiah,  after  consulting  a  cer¬
tain  prophetess,  were  not  so  remote  in  essence  from
prophetic  sincerity.  In  an  age  when  every  proph¬
et,  seeing  what  was  needful  politically,  could  cry,
“  So  saith  the  Lord,”  it  could  hardly  be  illegiti¬
mate  for  the  priests,  seeing  what  was  expedient
legally,  to  declare,  “  So  said  Moses.”  Conscience,
in  a  primitive  and  impetuous  people,  may  express
itself  in  an  apocryphal  manner  which  in  a  critical
age  conscience  would  altogether  exclude.  It  would
have  been  hardly  conceivable  that  what  was  obvi¬
ously  right  and  necessary  should  not  be  the  will
of  Jehovah,  manifested  of  old  to  the  fathers  in
the  desert  and  now  again  whispered  in  their  chil¬
dren’s  hearts.  To  contrive  a  stricter  observance
was  an  act  at  once  of  experimental  prudence — a
means  of  making  destiny,  perhaps,  less  unfavour¬
able — and  an  act  of  more  fervent  worship — a  re-


76


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


newal  of  faith  in  Jehovah,  to  whose  hands  the
nation  was  intrusted  more  solemnly  and  irrevoca¬
bly  than  ever.

This  pious  experiment  failed  most  signally.  Je¬
rusalem  was  taken,  the  Temple  destroyed,  and  the
Beginnings  flower  of  the  people  carried  into  exile,
of  the  The  effect  of  failure,  however,  was  not

to  discredit  the  Law  and  the  Covenant,
now  once  for  all  adopted  by  the  unshakable  Jews.
On  the  contrary,  when,  they  returned  from  exile
they  re-established  the  theocracy  with  greater
rigour  than  ever,  adding  all  the  minute  observ¬
ances,  ritualistic  and  social,  enshrined  in  Leviticus.
Israel  became  an  ecclesiastical  community.  The
Temple,  half  fortress,  half  sanctuary,  resounded
with  perpetual  psalms.  Piety  was  fed  on  a  sense
at  once  of  consecration  and  of  guidance.  All  was
prescribed,  and  to  fulfil  the  Law,  precisely  because
it  involved  so  complete  and,  as  the  world  might
say,  so  arbitrary  a  regimen,  became  a  precious  sac¬
rifice,  a  continual  act  of  religion.

Dogmas  are  at  their  best  when  nobody  denies
them,  for  then  their  falsehood  sleeps,  like  that  of
an  unconscious  metaphor,  and  their  moral  func¬
tion  is  discharged  instinctively.  They  count  and
are  not  defined,  and  the  side  of  them  that  is  not
Bigotry  deceptive  is  the  one  that  comes  for¬
tuned  into  a  ward.  What  was  condemnable  in  the
principle.  jews  was  not  that  they  asserted  the  di¬
vinity  of  their  law,  for  that  they  did  with  substan¬
tial  sincerity  and  truth.  Their  crime  is  to  have


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


77


denied  the  equal  prerogative  of  other  nations’  laws
and  deities,  for  this  they  did,  not  from  critical
insight  or  intellectual  scruples,  but  out  of  pure
bigotry,  conceit,  and  stupidity.  They  did  not  want
other  nations  also  to  have  a  god.  The  moral  gov¬
ernment  of  the  world,  which  the^  J ews  are  praised
for  having  first  asserted,  did  not  mean  for  them
that  nature  shows  a  generic  benevolence  toward
life  and  reason  wherever  these  arise.  Such  a
moral  government  might  have  been  conceived  by
a  pagan  philosopher  and  was  not  taught  in  Israel
until,  selfishness  having  been  outgrown,  the  birds
and  the  heathen  were  also  placed  under  divine
protection.  What  the  moral  government  of  things
meant  when  it  was  first  asserted  was  that  J ehovah
expressly  directed  the  destinies  of  heathen  nations
and  the  course  of  nature  itself  for  the  final  glori¬
fication  of  the  Jews.

No  civilised  people  had  ever  had  such  preten¬
sions  before.  They  all  recognised  one  another’s
religions,  if  not  as  literally  true  (for  some  famil¬
iarity  is  needed  to  foster  that  illusion),  certainly
as  more  or  less  sacred  and  significant.  Had  the
Jews  not  rendered  themselves  odious  to  mankind
by  this  arrogance,  and  taught  Christians  and
Moslems  the  same  fanaticism,  the  nature  of  re¬
ligion  would  not  have  been  falsified  among  us  and
we  should  not  now  have  so  much  to  apologise  for
and  to  retract.

Israel’s  calamities,  of  which  the  prophets  saw
only  the  beginning,  worked  a  notable  spiritualisa-


78


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tion  in  its  religion.  The  happy  thought  of  attrib¬
uting  misfortune  to  wickedness  remained  a  perma-
Penance  nent  element  in  the  creed;  but  as  no
accepted.  scrupulous  administration  of  rites,  no
puritanism,  no  good  conscience,  could  avail  to  im¬
prove  the  political  situation,  it  became  needful  for
the  faithful  to  reconsider  their  idea  of  happiness.
Since  holiness  must  win  divine  favour,  and  Israel
was  undoubtedly  holy,  the  marks  of  divine  favour
must  be  looked  for  in  Israelis  history.  To  have  been
brought  in  legendary  antiquity  out  of  Egypt  was
something;  to  have  been  delivered  from  captivity
in  Babylon  was  more;  yet  these  signs  of  favour
could  not  suffice  unless  they  were  at  the  same  time
emblems  of  hope.  But  Jewish  life  had  meantime
passed  into  a  new  phase:  it  had  become  pietistic,
priestly,  almost  ascetic.  Such  is  the  might  of  suf¬
fering,  that  a  race  whose  nature  and  traditions  were
alike  positivistic  could  for  the  time  being  find  it
sweet  to  wash  its  hands  among  the  innocent,  to
love  the  beauty  of  the  Lord’s  house,  and  to  praise
him  for  ever  and  ever.  It  was  agreed  and  settled
beyond  cavil  that  God  loved  his  people  and  con¬
tinually  blessed  them,  and  yet  in  the  world  of  men
tribulation  after  tribulation  did  not  cease  to  fall
upon  them.  There  was  no  issue  but  to  assert  (what
so  chastened  a  spirit  could  now  understand)  that
tribulation  endured  for  the  Lord  was  itself  blessed¬
ness,  and  the  sign  of  some  mystical  election.
Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth;  so  the
chosen  children  of  God  were,  without  paradox,  to


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


79


be  looked  for  among  the  most  unfortunate  of
earth’s  children.

The  prophets  and  psalmists  had  already  shown
some  beginnings  of  this  asceticism  or  inverted
Christianity  worldliness.  The  Essenes  and  the  early

optimism  and  Christians  made  an  explicit  reversal  of
asceticism.  ancient  Jewish  conceptions  on  this
point  the  corner-stone  of  their  morality.  True,
the  old  positivism  remained  in  the  background.
Tribulation  was  to  be  short-lived.  Very  soon  the
kingdom  of  God  would  be  established  and  a  dra¬
matic  exchange  of  places  would  ensue  between  the
proud  and  the  humble.  The  mighty  would  be
hurled  from  their  seat,  the  lowly  filled  with  good
things.  Yet  insensibly  the  conception  of  a  king¬
dom  of  God,  of  a  theocracy,  receded  or  became
spiritualised.  The  joys  of  it  were  finally  conceived
as  immaterial  altogether,  contemplative,  and  re¬
served  for  a  life  after  death.  Although  the  official
and  literal  creed  still  spoke  of  a  day  of  judgment,
a  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  a  New  Jerusalem,
these  things  were  instinctively  taken  by  Christian
piety  in  a  more  or  less  symbolic  sense.  A  longing
for  gross  spectacular  greatness,  prolonged  life,  and
many  children,  after  the  good  old  Hebraic  fashion,
had  really  nothing  to  do  with  the  Christian  notion
of  salvation.  Salvation  consisted  rather  in  having
surrendered  all  desire  for  such  things,  and  all  ex¬
pectation  of  happiness  to  be  derived  from  them.
Thus  the  prophet’s  doctrine  that  not  prosperity
absolutely  and  unconditionally,  but  prosperity


80


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


merited  by  virtue,  was  the  portion  of  God’s  people
changed  by  insensible  gradations  to  an  ascetic  be¬
lief  that  prosperity  was  altogether  alien  to  virtue
and  that  a  believer’s  true  happiness  would  be  such
as  Saint  Francis  paints  it:  upon  some  blustering
winter’s  night,  after  a  long  journey,  to  have  the
convent  door  shut  in  one’s  face  with  many  mut¬
tered  threats  and  curses.

In  the  history  of  Jewish  and  Christian  ethics
the  pendulum  has  swung  between  irrational  ex-
Reason  tremes,  without  ever  stopping  at  that

bTtweeTthe  P°int  of  equilibrium  at  which  alone  rest
two.  is  possible.  Yet  this  point  was  some¬

times  traversed  and  included  in  the  gyrations  of
our  tormented  ancestral  conscience.  It  was  passed,
for  example,  at  the  moment  when  the  prophets
saw  that  it  was  human  interest  that  governed  right
and  wrong  and  conduct  that  created  destiny.  But
the  mythical  form  in  which  this  novel  principle
naturally  presented  itself  to  the  prophets’  minds,
and  (the  mixture  of  superstition  and  national
bigotry  which  remained  in  their  philosophy,  con¬
taminated  its  truth  and  were  more  prolific  and
contagious  than  its  rational  elements.  Hence  the
incapacity  of  so  much  subsequent  thinking  to  reach
clear  ideas,  and  the  failure  of  Christianity,  with  its
prolonged  discipline  and  opportunities,  to  establish
a  serious  moral  education.  The  perpetual  painful
readjustments  of  the  last  twenty  centuries  have
been  adjustments  to  false  facts  and  imaginary  laws;
so  that  neither  could  a  worthy  conception  of  pros-


THE  HEBRAIC  TRADITION


81


perity  and  of  the  good  be  substituted  for  heathen
and  Hebrew  crudities  on  that  subject,  nor  could
the  natural  goals  of  human  endeavour  come  to  be
recognised  and  formulated,  but  all  was  left  to  blind
impulse  or  chance  tradition.

These  defeats  of  reason  are  not  to  be  wondered
at,  if  we  may  indeed  speak  of  the  defeat  of  what
Religion  never  has  led  an  army.  The  primitive
made  an  naturalism  of  the  Hebrews  was  not  yet

institution.  -i  t  i  •  -i

superseded  by  prophetic  doctrines  when
a  new  form  of  materialism  arose  to  stifle  and  de¬
naturalise  what  was  rational  in  those  doctrines.
Even  before  hope  of  earthly  empire  to  be  secured
by  Jehovah’s  favour  had  quite  vanished,  claims
had  arisen  to  supernatural  knowledge  founded  on
revelation.  Mythology  took  a  wholly  new  shape
and  alliance  with  God  acquired  a  new  meaning
and  implication.  For  mythology  grew,  so  to  speak,
double;  moral  or  naturalistic  myths  were  now  re¬
inforced  by  others  of  a  historical  character,  to  the
effect  that  the  former  myths  had  been  revealed
supernaturally.  At  the  same  time  the  sign  of  di¬
vine  protection  and  favour  ceased  to  be  primarily
political.  Religion  now  chiefly  boasted  to  possess
the  Truth,  and  with  the  Truth  to  possess  the  se¬
cret  of  a  perfectly  metaphysical  and  posthumous
happiness.  Revelation,  enigmatically  contained  in
Scripture,  found  its  necessary  explication  in  theol¬
ogy,  while  the  priests,  now  guardians  of  the  keys
of  heaven,  naturally  enlarged  their  authority  over
the  earth.  In  fine,  the  poetic  legends  and  patri-


82


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


archal  worship  that  had  formerly  made  up  the
religion  of  Israel  were  transformed  into  two  con¬
crete  and  formidable  engines — the  Bible  and  the
Church.


CHAPTER  VI


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


Revolutions  are  ambiguous  things.  Their  suc¬
cess  is  generally  proportionate  to  their  power  of
The  essence  adaptation  and  to  the  reabsorption
of  the  good  within  them  of  what  they  rebelled

not  adventi-  ^

tious  but  against.  A  thousand  reforms  have  left
expressive.  the  world  as  corrupt  as  ever,  for  each

successful  reform  has  founded  a  new  institution,
and  this  institution  has  bred  its  new  and  congenial
abuses.  What  is  capable  of  truly  purifying  the  [
world  is  not  the  mere  agitation  of  its  elements,/
but  their  organisation  into  a  natural  body  that
shall  exude  what  redounds  and  absorb  or  generate  \
what  is  lacking  to  the  perfect  expression  of  its
soul.

Whence  fetch  this  seminal  force  and  creative
ideal?  It  must  evidently  lie  already  in  the  matter
it  is  to  organise;  otherwise  it  would  have  no  affinity
to  that  matter,  no  power  over  it,  and  no  ideality
or  value  in  respect  to  the  existences  whose  stand¬
ard  and  goal  it  was  to  be.  There  can  be  no  goods
antecedent  to  the  natures  they  benefit,  no  ideals
prior  to  the  wills  they  define.  A  revolution  must
find  its  strength  and  legitimacy  not  in  the  re-

83


84


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


former’s  conscience  and  dream  but  in  the  temper
of  that  society  which  he  would  transform;  for  no
transformation  is  either  permanent  or  desirable
which  does  not  forward  the  spontaneous  life  of  the
world,  advancing  those  issues  toward  which  it  is
already  inwardly  directed.  How  should  a  gospel
bring  glad  tidings,  save  by  announcing  what  was
from  the  beginning  native  to  the  heart?

Ho  judgment  could  well  be  shallower,  therefore,
than  that  which  condemns  a  great  religion  for  not
A  universal  being  faithful  to  that  local  and  partial
[nteTp^et^hf  irapulse  which  may  first  have  launched
whole  world,  it  into  the  world.  A  great  religion  has
something  better  to  consider:  the  conscience  and
imagination  of  those  it  ministers  to.  The  prophet
who  announced  it  first  was  a  prophet  only  because
he  had  a  keener  sense  and  clearer  premonition  than
other  men  of  their  common  necessities;  and  he
loses  his  function  and  is  a  prophet  no  longer  when
the  public  need  begins  to  outrun  his  intuitions.
Could  Hebraism  spread  over  the  Roman  Empire
and  take  the  name  of  Christianity  without  adding
anything  to  its  native  inspiration?  Is  it  to  be
lamented  that  we  are  not  all  Jews?  Yet  what
makes  the  difference  is  not  the  teaching  of  Jesus
— which  is  pure  Hebraism  reduced  to  its  spiritual
essence — but  the  worship  of  Christ — something
perfectly  Greek.  Christianity  would  have  re¬
mained  a  Jewish  sect  had  it  not  been  made  at  once
speculative,  universal,  and  ideal  by  the  infusion  of
Greek  thought,  and  at  the  same  time  plastic  and


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


85


devotional  by  the  adoption  of  pagan  habits.  The
incarnation  of  God  in  man,  and  the  divinisation
of  man  in  God  are  pagan  conceptions,  expressions
of  pagan  religions  sentiment  and  philosophy.  Yet
what  would  Christianity  be  without  them?  It
would  have  lost  not  only  its  theology,  which  might
be  spared,  but  its  spiritual  aspiration,  its  artistic
affinities,  and  the  secret  of  its  metaphysical  char¬
ity  and  joy.  It  would  have  remained  unconscious.,
as  the  Gospel  is,  that  the  hand  or  the  mind  of  man
can  ever  construct  anything.  Among  the  Jews
there  were  no  liberal  interests  for  the  ideal  to  ex¬
press.  They  had  only  elementary  human  experi¬
ence — the  perpetual  Oriental  round  of  piety  and
servitude  in  the  bosom  of  a  scorched,  exhausted
country.  A  disillusioned  eye,  surveying  such  a
world,  could  find  nothing  there  to  detain  it;  relig¬
ion,  when  wholly  spiritual,  could  do  nothing  but
succour  the  afflicted,  understand  and  forgive  the
sinful,  and  pass  through  the  sad  pageant  of  life
unspotted  and  resigned.  Its  pity  for  human  ills
would  go  hand  in  hand  with  a  mystic  plebeian
insensibility  to  natural  excellence.  It  would
breathe  what  Tacitus,  thinking  of  the  liberal  life,
could  call  odium  generis  humani;  it  would  be  in¬
imical  to  human  genius.

There  were,  we  may  say,  two  things  in  Apostolic

Double  teaching  which  rendered  it  capable  of

appeal  of  converting  the  world,  (f  One  was  the

Christianity.  ..  ^  j  ...

later  Jewish  morality  and  mysticism,
beautifully  expressed  in  Christ’s  parables  and  max-


86


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ims,  and  illustrated  by  his  miracles,  those  cures
and  absolutions  which  he  was  ready  to  dispense,
whatever  their  sins,  to  such  as  called  upon  his
name.  This  democratic  and  untrammelled  charity
could  powerfully  appeal  to  an  age  disenchanted
with  the  world,  and  especially  to  those  lower  classes
which  pagan  polity  had  covered  with  scorn  and
condemned  to  hopeless  misery^  The  other  point
of  contact  which  early  Christianity  had  with  the
public  need  was  the  theme  it  offered  to  contem¬
plation,  the  philosophy  of  history  which  it  intro-
;  duced  into  the  western  world,  and  the  delicious
unfathomable  mysteries  into  which  it  launched  the
fancy.  Here,  too,  the  figure  of  Christ  was  the
centre  for  all  eyes.  Its  lowliness,  its  simplicity,  its
humanity  were  indeed,  for  a  while,  obstacles  to
its  acceptance;  they  did  not  really  lend  themselves
to  the  metaphysical  interpretation  which  was  re¬
quired.  Yet  even  Greek  fable  was  not  without  its
Apollo  tending  flocks  and  its  Demeter  mourning
for  her  lost  child  and  serving  in  meek  disguise
the  child  of  another.  Feeling  was  ripe  for  a  myth¬
ology  loaded  with  pathos.  The  humble  life,  the
homilies,  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  could  be  felt  in
all  their  incomparable  beauty  all  the  more  when
the  tenderness  and  tragedy  of  them,  otherwise  too
poignant,  were  relieved  by  the  story  of  his  miracu¬
lous  birth,  his  glorious  resurrection,  and  his  re¬
stored  divinity.

The  gospel,  thus  grown  acceptable  to  the  pagan
mind,  was,  however,  but  a  grain  of  mustard-seed


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


87


destined  to  branch  and  flower  in  its  new  soil  in
a  miraculous  manner.  Not  only  was  the  Greek  and
Roman  to  refresh  himself  under  its  shade,  but  birds
of  other  climates  were  to  build  their  nests,  at  least
for  a  season,  in  its  branches.  Hebraism,  when
thus  expanded  and  paganised,  showed  many  new
characteristics  native  to  the  minds  which  had  now
adopted  and  transformed  it.  The  Jews,  for  in-
Hebrew  stance,  like  other  Orientals,  had  a  fig-
b^ome0”  urative  way  of  speaking  and  thinking;
Greek  myths,  their  poetry  and  religion  were  full  of
the  most  violent  metaphors.  Now  to  the  classic
mind  violent  and  improper  metaphors  were  abhor¬
rent.  Uniting,  as  it  did,  clear  reason  with  lively
fancy,  it  could  not  conceive  one  thing  to  be  an¬
other,  nor  relish  the  figure  of  speech  that  so  de¬
scribed  it,  hoping  by  that  unthinkable  phrase  to
suggest  its  affinities.  But  the  classic  mind  could
well  conceive  transformation,  of  which  indeed  na¬
ture  is  full;  and  in  Greek  fables  anything  might
change  its  form,  become  something  else,  and  dis¬
play  its  plasticity,  not  by  imperfectly  being  many
things  at  once,  but  by  being  the  perfection  of  many
things  in  succession.  While  metaphor  was


unintelligible  and  confusing  to  the  Greek,  meta¬
morphosis  was  perfectly  familiar  to  him.  Wher¬
ever  Hebrew  tradition,  accordingly,  used  violent
metaphors,  puzzling  to  the  Greek  Christian,  he
rationalised  them  by  imagining  a  metamorphosis
instead;  thus,  for  instance,  the  metaphors  of  the
Last  Supper,  so  harmless  and  vaguely  satisfying


88


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


to  an  Oriental  audience,  became  the  doctrine  of
transnbstantiation — a  doctrine  where  images  are
indeed  lacking  to  illustrate  the  concepts,  but  where
the  concepts  themselves  are  not  confused.  For
that  bread  should  "become  flesh  and  wine  blood
is  not  impossible,  seeing  that  the  change  occurs
daily  in  digestion;  what  the  assertion  in  this  case
contradicts  is  merely  the  evidence  of  sense.
r  v  Thus  at  many  a  turn  in  Christian  tradition  a
metaphysical  mystery  takes  the  place  of  a  poetic
figure;  the  former  now  expressing  by  a  little  mi¬
raculous  drama  the  emotion  which  the  latter  ex¬
pressed  by  a  tentative  phrase.  And  the  emotion  is
thereby  immensely  clarified  and  strengthened;  it
is,  in  fact,  for  the  first  time  really  expressed.  ("For
the  idea  that  Christ  stands  upon  the  altar  and
mingles  still  with  our  human  flesh  is  an  explicit
assertion  that  his  influence  and  love  are  perpetual ;
whereas  the  original  parable  revealed  at  most  the
wish  and  aspiration,  contrary  to  fact,  that  they
might  have  been  so.)  By  substituting  embodiment
for  allegory,  the  Greek  mind  thus  achieved  some¬
thing  very  congenial  to  its  habits :  it  imagined  the
full  and  adequate  expression,  not  in  words  but  in
existences,  of  the  emotion  to  be  conveyed.  The
Eucharist  is  to  the  Last  Supper  what  a  centaur  is
to  a  horseman  or  a  tragedy  to  a  song.  Similarly
a  Dantesque  conception  of  hell  and  paradise  em¬
bodies  in  living  detail  the  innocent  apologue  in
the  gospel  about  a  separation  of  the  sheep  from
the  goats.  The  result  is  a  chimerical  metaphysics,


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


89


containing  much  which,  in  reference  to  existing
facts,  is  absurd ;  but  that  metaphysics,  when  taken
for  what  it  truly  is,  a  new  mythology,  utters  the
subtler  secrets  of  the  new  religion  not  less  ingen¬
iously  and  poetically  than  pagan  mythology  re¬
flected  the  daily  shifts  in  nature  and  in  human
life.

(  Metaphysics  became  not  only  a  substitute  for
allegory  but  at  the  same  time  a  background  for
Hebrew  history.  jNeo-Platonism  had  enlarged,
philosophy  of  in  a  way  suited  to  the  speculative  de¬
tmed  with  mands  oi  the  time,  the  cosmos  con-
piatonic  ceived  by  Greek  science.  In  an  intelli-

cosmology.  ,  .  ,  ,  .

gible  region,  unknown  to  cosmography
and  peopled  at  first  by  the  Platonic  ideas  and  after¬
ward  by  Aristotle’s  solitary  God,  there  was  now
the  Absolute  One,  too  exalted  for  any  predicates,
but  manifesting  its  essence  in  the  first  place  in
a  supreme  Intelligence,  the  second  hypostasis  of
a  Trinity;  and  in  the  second  place  in  the  Soul  of
the  World,  the  third  hypostasis,  already  relative
to  natural  existence.  Now  the  Platonists  con¬
ceived  these  entities  to  be  permanent  and  immuta¬
ble;  the  physical  world  itself  had  a  meaning  and
an  expressive  value,  like  a  statue,  but  no  signifi¬
cant  history.  When  the  J ewish  notion  of  creation
and  divine  government  of  the  world  presented  it¬
self  to  the  Greeks,  they  hastened  to  assimilate  it
to  their  familiar  notions  of  imitation,  expression,
finality,  and  significance.  And  when  the  Chris¬
tians  spoke  of  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  who  now


90


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sat  at  his  right  hand  in  the  heavens,  their  Pla¬
tonic  disciples  immediately  thought  of  the  Nous
or  Logos,  the  divine  Intelligence,  incarnate  as  they
had  always  believed  in  the  whole  world,  and  yet
truly  the  substance  and  essence  of  divinity.  To
say  that  this  incarnation  had  taken  place  pre-emi¬
nently,  or  even  exclusively,  in  Christ  was  not  an
impossible  concession  to  make  to  pious  enthusiasm,
at  least  if  the  philosophy  involved  in  the  old  con¬
ception  could  be  retained  and  embodied  in  the
new  orthodoxy.  Sacred  history  could  thus  be  in¬
terpreted  as  a  temporal  execution  of  eternal  de¬
crees,  and  the  plan  of  salvation  as  an  ideal  neces¬
sity.  Cosmic  scope  and  metaphysical  meaning
were  given  to  Hebrew  tenets,  so  unspeculative  in
their  original  intention,  and  it  became  possible
even  for  a  Platonic  philosopher  to  declare  himself
a  Christian.

The  eclectic  Christian  philosophy  thus  engen¬
dered  constitutes  one  of  the  most  complete,  elab-

The  resulting  orate,  and  impressive  products  of  the
orthodox  human  mind.  The  ruins  of  more  than

system

one  civilisation  and  of  more  than  one
philosophy  were  ransacked  to  furnish  materials  for
this  heavenly  Byzantium.  It  was  a  myth  circum¬
stantial  and  sober  enough  in  tone  to  pass  for  an
account  of  facts,  and  yet  loaded  with  enough  mira¬
cle,  poetry,  and  submerged  wisdom  to  take  the
place  of  a  moral  philosophy  and  present  what
seemed  at  the  time  an  adequate  ideal  to  the  heart.
Many  a  mortal,  in  all  subsequent  ages,  perplexed


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


91


and  abandoned  in  this  ungovernable  world,  has  set
sail  resolutely  for  that  enchanted  island  and
found  there  a  semblance  of  happiness,  its  nar¬
row  limits  give  so  much  room  for  the  soul  and
its  penitential  soil  breeds  so  many  consolations.
True,  the  brief  time  and  narrow  argument  into
which  Christian  imagination  squeezes  the  world
must  seem  to  a  speculative  pantheist  childish
and  poor,  involving,  as  it  does,  a  fatuous  per¬
version  of  nature  and  history  and  a  ridiculous
emphasis  laid  on  local  events  and  partial  interests.
Yet  just  this  violent  reduction  of  things  to  a  hu¬
man  stature,  this  half-innocent,  half-arrogant  as¬
sumption  that  what  is  important  for  a  man  must
control  the  whole  universe,  is  what  made  Christian
philosophy  originally  appealing  and  what  still
arouses,  in  certain  quarters,  enthusiastic  belief  in
its  beneficence  and  finality.

Nor  should  we  wonder  at  this  enduring  illusion.
Man  is  still  in  his  childhood;  for  he  cannot  respect
an  ideal  which  is  not  imposed  on  him  against  his
will,  nor  can  he  find  satisfaction  in  a  good  created
by  his  own  action.  He  is  afraid  of  a  universe  that
leaves  him  alone.  Freedom  appals  him;  he  can
apprehend  in  it  nothing  but  tedium  and  desola¬
tion,  so  immature  is  he  and  so  barren  does  he  think
himself  to  be.  He  has  to  imagine  what  the  angels
would  say,  so  that  his  own  good  impulses  (which
create  those  angels)  may  gain  in  authority,  and
none  of  the  dangers  that  surround  his  poor  life
make  the  least  impression  upon  him  until  he


92


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


hears  that  there  are  hobgoblins  hiding  in  the  wood.
His  moral  life,  to  take  shape  at  all,  must  appear
to  him  in  fantastic  symbols.  The  history  of  these
symbols  is  therefore  the  history  of  his  soul.


drama  of
things.


There  was  in  the  beginning,  so  runs  the  Chris¬
tian  story,  a  great  celestial  King,  wise  and  good,
The  brief  surrounded  by  a  court  of  winged  musi¬
cians  and  messengers.  He  had  existed
from  all  eternity,  but  had  always  in¬
tended,  when  the  right  moment  should  come,  to
create  temporal  beings,  imperfect  copies  of  him¬
self  in  various  degrees.  These,  of  which  man  was
the  chief,  began  their  career  in  the  year  4004  b.  c.,
and  they  would  live  on  an  indefinite  time,  possibly,
that  chronological  symmetry  might  not  be  violated,
until  a.  D.  4004.  The  opening  and  close  of  this
drama  were  marked  by  two  magnificent  tableaux.
In  the  first,  in  obedience  to  the  word  of  God,  sun,
moon,  and  stars,  and  earth  with  all  her  plants  and
animals,  assumed  their  appropriate  places,  and  na¬
ture  sprang  into  being  with  all  her  laws.  The  first
man  was  made  out  of  clay,  by  a  special  act  of  God,
and  the  first  woman  was  fashioned  from  one  of
his  ribs,  extracted  while  he  lay  in  a  deep  sleep.
They  were  placed  in  an  orchard  where  they  often
could  see  God,  its  owner,  walking  in  the  cool  of
the  evening.  He  suffered  them  to  range  at  will
and  eat  of  all  the  fruits  he  had  planted  save  that
of  one  tree  only.  But  they,  incited  by  a  devil,
transgressed  this  single  prohibition,  and  were  ban-


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


93


ished  from  that  paradise  with  a  curse  upon  their
head,  the  man  to  live  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow
and  the  woman  to  bear  children  in  labour.  These
children  possessed  from  the  moment  of  conception
the  inordinate  natures  which  their  parents  had
acquired.  They  were  born  to  sin  and  to  find  dis¬
order  and  death  everywhere  within  and  without
them.

At  the  same  time  God,  lest  the  work  of  his  hands
should  wholly  perish,  promised  to  redeem  in  his
good  season  some  of  Adam’s  children  and  restore
them  to  a  natural  life.  This  redemption  was  to
come  ultimately  through  a  descendant  of  Eve,
whose  foot  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  serpent.
But  it  was  to  be  prefigured  by  many  partial  and
special  redemptions.  Thus,  Noah  was  to  be  saved
from  the  deluge,  Lot  from  Sodom,  Isaac  from  the
sacrifice,  Moses  from  Egypt,  the  captive  J ews  from
Babylon,  and  all  faithful  souls  from  heathen  for¬
getfulness  and  idolatry.  For  a  certain  tribe  had
been  set  apart  from  the  beginning  to  keep  alive
the  memory  of  God’s  judgments  and  promises,
while  the  rest  of  mankind,  abandoned  to  its  nat¬
ural  depravity,  sank  deeper  and  deeper  into  crimes
and  vanities.  The  deluge  that  came  to  punish
these  evils  did  not  avail  to  cure  them.  “  The
world  was  renewed  *  and  the  earth  rose  again
above  the  bosom  of  the  waters,  but  in  this  reno¬
vation  there  remained  eternally  some  trace  of  di-

*  Bossuet :  Discours  sur  Thistoire  universelle,  Part  II,
Chap.  I.


94


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


vine  vengeance.  Until  the  deluge  all  nature  had
been  exceedingly  hardy  and  vigorous,  but  by  that
vast  flood  of  water  which  God  had  spread  out  over
the  earth,  and  by  its  long  abiding  there,  all  saps
were  diluted;  the  air,  charged  with  too  dense  and
heavy  a  moisture,  bred  ranker  principles  of  cor¬
ruption.  The  early  constitution  of  the  universe
was  weakened,  and  human  life,  from  stretching
as  it  had  formerly  done  to  near  a  thousand  years,
grew  gradually  briefer.  Herbs  and  roots  lost  their
primitive  potency  and  stronger  food  had  to  be
furnished  to  man  by  the  flesh  of  other  animals.
.  .  .  Death  gained  upon  life  and  men  felt  them¬
selves  overtaken  by  a  speedier  chastisement.  As
day  by  day  they  sank  deeper  in  their  wickedness,  it
was  hut  right  they  should  daily,  as  it  were,  stick
faster  in  their  woe.  The  very  change  in  nourish¬
ment  made  manifest  their  decline  and  degradation,
since  as  they  became  feebler  they  became  also  more
voracious  and  blood-thirsty.”

Henceforth  there  were  two  spirits,  two  parties,
or,  as  Saint  Augustine  called  them,  two  cities  in
the  world.  The  City  of  Satan,  whatever  its  arti¬
fices  in  art,  war,  or  philosophy,  was  essentially  cor¬
rupt  and  impious.  Its  joy  was  but  a  comic  mask
and  its  beauty  the  whitening  of  a  sepulchre.  It
stood  condemned  before  God  and  before  man’s  bet¬
ter  conscience  by  its  vanity,  cruelty,  and  secret
misery,  by  its  ignorance  of  all  that  it  truly  be¬
hoved  a  man  to  know  who  was  destined  to  immor¬
tality.  Lost,  as  it  seemed,  wdthin  this  Babylon,


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


95


or  visible  only  in  its  obscure  and  forgotten  pur¬
lieus,  lived  on  at  the  same  time  the  City  of  God,
the  society  of  all  the  souls  God  predestined  to
salvation;  a  city  which,  however  humble  and  in¬
conspicuous  it  might  seem  on  earth,  counted  its
myriad  transfigured  citizens  in  heaven,  and  had
its  destinies,  like  its  foundations,  in  eternity.  To
this  City  of  God  belonged,  in  the  first  place,  the
patriarchs  and  the  prophets  who,  throughout  their
plaintive  and  ardent  lives,  were  faithful  to  what
echoes  still  remained  of  a  primeval  revelation,  and
waited  patiently  for  the  greater  revelation  to  come.
To  the  same  city  belonged  the  magi  who  followed
a  star  till  it  halted  over  the  stable  in  Bethlehem;
Simeon,  who  divined  the  present  salvation  of  Is-  ‘
rael;  John  the  Baptist,  who  bore  witness  to  the
same  and  made  straight  its  path;  and  Peter,  to
whom  not  flesh  and  blood,  but  the  spirit  of  the
Father  in  heaven,  revealed  the  Lord’s  divinity.
For  salvation  had  indeed  come  with  the  fulness
of  time,  not,  as  the  carnal  Jews  had  imagined  it,
in  the  form  of  an  earthly  restoration,  but  through
the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  Virgin
Mary,  his  death  upon  a  cross,  his  descent  into  hell,
and  his  resurrection  at  the  third  day  according  to
the  Scriptures.  To  the  same  city  belonged  finally
all  those  who,  believing  in  the  reality  and  efficacy
of  Christ’s  mission,  relied  on  his  merits  and  fol¬
lowed  his  commandment  of  unearthly  love.

All  history  was  henceforth  essentially  nothing
but  the  conflict  between  these  two  cities;  two  mo-


96


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ralities,  one  natural,  the  other  supernatural;  two
philosophies,  one  rational,  the  other  revealed ;
two  beauties,  one  corporeal,  the  other  spiritual;
two  glories,  one  temporal,  the  other  eternal;  two
institutions,  one  the  world,  the  other  the  Church.
These,  whatever  their  momentary  alliances  or  com¬
promises,  were  radically  opposed  and  fundamen¬
tally  alien  to  one  another.  Their  conflict  was  to
fill  the  ages  until,  when  wheat  and  tares  had  long
flourished  together  and  exhausted  between  them
the  earth  for  whose  substance  they  struggled,  the
harvest  should  come;  the  terrible  day  of  reckoning
when  those  who  had  believed  the  things  of  religion
to  be  imaginary  would  behold  with  dismay  the
Lord  visibly  coming  down  through  the  clouds  of
heaven,  the  angels  blowing  their  alarming  trum¬
pets,  all  generations  of  the  dead  rising  from  their
graves,  and  judgment  without  appeal  passed  on
every  man,  to  the  edification  of  the  universal  com¬
pany  and  his  own  unspeakable  joy  or  confusion.
Whereupon  the  blessed  would  enter  eternal  bliss
with  God  their  master  and  the  wicked  everlasting
torments  with  the  devil  whom  they  served.

The  drama  of  history  was  thus  to  close  upon  a
second  tableau:  long-robed  and  beatified  cohorts
passing  above,  amid  various  psalmodies,  into  an
infinite  luminous  space,  while  below  the  damned,
howling,  writhing,  and  half  transformed  into  loath¬
some  beasts,  should  be  engulfed  in  a  fiery  furnace.
The  two  cities,  always  opposite  in  essence,  should
thus  be  finally  divided  in  existence,  each  bear-


THE  CHRISTIAN  EPIC


97


ing  its  natural  fruits  and  manifesting  its  true
nature.


Let  the  reader  fill  out  this  outline  for  himself
with  its  thousand  details;  let  him  remember  the
endless  mysteries,  arguments,  martyrdoms,  conse¬
crations  that  carried  out  the  sense  and  made  vital
the  beauty  of  the  whole.  Let  him  pause  before
the  phenomenon;  he  can  ill  afford,  if  he  wishes
to  understand  history  or  the  human  mind,  to  let
the  apparition  float  by  unchallenged  without  de¬
livering  up  its  secret.  What  shall  we  say  of  this
Christian  dream?

Those  who  are  still  troubled  by  the  fact  that
this  dream  is  by  many  taken  for  a  reality,  and
who  are  consequently  obliged  to  defend
themselves  against  it,  as  against  some
dangerous  error  in  science  or  in  philoso¬
phy,  may  be  allowed  to  marshal  argu¬
ments  in  its  disproof.  Such,  however,
is  not  my  intention.  Do  we  marshal
arguments  against  the  miraculous  birth  of  Bud¬
dha,  or  the  story  of  Cronos  devouring  his  chil¬
dren?  We  seek  rather  to  honour  the  piety  and
to  understand  the  poetry  embodied  in  those  fa¬
bles.  If  it  be  said  that  those  fables  are  be-

»

lieved  by  no  one,  I  reply  that  those  fables  are
or  have  been  believed  just  as  unhesitatingly  as  the
Christian  theology,  and  by  men  no  less  reasonable
or  learned  than  the  unhappy  apologists  of  our  own
ancestral  creeds.  Matters  of  religion  should  never


Mythology  is
a  language
and  must  be
understood  to
convey  some¬
thing  by
symbols.


98


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


be  matters  of  controversy.  We  neither  argue  with
a  lover  about  his  taste,  nor  condemn  him,  if  we
are  just,  for  knowing  so  human  a  passion.  That
he  harbours  it  is  no  indication  of  a  want  of  sanity
on  his  part  in  other  matters.  But  while  we  acqui¬
esce  in  his  experience,  and  are  glad  he  has  it,  we
need  no  arguments  to  dissuade  us  from  sharing  it.
Each  man  may  have  his  own  loves,  but  the  object
in  each  case  is  different.  And  so  it  is,  or  should
be,  in  religion.  Before  the  rise  of  those  strange
and  fraudulent  Hebraic  pretensions  there  was  no
question  among  men  about  the  national,  personal,
and  poetic  character  of  religious  allegiance.  It
could  never  have  been  a  duty  to  adopt  a  religion
not  one’s  own  any  more  than  a  language,  a  coin¬
age,  or  a  costume  not  current  in  one’s  own  coun-
v'  try.  The  idea  that  religion  contains  a  literal,  not
a  symbolic,  representation  of  truth  and  life  is  sim¬
ply  an  impossible  idea.j  Whoever  entertains  it  has
not  come  within  the  region  of  profitable  philoso¬
phising  on  that  subject.  His  science  is  not  wide
enough  to  cover  all  existence.  He  has  not  discov¬
ered  that  there  can  be  no  moral  allegiance  except
to  the  ideal.^  His  certitude  and  his  arguments  are
no  more  pertinent  to  the  religious  question  than
would  be  the  insults,  blows,  and  murders  to  which,
if  he  could,  he  would  appeal  in  the  next  instance.
Philosophy  may  describe  unreason,  as  it  may  de¬
scribe  force;  it  cannot  hope  to  refute  them.


CHAPTER  VII


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  INFUSED

INTO  CHRISTIANITY

The  western  intellect,  in  order  to  accept  the

gospel,  had  to  sublimate  it  into  a  neo-Platonic

Need  of  system  of  metaphysics.  In  like  man-

paganising  ner  (the  western  heart  had  to  render

Christianity.  , .  ..  .  n  ,

Christianity  congenial  and  adequate  by
a  rich  infusion  of  pagan  custom  and  sentimenij
This  adaptation  was  more  gentle  and  facile  than
might  be  supposed.  We  are  too  much  inclined  to
impute  an  abstract  and  ideal  Christianity  to  the
polyglot  souls  of  early  Christians,  and  to  ignore
that  mysterious  and  miraculous  side  of  later  pagan¬
ism  from  which  Christian  cultus  and  ritual  are
chiefly  derived.  In  the  third  century  Christianity  ,
and  devout  paganism  were,  in  a  religious  sense,
closely  akin ;  each  differed  much  less  from  the  other
than  from  that  religion  which  at  other  epochs  had
borne  or  should  bear  its  own  name.  Had  Julian
the  Apostate  succeeded  in  his  enterprise  he  would
not  have  rescued  anything  which  the  admirers  of
classic  paganism  could  at  all  rejoice  in;  a  disciple
of  Iamblichus  could  not  but  plunge  headlong  into
the  same  sea  of  superstition  and  dialectic  which

99


100


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


had  submerged  Christianity.  In  both  parties  ethics
were  irrational  and  morals  corrupt.  The  political
and  humane  religion  of  antiquity  had  disappeared,
and  the  question  between  Christians,  and  pagans
amounted  simply  to  a  choice  of  fanaticisms.  Rea¬
son  had  suffered  a  general  eclipse,  but  civilisation,
although  decayed,  still  subsisted,  and  a  certain
scholastic  discipline,  a  certain  speculative  habit,
and  many  an  ancient  religious  usage  remained  in
the  world.  The  people  could  change  their  gods,
but  not  the  spirit  in  which  they  worshipped  them.
Christianity  had  insinuated  itself  almost  unob¬
served  into  a  society  full  of  rooted  traditions.  I  The
first  disciples  had  been  disinherited  J ews,  with  re¬
ligious  habits  which  men  of  other  races  and  inter¬
ests  could  never  have  adopted  intelligently;  the
Church  was  accordingly  wise  enough  to  perpetuate
in  its  practice  at  least  an  indispensable  minimum
of  popular  paganism/  How  considerable  this  mini¬
mum  was  a  glance  at  Catholic  piety  will  suffice
to  convince  us.

The  Graeco- Jewish  system  of  theology  con¬
structed  by  the  Fathers  had  its  liturgical  coun-
Cathoiic  terpart  in  the  sacraments  and  in  a

human1  than  devout  eloquence  which  may  be  repre-
the  liturgy.  sented  to  us  fairly  enough  by  the  Ro¬
man  missal  and  breviary.  This  liturgy,  transfused
as  it  is  with  pagan  philosophy  and  removed  thereby
from  the  Oriental  directness  and  formlessness  of
the  Bible,  keeps  for  the  most  part  its  theological
and  patristic  tone.  Psalms  abound,  Virgin  and


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  101


saints  are  barely  mentioned,  a  certain  uniyersalism
and  concentration  of  thought  upon  the  Redemp¬
tion  and  its  speculative  meaning  pervades  the
Latin  ritual  sung  behind  the  altar-rails.  But  any
one  who  enters  a  Catholic  church  with  an  intelli¬
gent  interpreter  will  at  once  perceive  the  immense
distance  which  separates  that  official  and  imper¬
sonal  ritual  from  the  daily  prayers  and  practices
of  Catholic  people.  The  latter  refer  to  the  real
exigences  of  daily  life  and  serve  to  express  or  re¬
organise  personal  passions.  While  mass  is  being
celebrated  the  old  woman  will  tell  her  beads,  lost
in  a  vague  rumination  over  her  own  troubles;  while
the  priests  chant  something  unintelligible  about
Abraham  or  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  housewife  will
light  her  wax-candles,  duly  blessed  for  the  occa¬
sion,  before  Saint  Barbara,  to  be  protected  thereby
from  the  lightning;  and  while  the  preacher  is  re¬
peating,  by  rote,  dialectical  subtleties  about  the
union  of  the  two  natures  in  Christ’s  person,  a  lis¬
tener’s  fancy  may  float  sadly  over  the  mystery  of
love  and  of  life,  and  (being  himself  without  re¬
sources  in  the  premises)  he  may  order  a  mass  to
be  said  for  the  repose  of  some  departed  soul.

In  a  Catholic  country,  every  spot  and  every  man
has  a  particular  patron.  These  patrons  are  some¬
times  local  worthies,  canonised  by  tradition  or  by
the  Roman  see,  but  no  less  often  they  are  simply
local  appellations  of  Christ  or  the  Virgin,  appella¬
tions  which  are  known  theoretically  to  refer  all
to  the  same  numen ,  but  which  practically  possess


102


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


diverse  religious  values;  for  the  miracles  and  in¬
tercessions  attributed  to  the  Virgin  under  one  title
are  far  from  being  miracles  and  intercessions  at¬
tributable  to  her  under  another.  He  who  has  been
all  his  life  devout  to  Loreto  will  not  place  any  spe¬
cial  reliance  on  the  Pillar  at  Saragossa.  A  bereaved
mother  will  not  fly  to  the  Immaculate  Conception
for  comfort,  but  of  course  to  Our  Lady  of  the
Seven  Sorrows.  Each  religious  order  and  all  the
laity  more  or  less  affiliated  to  it  will  cultivate  spe¬
cial  saints  and  special  mysteries.  There  are  also
particular  places  and  days  on  which  graces  are
granted,  as  not  on  others,  and  the  quantity  of  such
graces  is  measurable  by  canonic  standards.  So
many  days  of  remitted  penance  correspond  to  a
work  of  a  certain  merit,  for  there  is  a  celestial
currency  in  which  mulcts  and  remissions  may  be
accurately  summed  and  subtracted  by  angelic  re¬
corders.  One  man’s  spiritual  earnings  may  by  gift
be  attributed  and  imputed  to  another,  a  belief
which  may  seem  arbitrary  and  superstitious  but
which  is  really  a  natural  corollary  to  fundamental
doctrines  like  the  atonement,  the  communion  of
saints,  and  intercession  for  the  dead  and  living.

Another  phase  of  the  same  natural  religion  is
seen  in  frequent  festivals,  in  the  consecration  of
Natural  buildings,  ships,  fields,  labours,  and
pieties.  seasons;  in  intercessions  by  the  greater
dead  for  the  living  and  by  the  living  for  the  lesser
dead — a  perfect  survival  of  heroes  and  penates  on
the  one  hand  and  of  pagan  funeral  rites  and  com-


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  103


memorations  on  the  other.  Add  Lent  with  its
carnival,  ember-days,  all  saints5  and  all  souls5,
Christmas  with  its  magi  or  its  Saint  Nicholas,
Saint  Agnes5s  and  Saint  Yalentine5s  days  with
their  profane  associations,  a  saint  for  finding  lost
objects  and  another  for  prospering  amourettes,
since  all  great  and  tragic  loves  have  their  inevita¬
ble  patrons  in  Christ  and  the  Virgin,  in  Mary
Magdalene,  and  in  the  mystics  innumerable.  This,
with  what  more  could  easily  be  rehearsed,  makes
a  complete  paganism  within  Christian  tradition,  a
paganism  for  which  little  basis  can  be  found  in  the
gospel,  the  mass,  the  breviary,  or  the  theologians.

Yet  these  accretions  were  as  well  authenticated
as  the  substructure,  for  they  rested  on  human  na¬
ture.  To  feel,  for  instance,  the  special  efficacy  of
your  village  Virgin  or  of  the  miraculous  Christ
whose  hermitage  is  perched  on  the  overhanging  hill,
is  a  genuine  experience.  The  principle  of  it  is  clear
and  simple.  Those  shrines,  those  images,  the  festi¬
vals  associated  with  them,  have  entered  your  mind
together  with  your  earliest  feelings.  Your  first
glimpses  of  mortal  vicissitudes  have  coincided  with
the  awe  and  glitter  of  sacramental  moments  in
which  those  numina  were  invoked;  and  on  that
deeper  level  of  experience,  in  those  lower  reaches
of  irrationalism  in  which  such  impressions  lie,  they
constitute  a  mystic  resource  subsisting  beneath  all
conventions  and  overt  knowledge.  When  the  doc¬
tors  blunder — as  they  commonly  do — the  saints
may  find  a  cure;  after  all,  the  saints5  success  in


104


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


medicine  seems  to  a  crude  empiricism  almost  as
probable  as  the  physicians’.  Special  and  local
patrons  are  the  original  gods,  and  whatever  re¬
ligious  value  speculative  and  cosmic  deities  retain
they  retain  surreptitiously,  by  virtue  of  those  very
bonds  with  human  interests  and  passionate  desires
which  ancestral  demons  once  borrowed  from  the
hearth  they  guarded,  the  mountain  they  haunted,
or  the  sacrifice  they  inhaled  with  pleasure,  until
their  hearts  softened  toward  their  worshippers.  In
itself,  and  as  a  minimised  and  retreating  theology
represents  it,  a  universal  power  has  no  specific  en-
ergy,  no  determinate  interest  at  heart;  there  is
nothing  friendly  about  it  nor  allied  to  your  private
necessities;,  no  links  of  place  and  time  fortify  and
define  its  influence.  Nor  is  it  rational  to  appeal
for  a  mitigation  of  evils  or  for  assistance  against
them  to  the  very  being  that  has  decreed  and  is
inflicting  them  for  some  fixed  purpose  of  its  own.

Paganism  or  natural  religion  wTas  at  first,  like
so  many  crude  religious  notions,  optimistic  and
Refuge  taken  material;  the  worshipper  expected  his
in  the  piety  to  make  his  pot  boil,  to  cure  his

supernatural.  .  i  •  i  jit  t

disease,  to  prosper  his  battles,  and
to  render  harmless  his  ignorance  of  the  world  in
which  he  lived.  But  such  faith  ran  up  immedi¬
ately  against  the  facts;  it  was  discountenanced  at
every  turn  by  experience  and  reflection.  The
V  whole  of  nature  and  life,  when  they  are  understood
at  all,  have  to  be  understood  on  an  opposite  prin¬
ciple,  on  the  principle  that  fate,  having  naturally


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  105


furnished  us  with  a  determinate  will  and  a  deter¬
minate  endowment,  gives  us  a  free  field  and  no
favour  in  a  natural  world.  Hence  the  retreat  of
religion  to  the  supernatural,  a  region  to  which  in
its  cruder  forms  it  was  far  from  belonging.  Now
this  retreat,  in  the  case  of  classic  paganism,  took
place  with  the  decay  of  military  and  political  life
and  would  have  produced  an  ascetic  popular  sys¬
tem,  some  compound  of  Oriental  and  Greek  tradi¬
tions,  even  if  Christianity  had  not  intervened  at
that  juncture  and  opportunely  pre-empted  the
ground.

Christianity,  as  wTe  have  seen,  had  elements  in
it  which  gave  it  a  decisive  advantage;  its  outlook
was  historical,  not  cosmic,  and  consequently  ad¬
mitted  a  non-natural  future  for  the  individual  and
for  the  Church;  it  was  anti-political  and  looked
for  progress  only  in  that  region  in  which  progress
was  at  that  time  possible,  in  the  private  soul;  it
was  democratic,  feminine,  and  unworldly;  its  Ori¬
ental  deity  and  prophets  had  a  primitive  simplicity
and  pathos  not  found  in  pagan  heroes  or  polite
metaphysical  entities;  its  obscure  Hebrew  poetry
opened,  like  music,  an  infinite  field  for  brooding
fancy  and  presumption.  The  consequence  was  a
doubling  of  the  world,  so  that  every  Christian  led
The  episodes  a  dual  existence,  one  full  of  trouble  and

consecrated  vanity  0n  earth>  which  [t  WaS  Piety  in
mystically.  him  to  despise  and  neglect,  another  full

of  hope  and  consolation  in  a  region  parallel  to

earth  and  directly  above  it,  every  part  of  which


106


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


corresponded  to  something  in  earthly  life  and  could
he  reached,  so  to  speak,  by  a  Jacob's  ladder  upon
which  aspiration  and  grace  ascended  and  descended
continually.  Birth  had  its  sacramental  consecra¬
tion  to  the  supernatural  in  baptism,  growth  in  con¬
firmation,  self-consciousness  in  confession,  puberty
in  communion,  effort  in  prayer,  defeat  in  sacrifice,
sin  in  penance,  speculation  in  revealed  wisdom,  art
in  worship,  natural  kindness  in  charity,  poverty  in
humility,  death  in  self-surrender  and  resurrection.
When  the  mind  grew  tired  of  contemplation  the
lips  could  still  echo  some  pious  petition,  keeping
the  body's  attitude  and  habit  expressive  of  humil¬
ity  and  propitious  to  receiving  grace;  and  when
the  knees  and  lips  were  themselves  weary,  a  candle
might  be  left  burning  before  the  altar,  to  witness
that  the  desire  momentarily  forgotten  was  not  ex¬
tinguished  in  the  heart.  Through  prayer  and  re¬
ligious  works  the  absent  could  be  reached  and  the
dead  helped  on  their  journey,  and  amid  earthly
estrangements  and  injustices  there  always  remained
the  church  open  to  all  and  the  society  of  heaven.

Nothing  is  accordingly  more  patent  than  that
Christianity  was  paganised  by  the  early  Church;
Paganism  indeed,  the  creation  of  the  Church  was

Hebraism'  itself  what  to  a  Hebraising  mind  must
liberalised.  seem  a  corruption,  namely,  a  mixing  of
pagan  philosophy  and  ritual  with  the  Gospel. )  But
this  sort  of  constitutive  corruption  would  more
properly  be  called  an  adaptation,  an  absorption,
or  even  a  civilisation  of  Hebraism;  for  by  this  mar-


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  107


riage  with  paganism  Christianity  fitted  itself  to
live  and  work  in  the  civilised  world.  By  this  cor¬
ruption  it  was  completed  and  immensely  improved,
like  Anglo-Saxon  by  its  corruption  through  French
and  Latin;  for  it  is  always  an  improvement  in  re¬
ligion,  whose  business  is  to  express  and  inspire
spiritual  sentiment,  that  it  should  learn  to  express
and  inspire  that  sentiment  more  generously.  Pa¬
ganism  was  nearer  than  Hebraism  to  the  Life  of
Reason  because  its  myths  were  more  transparent
and  its  temper  less  fanatical;  and  so  a  paganised
Christianity  approached  more  closely  that  ideality
which  constitutes  religious  truth  than  a  bare  and
intense  Hebraism,  in  its  hostility  to  human  genius,
could  ever  have  done  if  isolated  and  unqualified.  )
The  Christianity  which  the  pagans  adopted,  in
becoming  itself  pagan,  remained  a  religion  natu-
The  system  ral  to  their  country  and  their  heart.  It

and  fcnmded  constituted  a  paganism  expressive  of
on  despair.  their  later  and  calamitous  experience,
a  paganism  acquainted  with  sorrow,  a  religion  that
had  passed  through  both  civilisation  and  despair,
and  had  been  reduced  to  translating  the  eclipsed
values  of  life  into  supernatural  symbols.  It  be¬
came  a  post-rational  religion.  Of  course,  to  un¬
derstand  such  a  system  it  is  necessary  to  possess
the  faculties  it  exercises  and  the  experience  it  rep¬
resents.  Where  life  has  not  reached  the  level  of
reflection,  religion  and  philosophy  must  both  be
pre-rational;  they  must  remain  crudely  experi¬
mental,  unconscious  of  the  limits  of  excellence  and


108


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


life.  Under  such  circumstances  it  is  obviously  im¬
possible  that  religion  should  be  reconstituted  on
a  supernatural  plane,  or  should  learn  to  express
experience  rather  than  impulse.  Now  the  Chris¬
tianity  of  the  gospels  was  itself  post-rational;  it
had  turned  its  back  on  the  world.  In  this  respect
the  mixture  with  paganism  altered  nothing;  it
merely  reinforced  the  spiritualised  and  lyric  de¬
spair  of  the  Hebrews  with  the  personal  and  meta¬
physical  despair  of  the  Romans  and  Greeks.  For
all  the  later  classic  philosophy — Stoic,  Sceptic,  or
Epicurean — was  founded  on  despair  and  was  post-
rational.  Pagan  Christianity,  or  Catholicism,  may
accordingly  be  said  to  consist  of  two  elements:
-"first,  the  genius  of  paganism,  the  faculty  of  ex¬
pressing  spiritual  experience  in  myth  and  external
symbol,  and,  second,  the  experience  of  disillusion,
forcing  that  pagan  imagination  to  take  wing  from
earth  and  to  decorate  no  longer  the  political  and
material  circumstances  of  life,  but  rather  to  re¬
move  beyond  the  clouds  and  constitute  its  realm
of  spirit  beyond  the  veil  of  time  and  nature,  in  a
posthumous  and  metaphysical  sphere:  A  mythical
economy  abounding  in  points  of  attachment  to
human  experience  and  in  genial  interpretations  of
life,  yet  lifted  beyond  visible  nature  and  filling  a
reported  world,  a  world  believed  in  on  hearsay  or,
as  it  is  called,  on  faith — that  is  Catholicism.

When  this  religion  was  established  in  the  Ro¬
man  Empire,  that  empire  was  itself  threatened  by
the  barbarians  who  soon  permeated  and  occupied


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  109


it  and  made  a  new  and  unhappy  beginning  to
European  history.  They  adopted  Christianity,  not
because  it  represented  their  religious  needs  or  in¬
spiration,  but  because  it  formed  part  of  a  culture
and  a  social  organisation  the  influence  of  which
they  had  not,  in  their  simplicity,  the  means  to
withstand.  During  several  ages  they  could  only
modify  by  their  misunderstandings  and  inertia
arts  wholly  new  to  their  lives.

What  sort  of  religion  these  barbarians  may  pre¬
viously  have  had  is  beyond  our  accurate  knowl-

External  con-  e<2ge-  They  handed  down  a  mythology

version  of  the  not  radically  different  from  the  Graeco¬
barbarians.  -rv  .  i  i  ,

Roman,  though  more  vaguely  and  gro¬
tesquely  conceived;  and  they  recognised  tribal  du¬
ties  and  glories  from  which  religious  sanctions
could  hardly  have  been  absent.  But  a  barbarian
mind,  like  a  child’s,  is  easy  to  convert  and  to
people  with  what  stories  you  will.  The  Northmen
drank  in  with  pleased  astonishment  what  the  monks
told  them  about  hell  and  heaven,  God  the  Father
and  God  the  Son,  the  Virgin  and  the  beautiful
angels;  they  accepted  the  sacraments  with  vague
docility;  they  showed  a  qualified  respect,  often
broken  upon,  it  is  true,  by  instinctive  rebellions,
for  a  clergy  which  after  all  represented  whatever
vestiges  of  learning,  benevolence,  or  art  still  lin¬
gered  in  the  world.  But  this  easy  and  boasted
conversion  was  fanciful  only  and  skin-deep.  A
non-Christian  ethics  of  valour  and  honour,  a  non-
Christian  fund  of  superstition,  legend,  and  senti-


110


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ment,  subsisted  always  among  mediaeval  peoples.
Their  soul,  so  largely  inarticulate,  might  be  over¬
laid  with  churchly  habits  and  imprisoned  for  the
moment  in  the  panoply  of  patristic  dogma;  but
pagan  Christianity  always  remained  a  religion  for¬
eign  to  them,  accepted  only  while  their  minds  con¬
tinued  in  a  state  of  helpless  tutelage.  Such  a
foreign  religion  could  never  be  understood  by  them
in  its  genuine  motives  and  spirit.  They  were  with¬
out  the  experience  and  the  plastic  imagination
which  had  given  it  birth.  It  might  catch  them
unawares  and  prevail  over  them  for  a  time,  but
even  during  that  period  it  could  not  root  out  from
barbarian  souls  anything  opposed  to  it  which
subsisted  there.  It  was  thus  that  the  Roman
Church  hatched  the  duck’s  egg  of  Protestantism.

In  its  native  seats  the  Catholic  system  prompts
among  those  who  inwardly  reject  it  satire  and  in-
Expression  of  difference  rather  than  heresy,  because

genius  within  011  the  wh°le  it  expresses  well  enough
Catholicism,  the  religious  instincts  of  the  people.

Only  those  strenuously  oppose  it  who  hate  religion
itself.  But  among  converted  barbarians  the  case
was  naturally  different,  and  opposition  to  the
Church  came  most  vehemently  from  certain  re¬
ligious  natures  whose  instincts  it  outraged  or  left
unsatisfied.  Even  before  heresy  burst  forth  this
religious  restlessness  found  vent  in  many  direc¬
tions.  It  endowed  Christianity  with  several  beau¬
tiful  but  insidious  gifts,  several  incongruous  though
well-meant  forms  of  expression.  Among  these  we


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  111


may  count  Gothic  art,  chivalrous  sentiment,  and
even  scholastic  philosophy.  These  things  came,
as  we  know,  ostensibly  to  serve  Christianity,  which
has  learned  to  regard  them  as  its  own  emanations.
But  in  truth  they  barbarised  Christianity  just  as
Greek  philosophy  and  worship  and  Boman  habits
of  administration  had  paganised  it  in  the  begin¬
ning.  And  barbarised  Christianity,  even  before
it  became  heretical,  was  something  new,  something
very  different  in  temper  and  beauty  from  the
pagan  Christianity  of  the  South  and  East.

In  the  Catholicism  of  the  Middle  Ages,  as  it
flourished  in  the  North,  the  barbarian  soul,  ap¬
prenticed  to  monkish  masters,  appeared  in  all  its
childlike  trust,  originality,  and  humour.  There
was  something  touching  and  grotesque  about  it.
We  seem  to  see  a  child  playing  with  the  toys  of
age,  his  green  hopes  and  fancies  weaving  them¬
selves  about  an  antique  metaphysical  monument,
the  sanctuary  of  a  decrepit  world.  The  structure
of  that  monument  was  at  first  not  affected,  and
even  when  it  had  been  undermined  and  partially
ruined,  its  style  could  not  be  transformed,  but,
clad  in  its  northern  ivy,  it  wore  at  once  a  new
aspect.  To  races  without  experience — that  is,
without  cumulative  traditions  or  a  visible  past —
Christianity  could  be  nothing  but  a  fairy  story
and  a  gratuitous  hope,  as  if  they  had  been  told
about  the  Sultan  of  Timbuctoo  and  promised  that
they  should  some  day  ride  on  his  winged  Arabian
horses.  The  tragic  meaning  of  the  Christian  faith.


112


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


its  immense  renunciation  of  all  things  earthly  and
the  merely  metaphysical  glory  of  its  transfigured
life,  commonly  escaped  theix  apprehension,  as  it
still  continues  to  do.  They  listened  open-mouthed
to  the  missionary  and  accepted  his  asseverations
with  unsuspecting  emotion,  like  the  Anglo-Saxon
king  who  likened  the  soul  to  a  bird  flying  in  and
out  of  a  tent  at  night,  about  whose  further  for¬
tunes  any  account  would  be  interesting  to  hear.
fA  seed  planted  in  such  a  virgin  and  unculti¬
vated  soil  must  needs  bring  forth  fruit  of  a  new
savour.

In  northern  Christianity  a  fresh  quality  of
brooding  tenderness  prevailed  over  the  tragic  pas-
intemai  sion  elsewhere  characteristic  of  Catholic

between  devotion.  Intricacy  was  substituted

the  two.  for  dignity  and  poetry  for  rhetoric;  the
basilica  became  an  abbey  and  the  hermitage  a
school.  The  feudal  ages  were  a  wonderful  seed¬
time  in  a  world  all  gaunt  with  ruins.  Horrors  were
there  mingled  with  delicacies  and  confusion  with
idyllic  peace.  It  was  here  a  poet’s  childhood  passed
amid  the  crash  of  war,  there  an  alchemist’s  old
age  flickering  away  amid  cobwebs  and  gibberish.
Something  jocund  and  mischievous  peeped  out
even  in  the  cloister ;  gargoyles  leered  from  the  bel¬
fry,  while  ivy  and  holly  grew  about  the  cross.  The
Middle  Ages  were  the  true  renaissance.  Their
Christianity  was  the  theme,  the  occasion,  the  ex¬
cuse  for  their  art  and  jollity,  their  curiosity  and
tenderness;  it  was  far  from  being  the  source  of


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  113


those  delightful  inventions.  The  Crusades  were
not  inspired  by  the  Prince  of  Peace,  to  whose  hon¬
our  they  were  fancifully  and  passionately  dedi¬
cated;  so  chivalry,  Gothic  architecture,  and  scho¬
lastic  philosophy  were  profane  expressions  of  a
self-discovering  genius  in  a  people  incidentally
Christian.  The  barbarians  had  indeed  been  indoc¬
trinated,  they  had  been  introduced  into  an  alien
spiritual  and  historic  medium,  but  they  had  not
been  made  over  or  inwardly  tamed.  It  had  per¬
haps  been  rendered  easier  for  them,  by  contact
with  an  existing  or  remembered  civilisation,  to
mature  their  own  genius,  even  in  the  act  of  con¬
fusing  its  expression  through  foreign  accretions.
They  had  been  thereby  stimulated  to  civilise  them¬
selves  and  encouraged  also  to  believe  themselves
civilised  somewhat  prematurely,  when  they  had  be¬
come  heirs  merely  to  the  titles  and  trappings  of
civilisation.

The  process  of  finding  their  own  art  and  polity,
begun  under  foreign  guidance,  was  bound  on
the  whole  to  diverge  more  and  more  from  its
Latin  model.  It  consisted  now  of  imitation,  now
of  revulsion  and  fanciful  originality;  never  was
a  race  so  much  under  the  sway  of  fashions.
Fashion  is  something  barbarous,  for  it  produces
innovation  without  reason  and  imitation  with¬
out  benefit.  It  marks  very  clearly  that  mar¬
gin  of  irresponsible  variation  in  manners  and
thoughts  which  among  a  people  artificially  civil¬
ised  may  so  easily  be  larger  than  the  solid  core.


114


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


It  is  characteristic  of  occidental  society  in  mediae¬
val  and  modern  times,  because  this  society  is  led
by  people  who,  being  educated  in  a  foreign  culture,
remain  barbarians  at  heart.  To  this  day  we  have
not  achieved  a  really  native  civilisation.  Our  art,
morals,  and  religion,  though  deeply  dyed  in  native
feeling,  are  still  only  definable  and,  indeed,  con¬
ceivable  by  reference  to  classic  and  alien  standards.
Among  the  northern  races  culture  is  even  more
artificial  and  superinduced  than  among  the  south¬
ern;  whence  the  strange  phenomenon  of  snobbery
in  society,  affectation  in  art,  and  a  violent  con¬
trast  between  the  educated  and  the  uneducated,
the  rich  and  the  poor,  classes  that  live  on  different
intellectual  planes  and  often  have  different  relig¬
ions.  Some  educated  persons,  accordingly,  are
merely  students  and  imbibers;  they  sit  at  the  feet
of  a  past  which,  not  being  really  theirs,  can  pro¬
duce  no  fruit  in  them  but  sentimentality.  Others
are  merely  protestants;  they  are  active  in  the
moral  sphere  only  by  virtue  of  an  inward  rebellion
against  something  greater  and  overshadowing,  yet
repulsive  and  alien.  They  are  conscious  truants
from  a  foreign  school  of  life.

In  the  Protestant  religion  it  is  necessary  to  dis¬
tinguish  inner  inspiration  from  historical  entan-
Tradition  glements.  Unfortunately,  as  the  whole
at  oddsln^  doctrinal  form  of  this  religion  is  irrele-
Protcstantism.  vant  to  its  spirit  and  imposed  from
without,  being  due  to  the  step-motherly  nurture
it  received  from  the  Church,  we  can  reach  a  con-


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  115


ception  of  its  inner  spirit  only  by  studying  its
tendency  and  laws  of  change  or  its  incidental  ex¬
pression  in  literature  and  custom.  Yet  these  in¬
direct  symptoms  are  so  striking  that  even  an
outsider,  if  at  all  observant,  need  not  fear  to  mis¬
interpret  them.  Taken  externally,  Protestantism
is,  of  course,  a  form  of  Christianity ;  it  retains  the
Bible  and  a  more  or  less  copious  selection  of  pa¬
tristic  doctrines.  But  in  its  spirit  and  inward
inspiration  it  is  something  quite  as  independent
of  Judea  as  of  Rome.  It  is  simply  the  natural
religion  of  the  Teutons  raising  its  head  above  the
flood  of  Roman  and  Judean  influences.  Its  char¬
acter  may  be  indicated  by  saying  that  it  is  a  relig¬
ion  of  pure  spontaneity,  of  emotional  freedom,
deeply  respecting  itself  but  scarcely  deciphering
its  purposes.  It  is  the  self-consciousness  of  a  spirit
in  process  of  incubation,  jealous  of  its  potentiali¬
ties,  averse  to  definitions  and  finalities  of  any  kind
because  it  can  itself  discern  nothing  fixed  or  final.
It  is  adventurous  and  puzzled  by  the  world,  full  of
rudimentary  virtues  and  clear  fire,  energetic,  faith¬
ful,  rebellious  to  experience,  inexpert  in  all  mat¬
ters  of  art  and  mind.  It  boasts,  not  without  cause,
of  its  depth  and  purity;  but  this  depth  and  purity
are  those  of  any  formless  and  primordial  substance.
It  keeps  unsullied  that  antecedent  integrity  which
is  at  the  bottom  of  every  living  thing  and  at  its
core ;  it  is  not  acquainted  with  that  ulterior  integ¬
rity,  that  sanctity,  which  might  be  attained  at  the
summit  of  experience  through  reason  and  specu-


116


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


\


lative  dominion.  It  accordingly  mistakes  vitality,
both  in  itself  and  in  the  universe,  for  spiritual
life.

This  underlying  Teutonic  religion,  which  we
must  call  Protestantism  for  lack  of  a  better
The  name,  is  anterior  to  Christianity  and

Protestant  can  survive  it.  To  identify  it  with

from  that  of  the  Gospel  may  have  seemed  possible
the  gospeL  so  iong  ag^  ^  opposition  to  pagan

Christianity,  the  Teutonic  spirit  could  appeal  to
the  Gospel  for  support.  The  Gospel  has  indeed
nothing  pagan  about  it,  but  it  has  also  nothing
Teutonic;  and  the  momentary  alliance  of  two
such  disparate  forces  must  naturally  cease  with
the  removal  of  the  common  enemy  which  alone
united  them.  The  Gospel  is  unworldly,  disen¬
chanted,  ascetic;  it  treats  ecclesiastical  estab¬
lishments  with  tolerant  contempt,  conforming  to
them  with  indifference;  it  regards  prosperity  as
a  danger,  earthly  ties  as  a  burden,  Sabbaths  as
a  superstition;  it  revels  in  miracles;  it  is  demo¬
cratic  and  antinomian;  it  loves  contemplation,
poverty,  and  solitude;  it  meets  sinners  with  sym¬
pathy  and  heartfelt  forgiveness,  but  Pharisees
and  Puritans  with  biting  scorn.  In  a  word,  it  is
a  product  of  the  Orient,  where  all  things  are  old
and  equal  and  a  profound  indifference  to  the
business  of  earth  breeds  a  silent  dignity  and  high
sadness  in  the  spirit.  Protestantism  is  the  exact
opposite  of  all  this.  It  is  convinced  of  the  im¬
portance  of  success  and  prosperity;  it  abomi-


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  117


nates  what  is  disreputable;  contemplation  seems
to  it  idleness,  solitude  selfishness,  and  poverty  a
sort  of  dishonourable  punishment.  It  is  con¬
strained  and  punctilious  in  righteousness;  it  re¬
gards  a  married  and  industrious  life  as  typically
godly,  and  there  is  a  sacredness  to  it,  as  of  a
vacant  Sabbath,  in  the  unoccupied  higher  spaces
which  such  an  existence  leaves  for  the  soul.  It
is  sentimental,  its  ritual  is  meagre  and  unctuous,
it  expects  no  miracles,  it  thinks  optimism  akin  to
piety,  and  regards  profitable  enterprise  and  prac¬
tical  ambition  as  a  sort  of  moral  vocation.  Its
Evangelicalism  lacks  the  notes,  so  prominent  in
the  gospel,  of  disillusion,  humility,  and  specula¬
tive  detachment.  Its  benevolence  is  optimistic
and  aims  at  raising  men  to  a  conventional  well¬
being;  it  thus  misses  the  inner  appeal  of  Chris¬
tian  charity  which,  being  merely  remedial  in
physical  matters,  begins  by  renunciation  and
looks  to  spiritual  freedom  and  peace.

Protestantism  was  therefore  attached  from  the
first  to  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  Hebrew
fervour  appears  in  its  worldly  and  pre-rational
form.  It  is  not  democratic  in  the  same  sense  as
post-rational  religions,  which  see  in  the  soul  an
exile  from  some  other  sphere  wearing  for  the
moment,  perhaps,  a  beggar’s  disguise :  it  is  demo¬
cratic  only  in  the  sense  of  having  a  popular  ori¬
gin  and  bending  easily  to  popular  forces.  Swayed
as  it  is  by  public  opinion,  it  is  necessarily  con¬
ventional  in  its  conception  of  duty  and  earnestly


118


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


materialistic;  for  the  meaning  of  the  word  vanity
never  crosses  the  vulgar  heart.  In  fine,  it  is  the
religion  of  a  race  young,  wistful,  and  adven¬
turous,  feeling  its  latent  potentialities,  vaguely
assured  of  an  earthly  vocation,  and  possessing,
like  the  barbarian  and  the  healthy  child,  pure
but  unchastened  energies.  Thus  in  the  Prot¬
estant  religion  the  faith  natural  to  barbarism
appears  clothed,  by  force  of  historical  accident,
in  the  language  of  an  adapted  Christianity.

As  the  Middle  Ages  advanced  the  new-born
human  genius  which  constituted  their  culture

Obstacles  to  grew  daily  more  playful,  curious,  and
humanism.  ornate.  It  was  naturally  in  the  coun¬
tries  formerly  pagan  that  this  new  paganism
principally  flourished.  Religion  began  in  certain
quarters  to  be  taken  philosophically;  its  relation
to  life  began  to  be  understood,  that  it  was  a
poetic  expression  of  need,  hope,  and  ignorance.
Here  prodigious  vested  interests  and  vested  illu¬
sions  of  every  sort  made  dangerous  the  path  of
sincerity.  Genuine  moral  and  religious  impulses
could  not  be  easily  dissociated  from  a  system  of
thought  and  discipline  with  which  for  a  thou¬
sand  years  they  had  been  intimately  interwoven.
Scepticism,  instead  of  seeming,  what  it  naturally
is,  a  moral  force,  a  tendency  to  sincerity,  economy,
and  fine  adjustment  of  life  and  mind  to  experi¬
ence — scepticism  seemed  a  temptation  and  a
danger.  This  situation,  which  still  prevails  in
a  certain  measure,  strikingly  shows  into  how  arti-


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  119

ficial  a  posture  Christianity  has  thrown  the  mind.
If  scepticism,  under  such  circumstances,  by
chance  penetrated  among  the  clergy,  it  was  not
favourable  to  consistency  of  life,  and  it  was  the
more  certain  to  penetrate  among  them  in  that
their  ranks,  in  a  fat  and  unscrupulous  age,  would
naturally  be  largely  recruited  by  men  without  con¬
science  or  ideal  ambitions.  It  became  accordingly
necessary  to  reform  something;  either  the  gay
world  to  suit  the  Churches  primitive  austerity  and
asceticism,  or  the  Church  to  suit  the  world’s  pro¬
fane  and  general  interests.  The  latter  task  was
more  or  less  consciously  undertaken  by  the
humanists  who  would  have  abated  the  clergy’s
wealth  and  irrational  authority,  advanced  polite
learning,  and,  while  of  course  retaining  Chris¬
tianity — for  why  should  an  ancestral  religion  be
changed? — would  have  retained  it  as  a  form  of
paganism,  as  an  ornament  and  poetic  expression
of  human  life.  This  movement,  had  it  not  been
overwhelmed  by  the  fanatical  Reformation  and
the  fanatical  reaction  against  it,  would  doubtless
have  met  with  many  a  check  from  the  Church’s
sincere  zealots;  but  it  could  have  overcome  them
and,  had  it  been  allowed  to  fight  reason’s  battle
with  reason’s  weapons,  would  ultimately  have
led  to  general  enlightenment  without  dividing
Christendom,  kindling  venomous  religious  and  na¬
tional  passions,  or  vitiating  philosophy.

It  was  not  humanism,  however,  that  was  des¬
tined  to  restrain  and  soften  the  Church,  com-


120


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


pleting  by  critical  reflection  that  paganisation  of
Christianity  which  had  taken  place  at  the  begin-
The  ning  instinctively  and  of  necessity.

and°co^e^.  There  was  now  another  force  in  the
reformation,  field,  the  virgin  conscience  and  wil-
fulness  of  the  Teutonic  races,  sincerely  attached
to  what  they  had  assimilated  in  Christianity
and  now  awakening  to  the  fact  that  they  in¬
wardly  abhorred  and  rejected  the  rest.  This
situation,  in  so  uncritical  an  age,  could  be  in¬
terpreted  as  a  return  to  primitive  Christianity,
though  this  had  been  in  truth,  as  we  may  now
perceive,  utterly  opposed  to  the  Teutonic  spirit.
Accordingly,  the  humanistic  movement  was
crossed  and  obscured  by  another,  specifically
religious  and  ostensibly  more  Christian  than  the
Church.  Controversies  followed,  as  puerile  as
they  were  bloody;  for  it  was  not  to  be  expected
that  the  peoples  once  forming  the  Roman  Em¬
pire  were  going  to  surrender  their  ancestral  re¬
ligion  without  a  struggle  and  without  resisting
this  new  barbarian  invasion  into  their  imagina¬
tions  and  their  souls.  They  might  have  suffered
their  Christianised  paganism  to  fade  with  time;
worldly  prosperity  and  arts  might  have  weaned
them  gradually  from  their  supernaturalism,  and
science  from  their  myths;  but  how  were  they  to
abandon  at  once  all  their  traditions,  when  chal¬
lenged  to  do  so  by  a  foreign  supematuralism  so
much  poorer  and  cruder  than  their  own  ?  What
happened  was  that  they  intrenched  themselves


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  121


in  their  system,  cut  themselves  off  from  the
genial  influences  that  might  have  rendered  it
innocuous,  and  became  sectaries,  like  their  oppo¬
nents.  Enlightenment  was  only  to  come  after  a
recrudescence  of  madness  and  by  the  mutual
slaughter  of  a  fresh  crop  of  illusions,  usurpa¬
tions,  and  tyrannies.

It  would  be  easy  to  write,  in  a  satirical  vein,
the  history  of  Protestant  dogma.  Its  history
was  foreseen  from  the  beginning  by  intelligent
observers.  It  consisted  in  a  gradual  and  in¬
evitable  descent  into  a  pious  scepticism.  The
attempt  to  cling  to  various  intermediate  posi¬
tions  on  the  inclined  plane  that  slopes  down
from  ancient  revelation  to  private  experience
can  succeed  only  for  a  time  and  where  local
influences  limit  speculative  freedom.  You  must
slide  smilingly  down  to  the  bottom  or,  in  horror
at  that  eventuality,  creep  up  again  and  reach
out  pathetically  for  a  resting-place  at  the  top.
To  insist  on  this  rather  obvious  situation,  as
exhibited  for  instance  in  the  Anglican  Church,
would  be  to  thresh  straw  and  to  study  in  Prot¬
estantism  only  its  feeble  and  accidental  side.  Its
true  essence  is  not  constituted  by  the  Christian
dogmas  that  at  a  given  moment  it  chances  to
retain,  but  by  the  spirit  in  which  it  constantly

Protestantism  challenges  the  others,  by  the  expres-
an  expression  sion  it  gives  to  personal  integrity,  to

of  character,  .  •  >  i  .  .  §  7  .  »•  «

faith  in  conscience,  to  human  instinct
courageously  meeting  the  world.  It  rebels,  for


122


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


instance,  against  the  Catholic  system  of  measur¬
able  sins  and  merits,  with  rewards  and  pun¬
ishments  legally  adjusted  and  controlled  by
priestly  as  well  as  by  divine  prerogative.  Such
a  supernatural  mechanism  seems  to  an  independ¬
ent  and  uncowed  nature  a  profanation  and  an
imposture.  Away,  it  says,  with  all  intermedi¬
aries  between  the  soul  and  God,  with  all  med¬
dlesome  priestcraft  and  all  mechanical  salvation.
Salvation  shall  be  by  faith  alone,  that  is,  by
an  attitude  and  sentiment  private  to  the  spirit,
by  an  inner  co-operation  of  man  with  the  world.
The  Church  shall  be  invisible,  constituted  by  all
those  who  possess  this  necessary  faith  and  by  no
others.  It  really  follows  from  this,  although  the
conclusion  may  not  be  immediately  drawn,  that
religion  is  not  an  adjustment  to  other  facts  or
powers,  or  to  other  possibilities,  than  those  met
with  in  daily  life  and  in  surrounding  nature,
but  is  rather  a  spiritual  adjustment  to  natural
life,  an  insight  into  its  principles,  by  which  a
man  learns  to  identify  himself  with  the  cosmic
power  and  to  share  its  multifarious  business  no
less  than  its  ulterior  security  and  calm.

Protestantism,  in  this  perfectly  instinctive
trustfulness  and  self-assertion,  is  not  only  prior
it  has  the  to  Christianity  but  more  primitive
spirit  of  life,  than  reason  and  even  than  man.  The

plants  and  animals,  if  they  could  speak,  would
express  their  attitude  to  their  destiny  in  the
Protestant  fashion.  “  He  that  formed  us,”  they


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  123


would  say,  “  lives  and  energises  within  us.  He
has  sealed  a  covenant  with  us,  to  stand  by  us  if
we  are  faithful  and  strenuous  in  following  the
suggestions  he  whispers  in  our  hearts.  With
fidelity  to  ourselves  and,  what  is  the  same  thing,
to  him,  we  are  bound  to  prosper  and  to  have
life  more  and  more  abundantly  for  ever.”  This
attitude,  where  it  concerns  religion,  involves  two
corollaries:  first,  what  in  accordance  with  He¬
brew  precedent  may  be  called  symbolically  faith
in  God,  that  is,  confidence  in  one’s  own  impulse
and  destiny,  a  confidence  which  the  world  in  the
end  is  sure  to  reward;  and  second,  abomination
of  all  contrary  religious  tenets  and  practices — of
asceticism,  for  instance,  because  it  denies  the
will;  of  idolatry  and  myth,  because  they  render
divinity  concrete  rather  than  relative  to  inner
cravings  and  essentially  responsive;  finally  of
tradition  and  institutional  authority,  because
these  likewise  jeopardise  the  soul’s  experimental
development  as,  in  profound  isolation,  she
wrestles  with  reality  and  with  her  own  inspira¬
tion.

In  thus  meeting  the  world  the  soul  without
experience  shows  a  fine  courage  proportionate  to
and  of  its  own  vigour.  We  may  well  imagine

courage,  that  Rons  an(j  porpoises  have  a  more

masculine  assurance  that  God  is  on  their  side
than  ever  visits  the  breast  of  antelope  or  jelly¬
fish.  This  assurance,  when  put  to  the  test  in
adventurous  living,  becomes  in  a  strong  and


124


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


high-bred  creature  a  refusal  to  be  defeated,  a
gallant  determination  to  hold  the  last  ditch  and
hope  for  the  best  in  spite  of  appearances.  It
is  a  part  of  Protestantism  to  be  austere,  ener¬
getic,  unwearied  in  some  laborious  task.  The
end  and  profit  are  not  so  much  regarded  as  the
mere  habit  of  self-control  and  practical  devotion
and  steadiness.  The  point  is  to  accomplish  some¬
thing,  no  matter  particularly  what;  so  that  Prot¬
estants  show  on  this  ground  some  respect  even
for  an  artist  when  he  has  once  achieved  success.
A  certain  experience  of  ill  fortune  is  only  a
stimulus  to  this  fidelity.  So  great  is  the  ante¬
cedent  trust  in  the  world  that  the  world,  as  it
appears  at  first  blush,  may  be  confidently  defied.

Hence,  in  spite  of  a  theoretic  optimism,  disap¬
proval  and  proscription  play  a  large  part  in
Protestant  sentiment.  The  zeal  for  righteous¬
ness,  the  practical  expectation  that  all  shall  be
well,  cannot  tolerate  recognised  evils.  Evils  must
be  abolished  or  at  least  hidden;  they  must  not
offend  the  face  of  day  and  give  the  lie  to
universal  sanctimony.  This  austerity  and  re¬
pression,  though  they  involve  occasional  hypoc¬
risy,  lead  also  to  substantial  moral  reconstruc¬
tion.  Protestantism,  springing  from  a  pure
heart,  purifies  convention  and  is  a  tonic  to  any
society  in  which  it  prominently  exists.  It  has
the  secret  of  that  honest  simplicity  which  be¬
longs  to  unspoiled  youth,  that  keen  integrity
native  to  the  ungalled  spirit  as  yet  unconscious


PAGAN  CUSTOM  AND  BARBARIAN  GENIUS  125


of  any  duplicity  in  itself  or  of  any  inward  reason
why  it  should  fail.  The  only  evils  it  recognises
seem  so  many  challenges  to  action,  so  many  con¬
ditions  for  some  glorious  unthought-of  victory.

but  the  voice  Such  a  religion  is  indeed  profoundly
of  mexperi-  ignorant,  it  is  the  religion  of  inex-

cnce'  perience,  yet  it  has,  at  its  core,  the

very  spirit  of  life.  Its  error  is  only  to  consider
the  will  omnipotent  and  sacred  and  not  to  dis¬
tinguish  the  field  of  inevitable  failure  from  that
of  possible  success.  Success,  however,  would
never  be  possible  without  that  fund  of  energy
and  that  latent  resolve  and  determination  which
bring  also  faith  in  success.  Animal  optimism  is
a  great  renovator  and  disinfectant  in  the  world.

It  was  this  youthful  religion — profound,  bar¬
baric,  poetical — that  the  Teutonic  races  insin-
its  uated  into  Christianity  and  substi-

f^mCiPati°n  tuted  for  that  last  sigh  of  two
Christianity,  expiring  worlds.  In  the  end,  with
the  complete  crumbling  away  of  Christian  dogma
and  tradition,  Absolute  Egotism  appeared  openly
on  the  surface  in  the  shape  of  German  specula¬
tive  philosophy.  This  form,  which  Protestantism
assumed  at  a  moment  of  high  tension  and  reck¬
less  self-sufficiency,  it  will  doubtless  shed  in  turn
and  take  on  new  expressions;  but  that  declara¬
tion  of  independence  on  the  part  of  the  Teutonic
spirit  marks  emphatically  its  exit  from  Chris¬
tianity  and  the  end  of  that  series  of  transforma¬
tions  in  which  it  took  the  Bible  and  patristic


126


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


dogma  for  its  materials.  It  now  bids  fair  to
apply  itself  instead  to  social  life  and  natural
science  and  to  attempt  to  feed  its  Protean  hunger
directly  from  these  more  homely  sources.


i


CHAPTER  VIIX


CONFLICT  OF  MYTHOLOGY  WITH  MORAL  TRUTH

That  magic  and  mythology  have  no  experi¬
mental  sanction  is  clear  so  soon  as  experience
Myth  should  begins  to  he  gathered  together  with

the  advance  any  care-  As  maglc  attempts  to  do
of  science.  work  by  incantations,  so  myth  tries  to

attain  knowledge  by  playing  with  lies.  The
attempt  is  in  the  first  instance  inevitable  and
even  innocent,  for  it  takes  time  to  discriminate
valid  from  valueless  fancies  in  a  mind  in  which
they  spring  up  together,  with  no  intrinsic  mark
to  distinguish  them.  The  idle  notion  attracts
attention  no  less  than  the  one  destined  to  prove
significant;  often  it  pleases  more.  Only  watch¬
ful  eyes  and  that  rare  thing,  conscience  applied
to  memory,  can  pluck  working  notions  from  the
gay  and  lascivious  vegetation  of  the  mind,  or
learn  to  prefer  Cinderella  to  her  impudent  sis¬
ters.  If  a  myth  has  some  modicum  of  applica¬
bility  or  significance  it  takes  root  all  the  more
firmly  side  by  side  with  knowledge.  There  are
many  subjects  of  which  man  is  naturally  so
ignorant  that  only  mythical  notions  can  seem
to  do  them  justice;  such,  for  instance,  are  the

127


128


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


minds  of  other  men.  Myth  remains  for  this
reason  a  constituent  part  even  of  the  most  ra¬
tional  consciousness,  and  what  can  at  present  be
profitably  attempted  is  not  so  much  to  abolish
myth  as  to  become  aware  of  its  mythical  char¬
acter.

The  mark  of  a  myth  is  that  it  does  not  inter-
V.  I  pret  a  phenomenon  in  terms  capable  of  being  sub¬
sumed  under  the  same  category  with  that  phe¬
nomenon  itself,  but  fills  it  out  instead  with  images
that  could  never  appear  side  by  side  with  it  or
complete  it  on  its  own  plane  of  existence.  Thus
if  meditating  on  the  moon  I  conceive  her  other
side  or  the  aspect  she  would  wear  if  I  were  travel¬
ling  on  her  surface,  or  the  position  she  would
assume  in  relation  to  the  earth  if  viewed  from
some  other  planet,  or  the  structure  she  would  dis¬
close  could  she  be  cut  in  halves,  my  thinking,
however  fanciful,  would  be  on  the  scientific  plane
and  not  mythical,  for  it  would  forecast  possible
perceptions,  complementary  to  those  I  am  trying
to  enlarge.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  I  say  the  moon
is  the  sun’s  sister,  that  she  carries  a  silver  bow,
that  she  is  a  virgin  and  once  looked  lovingly  on
the  sleeping  Endymion,  only  the  fool  never  knew
it — my  lucubration  is  mythical ;  for  I  do  not  pre¬
tend  that  this  embroidery  on  the  aspects  which
the  moon  actually  wears  in  my  feeling  and  in  the
interstices  of  my  thoughts  could  ever  be  trans¬
lated  into  perceptions  making  one  system  with
the  present  image.  By  going  closer  to  that  disc


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  129


I  should  not  see  the  silver  bow,  nor  by  retreat¬
ing  in  time  should  I  come  to  the  moment  when
the  sun  and  moon  were  actually  born  of  Latona.
The  elements  are  incongruous  and  do  not  form
one  existence  but  two,  the  first  sensible,  the
other  only  to  be  enacted  dramatically,  and  hav¬
ing  at  best  to  the  first  the  relation  of  an  experi¬
ence  to  its  symbol.  These  fancies  are  not  fore¬
tastes  of  possible  perceptions,  but  are  free  inter¬
pretations  or  translations  of  the  perceptions  I
have  actually  had.

Mythical  thinking  has  its  roots  in  reality,  but,
like  a  plant,  touches  the  ground  only  at  one  end.
It  stands  unmoved  and  flowers  wantonly  into
the  air,  transmuting  into  unexpected  and  richer
forms  the  substances  it  sucks  from  the  soil.  It
is  therefore  a  fruit  of  experience,  an  ornament,
a  proof  of  animal  vitality;  but  it  is  no  vehicle
for  experience;  it  cannot  serve  the  purposes  of
transitive  thought  or  action.  Science,  on  the
other  hand,  is  constituted  by  those  fancies  which,
arising  like  myths  out  of  perception,  retain  a
sensuous  language  and  point  to  further  percep¬
tions  of  the  same  kind;  so  that  the  suggestions
drawn  from  one  object  perceived  are  only  ideas
of  other  objects  similarly  perceptible.  A  scien¬
tific  hypothesis  is  one  which  represents  some¬
thing  continuous  with  the  observed  facts  and
conceivably  existent  in  the  same  medium.  Sci¬
ence  is  a  bridge  touching  experience  at  both
ends,  over  which  practical  thought  may  travel


130


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


from  act  to  act,  from  perception  to  percep¬
tion.

To  separate  fable  from  knowledge  nothing  is
therefore  requisite  except  close  scrutiny  and  the
But  myth  principle  of  parsimony.  Were  myth-
is  ™^used  ology  merely  a  poetic  substitute  for

moral  values  natural  science  the  advance  of  science
it  expresses,  would  sufficiently  dispose  of  it.  What

remained  over  would,  like  the  myths  in  Plato,
be  at  least  better  than  total  silence  on  a  sub¬
ject  that  interests  us  and  makes  us  think,
although  we  have  no  means  of  testing  our
thoughts  in  its  regard.  But  the  chief  source  of
perplexity  and  confusion  in  mythology  is  its
confusion  with  moral  truth.  The  myth  which
originally  was  but  a  symbol  substituted  for  em¬
pirical  descriptions  becomes  in  the  sequel  an
idol  substituted  for  ideal  values.  This  compli¬
cation,  from  which  half  the  troubles  of  phil¬
osophy  arise,  deserves  our  careful  attention.

European  history  has  now  come  twice  upon
the  dissolution  of  mythologies,  first  among  the
Stoics  and  then  among  the  Protestants.  The
circumstances  in  the  two  cases  were  very  un¬
like;  so  were  the  mythical  systems  that  were  dis¬
carded;  and  yet  the  issue  was  in  both  instances
similar.  Greek  and  Christian  mythology  have
alike  ended  in  pantheism.  So  soon  as  the  con¬
structions  of  the  poets  and  the  Fathers  were
seen  to  be  ingenious  fictions,  criticism  was  con¬
fronted  with  an  obvious  duty:  to  break  up  the


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  131


mythical  compound  furnished  by  tradition  into
its  elements,  putting  on  one  side  what  natural
observation  or  actual  history  had  supplied,  and
on  the  other  what  dramatic  imagination  had
added.  For  a  cool  and  disinterested  observer  the
task,  where  evidence  and  records  were  not  want¬
ing,  would  be  simple  enough.  But  the  critic  in
this  case  would  not  usually  be  cool  or  disinter¬
ested.  His  religion  was  concerned;  he  had  no
other  object  to  hang  his  faith  and  happiness
upon  than  just  this  traditional  hybrid  which  his
own  enlightenment  was  now  dissolving.  To  which
part  should  he  turn  for  support  ?  In  which  quar¬
ter  should  he  continue  to  place  the  object  of  his
worship  ?

From  the  age  of  the  Sophists  to  the  final  dis¬
appearance  of  paganism  nearly  a  thousand  years
elapsed.  A  thousand  years  from  the  infliction
of  a  mortal  wound  to  the  moment  of  extinction
is  a  long  agony,  i  Religions  do  not  disappear  when
they  are  discredited;  it  is  requisite  that  they
should  be  replaced.  For  a  thousand  years  the
augurs  may  have  laughed,  they  were  bound
nevertheless  to  stand  at  their  posts  until  the
monks  came  to  relieve  them.  During  this  pro¬
longed  decrepitude  paganism  lived  on  inertia,  by
accretions  from  the  Orient,  and  by  philosophic
reinterpretations.  Of  these  reinterpretations  the

Neo-piatonic  was  that  attempted  by  Plato,

revision.  and  afterward  carried  out  by  the

neo-Platonists  and  Christians  into  the  notion  of


132


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


a  supernatural  spiritual  hierarchy;  above,  a  dia¬
lectical  deity,  the  hypostasis  of  intellect  and  its
ontological  phases;  below,  a  host  of  angels  and
demons,  hypostases  of  faculties,  moral  influences,
and  evil  promptings.  In  other  words,  in  the
diremption  of  myths  which  yielded  here  a  natu¬
ral  phenomenon  to  be  explained  and  there  a
moral  value  to  be  embodied,  Platonism  attached
divinity  exclusively  to  the  moral  element.  The
ideas,  which  were  essentially  moral  functions,  were
many  and  eternal;  their  physical  embodiments
were  adventitious  to  them  and  constituted  a  lapse,
a  misfortune  to  he  wiped  out  by  an  eventual  re¬
union  of  the  alienated  nature  with  its  own  ideal.
Religion  in  such  a  system  necessarily  meant  re¬
demption.  In  this  movement  paganism  turned
toward  the  future,  toward  supernatural  and  re¬
vealed  religion,  and  away  from  its  own  naturalistic
principle.  Revelation,  as  Plato  himself  had  said,
was  needed  to  guide  a  mind  which  distrusted  phe¬
nomena  and  recoiled  from  earthly  pursuits.

This  religion  had  the  strength  of  despair,  but
all  else  in  it  was  weakness.  Apart  from  a  revela-
it  made  tion  which,  until  Christianity  appeared,

entitiesTof  remained  nebulous  and  arbitrary,  there
abstractions,  could  be  no  means  of  maintaining  the

existence  of  those  hypostasised  moral  entities.  The
effort  to  separate  them  from  the  natural  functions
which  they  evidently  expressed  could  not  succeed
while  any  critical  acumen  or  independence  sub¬
sisted  in  the  believer.  Platonism,  to  become  a  re-


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  133


ligion,  had  to  appeal  to  superstition.  Unity,  for
instance  (which,  according  to  Plato  himself,  is  a
category  applicable  to  everything  concomitantly
wit-*  the  complementary  category  of  multiplicity,
for  everything,  he  says,  is  evidently  both  one  and
many) — unity  could  not  become  the  One,  an  in¬
dependent  and  supreme  deity,  unless  the  meaning
and  function  of  unity  were  altogether  forgotten
and  a  foolish  idolatry,  agape  at  words,  were  sub¬
stituted  for  understanding.  Some  one  had  to  come
with  an  air  of  authority  and  report  his  visions  of
the  One  before  such  an  entity  could  be  added  to
the  catalogue  of  actual  existences.  The  reality  of
all  neo-Platonic  hypostasis  was  thus  dependent  on
revelation  and  on  forgetting  the  meaning  once
conveyed  by  the  terms  so  mysteriously  transfig¬
ured  into  metaphysical  beings.

This  divorce  of  neo-Platonic  ideas  from  the
functions  they  originally  represented  in  human
life  and  discourse  was  found  in  the  end  to  defeat
the  very  interest  that  had  prompted  it — enthusi¬
asm  for  the  ideal.  Enthusiasm  for  the  ideal  had
led  Plato  to  treat  all  beauties  as  stepping-stones
toward  a  perfect  beauty  in  which  all  their  charms
might  be  present  together,  eternally  and  without
alloy.  Enthusiasm  for  the  ideal  had  persuaded
him  that  mortal  life  was  only  an  impeded  effort
to  fall  back  into  eternity.  These  inspired  but
strictly  unthinkable  suggestions  fell  from  his  lips
in  his  zeal  to  express  how  much  the  burden  and
import  of  experience  exceeded  its  sensuous  vehicle


134


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


in  permanence  and  value.  A  thousand  triangles
revealed  one  pregnant  proportion  of  lines  and
areas;  a  thousand  beds  and  bridles  served  one  per¬
petual  purpose  in  human  life,  and  found  in  ful¬
filling  it  their  essence  and  standard  of  excellence;
a  thousand  fascinations  taught  the  same  lesson
and  coalesced  into  one  reverent  devotion  to  beauty
and  nobility  wherever  they  might  bloom.  It  was
accordingly  a  poignant  sense  for  the  excellence
of  real  things  that  made  Plato  wish  to  transcend
them;  his  metaphysics  was  nothing  but  a  visionary
intuition  of  values,  an  idealism  in  the  proper  sense
of  the  word.  But  when  the  momentum  of  such
enthusiasm  remained  without  its  motive  power,
and  its  transcendence  without  its  inspiration  in
real  experience,  idealism  ceased  to  be  an  idealisa¬
tion,  an  interpretation  of  reality  reaching  prophet-
Hypostasis  ically  to  its  goals.  It  became  a  super-
mins  ideals,  numerary  second  physics,  a  world  to

which  an  existence  was  attributed  which  could  be
hardly  conceived  and  was  certainly  supported  by
no  evidence,  while  that  significance  which  it  really
possessed  in  reference  to  natural  processes  was  ig-
\  nored,  or  even  denied.  An  idealism  which  had
consisted  in  understanding  and  discriminating
values  now  became  a  superstition  incapable  of
discerning  existences.  It  added  a  prodigious  fic¬
titious  setting  to  the  cosmos  in  which  man  had
to  operate ;  it  obscured  his  real  interests  and  pos¬
sible  happiness  by  seeking  to  transport  him  into

that  unreal  environment,  with  its  fantastic  and

7


i


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  135


disproportionate  economy;  and,  worst  of  all,  it
robbed  the  ideal  of  its  ideality  by  tearing  it  up
from  its  roots  in  natural  will  and  in  experienced
earthly  benefits.  For  an  ideal  is  not  ideal  if  it
is  the  ideal  of  nothing.  In  that  case  it  is  only  a
ghostly  existence,  with  no  more  moral  significance
or  authority  in  relation  to  the  observer  than  has
any  happy  creature  which  may  happen  to  exist
somewhere  in  the  unknown  reaches  of  the  universe.

Meantime,  a  second  reinterpretation  of  mythol¬
ogy  was  attempted  by  the  Stoics.  Instead  of  mov-
The  stoic  ing  forward,  like  Plato,  toward  the
revision.  supernaturalism  that  was  for  so  many

ages  to  dominate  the  world,  the  Stoics,  with  greater
loyalty  to  pagan  principles,  reverted  to  the  natural
forces  that  had  been  the  chief  basis  for  the  tradi¬
tional  deities.  The  progress  of  philosophy  had
given  the  Stoics  a  notion  of  the  cosmos  such  as
the  early  Aryan  could  not  have  possessed  when  he
recorded  and  took  to  heart  his  scattered  observa¬
tions  in  the  form  of  divine  influences,  as  many
and  various  as  the  observations  themselves.  To
the  Stoics  the  world  was  evidently  one  dynamic
system.  The  power  that  animated  it  was  there¬
fore  one  God.  Accordingly,  after  explaining  away
the  popular  myths  by  turning  them  somewhat
ruthlessly  into  moral  apologues,  they  proceeded  to
identify  Zeus  with  the  order  of  nature.  This  iden¬
tification  was  supported  by  many  traditional  tend¬
encies  and  philosophic  hints.  The  resulting  con¬
cept,  though  still  mythical,  was  perhaps  as  ration-


136


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


alistic  as  the  state  of  science  at  the  time  could
allow.  Zeus  had  been  from  the  beginning  a  natu¬
ral  force,  at  once  serene  and  formidable,  the  thun-
derer  no  less  than  the  spirit  of  the  blue.  He  was
the  ruler  of  gods  and  men;  he  was,  under  limita¬
tions,  a  sort  of  general  providence.  Anaxagoras,
too,  in  proclaiming  the  cosmic  function  of  reason,
had  prepared  the  way  for  the  Stoics  in  another
direction.  This  “  reason,”  which  in  Socrates  and
Plato  was  already  a  deity,  meant  an  order,  an  order
making  for  the  good.  It  was  the  name  for  a  prin¬
ciple  much  like  that  which  Aristotle  called  Nature,
an  indwelling  prophetic  instinct  by  which  things
strive  after  their  perfection  and  happiness.  Now
Aristotle  observed  this  instinct,  as  behoved  a  dis¬
ciple  of  Socrates,  in  its  specific  cases,  in  which  the
good  secured  could  be  discriminated  and  visibly
attained.  There  were  many  souls,  each  with  its
provident  function  and  immutable  guiding  ideal,
one  for  each  man  and  animal,  one  for  each  heav¬
enly  sphere,  and  one,  the  prime  mover,  for  the
highest  sphere  of  all.  But  the  Stoics,  not  trained
in  the  same  humane  and  critical  school,  had  felt
the  unity  of  things  more  dramatically  and  vaguely
in  the  realm  of  physics.  Like  Xenophanes  of  old,
they  gazed  at  the  broad  sky  and  exclaimed,  “  The
All  is  One.”  Uniting  these  various  influences,
they  found  it  easy  to  frame  a  conception  of  Zeus,
or  the  world,  or  the  universal  justice  and  law,  so
as  to  combine  in  it  a  dynamic  unity  with  a  provi¬
dent  reason.  A  world  conceived  to  be  material


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  137


and  fatally  determined  was  endowed  with  fore¬
sight  of  its  own  changes,  perfect  internal  harmony,
and  absolute  moral  dignity.  Thus  mythology,  with
the  Stoics,  ended  in  pantheism.

By  reducing  their  gods  to  a  single  divine  influ¬
ence,  and  identifying  this  in  turn  with  natural
forces,  the  Stoics  had,  in  one  sense,  saved  myth¬
ology.  For  no  one  would  be  inclined  to  deny  ex¬
istence  or  power  to  the  cosmos,  to  the  body  the
soul  of  which  was  Zeus.  Pantheism,  taken  theo¬
retically,  is  only  naturalism  poetically  expressed.

It  therefore  was  a  most  legitimate  and  congenial
interpretation  of  paganism  for  a  rationalistic  age.

On  the  other  hand,  mythology  had  not  been  a
mere  poetic  physics;  it  had  formulated  the  object
of  religion;  it  had  embodied  for  mankind  its  high¬
est  ideals  in  worshipful  forms.  It  was  when  this
religious  function  was  transferred  to  the  god  of
The  ideal  pantheism  that  the  paradox  and  im-

before  the  possibility  of  the  reform  became  evi-

physicai.  dent.  Nature  neither  is  nor  can  be
man’s  ideal.  The  substitution  of  nature  for  the
traditional  and  ideal  object  of  religion  involves
giving  nature  moral  authority  over  man;  it  in¬
volves  that  element  of  Stoicism  which  is  the  syno¬
nym  of  inhumanity.  Life  and  death,  good  and
ill  fortune,  happiness  and  misery,  since  they  flow
equally  from  the  universal  order,  shall  be  declared,
in  spite  of  reason,  to  be  equally  good.  True  virtue
shall  be  reduced  to  conformity.  He  who  has  no  1
ideal  but  that  nature  should  possess  her  actual


138


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


|  constitution  will  be  wise  and  superior  to  all  flat¬
tery  and  calamity;  he  will  be  equal  in  dignity  to
Zeus.  He  who  has  any  less  conformable  and  more
determinate  interests  will  be  a  fool  and  a  worm.

The  wise  man  will,  meantime,  perform  all  the
offices  of  nature;  he  will  lend  his  body  and  his
mind  to  her  predestined  labours.  For  pantheistic
morals,  though  post-rational,  are  not  ascetic.  In
dislodging  the  natural  ideal  from  the  mind,  they
put  in  its  place  not  its  supernatural  exaggeration
but  a  curtailment  of  it  inspired  by  despair.  The
passions  are  not  renounced  on  the  ground  that
they  impede  salvation  or  some  visionary  ecstasy;
they  are  merely  chilled  by  the  sense  that  their
defeat,  when  actual,  is  also  desirable.  As  all  the
gods  have  been  reduced  to  one  substance  or  law,
so  all  human  treasures  are  reduced  to  one  privi¬
lege — that  of  fortitude.  You  can  always  consent,
and  by  a  forced  and  perpetual  conformity  to  na¬
ture  lift  yourself  above  all  vicissitudes.  Those
tender  and  tentative  ideals  which  nature  really
breeds,  and  which  fill  her  with  imperfect  but  genu¬
ine  excellences,  you  will  be  too  stolid  to  perceive
or  too  proud  to  share.

Thus  the  hereditary  taint  of  mythology,  the
poison  of  lies,  survived  in  the  two  forms  of  philo¬
sophic  paganism  which  it  concerns  us  to  study.
In  Plato’s  school,  myth  helped  to  hypostasise  the
ideas  and,  by  divorcing  them  from  their  natural
basis,  to  deprive  them  of  their  significance  and
moral  function,  and  render  the  worship  of  them


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  139


superstitious.  In  the  Stoa  the  surviving  mytho¬
logical  element  turned  nature,  when  her  unity  and
order  had  been  perceived,  into  an  idol;  so  that  the
worship  of  her  blasted  all  humane  and  plastic
ideals  and  set  men  upon  a  vain  and  fanatical  self-
denial.  Both  philosophies  were  post-rational,  as
befitted  a  decadent  age  and  as  their  rival  and  heir,
Christianity,  was  also.

Christianity  had  already  within  itself  a  similar
duality;  being  a  doctrine  of  redemption,  like  neo-

Paraiiei  Platonism,  it  tended  to  deny  the  natu-

movements  in  ral  values  of  this  life;  but,  being  a
Christianity.  ,  .  P  , .  ,

doctrine  ot  creation  and  providential
government,  comparable  in  a  way  to  the  Stoic,  it
had  an  ineradicable  inward  tendency  toward  pan¬
theism,  and  toward  a  consequent  acceptance  of
both  the  goods  and  evils  of  this  world  as  sanctioned
and  required  by  providence.

The  horror  which  pantheism  has  always  inspired
in  the  Church  is  like  that  which  materialism  in-
Hebraism,  if  spires  in  sentimental  idealists;  they  at-

philosophical*  •  n  i  it

must  be  tack  ^  continually,  not  so  much  because
pantheistic,  anybody  else  defends  it  as  because  they
feel  it  to  be  implied  unmistakably  in  half  their
own  tenets.  The  non-Platonic  half  of  Christian
theology,  the  Mosaic  half,  is  bound  to  become  pan¬
theism  in  the  hands  of  a  philosopher.  The  Jews
were  not  pantheists  themselves,  because  they  never
speculated  on  the  relation  which  omnipotence
stood  in  to  natural  forces  and  human  acts.  They
conceived  Jehovah’s  omnipotence  dramatically,  as


140


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


they  conceived  everything.  He  might  pounce  upon
anything  and  anybody;  he  might  subvert  or  play
with  the  laws  of  nature;  he  might  laugh  at  men’s
devices,  and  turn  them  to  his  own  ends;  his  craft
and  energy  could  not  but  succeed  in  every  in¬
stance;  but  that  was  not  to  say  that  men  and
nature  had  no  will  of  their  own,  and  did  not  pro¬
ceed  naturally  on  their  respective  ways  when  Je¬
hovah  happened  to  be  busy  elsewhere.  So  soon,
however,  as  this  dramatic  sort  of  omnipotence  was
made  systematic  by  dialectic,  so  soon  as  the  doc¬
trines  of  creation,  omniscience,  and  providential
government  were  taken  absolutely,  pantheism  was
^-clearly  involved.  The  consequences  to  moral  phi¬
losophy  were  truly  appalling,  for  then  the  sins
God  punished  so  signally  were  due  to  his  own  con¬
trivance.  The  fervours  of  his  saints,  the  fate  of
his  chosen  people  and  holy  temples,  became  noth¬
ing  but  a  puppet-show  in  his  ironical  self-con¬
sciousness.

The  strangest  part  of  this  system,  or  what  would
seem  so  if  its  antecedents  were  not  known,  is  that
Pantheism,  it  is  only  half-conscious  of  its  physical
psychic,  temper,  and  m  calling  itself  an  idealism
ignores  ideals,  (because  it  makes  perception  and  will
the  substance  of  their  objects),  thinks  itself  an
expression  of  human  aspirations.  This  illusion
has  deep  historical  roots.  It  is  the  last  stage  of
a  mythical  philosophy  which  has  been  earnestly
criticising  its  metaphors,  on  the  assumption  that
they  were  not  metaphorical;  whereby  it  has  stripped


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  141


them  of  all  significance  and  reduced  them  at  last
to  the  bare  principle  of  inversion.  Nothing  is  any
longer  idealised,  yet  all  is  still  called  an  idealism.
A  myth  is  an  inverted  image  of  things,  wherein
their  moral  effects  are  turned  into  their  dramatic
antecedents — as  when  the  wind’s  rudeness  is
turned  into  his  anger.  When  the  natural  basis
of  moral  life  is  not  understood,  myth  is  the  only
way  of  expressing  it  theoretically,  as  eyes  too  weak
to  see  the  sun  face  to  face  may,  as  Plato  says,  for
a  time  study  its  image  mirrored  in  pools,  and,  as
we  may  add,  inverted  there.  So  the  good,  which
in  itself  is  spiritual  only,  is  transposed  into  a  natu¬
ral  power.  At  first  this  amounts  to  an  amiable
misrepresentation  of  natural  things;  the  gods  in¬
habit  Mount  Olympus  and  the  Elysian  Fields  are
not  far  west  of  Cadiz.  With  the  advance  of  geog¬
raphy  the  mythical  facts  recede,  and  in  a  cosmog¬
raphy  like  Hegel’s,  for  instance,  they  have  disap¬
peared  altogether;  but  there  remain  the  mythical
values  once  ascribed  to  those  ideal  objects  but  now
transferred  and  fettered  to  the  sad  realities  that
have  appeared  in  their  place.  The  titles  of  hon¬
our  once  bestowed  on  a  fabled  world  are  thus
applied  to  the  real  world  by  right  of  inheritance.

Nothing  could  be  clearer  than  the  grounds  on
Truly  diyin*  which  pious  men  in  the  beginning  rec-
Um't^  ognise  divine  agencies.  We  see,  they
what  makes  say,  the  hand  of  God  in  our  lives.  He
for  the  good.  has  saved  us  from  dangers,  he  has  com¬
forted  us  in  sorrow.  He  has  blessed  us  with  the


142


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


treasures  of  life,  of  intelligence,  of  affection.  He
has  set  around  us  a  beautiful  world,  and  one  still
more  beautiful  within  us.  Pondering  all  these
blessings,  we  are  convinced  that  he  is  mighty  in
the  world  and  will  know  how  to  make  all  things
good  to  those  who  trust  in  him.  In  other  words,
pious  men  discern  God  in  the  excellence  of  things.
If  all  were  well,  as  they  hope  it  may  some  day  be,
God  would  henceforth  be  present  in  everything.
While  good  is  mixed  with  evil,  he  is  active  in  the
good  alone.  The  pleasantness  of  life,  the  precious¬
ness  of  human  possessions,  the  beauty  and  promise
of  the  world,  are  proof  of  God’s  power;  so  is  the
stilling  of  tempests  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins.
But  the  sin  itself  and  the  tempest,  which  optimis¬
tic  theology  has  to  attribute  just  as  much  to  God’s
purposes,  are  not  attributed  to  him  at  all  by  pious
feeling,  but  rather  to  his  enemies.  In  spite  of
centuries  wasted  in  preaching  God’s  omnipotence,
his  omnipotence  is  contradicted  by  every  Christian
judgment  and  every  Christian  prayer.  If  the  most
pious  of  nations  is  engaged  in  war,  and  suffers  a
great  accidental  disaster,  such  as  it  might  expect
to  be  safe  from,  Te  deums  are  sung  for  those  that
were  saved  and  Requiems  for  those  that  perished.
God’s  office,  in  both  cases,  is  to  save  only.  No  one
seriously  imagines  that  Providence  does  more
than  govern — that  is,  watch  over  and  incidentally
modify  the  natural  course  of  affairs — not  even  in
the  other  world,  if  fortunes  are  still  changeable
there.


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  143


The  criterion  of  divine  activity  could  not  be


placed  more  squarely  and  unequivocally  in  the
good.  Plato  and  Aristotle  are  not  in  this  respect
better  moralists  than  is  an  unsophisticated  piety.
God  is  the  ideal,  and  what  manifests  the  ideal
manifests  God.  Are  you  confident  of  the  perma¬
nence  and  triumph  of  the  things  you  prize  ?  Then
you  trust  in  God,  you  live  in  the  consciousness
of  his  presence.  The  proof  and  measure  of  ration¬
ality  in  the  world,  and  of  God’s  power  over  it,  is
the  extent  of  human  satisfactions.  In  hell,  good
people  would  disbelieve  in  God,  and  it  is  impious
of  the  trembling  devils  to  believe  in  him  there.


The  existence  of  any  evil — and  if  evil


Need  of  an

opposing

principle.


of  an


is  felt  it  exists,  for  experience  is  its


locus — is  a  proof  that  some  accident


is  to  remain  standing,  we  must  admit  into  the
world,  while  it  contains  anything  practically  evil,
a  principle,  however  minimised,  which  is  not  ra¬
tional.  This  irrational  principle  may  be  inertia
in  matter,  accidental  perversity  in  the  will,  or  ul¬
timate  conflict  of  interests.  Somehow  an  element
of  resistance  to  the  rational  order  must  be  intro¬
duced  somewhere.  And  immediately,  in  order  to
distinguish  the  part  furnished  by  reason  from  its
irrational  alloy,  we  must  find  some  practical  test;
for  if  we  are  to  show  that  there  is  a  great  and
triumphant  rationality  in  the  world,  in  spite  of
irrational  accidents  and  brute  opposition,  we  must


144


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


frame  an  idea  of  rationality  different  from  that
of  being.  It  will  no  longer  do  to  say,  with  the
optimists,  the  rational  is  the  real,  the  real  is  the
rational.  For  we  wish  to  make  a  distinction,  in
order  to  maintain  our  loyalty  to  the  good,  and  not
to  eviscerate  the  idea  of  reason  by  emptying  it
of  its  essential  meaning,  which  is  action  addressed
to  the  good  and  thought  envisaging  the  ideaL
To  pious  feeling,  the  free-will  of  creatures,  their
power,  active  or  passive,  of  independent  origina¬
tion,  is  the  explanation  of  all  defects;  and  every¬
thing  which  is  not  helpful  to  men’s  purposes  must
be  assigned  to  their  own  irrationality  as  its  cause.
Herein  lies  the  explanation  of  that  paradox  in  re¬
ligious  feeling  which  attributes  sin  to  the  free
will,  but  repentance  and  every  good  work  to  di¬
vine  grace.  Physically  considered — as  theology
must  consider  the  matter — both  acts  and  both  voli¬
tions  are  equally  necessary  and  involved  in  the
universal  order;  but  practical  religion  calls  divine
only  what  makes  for  the  good.  Whence  it  follows
at  once  that,  both  within  and  without  us,  what  is
done  well  is  God’s  doing,  and  what  is  done  ill  is
not.

Thus  what  we  may  call  the  practical  or  Hebrew
theory  of  cosmic  rationality  betrays  in  plainest  pos-
_  •  sible  manner  that  reason  is  primarily

The  standard  r

of  value  is  a  function  of  human  nature.  Reason
human.  dwells  in  the  world  in  so  far  as  the

world  is  good,  and  the  world  is  good  in  so  far  as
it  supports  the  wills  it  generates — the  excellence


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  145


of  each  creature,  the  value  of  its  life,  and  the
satisfaction  of  it-s  ultimate  desires.  Thus  Hebrew
optimism  eould  be  moral  because,  although  it  as¬
serted  in  a  sense  the  morality  of  the  universe,  it
asserted  this  only  by  virtue  of  a  belief  that  the
universe  supported  human  ideals.  Undoubtedly
much  insistence  on  the  greatness  of  that  power
which  made  for  righteousness  was  in  danger  of
passing  over  into  idolatry  of  greatness  and  power,
for  whatever  they  may  make.  Yet  these  relapses
into  Nature-worship  are  the  more  rare  in  that  the
Jews  were  not  a  speculative  people,  and  had  in
the  end  to  endow  even  J ob  with  his  worldly  goods
in  order  to  rationalise  his  constancy.  It  was  only
t>y  a  scandalous  heresy  that  Spinoza  could  so
change  the  idea  of  God  as  to  make  him  indifferent
to  his  creatures;  and  this  transformation,  in  spite
of  the  mystic  and  stoical  piety  of  its  author,  passed
very  justly  for  atheism;  for  that  divine  govern¬
ment  and  policy  had  been  denied  by  which  alone
God  was  made  manifest  to  the  Hebrews.

If  Job’s  reward  seems  to  us  unworthy,  we  must
remember  that  we  have  since  passed  through  the
discipline  of  an  extreme  moral  idealism,  through
a  religion  of  sacrifice  and  sorrow.  We  should
not  confuse  the  principle  that  virtue  must  some¬
how  secure  the  highest  good  (for  what  should  not
secure  it  would  not  be  virtue)  with  the  gross  sym¬
bols  by  which  the  highest  good  might  be  expressed
at  Jerusalem.  That  Job  should  recover  a  thousand
she-asses  may  seem  to  us  a  poor  sop  for  his  long


146


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


anguish  of  mind  and  body,  and  we  may  hardly
agree  with  him  in  finding  his  new  set  of  children
just  as  good  as  the  old.  Yet  if  fidelity  had  led
to  no  good  end,  if  it  had  not  somehow  brought
happiness  to  somebody,  that  fidelity  would  have
been  folly.  There  is  a  noble  folly  which  consists
in  pushing  a  principle  usually  beneficent  to  such
lengths  as  to  render  it  pernicious;  and  the  perti¬
nacity  of  J ob  would  have  been  a  case  of  such  noble
folly  if  we  were  not  somehow  assured  of  its  ulti¬
mate  fruits.  In  Christianity  we  have  the  same
principle,  save  that  the  fruits  of  virtue  are  more
spiritually  conceived;  they  are  inward  peace,  the
silence  of  the  passions,  the  possession  of  truth,  and
the  love  of  God  and  of  our  fellows.  This  is  a
different  conception  of  happiness,  incomplete,  per- ,
haps,  in  a  different  direction.  But  were  even  this
attenuated  happiness  impossible  to  realise,  all  ra¬
tionality  would  vanish  not  merely  from  Christian
charity  and  discipline,  but  from  the  whole  Chris¬
tian  theory  of  creation,  redemption,  and  judgment.
Without  some  window  open  to  heaven,  religion
would  be  more  fantastic  than  worldliness  without
being  less  irrational  and  vain.

Revelation  has  intervened  to  bring  about  a  con¬
ception  of  the  highest  good  which  never  could
have  been  derived  from  an  impartial  synthesis  of
human  interests.  The  influence  of  great  person¬
alities  and  the  fanaticism  of  peculiar  times  and
races  have  joined  in  imposing  such  variations  from
the  natural  ideal.  The  rationality  of  the  world,


MYTHOLOGY  AND  MORAL  TRUTH  147


as  Christianity  conceived  it,  is  due  to  the  plan  of
salvation;  and  the  satisfaction  of  human  nature,
Hope  for  however  purified  and  developed,  is

happiness  t_c  i  •

makes  belief  what  salvation  means.  It  an  ascetic
in  God.  ideal  could  for  a  moment  seem  accept¬
able,  it  was  because  the  decadence  and  sophistica¬
tion  of  the  world  had  produced  a  great  despair  in
all  noble  minds ;  and  they  thought  it  better  that  an
eye  or  a  hand  which  had  offended  should  perish,
and  that  they  should  enter  blind  and  maimed  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  than  that,  whole  and  see¬
ing,  they  should  remain  for  ever  in  hell-fire.  Su¬
pernatural,  then,  as  the  ideal  might  seem,  and  im¬
posed  on  human  nature  from  above,  it  was  yet
accepted  only  because  nothing  else,  in  that  state
of  conscience  and  imagination,  could  revive  hope;
nothing  else  seemed  to  offer  an  escape  from  the
heart’s  corruption  and  weariness  into  a  new  exist¬
ence.


4  CHAPTER  IX


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE

The  human  spirit  has  not  passed  in  historical
times  through  a  more  critical  situation  or  a  greater
revulsion  than  that  involved  in  accepting  Chris¬
tianity.  Was  this  event  favourable  to  the  Life  of
Reason?  Was  it  a  progress  in  competence,  under¬
standing,  and  happiness?  Any  absolute  answer
would  be  misleading.  Christianity  did  not  come
to  destroy;  the  ancient  springs  were  dry  already,
and  for  two  or  three  centuries  unmistakable  signs
of  decadence  had  appeared  in  every  sphere,  not
least  in  that  of  religion  and  philosophy.  Chris¬
tianity  was  a  reconstruction  out  of  ruins.  In  the
new  world  competence  could  only  be  indirect,  un¬
derstanding  mythical,  happiness  surreptitious;  but
all  three  subsisted,  and  it  was  Christianity  that
gave  them  their  necessary  disguises.

The  young  West  had  failed  in  its  first  great
experiment,  for,  though  classic  virtue  and  beauty
Suspend  and  a  great  classic  state  subsisted,  the
between  force  that  had  created  them  was  spent.

hope  and  .  x

disillusion.  Was  it  possible  to  try  again?  Was  it
necessary  to  sit  down,  like  the  Orient,  in  perpetual
flux  and  eternal  apathy?  This  question  was  an-

148


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE  149


swered  by  Christianity  in  a  way,  under  the  circum¬
stances,  extremely  happy.  The  Gospel,  on  which
Christianity  was  founded,  had  drawn  a  very  sharp
contrast  between  this  world  and  the  kingdom  of
heaven — a  phrase  admitting  many  interpretations.
From  the  Jewish  millennium  or  a  celestial  para¬
dise  it  could  shift  its  sense  to  mean  the  invisible
Church,  or  even  the  inner  life  of  each  mystical
spirit.  Platonic  philosophy,  to  which  patristic  the¬
ology  was  allied,  had  made  a  contrast  not  less  ex¬
treme  between  sense  and  spirit,  between  life  in
time  and  absorption  in  eternity.  Armed  with  this
double  dualism,  Christianity  could  preach  both  re¬
nunciation  and  hope,  both  asceticism  and  action,
both  the  misery  of  life  and  the  blessing  of  creation.
It  even  enshrined  the  two  attitudes  in  its  dogma,
uniting  the  Jewish  doctrine  of  a  divine  Creator  and
Governor  of  this  world  with  that  of  a  divine  Re¬
deemer  to  lead  us  into  another.  Persons  were  not
lacking  to  perceive  the  contradiction  inherent  in
such  an  eclecticism ;  and  it  was  the  Gnostic  or  neo-
Platonic  party,  which  denied  creation  and  taught
a  pure  asceticism,  that  had  the  best  of  the  argu¬
ment.  The  West,  however,  would  not  yield  to
their  logic.  It  might,  in  an  hour  of  trouble  and
weakness,  make  concessions  to  quietism  and  accept
the  cross,  but  it  would  not  suffer  the  naturalistic
note  to  die  out  altogether.  It  preferred  an  in¬
consistency,  which  it  hardly  perceived,  to  a  com¬
plete  surrender  of  its  instincts.  It  settled  down
to  the  conviction  that  God  created  the  world  and


150


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


redeemed  it;  that  the  soul  is  naturally  good  and
needs  salvation.

This  contradiction  can  be  explained  exoterically
by  saying  that  time  and  changed  circumstances
Superficial  separate  the  two  situations:  having
solution.  made  the  world  perfect,  God  redeems
it  after  it  has  become  corrupt;  and  whereas  all
things  are  naturally  good,  they  may  by  accident
lose  their  excellence,  and  need  to  have  it  restored.
There  is,  however,  an  esoteric  side  to  the  matter.
A  soul  that  may  be  redeemed,  a  will  that  may  look
forward  to  a  situation  in  which  its  action  will  not
be  vain  or  sinful,  is  one  that  in  truth  has  never
sinned;  it  has  merely  been  thwarted.  Its  ambition
is  rational,  and  what  its  heart  desires  is  essentially
good  and  ideal.  So  that  the  whole  classic  attitude,
the  faith  in  action,  art,  and  intellect,  is  preserved
under  this  protecting  cuticle  of  dogma;  nothing
was  needed  but  a  little  courage,  and  circumstances
somewhat  more  favourable,  for  the  natural  man
to  assert  himself  again.  A  people  believing  in  the
resurrection  of  the  flesh  in  heaven  will  not  be
averse  to  a  reawakening  of  the  mind  on  earth.

Another  pitfall,  however,  opens  here.  These
contrasted  doctrines  may  change  roles.  So  long
But  from  as  by  redemption  we  understand,  in  the
we  beShaU  mystic  way,  exaltation  above  finitude
redeemed?  and  existence,  because  all  particularity
is  sin,  to  be  redeemed  is  to  abandon  the  Life  of
Reason;  but  redemption  might  mean  extrication
from  untoward  accidents,  so  that  a  rational  life


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE  151


might  be  led  under  right  conditions.  Instead  of
being  like  Buddha,  the  redeemer  might  be  like
Prometheus.  In  that  case,  however,  the  creator
would  become  like  Zeus — a  tyrant  will  responsible
for  our  conditions  rather  than  expressive  of  our
ideal.  The  doctrine  of  creation  would  become  pan¬
theism  and  that  of  redemption,  formerly  ascetic,
would  represent  struggling  humanity.

The  seething  of  these  potent  and  ambiguous  ele¬
ments  can  be  studied  nowhere  better  than  in  Saint
Typical  Augustine.  He  is  a  more  genial  and
attitude  of  complete  representative  of  Christianity
st.  Augustme.  ^an  any  0-£  ^he  Fathers,  in

whom  the  Hebraic  and  Roman  vitality  was  com¬
paratively  absent.  Philosophy  was  only  one  phase
of  Augustine’s  genius;  with  him  it  was  an  instru¬
ment  of  zeal  and  a  stepping-stone  to  salvation.
Scarcely  had  it  been  bora  out  of  rhetoric  when  it
was  smothered  in  authority.  Yet  even  in  that
precarious  and  episodic  form  it  acquired  a  won¬
derful  sweep,  depth,  and  technical  elaboration.  He
stands  at  the  watershed  of  history,  looking  over
either  land;  his  invectives  teach  us  almost  as  much
of  paganism  and  heresy  as  his  exhortations  do  of
Catholicism.  To  Greek  subtlety  he  joins  Hebrew
fervour  and  monkish  intolerance;  he  has  a  Latin
amplitude  and  (it  must  be  confessed)  coarseness
of  feeling;  but  above  all  he  is  the  illumined,  en¬
raptured,  forgiven  saint.  In  him  theology,  how¬
ever  speculative,  remains  a  vehicle  for  living  piety;
and  while  he  has,  perhaps,  done  more  than  any


152


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


other  man  to  materialise  Christianity,  no  one  was
ever  more  truly  filled  with  its  spirit.

Saint  Augustine  was  a  thorough  Platonist,  hut
'  to  reach  that  position  he  had  to  pass  in  his  youth
through  severe  mental  struggles.  The  difficult
triumph  over  the  sensuous  imagination  by  which
he  attained  the  conception  of  intelligible  objects
was  won  only  after  long  discipline  and  much  read¬
ing  of  Platonising  philosophers.  Every  reality
seemed  to  him  at  first  an  object  of  sense:  God,  if
he  existed,  must  be  perceptible,  for  to  Saint  Au-

He  achieves  gustine’s  mind  also,  at  this  early  and
Platonism.  sensuous  stage  of  its  development,  esse
was  percipi .  He  might  never  have  worked  himself
loose  from  these  limitations,  with  which  his  vivid
fancy  and  not  too  delicate  eloquence  might  easily
have  been  satisfied,  had  it  not  been  for  his  pre¬
occupation  with  theology.  God  must  somehow  be
conceived;  for  no  one  in  that  age  of  religious  need
and  of  theological  passion  felt  both  more  intensely
than  Saint  Augustine.  If  sensible  objects  alone
were  real,  God  must  be  somewhere  discoverable  in
space;  he  must  either  have  a  body  like  the  human,
or  be  the  body  of  the  universe,  or  some  subtler
body  permeating  and  moving  all  the  rest.

These  conceptions  all  offered  serious  dialectical
difficulties,  and,  what  was  more  to  the  point,  they
did  not  satisfy  the  religious  and  idealistic  instinct
which  the  whole  movement  of  Saint  Augustine’s
mind  obeyed.  So  he  pressed  his  inquiries  farther.
At  length  meditation,  and  more,  perhaps,  that


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


153


experience  of  the  flux  and  vanity  of  natural  things
on  which  Plato  himself  had  built  his  heaven  of
ideas,  persuaded  him  that  reality  and  substantial¬
ity,  in  any  eulogistic  sense,  must  belong  rather  to
the  imperceptible  and  eternal.  Only  that  which  is
never  an  object  of  sense  or  experience  can  be  the
root  and  principle  of  experience  and  sense.  Only
the  invisible  and  changeless  can  be  t ^


of  a  moving  show.  God  could  now  be


and  believed  in  precisely  because  he  was  essentially
invisible:  had  he  anywhere  appeared  he  could  not
be  the  principle  of  all  appearance;  had  he  had  a
body  and  a  locus  in  the  universe,  he  could  not  have
been  its  spiritual  creator.  The  ultimate  objects
of  human  knowledge  were  accordingly  ideas,  not
things;  principles  reached  by  the  intellect,  not  ob¬
jects  by  any  possibility  offered  to  sense.  The
methodological  concepts  of  science,  by  which  we
pass  from  fact  to  fact  and  from  past  perception
to  future,  did  not  attract  Augustine’s  attention.
He  admitted,  it  is  true,  that  there  was  a  subordi¬
nate,  and  to  him  apparently  uninteresting,  region
governed  by  “  certissima  ratione  vel  experiential
and  he  even  wished  science  to  be  allowed  a  free
hand  within  that  empirical  and  logical  sphere.  A
mystic  and  allegorical  interpretation  of  Scripture
was  to  be  invoked  to  avoid  the  puerilities  into
which  any  literal  interpretation — of  the  creation
in  six  days,  for  instance — would  be  sure  to  run.
Unbelievers  would  thus  not  be  scandalised  by
mythical  dogmas  “  concerning  things  which  they


154


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


might  have  actually  experienced,  or  discovered  by
sure  calculation.”

Science  was  to  have  its  way  in  the  field  of  calcu¬
lable  experience;  that  region  could  be  the  more
readily  surrendered  by  Augustine  because  his  at¬
tention  was  henceforth  held  by  those  ideal  objects
which  he  had  so  laboriously  come  to  conceive.
These  were  concepts  of  the  contemplative  reason
or  imagination,  which  envisages  natures  and  eter¬
nal  essences  behind  the  variations  of  experience,
essences  which  at  first  receive  names,  becoming
thus  the  centres  of  rational  discourse,  then  acquire
values,  becoming  guides  to  action  and  measures
of  achievement,  and  finally  attract  unconditional
worship,  being  regarded  as  the  first  causes  and
ultimate  goals  of  all  existence  and  aspiration.

This  purely  Platonic  philosophy,  however,  was
not  to  stand  alone.  Like  every  phase  of  Saint

He  identifies  Augustine’s  speculation,  it  came,  as  we
it  with  have  said,  to  buttress  or  express  some
Christianity.  reiigj0Tls  belief.  But  it  is  a  proof  of

his  depth  and  purity  of  soul  that  his  searching
philosophic  intuition  did  more  to  spiritualise  the
dogmas  he  accepted  from  others  than  these  dog¬
mas  could  do  to  denaturalise  his  spontaneous
philosophy.  Platonic  ideas  had  by  that  time  long
lost  their  moral  and  representative  value,  their
Socratic  significance.  They  had  become  ontolog¬
ical  entities,  whereas  originally  they  had  repre¬
sented  the  rational  functions  of  life.  This
hypostasis  of  the  rational,  by  which  the  rational


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


155


abdicates  its  meaning  in  the  effort  to  acquire  a
metaphysical  existence,  had  already  been  carried
to  its  extreme  by  the  Neo-Platonists.  But  Saint
Augustine,  while  helpless  as  a  philosopher  to  re¬
sist  that  speculative  realism,  was  able  as  a  Christian
to  infuse  into  those  dead  concepts  some  of  the
human  blood  which  had  originally  quickened  them.
Metaphysics  had  turned  all  human  interests  into
mythical  beings,  and  now  religion,  without  at  all
condemning  or  understanding  that  transformation,
was  going  to  adopt  those  mythical  beings  and  turn
them  again  into  moral  influences.  In  Saint  Au¬
gustine’s  mind,  fed  as  it  was  by  the  Psalmist,  the
Platonic  figments  became  the  Christian  God,  the
Christian  Church,  and  the  Christian  soul,  and  thus
acquired  an  even  subtler  moral  fragrance  than  that
which  they  had  lost  when  they  were  uprooted  by
a  visionary  philosophy  from  the  soil  of  Greek  cul¬
ture.

Saint  Augustine’s  way  of  conceiving  God  is  an
excellent  illustration  of  the  power,  inherent  in  his
God  the  religious  genius  and  sincerity,  of  giving
good.  life  and  validity  to  ideas  which  he  was

obliged  to  borrow  in  part  from  a  fabulous  tradition
and  in  part  from  a  petrified  metaphysics.  God,
to  him,  was  simply  the  ideal  eternal  object  of
human  thought  and  love.  All  ideation  on  an  in¬
tellectual  plane  was  a  vague  perception  of  the  di¬
vine  essence.  “  The  rational  soul  understands
God,  for  it  understands  what  exists  always  un¬
changed.”  .  .  .  “  God  is  happiness;  and  in  him


156


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  from  him  and  through  him  all  things  are
happy  which  are  happy  at  all.  God  is  the  good
and  the  beautiful.”  He  was  never  tired  of  telling
us  that  God  is  not  true  but  the  truth  (t.  e the
ideal  object  of  thought  in  any  sphere),  not  good
but  the  good  (i.  e.,  the  ideal  object  of  will  in  all
its  rational  manifestations).  In  other  words,  when¬
ever  a  man,  reflecting  on  his  experience,  conceived
the  better  or  the  best,ythe  perfect  and  the  eternal,
he  conceived  God,  inadequately,  of  course,  yet  es¬
sentially,  because  God  signified  the  comprehensive
ideal  of  all  the  perfections  which  the  human  spirit
could  behold  in  itself  or  in  its  objects.  Of  this
divine  essence,  accordingly,  every  interesting  thing
was  a  manifestation;  all  virtue  and  beauty  were
parcels  of  it,  tokens  of  its  superabundant  grace.
Hence  the  inexhaustible  passion  of  Saint  Augustine
toward  his  God;  hence  the  sweetness  of  that  end¬
less  colloquy  in  prayer  into  which  he  was  continu¬
ally  relapsing,  a  passion  and  a  sweetness  which  no
one  will  understand  to  whom  God  is  primarily  a
natural  power  and  only  accidentally  a  moral  ideal.

Herein  lies  the  chief  difference  between  those  in
whom  religion  is  spontaneous  and  primary — a  very

Primary  and  ^ew — an(l  those  in  whom  it  is  imitative
secondary  and  secondary.  To  the  former,  divine
religion.  things  are  inward  values,  projected  by

chance  into  images  furnished  by  poetic  tradition
or  by  external  nature,  while  to  the  latter,  divine
things  are  in  the  first  instance  objective  factors  of
nature  or  of  social  tradition,  although  they  have


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


157


come,  perhaps,  to  possess  some  point  of  contact
with  the  interests  of  the  inner  life  on  account  of
the  supposed  physical  influence  which  those  super¬
human  entities  have  over  human  fortunes.  In  a
word,  theology,  for  those  whose  religion  is  second¬
ary,  is  simply  a  false  physics,  a  doctrine  about
eventual  experience  not  founded  on  the  experience
of  the  past.  Such  a  false  physics,  however,  is  soon
discredited  by  events;  it  does  not  require  much
experience  or  much  shrewdness  to  discover  that
supernatural  beings  and  laws  are  without  the  em¬
pirical  efficacy  which  was  attributed  to  them.
True  physics  and  true  history  must  always  tend,
in  enlightened  minds,  to  supplant  those  misinter¬
preted  religious  traditions.  Therefore,  those  whose

reflection  or  sentiment  does  not  furnish  them  with

4,'\-  '  !

a  key  to  the  moral  symbolism  and  poetic  validity
underlying  theological  ideas,  if  they  apply  their
intelligence  to  the  subject  at  all,  and  care  to  be
sincere,  will  very  soon  con^e  to  regard  religion  as
a  delusion.  Where  religion  is  primary,  however,
all  that  worldly  dread  of  fraud  and  illusion  be¬
comes  irrelevant,  as  it  is  irrelevant  to  an  artist’s
pleasure  to  be  warned  that  the  beauty  he  expresses
has  no  objective  existence,  or  as  it  would  be  irrele¬
vant  to  a  mathematician’s  reasoning  to  suspect  that
Pythagoras  was  a  myth  and  his  supposed  philoso¬
phy  an  abracadabra.  To  the  religious  man  religion
is  inwardly  justified.  God  has  no  need  of  natural
or  logical  witnesses,  but  speaks  himself  within  the
heart,  being  indeed  that  ineffable  attraction  which


158


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


dwells  in  whatever  is  good  and  beautiful,  and  that
persuasive  visitation  of  the  soul  by  the  eternal  and
incorruptible  by  which  she  feels  herself  purified,
rescued  from  mortality,  and  given  an  inheritance
in  the  truth.  This  is  precisely  what  Saint  Augus¬
tine  knew  and  felt  wfith  remarkable  clearness  and
persistence,  and  what  he  expressed  unmistakably
by  saying  that  every  intellectual  perception  is
knowledge  of  God  or  has  God’s  nature  for  its  ob¬
ject.

f  Proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  are  therefore
not  needed,  since  his  existence  is  in  one  sense  ob-

>%vious  and  in  another  of  no  religious  interest.  It
is  obvious  in  the  sense  that  the  ideal  is  a  term
of  moral  experience,  and  that  truth,  goodness,  and
beauty  are  inevitably  envisaged  by  any  one  whose
life  has  in  some  measure  a  rational  quality.  It  is
of  no  religious  interest  in  the  sense  that  perhaps
some  physical  or  dynamic  absolute  might  be  sci¬
entifically  discoverable  in  the  dark  entrails  of  na¬
ture  or  of  mind.  The  great  difference  between
religion  and  metaphysics  is  that  religion  looks  for
God  at  the  top  of  life  and  metaphysics  at  the  bot¬
tom;  a  fact  which  explains  why  metaphysics  has
such  difficulty  in  finding  God,  while  religion  has
never  lost  him.

This  brings  us  to  the  grand  characteristic  and
contradiction  of  Saint  Augustine’s  philosophy,  a
characteristic  which  can  be  best  studied,  perhaps,
in  him,  although  it  has  been  inherited  by  all  Chris¬
tian  theology  and  was  already  present  in  Stoic  and


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


159


Platonic  speculation,  when  the  latter  had  lost  its
ethical  moorings.  This  is  the  idea  that  the  same
God  who  is  the  ideal  of  human  aspiration  is  also
the  creator  of  the  universe  and  its  only  primary
substance.

t  If  Plato,  when  he  wrote  that  fine  and  profound
passage  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Republic,  where
Ambiguous  he  says  that  the  good  is  the  cause  of  all

t^Cgood°in  intelligence  in  the  mind  and  of  all  in-
piato.  t eligibility  in  the  object,  and  indeed

the  principle  of  all  essence  and  existence — if  Plato
could  have  foreseen  what  his  oracular  hyperbole
was  to  breed  in  the  world,  we  may  well  believe  that
he  would  have  expunged  it  from  his  pages  with
the  same  severity  with  which  he  banished  the  poets
from  his  State.  In  the  lips  of  Socrates,  and  at
that  juncture  in  the  argument  of  the  Republic,
those  sentences  have  a  legitimate  meaning.  The
good  is  the  principle  of  benefit,  and  the  philoso¬
phers  who  are  to  rule  the  state  will  not  be  alien¬
ated  by  their  contemplations  from  practical  wis¬
dom,  seeing  that  the  idea  of  the  good — i.  e of  the
advantageous,  profitable,  and  beneficial — is  the
highest  concept  of  the  whole  dialectic,  that  in  ref¬
erence  to  which  all  other  ideas  have  place  and
significance.  If  we  ventured  to  extend  the  inter¬
pretation  of  the  passage,  retaining  its  spirit,  into
fields  where  we  have  more  knowledge  than  Plato
could  have,  we  might  say  that  the  principle  of  the
good  generates  essence  and  existence,  in  the  sense
that  all  natural  organs  have  functions  and  utilities


160


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


by  which  they  establish  themselves  in  the  world,
and  that  the  system  of  these  useful  functions  is
the  true  essence  or  idea  of  any  living  thing.  But
the  Socratic  origin  and  sense  of  such  a  passage  as
this,  and  of  others  (in  the  Timseus,  for  instance)
allied  to  it,  was  soon  lost  in  the  headlong  ideolatry
which  took  possession  of  the  neo-Platonic  school ;
and  it  was  through  this  medium  that  Saint  Augus¬
tine  received  his  Platonic  inspiration.  The  good
no  longer  meant,  as  it  did  to  Plato,  the  principle
of  benefit  everywhere,  but  it  meant  the  good  Be¬
ing;  and  this,  for  a  Christian,  could  naturally  be
none  other  than  God;  so  that  the  idea  that  the
good  was  the  creator  of  all  essence  and  existence
now  assumed  a  marvellously  Mosaic  significance.
Here  was  one  of  those  bits  of  primeval  revelation
which,  it  was  explained,  had  survived  in  the
heathen  world.  The  hypostasis  of  moral  concep¬
tions,  then,  and  of  the  idea  of  the  good  in  par¬
ticular,  led  up  from  the  Platonic  side  to  the  doc¬
trine  of  creation.

The  history  of  the  conception  among  the  Jews
was  entirely  different,  the  element  of  goodness  in
Ambignoui  the  creator  being  there  adventitious

fhe  created  an(^  the  element  of  power  original,
in  job.  Jehovah  for  Job  was  a  universal  force,
justified  primarily  by  his  omnipotence;  but  this
physical  authority  would  in  the  end,  he  hoped,  be
partly  rationalised  and  made  to  clash  less  scan¬
dalously  with  the  authority  of  justice.  Among  the
Greeks,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  idea  of  justice


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE  161


was  more  independent  and  entire;  but  once  named
and  enshrined,  that  divinity,  too,  tended  to  abso¬
luteness,  and  could  be  confused  with  the  physical
basis  of  existence.  In  the  Stoic  philosophy  the
latter  actually  gained  the  upper  hand,  and  the
problem  of  Job  reappeared  on  the  horizon.  It  did
not  rise  into  painful  prominence,  however,  until
Christian  times,  when  absolute  moral  perfection
and  absolute  physical  efficacy  were  predicated  of
God  with  equal  emphasis,  if  not  among  the  people
who  never  have  conceived  God  as  either  perfectly
good  or  entirely  omnipotent,  at  least  among  the
theologians.  If  not  all  felt  the  contradiction  with
equal  acuteness,  the  reason  doubtless  was  that  a
large  part  of  their  thought  was  perfunctory  and
merely  apologetic:  they  did  not  quite  mean  what
they  said  when  they  spoke  of  perfect  goodness;
and  we  shall  see  how  Saint  Augustine  himself,
when  reduced  to  extremities,  surrendered  his  loy¬
alty  to  the  moral  ideal  rather  than  reconsider  his
traditional  premisses.

How  tenaciously,  however,  he  clung  to  the
moral  in  the  i^ligious,  we  can  see  by  the  difficulty
The  he  had  in  separating  himself  from

Manicheans.  the  Manicheans.  The  Manicheans  ad¬
mitted  two  absolutes,  the  essence  of  the  one
being  goodness  and  of  the  other  badness.  This
system  was  logically  weak,  because  these  abso¬
lutes  were  in  the  first  place  two,  which  is  one
contradiction,  and  in  the  second  place  relative,
which  is  another.  But  in  spite  of  the  pitfalls


162


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


into  which  the  Manicheans  were  betrayed  by  their
pursuit  of  metaphysical  absolutes,  they  were  sup¬
ported  by  a  moral  intuition  of  great  truth  and  im¬
portance.  They  saw  that  an  essentially  good  prin¬
ciple  could  not  have  essential  evil  for  its  effect.
These  moral  terms  are,  we  may  ourselves  feel  sure,
relative  to  existence  and  to  actual  impulse,  and  it
may  accordingly  be  always  misleading  to  make
them  the  essence  of  metaphysical  realities:  good
and  bad  may  be  not  existences  but  qualities  which
existences  have  only  in  relation  to  demands  in
themselves  or  in  one  another.  Yet  if  we  once
launch,  as  many  metaphysicians  would  have  us  do,
into  the  hypostasis  of  qualities  and  relations,  it  is
certainly  better  and  more  honest  to  make  contra¬
dictory  qualities  into  opposed  entities,  and  not  to
render  our  metaphysical  world  unmeaning  as  well
as  fictitious  by  peopling  it  with  concepts  in  which
the  most  important  categories  of  life  are  submerged
and  invalidated.  Evil  may  be  no  more  a  meta¬
physical  existence  than  good  is;  both  are  undoubt¬
edly  mere  terms  for  vital  utilities  and  impedi¬
ments;  but  if  we  are  to  indulge  in  mythology  at
all,  it  is  better  that  our  mythology  should  do  sym¬
bolic  justice  to  experience  and  should  represent
by  contrasted  figures  the  ineradicable  practical
difference  between  the  better  and  the  worse,  the
beautiful  and  the  ugly,  the  trustworthy  and  the
fallacious.  To  discriminate  between  these  things
in  practice  is  wisdom,  and  it  should  be  the  part
of  wisdom  to  discriminate  between  them  in  theory.


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


163


The  Manicheans  accordingly  attributed  what  is
good  in  the  world  to  one  power  and  what  is  bad
to  another.  The  fable  is  transparent  enough,  and
we,  who  have  only  just  learned  to  smile  at  a  per¬
sonal  devil,  may  affect  to  wonder  that  any  one
should  ever  have  taken  it  literally.  But  in  an  age
when  the  assertive  imagination  was  unchecked  by
any  critical  sense,  such  a  device  at  least  avoided
the  scandal  of  attributing  all  the  evils  and  sins  of
this  world  to  a  principle  essentially  inviolate  and
pure.  By  avoiding  what  must  have  seemed  a  blas¬
phemy  to  Saint  Augustine,  as  to  every  one  whose
speculation  was  still  relevant  to  his  conscience  and
to  his  practical  idealism,  the  Manicheans  thus  pre¬
vailed  on  many  to  overlook  the  contradictions
which  their  system  developed  so  soon  as  its  fig¬
ments  were  projected  into  the  sphere  of  absolute
existences.

The  horror  with  which  an  idealistic  youth  at
first  views  the  truculence  of  nature  and  the  turpi-

aii  things  tude  worldly  life  is  capable  of  being
good  by  softened  by  experience.  Time  subdues
nature’  our  initial  preferences  by  showing  us
the  complexity  of  moral  relations  in  this  world,
and  by  extending  our  imaginative  sympathy  to
forms  of  existence  and  passion  at  first  repulsive,
which  from  new  and  ultra-personal  points  of  view
may  have  their  natural  sweetness  and  value.  In
this  way,  Saint  Augustine  was  ultimately  brought
to  appreciate  the  catholicity  and  scope  of  those
Greek  sages  who  had  taught  that  all  being  was  to


164


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


itself  good,  that  evil  was  "but  the  impediment  of
natural  function,  and  that  therefore  the  concep¬
tion  of  anything  totally  or  essentially  evil  was
only  a  petulance  or  exaggeration  in  moral  judg¬
ment  that  took,  as  it  were,  the  bit  in  its  teeth,
and  turned  an  incidental  conflict  of  interests  into
a  metaphysical  opposition  of  natures.  All  definite
being  is  in  itself  congruous  with  the  true  and  the
good,  since  its  constitution  is  intelligible  and  its
operation  is  creative  of  values.  Were  it  not  for
the  limitations  of  matter  and  the  accidental  crowd¬
ing  and  conflict  of  life,  all  existing  natures  might
subsist  and  prosper  in  peace  and  concord,  just  as
their  various  ideas  live  without  contradiction  in
the  realm  of  conceptual  truth.  We  may  say  of  all
things,  in  the  words  of  the  Gospel,  that  their  an¬
gels  see  the  face  of  God.  Their  ideals  are  no  less
cases  of  the  good,  no  less  instances  of  perfection,
than  is  the  ideal  locked  in  our  private  bosom.  It
is  the  part  of  justice  and  charity  to  recognise  this
situation,  in  view  of  which  we  may  justly  say  that
evil  is  always  relative  and  subordinate  to  some  con¬
stituted  nature  in  itself  a  standard  of  worth,  a

for  the  moral  valuation  of
eventual  changes  and  of  surrounding  things.  Evil
is  accordingly  accidental  and  unnatural;  it  follows
upon  the  maladaptation  of  actions  to  natures  and
of  natures  to  one  another.  It  can  be  no  just
ground  for  the  condemnation  of  any  of  those  natu¬
ral  essences  which  only  give  rise  to  it  by  their
imperfect  realisation.


point  of  departure


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


165


The  Semitic  idea  of  creation  could  now  receive
that  philosophical  interpretation  which  it  so  sadly
needed.  Primordially,  and  in  respect  to  what  was
positive  in  them,  all  things  might  be  expressions
of  the  good;  in  their  essence  and  ideal  state  they
might  be  said  to  be  created  by  God.  For  God  was
the  supreme  ideal,  to  which  all  other  goods  were
subordinate  and  instrumental;  and  if  we  agree  to
make  a  cosmogony  out  of  morals  and  to  hyposta-
sise  the  series  of  rational  ideals,  taken  in  the  in¬
verse  order,  into  a  series  of  efficient  causes,  it  is
clear  that  the  highest  good,  which  is  at  the  end
of  the  moral  scale,  will  now  figure  as  a  first  cause
at  the  beginning  of  the  physical  sequence.  This
operation  is  what  is  recorded  and  demanded  in  the
doctrine  of  creation:  a  doctrine  which  would  lose
its  dogmatic  force  if  we  allowed  either  the  moral
ideality  or  the  physical  efficacy  of  the  creator  to
drop  out  of  sight.  If  the  moral  ideality  is  sacri¬
ficed,  we  pass  to  an  ordinary  pantheism,  while  if
the  physical  efficacy  is  surrendered,  we  take  refuge
in  a  naturalistic  idealism  of  the  Aristotelian  type,
where  the  good  is  a  function  of  things  and  neither
their  substance  nor  their  cause.

To  accept  the  doctrine  of  creation,  after  it  had
become  familiar,  was  not  very  hard,  because  the
contradiction  it  contains  could  then  be  set  down
to  our  imperfect  apprehension.  The  unintelligi¬
bility  of  matters  of  fact  does  not  lead  us  to  deny
them,  but  merely  to  study  them;  and  when  the
creation  was  accepted  as  a  fact,  iU  unintelligibility


166


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


became  merely  a  theological  problem  and  a  relig¬
ious  mystery,  such  as  no  mortal  philosophy  can  be
without.  But  for  Saint  Augustine  the  situation
was  wholly  different.  A  doctrine  of  the  creation
had  to  be  constructed:  the  disparate  ideas  had  to
be  synthesised  which  posterity  was  afterward  to
regard  as  the  obvious,  if  not  wholly  reconcilable,
attributes  of  the  deity.  The  mystery  could  not
then  be  recognised;  it  had  to  be  made.  And  Saint
Augustine,  with  his  vital  religion,  with  his  spon¬
taneous  adoration  of  God  the  ideal,  could  not  at¬
tribute  to  that  ideal  unimpeded  efficacy  in  the
world.  To  admit  that  all  natures  were  essentially
good  might  dispel  the  Manichean  fancy  about  an
Evil  Absolute  engaged  in  single  combat  with  an
Absolute  Good;  but  insight  into  the  meaning  and
the  natural  conditions  of  evil  could  only  make  its
presence  more  obvious  and  its  origin  more  inti¬
mately  bound  up  with  the  general  constitution
The  doctrine  of  the  world.  Evil  is  only  imperfec-

demand^that  ^ion;  but  everything  is  imperfect.  Con-
of  the  fail.  flict  is  only  maladaptation,  but  there  is
maladaptation  everywhere.  If  we  assume,  then,
what  the  doctrine  of  creation  requires,  that  all
things  at  first  proceeded  out  of  the  potency  of  the
good — their  matter  and  form,  their  distribution
and  their  energies,  being  wholly  attributable  to
the  attraction  of  the  ultimately  best — it  is  clear
that  some  calamity  must  have  immediately  super¬
vened  by  which  the  fountains  of  life  were  defiled,
the  strength  of  the  ideal  principle  in  living  things


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE  167


weakened,  and  the  mortal  conflict  instituted  which
not  only  condemns  all  existent  things  ultimately
to  perish,  hut  hardly  allows  them,  even  while  they
painfully  endure,  to  he  truly  and  adequately  them¬
selves.

Original  sin,  with  the  fall  of  the  angels  and  of
man  for  its  mythical  ground,  thus  enters  into  the
inmost  web  of  Augustinian  philosophy.  This  fact
cannot  he  too  much  insisted  upon,  for  only  hy  the
immediate  introduction  of  original  sin  into  the
history  of  the  world  could  a  man  to  whom  God
was  still  a  moral  term  believe  at  all  in  the  natural
and  fundamental  efficacy  of  God  in  the  cosmos.
The  doctrine  of  the  fall  made  it  possible  for  Saint
Augustine  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  the  creation.
Both  belonged  to  the  same  mythical  region  in
which  the  moral  values  of  life  were  made  to  figure
as  metaphysical  agents;  but  when  once  the  meta¬
physical  agency  of  the  highest  good  was  admitted
into  a  poetic  cosmogony,  it  became  imperative  to
admit  also  the  metaphysical  agency  of  sin  into  it ;
for  otherwise  the  highest  good  would  be  deprived
of  its  ideal  and  moral  character,  would  cease  to  be
the  entelechy  of  rational  life,  and  be  degraded  into
a  flat  principle  of  description  or  synthesis  for  ex¬
perience  and  nature  as  they  actually  are.  God
would  thus  become  a  natural  agent,  like  the  fire
of  Heraclitus,  in  which  human  piety  could  take
an  interest  only  by  force  of  traditional  inertia  and
unintelligence,  while  the  continued  muttering  of
the  ritual  prevented  men  from  awaking  to  the  dis-


168


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


appearance  of  the  god.  The  essence  of  deity,  as
Augustine  was  inwardly  convinced,  was  correspon¬
dence  to  human  aspiration,  moral  perfection,  and
ideality.  God,  therefore,  as  the  Manicheans,  with
Plato  and  Aristotle  before  them,  had  taught,  could
be  the  author  of  good  only;  or,  to  express  the  same
thing  in  less  figurative  and  misleading  language,
it  was  only  the  good  in  things  that  could  con¬
tribute  to  our  idea  of  divinity.  What  was  evil
must,  therefore,  be  carried  up  into  another  con¬
cept,  must  be  referred,  if  you  will,  to  another  myth¬
ical  agent;  and  this  mythical  agent  in  Saint  Au¬
gustine’s  theology  was  named  sin.

Everything  in  the  world  which  obscured  the  im¬
age  of  the  creator  or  rebelled  against  his  com-
Origin&i  mandments  (everything,  that  is,  which
silL  prevented  in  things  the  expression  of

their  natural  ideals)  was  due  to  sin.  Sin  was  re¬
sponsible  for  disease  of  mind  and  body,  for  all
suffering,  for  death,  for  ignorance,  perversity,  and
dulness.  Sin  was  responsible — so  truly  original
was  it — for  what  was  painful  and  wrong  even  in
the  animal  kingdom,  and  sin — such  was  the  para¬
doxical  apex  of  this  inverted  series  of  causes — sin
was  responsible  for  sin  itself.  The  insoluble  prob¬
lems  of  the  origin  of  evil  and  of  freedom,  in  a
world  produced  in  its  every  fibre  by  omnipotent
goodness,  can  never  be  understood  until  we  re¬
member  their  origin.  They  are  artificial  problems,
unknown  to  philosophy  before  it  betook  itself  to
the  literal  justification  of  fables  in  which  the  ob-


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


169


jects  of  rational  endeavour  were  represented  as
causes  of  natural  existence.  The  former  are  in¬
ternal  products  of  life,  the  latter  its  external  con¬
ditions.  When  the  two  are  confused  we  reach  the
contradiction  confronting  Saint  Augustine,  and  all
who  to  this  day  have  followed  in  his  steps.  The
cause  of  everything  must  have  been  the  cause  of
sin,  yet  the  principle  of  good  could  not  be  the
principle  of  evil.  Both  propositions  were  obviously
true,  and  they  were  contradictory  only  after  the
mythical  identification  of  the  God  which  meant
the  ideal  of  life  with  the  God  which  meant  the
forces  of  nature.

It  would  help  us  little,  in  trying  to  understand
these  doctrines,  to  work  over  the  dialectic  of  them.
Forced  and  seek  express  the  contradiction
abandonment  in  somewhat  veiled  terms  or  according

of  the  ideal.  i  •  j.  •  i  i  •  t  j

to  new  pictorial  analogies.  Good  and
evil,  in  the  context  of  life,  undoubtedly  have  com¬
mon  causes;  but  that  system  which  involves  both
is  for  that  very  reason  not  an  ideal  system,  and
to  represent  it  a£  such  is  simply  to  ignore  the  con¬
science  and  the  upward  effort  of  life.  The  contra¬
diction  can  be  avoided  only  by  renouncing  the
meaning  of  one  of  the  terms;  either,  that  is,  by  no
longer  regarding  the  good  as  an  absolute  creator,
but  merely  as  a  partial  result  or  tendency  in  a
living  world  whose  life  naturally  involves  values,
or  else  by  no  longer  conceiving  God  as  the  ideal
term  in  man’s  own  existence.  The  latter  is  the
solution  adopted  by  metaphysicians  generally,  and


170


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


by  Saint  Augustine  himself  when  hard  pressed  by
the  exigencies  of  his  double  allegiance.  God,  he
tells  us,  is  just,  although  not  just  as  man  is,  nor
as  man  should  be.  In  other  words,  God  is  to  be
called  just  even  when  he  is  unjust  in  the  only
sense  in  which  the  word  justice  has  a  meaning
among  men.  We  are  forced,  in  fact,  to  obscure
our  moral  concepts  and  make  them  equivocal  in
order  to  be  able  to  apply  them  to  the  efficient
forces  and  actual  habits  of  this  world.  The  essence
of  divinity  is  no  longer  moral  excellence,  but  on¬
tological  and  dynamic  relations  to  the  natural
world,  so  that  the  love  of  God  would  have  to
become,  not  an  exercise  of  reason  and  conscience,
as  it  naturally  was  with  Saint  Augustine,  but  a
mystical  intoxication,  as  it  was  with  Spinoza.

The  sad  effects  of  this  degradation  of  God  into  a
physical  power  are  not  hard  to  trace  in  Augustine’s
own  doctrine  and  feeling.  He  became  a  champion
of  arbitrary  grace  and  arbitrary  predestination  to
perdition.  The  eternal  damnation  of  innocents
gave  him  no  qualms;  and  in  this  we  must  admire
the  strength  of  his  logic,  since  if  it  is  right  that
there  should  be  wrong  at  all,  there  is  no  particular
reason  for  stickling  at  the  quantity  or  the  enormity
of  it.  And  yet  there  are  sentences  which  for  their
brutality  and  sycophancy  cannot  be  read  without
pain — sentences  inspired  by  this  misguided  desire
to  apologise  for  the  crimes  of  the  universe.  “  Why
should  God  not  create  beings  that  he  foreknew
were  to  sin,  when  indeed  in  their  persons  and  by


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


171


their  fates  he  could  manifest  both  what  punish¬
ment  their  guilt  deserved  and  what  free  gifts  he
might  bestow  on  them  by  his  favour?  ”  “  Think¬
ing  it  more  lordly  and  better  to  do  well  even  in
the  presence  of  evil  than  not  to  allow  evil  to  exist
at  all.”  Here  the  pitiful  maxim  of  doing  evil  that
good  may  come  is  robbed  of  the  excuse  it  finds  in
human  limitations  and  is  made  the  first  principle
of  divine  morality.  Repellent  and  contorted  as
these  ultimate  metaphysical  theories  may  seem,  we
must  not  suppose  that  they  destroyed  in  Saint
Augustine  that  practical  and  devotional  idealism
which  they  contradicted:  the  region  of  Christian
charity  is  fortunately  far  wider  and  far  nearer
home  than  that  of  Christian  apologetics.  The
work  of  practical  redemption  went  on,  while  the
dialectics  about  the  perfection  of  the  universe  were
forgotten;  and  Saint  Augustine  never  ceased,  by  |
a  happy  inconsistency,  to  bewail  the  sins  and  to
combat  the  heresies  which  his  God  was  stealthily  j
nursing,  so  that  in  their  melodramatic  punishment
his  glory  might  be  more  beautifully  manifested.

It  was  Saint  Augustine,  as  we  know,  who,  in
spite  of  his  fervid  Catholicism,  was  the  favourite

The  problem  master  of  both  Luther  and  Calvin,
among  the  They  emphasised,  however,  his  more
Protestants.  faiiatical  side,  and  this  very  predes-

tinarian  and  absolutist  doctrine  which  he  had  pre¬
vailed  on  himself  to  accept.  Here  was  the  pan¬
theistic  leaven  doing  its  work;  and  concentration
of  attention  on  the  Old  Testament,  given  the  re-


172


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


formers’  controversial  and  metaphysical  habit  of
thought,  could  only  precipitate  the  inevitable.
While  popular  piety  bubbled  up  into  all  sorts  of
emotional  and  captious  sects,  each  with  its  pathetic
insistence  on  some  text  or  on  some  whimsey,  but
all  inwardly  inspired  by  an  earnest  religious  hun¬
ger,  academic  and  cultivated  Protestantism  became
every  day  more  pale  and  rationalistic.  Mediocre
natures  continued  to  rehearse  the  old  platitudes
and  tread  the  slippery  middle  courses  of  one  ortho¬
doxy  or  another;  but  distinguished  minds  could
no  longer  treat  such  survivals  as  more  than  alle¬
gories,  historic  or  mythical  illustrations  of  general
spiritual  truths.  So  Lessing,  Goethe,  and  the
idealists  in  Germany,  and  after  them  such  lay
prophets  as  Carlyle  and  Emerson,  had  for  Chris¬
tianity  only  an  inessential  respect.  They  drank
their  genuine  inspiration  directly  from  nature,
from  history,  from  the  total  personal  apprehen¬
sion  they  might  have  of  life.  In  them  speculative
theology  rediscovered  its  affinity  to  neo-Platon-
ism;  in  other  words,  Christian  philosophy  was
washed  clean  of  its  legendary  alloy  to  become  a
pure  cosmic  speculation.  It  was  Gnosticism  come
again  in  a  very  different  age  to  men  in  an  opposite
phase  of  culture,  but  with  its  logic  unchanged.
The  creation  was  the  self-diremption  of  the  in¬
finite  into  finite  expression,  the  fall  was  the  self-
discovery  of  this  finitude,  the  incarnation  was  the
awakening  of  the  finite  to  its  essential  infinity;
and  here,  a  sufficient  number  of  pages  having  been


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE  173


engrossed,  the  matter  generally  hastened  to  a  con¬
clusion;  for  the  redemption  with  its  means  of  ap¬
plication,  once  the  central  point  in  Christianity,
was  less  pliable  to  the  new  pantheistic  interpreta¬
tion.  Neo-Platonism  had  indeed  cultivated  asceti¬
cism,  ecstasies,  and  a  hope  of  reabsorption  into  the
One;  but  these  things  a  modern,  and  especially  a
Teutonic,  temperament  could  hardly  relish;  and
though  absolutism  in  a  sense  must  discountenance
all  finite  interests  and  dissolve  all  experience,  in
theory,  into  a  neutral  whole,  yet  this  inevitable
mysticism  remained,  as  with  the  Stoics,  sternly  op¬
timistic,  in  order  to  respond  to  the  vital  social
forces  which  Protestantism  embodied.  The  ethical
part  of  neo-Platonism  and  the  corresponding
Christian  doctrine  of  salvation  had  accordingly  to
be  discarded ;  for  mystical  as  the  northern  soul
may  gladly  be  in  speculation,  to  satisfy  its  senti¬
mentality,  it  hardly  can  be  mystical  in  action,  since
it  has  to  satisfy  also  its  interest  in  success  and  its
fidelity  to  instinct.

An  absolutism  which  thus  encourages  and  sanc¬
tions  the  natural  will  is  Stoical  and  pantheistic;
it  does  not,  like  Indian  and  Platonic  absolutism,
seek  to  suspend  the  will  in  view  of  some  super¬
natural  destiny.  Pantheism  subordinates  mor¬
ally  what  it  finds  to  be  dependent  in  existence;
its  religion  bids  human  reason  and  interest  ab¬
dicate  before  cosmic  forces,  instead  of  standing
out,  like  Buddhism  and  Christianity,  for  salvation,
for  spiritual  extrication,  from  a  world  which  they


174


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


regard  as  delusive  and  fallen.  The  world  of  Ger¬
man  absolutism,  like  the  Stoic  world,  was  not
Pantheism  fallen.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  divine-
accepted.  ly  inspired  and  altogether  authoritative ;

he  alone  who  did  not  find  his  place  and  function
in  it  was  unholy  and  perverse.  This  world-
worship,  despising  heartily  every  finite  and  ra¬
tional  ideal,  gives  to  impulse  and  fact,  whatever
they  may  be,  liberty  to  flourish  under  a  divine
warrant.  Were  the  people  accepting  such  a  sys¬
tem  corrupt,  it  would  sanction  their  corruption,
and  thereby,  most  probably,  lead  to  its  own
abandonment,  for  it  would  bring  on  an  ascetic
and  supernaturalistic  reaction  by  which  its  con¬
venient  sycophancy  would  be  repudiated.  But
reflection  and  piety,  even  if  their  object  be  ma¬
terial  and  their  worship  idolatrous,  exalt  the
mind  and  raise  it  above  vulgar  impulse.  If  you
fetch  from  contemplation  a  theoretic  license  to
be  base,  your  contemplative  habit  itself  will  have
purified  you  more  than  your  doctrine  will  have
power  to  degrade  you  afresh,  for  training  affects
instinct  much  more  than  opinion  can.  Antinomian
theory  can  flourish  blamelessly  in  a  puritan  soil,
for  there  it  instinctively  remains  theoretical.  And
the  Teutonic  pantheists  are  for  the  most  part  un¬
contaminated  souls,  puritan  by  training,  and  only
interested  in  furthering  the  political  and  intellec¬
tual  efficiency  of  the  society  in  which  they  live.
Their  pantheism  under  these  circumstances  makes
them  the  more  energetic  and  turns  them  into  prac-


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


175


tical  positivists,  docile  to  their  social  medium  and
apologists  for  all  its  conventions.  So  that,  while
they  write  books  to  disprove  naturalism  in  natural
philosophy  where  it  belongs,  in  morals  where  natu¬
ralism  is  treason  they  are  themselves  naturalists
of  the  most  uncritical  description,  forgetting  that
only  the  interests  of  the  finite  soul  introduce  such
a  thing  as  good  and  evil  into  the  world,  and  that
nature  and  society  are  so  far  from  being  authorita¬
tive  and  divine  that  they  have  no  value  whatever
save  by  the  services  they  may  render  to  each  spirit
in  its  specific  and  genuine  ambitions.

Indeed,  this  pantheistic  subordination  of  con¬
science  to  what  happens  to  exist,  this  optimism
Plainer  scorn  annulling  every  human  ideal,  betrays
for  the  ideal.  j^s  immoral  tendency  very  clearly  so

soon  as  it  descends  from  theological  seminaries
into  the  lay  world.  Poets  at  first  begin  to  justify,
on  its  authority,  their  favourite  passions  and  to
sing  the  picturesqueness  of  a  blood-stained  world.
“  Practical”  men  follow,  deprecating  any  reflec¬
tion  which  may  cast  a  doubt  on  the  providential
justification  of  their  chosen  activities,  and  on  the
invisible  value  of  the  same,  however  sordid,  brutal,
or  inane  they  may  visibly  be.  Finally,  politicians
learn  to  invoke  destiny  and  the  movement  of  the
age  to  save  themselves  the  trouble  of  discerning
rational  ends  and  to  colour  their  secret  indifference
to  the  world’s  happiness.  The  follies  thus  sanc¬
tioned  theoretically,  because  they  are  involved  in
a  perfect  world,  would  doubtless  be  perpetrated


176


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


none  the  less  by  the  same  persons  had  they  ab¬
sorbed  in  youth  a  different  religion;  for  conduct
is  rooted  in  deep  instincts  which  affect  opinion
more  than  opinion  can  avail  to  affect  them  in  turn.
Yet  there  is  an  added  indignity  in  not  preserving
a  clear  and  honest  mind,  and  in  quitting  the  world
without  having  in  some  measure  understood  and
appreciated  it.

Pantheism  is  mythical  and  has,  as  we  have  just
seen,  all  the  subversive  powers  of  ordinary  super-

The  price  of  stition.  It  turns  the  natural  world,
mythology  is  man’s  stamping-ground  and  system  of
superstition,  opportunities,  into  a  self -justifying  and

sacred  life;  it  endows  the  blameless  giant  with  an
inhuman  soul  and  then  worships  the  monstrous
divinity  it  has  fabricated.  It  thereby  encounters
the  same  dilemma  that  defeats  all  mythology  when
it  forgets  its  merely  poetic  office  and  trespasses
upon  moral  ground.  It  must  either  interpret  the
natural  world  faithfully,  attributing  to  the  myth¬
ical  deity  the  sort  of  life  that  dramatically  suits
its  visible  behaviour,  or  if  it  idealises  and  moralises
the  spectacle  it  must  renounce  the  material  reality
and  efficacy  of  its  gods.  Either  the  cosmic  power
must  cover  the  actual  goodness  and  badness  in  na¬
ture  impartially,  when  to  worship  it  would  be  idola¬
trous,  or  it  must  cover  only  the  better  side  of  na¬
ture,  those  aspects  of  it  which  support  and  resemble
human  virtue.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  human
virtue  that  mythology  is  formulating  in  a  dramatic
fiction,  a  human  ideal  that  is  being  illustrated  by


THE  CHRISTIAN  COMPROMISE


177


a  poet,  who  selects  for  the  purpose  certain  phases
of  nature  and  experience.  By  this  idealisation  the
affinity  which  things  often  have  to  man’s  interests
may  be  brought  out  in  a  striking  manner;  but  their
total  and  real  mechanism  is  no  better  represented
than  that  of  animals  in  iEsop’s  fables.  To  detect
the  divergence  it  suffices  to  open  the  eyes;  and
while  nature  may  be  rationally  admired  and  cher¬
ished  for  so  supporting  the  soul,  it  is  her  eventual
ministry  to  man  that  makes  her  admirable,  not  her
independent  magnitude  or  antiquity.  To  worship
nature  as  she  really  is,  with  all  her  innocent  crimes
made  intentional  by  our  mythology  and  her  un¬
fathomable  constitution  turned  into  a  caricature
of  barbarian  passions,  is  to  subvert  the  order  of
values  and  to  falsify  natural  philosophy.  Yet  this
dislocation  of  reason,  both  in  its  conceptions  and
in  its  allegiance,  is  the  natural  outcome  of  think¬
ing  on  mythical  lines.  A  myth,  by  turning  phe¬
nomena  into  expressions  of  thought  and  passion,
teaches  man  to  look  for  models  and  goals  of
action  in  that  external  world  where  reason  can
find  nothing  but  instruments  and  materials*


CHAPTEK  X


PIETY

Hebraism  is  a  striking  example  of  a  religion
tending  to  discard  mythology  and  magic.  It  was

The  core  of  a  Hebraising  apostle  who  said  that
religion  not  true  religion  and  undefiled  was  to  visit
theoretical.  fatherless  and  the  widow,  and  do

other  works  of  mercy.  Although  a  complete  re¬
ligion  can  hardly  remain  without  theoretic  and
ritual  expression,  we  must  remember  that  after  all
religion  has  other  aspects  less  conspicuous,  perhaps,
than  its  mythology,  but  often  more  worthy  of  re¬
spect.  If  religion  be,  as  we  have  assumed,  an  im¬
aginative  symbol  for  the  Life  of  Eeason,  it  should
contain  not  only  symbolic  ideas  and  rites,  but  also
symbolic  sentiments  and  duties.  And  so  it  every¬
where  does  in  a  notable  fashion.  Piety  and  spirit¬
uality  are  phases  of  religion  no  less  important  than
mythology,  or  than  those  metaphysical  spectres
with  which  mythology  terminates.  It  is  there¬
fore  time  we  should  quite  explicitly  turn  from
religious  ideas  to  religious  emotions,  from  im¬
aginative  history  and  science  to  imaginative
morals.


178


PIETY


179


Piety,  in  its  nobler  and  Eoman  sense,  may  be
said  to  mean  man’s  reverent  attachment  to  the
sources  of  his  being  and  the  steadying  of  his  life
by  that  attachment.  A  soul  is  but  the  last  bubble
of  a  long  fermentation  in  the  world.  If  we  wish
to  live  associated  with  permanent  racial  interests
we  must  plant  ourselves  on  a  broad  historic  and
human  foundation,  we  must  absorb  and  interpret
the  past  which  has  made  us,  so  that  we  may  hand
down  its  heritage  reinforced,  if  possible,  and  in
no  way  undermined  or  denaturalised.  This  con¬
sciousness  that  the  human  spirit  is  derived  and
responsible,  that  all  its  functions  are  heritages  and
trusts,  involves  a  sentiment  of  gratitude  and  duty
which  we  may  call  piety.

The  true  objects  of  piety  are,  of  course,  those
on  which  life  and  its  interests  really  depend:  par-

Loyaity  to  ents  then  ancestors,  and

the  sources  of  country;  finally,  humanity  at  large  and
our  being.  fhe  wh0;[e  natural  cosmos.  But  had  a

lay  sentiment  toward  these  forces  been  fostered
by  clear  knowledge  of  their  nature  and  relation
to  ourselves,  the  dutifulness  or  cosmic  emotion
thereby  aroused  would  have  remained  purely  moral
and  historical.  As  science  would  not  in  the  end
admit  any  myth  which  was  not  avowed  poetry,  so
it  would  not  admit  any  piety  which  was  not  plain
reason  and  duty.  But  man,  in  his  perplexities  and
pressing  needs,  has  plunged,  once  for  all,  into  im¬
aginative  courses  through  which  it  is  our  business
to  follow  him,  to  see  if  he  may  not  eventually  reach


180


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


his  goal  even  by  those  by-paths  and  dark  circum¬
locutions.

What  makes  piety  an  integral  part  of  traditional
religions  is  the  fact  that  moral  realities  are  rep-
The  pious  resented  in  the  popular  mind  by  poetic
jEneas.  symbols.  The  awe  inspired  by  prin¬

ciples  so  abstract  and  consequences  so  remote  and
general  is  arrested  at  their  conventional  name.
We  have  all  read  in  boyhood,  perhaps  with
derision,  about  the  pious  -ZEneas.  His  piety  may
have  seemed  to  us  nothing  but  a  feminine  sensi¬
bility,  a  faculty  of  shedding  tears  on  slight  provo¬
cation.  But  in  truth  .Eneas’s  piety,  as  Virgil  or
any  Roman  would  have  conceived  it,  lay  less  in
his  feelings  than  in  his  function  and  vocation.  He
was  bearing  the  Palladium  of  his  country  to  a  new
land,  to  found  another  Troy,  so  that  the  blood  and
traditions  of  his  ancestors  might  not  perish.  His
emotions  were  only  the  appropriate  expression  of
his  priestly  office.  The  hero  might  have  been  stem
and  stolid  enough  on  his  own  martial  ground,  but
since  he  bore  the  old  Anchises  from  the  mins  of
Ilium  he  had  assumed  a  sacred  mission.  Hence¬
forth  a  sacerdotal  unction  and  lyric  pathos  be¬
longed  rightfully  to  his  person.  If  those  embers,
so  religiously  guarded,  should  by  chance  have  been
extinguished,  there  could  never  have  been  a  Vestal
fire  nor  any  Rome.  So  that  all  that  Virgil  and
his  readers,  if  they  had  any  piety,  revered  in  the
world  had  been  hazarded  in  those  legendary  ad¬
ventures.  It  was  not  .Eneas’s  own  life  or  private


PIETY


181


ambition  that  was  at  stake  to  justify  his  emotion.
His  tenderness,  like  Virgil’s  own,  was  ennobled
and  made  heroic  by  its  magnificent  and  impersonal
object.  It  was  truly  an  epic  destiny  that  inspired
both  poet  and  hero.

If  we  look  closer,  however,  we  shall  see  that
mythical  and  magic  elements  were  requisite  to  lend

An  ideal  this  loftiness  to  the  argument.  Had
background  iEneas  not  been  Venus’s  son,  had  no
required.  prophetic  instinct  animated  him,  had

no  Juno  been  planning  the  rise  of  Carthage,  how
could  the  future  destinies  of  this  expedition  have
been  imported  into  it,  to  lift  it  above  some  pirat¬
ical  or  desperate  venture?  Colonists  passing  in
our  day  to  America  or  Australia  might  conceivably
carry  with  them  the  seeds  of  empires  as  considera¬
ble  as  Home’s.  But  they  would  go  out  thinking
of  their  private  livelihood  and  convenience,  break¬
ing  or  loosening  whatever  pious  bonds  might  unite
them  to  the  past,  and  quite  irresponsibly  laying
the  foundations  for  an  unknown  future.  A  poet,
to  raise  them  to  the  height  of  their  unwitting  func¬
tion,  would  have  to  endow  them  with  second  sight
and  a  corresponding  breadth  of  soul  and  purpose.
He  would  need,  in  a  word,  heroic  figures  and  su¬
pernatural  machinery.

How,  what  supernatural  machinery  and  heroic
figures  do  for  an  epic  poet  piety  does  for  a  race.
It  endows  it,  through  mythical  and  magic  symbols,
with  something  like  a  vision  or  representation  of
its  past  and  future.  Eeligion  is  normally  the  most


\


/


182


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


traditional  and  national  of  things.  It  embodies
and  localises  the  racial  heritage.  Commandments
of  the  law,  feasts  and  fasts,  temples  and  the  tombs
associated  with  them,  are  so  many  foci  of  com¬
munal  life,  so  many  points  for  the  dissemination
of  custom.  The  Sabbath,  which  a  critical  age
might  justify  on  hygienic  grounds,  is  inconceivable
without  a  religious  sanction.  The  craving  for  rest
and  emotion  expressed  itself  spontaneously  in  a
practice  which,  as  it  established  itself,  had  to  be
sanctioned  by  fables  till  the  recurrent  holiday,  with
all  its  humane  and  chastening  influences,  came  to
be  established  on  supernatural  authority.  It  was
now  piety  to  observe  it  and  to  commemorate  in
it  the  sacred  duties  and  traditions  of  the  race.  In
this  function,  of  course,  lay  its  true  justification,
but  the  mythical  one  had  to  be  assigned,  since  the
diffused  prosaic  advantages  of  such  a  practice  would
never  avail  to  impose  it  on  irrational  wills.  In¬
deed,  to  revert  to  our  illustration,  had  iEneas  fore¬
seen  in  detail  the  whole  history  of  Borne,  would
not  his  faith  in  his  divine  mission  have  been  con¬
siderably  dashed?  The  reality,  precious  and  in¬
estimable  as  on  the  whole  it  was  to  humanity,
might  well  have  shocked  him  by  its  cruelties,
shames,  and  disasters.  He  would  have  wished  to
found  only  a  perfect  nation  and  a  city  eternal  in¬
deed.  A  want  of  rationality  and  measure  in  the
human  will,  that  has  not  learned  to  prize  small
betterments  and  finite  but  real  goods,  compels  it
1  to  deceive  itself  about  the  rewards  of  life  in  order


PIETY


1S3


to  secure  them.  That  celestial  mission,  those  heav¬
enly  apparitions,  those  incalculable  treasures  car¬
ried  through  many  a  storm,  abused  iEneas’s  mind
in  order  to  nerve  him  to  his  real  duty.  Yet  his
illusion  was  merely  intellectual.  The  mission  un¬
dertaken  was  truly  worth  carrying  out.  Piety
thus  came  to  bear  the  fruits  of  philanthropy  in
an  age  when  the  love  of  man  was  inconceivable.
A  dull  and  visionary  intellect  could  hit  on  no  other
way  of  justifying  a  good  instinct.

Philosophers  who  harbour  illusions  about  the
status  of  intellect  in  nature  may  feel  that  this  lead¬
ership  of  instinct  in  moral  life  is  a  sort  of  indig¬
nity,  and  that  to  dwell  on  it  so  insistently  is  to
prolong  satire  without  wit.  But  the  leadership  of
instinct,  the  conscious  expression  of  mechanism,
is  not  merely  a  necessity  in  the  Life  of  Reason,
it  is  a  safeguard.  Piety,  in  spite  of  its  allegories,
contains  a  much  greater  wisdom  than  a  half-en¬
lightened  and  pert  intellect  can  attain.  Natural
beings  have  natural  obligations,  and  the  value  of
things  for  them  is  qualified  by  distance  and  by
accidental  material  connections.  Intellect  would
tend  to  gauge  things  impersonally  by  their  intrin¬
sic  values,  since  intellect  is  itself  a  sort  of  disem¬
bodied  and  universal  function;  it  would  tend  to
disregard  material  conditions  and  that  irrational
substratum  of  reason  without  which  reason  would
have  no  organs  and  no  points  of  application.  Piety,


184


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


on  the  contrary,  esteems  things  apart  from  their
intrinsic  worth,  on  account  of  their  relation  to  the

Piety  accepts  agent’s  person  and  fortune.  Yet  such
natural  con-  esteem  is  perfectly  rational,  partiality

present  hi  man’s  affections  and  allegiance  be-
tasks.  ing  justified  by  the  partial  nature  and

local  status  of  his  life.  Piety  is  the  spirit’s  ac¬
knowledgment  of  its  incarnation.  So,  in  filial  and
parental  affection,  which  is  piety  in  an  elementary
form,  there  is  a  moulding  of  will  and  emotion,  a
check  to  irresponsible  initiative,  in  obedience  to
the  facts  of  animal  reproduction.  Every  living
creature  has  an  intrinsic  and  ideal  worth;  he  is
the  centre  of  actual  and  yet  more  of  potential  in¬
terests.  But  this  moral  value,  which  even  the  re¬
motest  observer  must  recognise  in  both  parent  and
child,  is  not  the  ground  of  their  specific  affection
The  for  each  other,  which  no  other  mortal

instincHs  °f  ca^e(i  to  feel  in  their  regard.  This
normal.  affection  is  based  on  the  incidental  and
irrational  fact  that  the  one  has  this  particular  man
for  a  father,  and  the  other  that  particular  man
for  a  son.  Yet,  considering  the  animal  basis  of
human  life,  an  attachment  resting  on  that  circum¬
stance  is  a  necessary  and  rational  attachment.

This  physical  bond  should  not,  indeed,  disturb
the  intellect  in  its  proper  function  or  warp  its  judg¬
ments;  you  should  not,  under  guise  of  tenderness,
become  foolish  and  attribute  to  your  father  or
child  greater  stature  or  cleverness  or  goodness  than
he  actually  possesses.  To  do  so  is  a  natural  foible


PIETY


185


but  no  part  of  piety  or  true  loyalty.  It  is  one
thing  to  lack  a  heart  and  another  to  possess  eyes
and  a  just  imagination.  Indeed,  piety  is  never
so  beautiful  and  touching,  never  so  thoroughly
humane  and  invincible,  as  when  it  is  joined  to  an
impartial  intellect,  conscious  of  the  relativity  in¬
volved  in  existence  and  able  to  elude,  through  im¬
aginative  sympathy,  the  limits  set  to  personal  life
by  circumstance  and  private  duty.  As  a  man  dies
nobly  when,  awaiting  his  own  extinction,  he  is  in¬
terested  to  the  last  in  what  will  continue  to  be  the
interests  and  joys  of  others,  so  he  is  most  pro¬
foundly  pious  who  loves  unreservedly  a  country,
friends,  and  associations  which  he  knows  very:.w;ell
to  be  not  the  most  beautiful  on  earth,  and  who,
being  wholly  content  in  his  personal  capacity  with
his  natural  conditions,  does  not  need  to  begrudge
other  things  whatever  speculative  admiration  they
may  truly  deserve.  The  ideal  in  this  polyglot
world,  where  reason  can  receive  only  local  and  tem¬
poral  expression,  is  to  understand  all  languages
and  to  speak  but  one,  so  as  to  unite,  in  a  manly
fashion,  comprehension  with  propriety.

Piety  is  in  a  sense  pathetic  because  it  involves
subordination  to  physical  accident  and  acceptance  \
of  finitude.  But  it  is  also  noble  and  eminently
fruitful  because,  in  subsuming  a  life  under  the
general  laws  of  relativity,  it  meets  fate  with  sim¬
ple  sincerity  and  labours  in  accordance  with  the
conditions  imposed.  Since  man,  though  capable
of  abstraction  and  impartiality,  is  rooted  like  a


186


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


vegetable  to  one  point  in  space  and  time,  and
exists  by  limitation,  piety  belongs  to  the  equili¬
brium  of  his  being.  It  resides,  so  to  speak,  at  his
centre  of  gravity,  at  the  heart  and  magnetic  focus
of  his  complex  endowment.  It  exercises  there  the
eminently  sane  function  of  calling  thought  home.
It  saves  speculative  and  emotional  life  from  hurt¬
ful  extravagance  by  keeping  it  traditional  and
social.  Conventional  absurdities  have  at  least  this
advantage,  that  they  may  be  taken  conventionally
and  may  come  to  be,  in  practice,  mere  symbols
for  their  uses.  Piety  is  more  closely  linked  with
custom  than  with  thought.  It  exercises  an  irra¬
tional  suasion,  moralises  by  contagion,  and  brings
an  emotional  peace.

Patriotism  is  another  form  of  piety  in  which  its
natural  basis  and  rational  function  may  be  clearly

Embodiment  seen.  It  is  right  to  prefer  our  own
essential  to  country  to  all  others,  because  we  are

spmt  children  and  citizens  before  we  can  be

travellers  or  philosophers.  Specific  character  is  a
necessary  point  of  origin  for  universal  relations:
a  pure  nothing  can  have  no  radiation  or  scope.
It  is  no  accident  for  the  soul  to  be  embodied;  her
very  essence  is  to  express  and  bring  to  fruition
the  body^s  functions  and  resources.  Its  instincts
make  her  ideals  and  its  relations  her  world.  A
native  country  is  a  sort  of  second  body,  another
enveloping  organism  to  give  the  will  definition.
A  specific  inheritance  strengthens  the  soul.  Cos¬
mopolitanism  has  doubtless  its  place,  because  a


PIETY


187


man  may  well  cultivate  in  himself,  and  represent
in  his  nation,  affinities  to  other  peoples,  and  such
assimilation  to  them  as  is  compatible  with  personal
integrity  and  clearness  of  purpose.  Plasticity  to
things  foreign  need  not  he  inconsistent  with  hap¬
piness  and  utility  at  home.  But  happiness  and
utility  are  possible  nowhere  to  a  man  who  repre¬
sents  nothing  and  who  looks  out  on  the  world
without  a  plot  of  his  own  to  stand  on,  either  on
earth  or  in  heaven.  He  wanders  from  place  to
place,  a  voluntary  exile,  always  querulous,  always
uneasy,  always  alone.  His  very  criticisms  express
no  ideal.  His  experience  is  without  sweetness,
without  cumulative  fruits,  and  his  children,  if  he
has  them,  are  without  morality.  For  reason  and
happiness  are  like  other  flowers — they  wither  when
plucked.

The  object  most  commonly  associated  with  piety
is  the  gods.  Popular  philosophy,  inverting  the
Piety  to  the  natural  order  of  ideas,  thinks  piety  to
gods  takes  the  gods  the  source  of  morality.  But

current  piety,  when  genuine,  is  rather  an  in¬
ideals.  cidental  expression  of  morality.  Its

sources  are  perfectly  natural.  A  volitional  life  that
reaches  the  level  of  reflection  is  necessarily  moral
in  proportion  to  the  concreteness  and  harmony  of
its  instincts.  The  fruits  which  such  harmonious
instincts,  expressed  in  consciousness,  may  event¬
ually  bear,  fruits  which  would  be  the  aim  of  virtue,
are  not  readily  imaginable,  and  the  description  of
them  has  long  ago  been  intrusted  to  poets  and


188


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


mythologists.  Thus  the  love  of  God,  for  example,
is  said  to  he  the  root  of  Christian  charity,  but  is
in  reality  only  its  symbol.  For  no  man  not  having
a  superabundant  need  and  faculty  of  loving  real
things  could  have  given  a  meaning  to  the  phrase,
“  love  of  God,”  or  been  moved  by  it  to  any  action.
History  shows  in  unequivocal  fashion  that  the  God
loved  shifts  his  character  with  the  shift  in  his
worshippers5  real  affections.  What  the  psalmist
loves  is  the  beauty  of  God’s  house  and  the  place
where  his  glory  dwelleth.  A  priestly  quietude  and
pride,  a  grateful,  meditative  leisure  after  the
storms  of  sedition  and  war,  some  retired  unity  of
mind  after  the  contradictions  of  the  world — this  is
what  the  love  of  God  might  signify  for  the  levites.
Saint  John  tells  us  that  he  who  says  he  loves  God
and  loves  not  his  neighbour  is  a  liar.  Here  the
love  of  God  is  an  anti-worldly  estimation  of  things
and  persons,  a  heart  set  on  that  kingdom  of  heaven
in  which  the  humble  and  the  meek  should  be  ex¬
alted.  Again,  for  modern  Catholicism  the  phrase
has  changed  its  meaning  remarkably  and  signifies
in  effect  love  for  Christ’s  person,  because  piety
has  taken  a  sentimental  turn  and  centred  on  main¬
taining  imaginary  personal  relations  with  the
Saviour.  How  should  we  conceive  that  a  single
supernatural  influence  was  actually  responsible  for
moral  effects  themselves  so  various,  and  producing,
in  spite  of  a  consecutive  tradition,  such  various
notions  concerning  their  object  and  supposed
source?


PIETY


189


Mankind  at  large  is  also,  to  some  minds,  an
object  of  piety.  But  this  religion  of  humanity  is
The  rather  a  desideratum  than  a  fact:  hu-

reiigion  of  manity  does  not  actually  appear  to  any-
humamty.  jn  a  religious  light.  The  nihil

homine  homini  utilius  remains  a  signal  truth,  but
the  collective  influence  of  men  and  their  average  \
nature  are  far  too  mixed  and  ambiguous  to  fill  the
soul  with  veneration.  Piety  to  mankind  must  be  V
three-fourths  pity.  There  are  indeed  specific  hu¬
man  virtues,  but  they  are  those  necessary  to  exist¬
ence,  like  patience  and  courage.  Supported  on
these  indispensable  habits,  mankind  always  carries
an  indefinite  load  of  misery  and  vice.  Life  spreads
rankly  in  every  wrong  and  impracticable  direction
as  well  as  in  profitable  paths,  and  the  slow  and
groping  struggle  with  its  own  ignorance,  inertia,
and  folly,  leaves  it  covered  in  every  age  of  history
with  filth  and  blood.  It  would  hardly  be  possible
to  exaggerate  man’s  wretchedness  if  it  were  not
so  easy  to  overestimate  his  sensibility.  There  is
a  fond  of  unhappiness  in  every  bosom,  but  the
depths  are  seldom  probed;  and  there  is  no  doubt
that  sometimes  frivolity  and  sometimes  sturdy
habit  helps  to  keep  attention  on  the  surface  and
to  cover  up  the  inner  void.  Certain  moralists,
without  meaning  to  be  satirical,  often  say  that  the
sovereign  cure  for  unhappiness  is  work.  Unhap¬
pily,  the  work  they  recommend  is  better  fitted  to
dull  pain  than  to  remove  its  cause.  It  occupies
the  faculties  without  rationalising  the  life.  Before


190


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


mankind  could  inspire  even  moderate  satisfaction,
not  to  speak  of  worship,  its  whole  economy  would
have  to  be  reformed,  its  reproduction  regulated,
its  thoughts  cleared  up,  its  affections  equalised  and
refined.

To  worship  mankind  as  it  is  would  be  to  de¬
prive  it  of  what  alone  makes  it  akin  to  the  divine —
its  aspiration.  For  this  human  dust  lives;  this
misery  and  crime  are  dark  in  contrast  to  an  im¬
agined  excellence;  they  are  lighted  up  by  a  pros¬
pect  of  good.  Man  is  not  adorable,  but  he  adores,
and  the  object  of  his  adoration  may  be  discovered
within  him  and  elicited  from  his  own  soul.  In
this  sense  the  religion  of  humanity  is  the  only
religion,  all  others  being  sparks  and  abstracts  of
the  same.  The  indwelling  ideal  lends  all  the  gods
their  divinity.  No  power,  either  physical  or  psy¬
chical,  has  the  least  moral  prerogative  nor  any
just  place  in  religion  at  all  unless  it  supports  and
advances  the  ideal  native  to  the  worshipper’s  soul.
Without  moral  society  between  the  votary  and  his
god  religion  is  pure  idolatry;  and  even  idolatry
would  be  impossible  but  for  the  suspicion  that
somehow  the  brute  force  exorcised  in  prayer  might
help  or  mar  some  human  undertaking.

There  is,  finally,  a  philosophic  piety  which  has
the  universe  for  its  object.  This  feeling,  common
Cosmic  to  ancient  and  modem  Stoics,  has  an

piety.  obvious  justification  in  man’s  depend¬

ence  upon  the  natural  world  and  in  its  service  to
many  sides  of  the  mind.  Such  justification  of  cos-


PIETY


191


mic  piety  is  rather  obscured  than  supported  by  the
euphemisms  and  ambiguities  in  which  these  phi¬
losophers  usually  indulge  in  their  attempt  to  pre¬
serve  the  customary  religious  unction.  For  the
more  they  personify  the  universe  and  give  it  the
name  of  God  the  more  they  turn  it  into  a  devil.
The  universe,  so  far  as  we  can  observe  it,  is  a
wonderful  and  immense  engine;  its  extent,  its  or¬
der,  its  beauty,  its  cruelty,  makes  it  alike  impres¬
sive.  If  we  dramatise  its  life  and  conceive  its
spirit,  we  are  filled  with  wonder,  terror,  and  amuse¬
ment,  so  magnificent  is  that  spirit,  so  prolific,  in¬
exorable,  grammatical,  and  dull.  Like  all  animals
and  plants,  the  cosmos  has  its  own  way  of  doing
things,  not  wholly  rational  nor  ideally  best,  but
patient,  fatal,  and  fruitful.  Great  is  this  organism
of  mud  and  fire,  terrible  this  vast,  painful,  glorious
experiment.  Why  should  we  not  look  on  the  uni¬
verse  with  piety?  Is  it  not  our  substance?  Are
we  made  of  other  clay?  All  our  possibilities  lie
from  eternity  hidden  in  its  bosom.  It  is  the  dis¬
penser  of  all  our  joys.  We  may  address  it  without
superstitious  terrors;  it  is  not  wicked.  It  follows
its  own  habits  abstractedly;  it  can  be  trusted  to
be  true  to  its  word.  Society  is  not  impossible  be¬
tween  it  and  us,  and  since  it  is  the  source  of  all
our  energies,  the  home  of  all  our  happiness,  shall
we  not  cling  to  it  and  praise  it,  seeing  that  it
vegetates  so  grandly  and  so  sadly,  and  that  it  is
not  for  us  to  blame  it  for  what,  doubtless,  it  never
knew  that  it  did?  Where  there  is  such  infinite


192


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  laborious  potency  there  is  room  for  every  hope.
If  we  should  abstain  from  judging  a  father’s  errors
or  a  mother’s  foibles,  why  should  we  pronounce
sentence  on  the  ignorant  crimes  of  the  universe,
which  have  passed  into  our  own  blood?  The  uni¬
verse  is  the  true  Adam,  the  creation  the  true  fall;
and  as  we  have  never  blamed  our  mythical  first
parent  very  much,  in  spite  of  the  disproportionate
consequences  of  his  sin,  because  we  felt  that  he
was  but  human  and  that  we,  in  his  place,  might
have  sinned  too,  so  we  may  easily  forgive  our  real
ancestor,  whose  connatural  sin  we  are  from  mo¬
ment  to  moment  committing,  since  it  is  only  the
necessary  rashness  of  venturing  to  be  without  fore¬
knowing  the  price  or  the  fruits  of  existence.


CHAPTER  XI


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS


To  be
spiritual  is
to  live  in
view  of  tbe
ideal.


In  honouring  the  sources  of  life,  piety  is  retro¬
spective.  It  collects,  as  it  were,  food  for  morality,
and  fortifies  it  with  natural  and  his¬
toric  nutriment.  But  a  digestive  and
formative  principle  must  exist  to  assim¬
ilate  this  nutriment;  a  direction  and  an
ideal  have  to  he  imposed  on  these  gathered  forces.

So  that  religion  has  a  second  and  a  higher  side,
which  looks  to  the  end  toward  which  we  move  as
piety  looks  to  the  conditions  of  progress  and  to
the  sources  from  which  we  draw  our  energies.  This
aspiring  side  of  religion  may  be  called  Spirituality.
Spirituality  is  nobler  than  piety,  because  what?
would  fulfil  our  being  and  make  it  worth  having
is  what  alone  lends  value  to  that  being’s  source.
Nothing  can  be  lower  or  more  wholly  instrumen¬
tal  than  the  substance  and  cause  of  all  things.
The  gift  of  existence  would  be  worthless  unless
existence  was  good  and  supported  at  least  a  pos¬
sible  happiness.  A  man  is  spiritual  when  he  lives
in  the  presence  of  the  ideal,  and  whether  he  eat
or  drink  does  so  for  the  sake  of  a  true  and  ulti¬
mate  good.  He  is  spiritual  when  he  envisages  his  v/

193


/


194


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


goal  so  frankly  that  his  whole  material  life  be¬
comes  a  transparent  and  transitive  vehicle,  an
instrument  which  scarcely  arrests  attention  but
allows  the  spirit  to  use  it  economically  and  with
perfect  detachment  and  freedom.

There  is  no  need  that  this  ideal  should  be  pom¬
pously  or  mystically  described.  A  simple  life  is  its
own  reward,  and  continually  realises  its  function.
Though  a  spiritual  man  may  perfectly  well  go
through  intricate  processes  of  thought  and  attend
to  very  complex  affairs,  his  single  eye,  fixed  on  a
rational  purpose,  will  simplify  morally  the  natural
chaos  it  looks  upon  and  will  remain  free.  This
spiritual  mastery  is,  of  course,  no  slashing  and
forced  synthesis  of  things  into  a  system  of  philos¬
ophy  which,  even  if  it  were  thinkable,  would  leave
the  conceived  logical  machine  without  ideality  and
without  responsiveness  to  actual  interests;  it  is
rather  an  inward  aim  and  fixity  in  affection  that
knows  what  to  take  and  what  to  leave  in  a  world
over  which  it  diffuses  something  of  its  own  peace.
It  threads  its  way  through  the  landscape  with  so
little  temptation  to  distraction  that  it  can  salute
every  irrelevant  thing,  as  Saint  Francis  did  the
sun  and  moon,  with  courtesy  and  a  certain  affec¬
tionate  detachment.

Spirituality  likes  to  say,  Behold  the  lilies  of  the
'  field!  For  its  secret  has  the  same  simplicity  as

Spirituality  their  vegetative  art;  only  spirituality
natural.  has  succeeded  in  adding  consciousness
without  confusing  instinct.  This  success,  unfor-


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  195


tunately  so  rare  in  man’s  life  as  to  seem  paradox¬
ical,  is  its  whole  achievement.  Spirituality  ought
to  have  been  a  matter  of  course,  since  conscious
existence  has  inherent  value  and  there  is  no  in¬
trinsic  ground  why  it  should  smother  that  value
in  alien  ambitions  and  servitudes.  But  spiritual¬
ity,  though  so  natural  and  obvious  a  thing,  is  sub¬
ject,  like  the  lilies’  beauty,  to  corruption.  I  know
not  what  army  of  microbes  evidently  invaded  from
the  beginning  the  soul’s  physical  basis  and  de¬
voured  its  tissues,  so  that  sophistication  and  bad
dreams  entirely  obscured  her  limpidity.

None  the  less,  spirituality,  or  life  in  the  ideal,
must  be  regarded  as  the  fundamental  and  native
type  of  all  life;  what  deviates  from  it  is  disease
and  incipient  dissolution,  and  is  itself  what  might
plausibly  demand  explanation  and  evoke  surprise.
The  spiritual  man  should  be  quite  at  home  in  a  |
world  made  to  be  used;  the  firmament  is  spread
over  him  like  a  tent  for  habitation,  and  sublunary
furniture  is  even  more  obviously  to  be  taken  as
a  convenience.  He  cannot,  indeed,  remove  mount¬
ains,  but  neither  does  he  wish  to  do  so.  He  comes
to  endow  the  mountains  with  a  function,  and  takes
them  at  that,  as  a  painter  might  take  his  brushes
and  canvas.  Their  beauty,  their  metals,  their
pasturage,  their  defence — this  is  what  he  observes
in  them  and  celebrates  in  his  addresses  to  them.
The  spiritual  man,  though  not  ashamed  to  be  a
beggar,  is  cognisant  of  what  wealth  can  do  and
of  what  it  cannot.  His  unworldliness  is  true


196


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


knowledge  of  the  world,  not  so  much  a  gaping
and  busy  acquaintance  as  a  quiet  comprehension
and  estimation  which,  while  it  cannot  come  with¬
out  intercourse,  can  very  well  lay  intercourse  aside.

If  the  essence  of  life  be  spiritual,  early  examples
of  life  would  seem  to  be  rather  the  opposite.  But
Primitive  man’s  view  of  primitive  consciousness

c^onsciousness  Jg  humanly  biassed  and  relies  tob  much

spiritual.  on  partial  analogies.  We  conceive  an
animal’s  physical  life  in  the  gross,  and  must  then
regard  the  momentary  feelings  that  accompany  it
as  very  poor  expressions  either  of  its  extent  or  con¬
ditions.  These  feelings  are,  indeed,  so  many
ephemeral  lives,  containing  no  comprehensive  view
of  the  animal’s  fortunes.  They  accordingly  fail
to  realise  our  notion  of  a  spiritual  human  life  which
would  have  to  be  rational  and  to  form  some  repre¬
sentation  of  man’s  total  environment  and  interests,
y/  But  it  hardly  follows  that  animal  feelings  are  not
spiritual  in  their  nature  and,  on  their  narrow
basis,  perfectly  ideal.  The  most  ideal  human  pas¬
sion  is  love,  which  is  also  the  most  absolute  and
animal  and  one  of  the  most  ephemeral.  Very
likely,  if  we  could  revert  to  an  innocent  and  ab¬
sorbed  view  of  our  early  sensations,  we  should  find
that  each  was  a  little  spiritual  universe  like
Dante’s,  with  its  internal  hell,  purgatory,  and
heaven.  Cut  off,  as  those  experiences  were,  from
all  vistas  and  from  sympathy  with  things  remote,
they  would  contain  a  closed  circle  of  interests,  a
flying  glimpse  of  eternity.  So  an  infant  living


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  197


in  his  mystical  limbo,  without  trailing  in  a  literal
sense  any  clouds  of  glory  from  elsewhere,  might
well  repeat  on  a  diminutive  scale  the  beatific  vis¬
ion,  insomuch  as  the  only  function  of  which  he
was  conscious  at  all  might  he  perfectly  fulfilled
by  him  and  felt  in  its  ideal  import.  Sucking  and
blinking  are  ridiculous  processes,  perhaps,  but  they
may  bring  a  thrill  and  satisfaction  no  less  ideal
than  do  the  lark’s  inexhaustible  palpitations.  Nar¬
row  scope  and  low  representative  value  are  not
defects  in  a  consciousness  having  a  narrow  phys¬
ical  basis  and  comparatively  simple  conditions.

The  spirit’s  foe  in  man  has  not  been  simplicity,  1
but  sophistication.  His  instincts,  in  becoming  j

Spirit  crossed  many,  became  confused,  and  in  grow¬
th  instru-  ing  permanent,  grew  feeble  and  subject

mentalities.  »  »  -»  -■  •  » •  “vnr  j

to  arrest  and  deviation.  Nature,  we

may  say,  threw  the  brute  form  back  into  her  caul¬
dron,  to  smelt  its  substance  again  before  pouring
it  into  a  rational  mould.  The  docility  which  in¬
stinct,  in  its  feebleness,  acquired  in  the  new  crea¬
ture  was  to  be  reason’s  opportunity,  but  before  the
larger  harmony  could  be  established  a  sorry  chaos
was  bound  to  reign  in  the  mind.  Every  peeping
impulse  would  drop  its  dark  hint  and  hide  its  head
in  confusion,  while  some  pedantic  and  unjust  law
would  be  passed  in  its  absence  and  without  its
vote.  Secondary  activities,  which  should  always
be  representative,  would  establish  themselves  with¬
out  being  really  such.  Means  would  be  pursued
as  if  they  were  ends,  and  ends,  under  the  illusion


198


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


that  they  were  forces,  would  be  expected  to  further
some  activity,  itself  without  justification.  So
pedantry  might  be  substituted  for  wisdom,  tyranny
for  government,  superstition  for  morals,  rhetoric
for  art.

This  sophistication  is  what  renders  the  pursuit
of  reason  so  perplexing  and  prolonged  a  problem.
Half-formed  adjustments  in  the  brain  and  in  the
body  politic  are  represented  in  consciousness  by
what  are  called  passions,  prejudices,  motives,  ani¬
mosities.  None  of  these  felt  ebullitions  in  the
least  understands  its  own  causes,  effects,  or  rela¬
tions,  but  is  hatched,  so  to  speak,  on  the  wing  and
flutters  along  in  the  direction  of  its  momentary
preference  until  it  lapses,  it  knows  not  why,  or  is
crossed  and  overwhelmed  by  some  contrary  power.
Thus  the  vital  elements,  which  in  their  compara¬
tive  isolation  in  the  lower  animals  might  have
yielded  simple  little  dramas,  each  with  its  obvious
ideal,  its  achievement,  and  its  quietus,  when  mixed
in  the  barbarous  human  will  make  a  boisterous
medley.  For  they  are  linked  enough  together  to
feel  a  strain,  but  not  knit  enough  to  form  a  har¬
mony.  In  this  way  the  unity  of  apperception  seems
to  light  up  at  first  nothing  but  disunion.  The  first
dawn  of  that  rational  principle  which  involves  im¬
mortality  breaks  upon  a  discovery  of  death.  The
consequence  is  that  ideality  seems  to  man  some¬
thing  supernatural  and  almost  impossible.  He
finds  himself  at  his  awakening  so  confused  that
he  puts  chaos  at  the  origin  of  the  world.  But


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  199


only  order  can  beget  a  world  or  evoke  a  sensa¬
tion.  Chaos  is  something  secondary,  composed  of
conflicting  organisations  interfering  with  one  an¬
other.  It  is  compounded  like  a  common  noise  out
of  jumbled  vibrations,  each  of  which  has  its  period
and  would  in  itself  be  musical.  The  problem  is
to  arrange  these  sounds,  naturally  so  tuneful,  into
concerted  music.  So  long  as  total  discord  endures
human  life  remains  spasmodic  and  irresolute;  it
can  find  no  ideal  and  admit  no  total  representation
of  nature.  Only  when  the  disordered  impulses  and
perceptions  settle  down  into  a  trained  instinct,  a
steady,  vital  response  and  adequate  preparation
for  the  world,  do  clear  ideas  and  successful  pur¬
poses  arise  in  the  mind.  The  Life  of  Reason,  with
all  the  arts,  then  begins  its  career.

The  forces  at  play  in  this  drama  are,  first,  the
primary  impulses  and  functions  represented  by
elementary  values;  second,  the  thin  network  of
signals  and  responses  by  which  those  functions
are  woven  into  a  total  organ,  represented  by  dis¬
cursive  thought  and  all  secondary  mental  figments,
and,  third,  the  equilibrium  and  total  power  of  that
new  organism  in  action  represented  by  the  ideal.
Spirituality,  which  might  have  resided  in  the  ele¬
mentary  values,  sensuous  or  passionate,  before  the
relational  process  supervened,  can  now  exist  only
in  the  ultimate  activity  to  which  these  processes
are  instrumental.  Obstacles  to  spirituality  in  hu¬
man  life  may  accordingly  take  the  form  of  an
arrest  either  at  the  elementary  values — an  entan-


200


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


glement  in  sense  and  passion — or  at  the  instru¬
mental  processes — an  entanglement  in  what  in  re¬
ligious  parlance  is  called  “  the  world  ”

Worldly  minds  bristle  with  conventional  moral¬
ity  (though  in  private  they  may  nurse  a  vice  or

One  foe  of  two  to  appease  wayward  nature),  and
the  spirit  is  they  are  rational  in  everything  except

worldliness.  n  ,  •  •  i  mi  •  i  (1

first  principles.  They  consider  the
voluptuary  a  weak  fool,  disgraced  and  disreputa¬
ble;  and  if  they  notice  the  spiritual  man  at  all —
for  he  is  easily  ignored — they  regard  him  as  a
useless  and  visionary  fellow.  Civilisation  has  to
work  algebraically  with  symbols  for  known  and
unknown  quantities  which  only  in  the  end  resume
their  concrete  values,  so  that  the  journeymen  and
vulgar  middlemen  of  the  world  know  only  conven¬
tional  goods.  They  are  lost  in  instrumentalities
and  are  themselves  only  instruments  in  the  Life  of
Reason.  Wealth,  station,  fame,  success  of  some
notorious  and  outward  sort,  make  their  standard
of  happiness.  Their  chosen  virtues  are  industry,
good  sense,  probity,  conventional  piety,  and  what¬
ever  else  has  acknowledged  utility  and  seemliness.  ,
In  its  strictures  on  pleasure  and  reverie  this
Philistia  is  perfectly  right.  Sensuous  living  (and

The  case  for  I  do  n°t  mean  debauchery  alone,  but
and  against  the  palpitations  of  any  poet  without  art

pleasure.  •  n  •  i  •  \  •  i

or  any  mystic  without  discipline)  is  not
only  inconsequential  and  shallow,  but  dangerous
to  honour  and  to  sincere  happiness.  When  life
remains  lost  in  sense  or  reverts  to  it  entirely,  hu-


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  201


inanity  itself  is  atrophied.  And  humanity  is  tor¬
mented  and  spoilt  when,  as  more  often  happens,
a  man  disbelieving  in  reason  and  out  of  humour
with  his  world,  abandons  his  soul  to  loose  whimseys
and  passions  that  play  a  quarrelsome  game  there,
like  so  many  ill-bred  children.  Nevertheless,  com¬
pared  with  the  worldling’s  mental  mechanism  and
rhetoric,  the  sensualist’s  soul  is  a  well  of  wisdom.
He  lives  naturally  on  an  animal  level  and  attains
a  kind  of  good.  He  has  free  and  concrete  pursuits,
though  they  be  momentary,  and  he  has  sincere
satisfactions.  He  is  less  often  corrupt  than  primi¬
tive,  and  even  when  corrupt  he  finds  some  justi¬
fication  for  his  captious  existence.  He  harvests
pleasures  as  he  goes  which  intrinsically,  as  we  have
seen,  may  have  the  depth  and  ideality  which  nature
breathes  in  all  her  oracles.  His  experience,  for
that  reason,  though  disastrous  is  interesting  and
has  some  human  pathos;  it  is  easier  to  make  a  saint
out  of  a  libertine  than  out  of  a  prig.  True,  the
libertine  is  pursued,  like  the  animals,  by  unfore¬
seen  tortures,  decay,  and  abandonment,  and  he  is
vowed  to  a  total  death;  but  in  these  respects  the
worldly  man  has  hardly  an  advantage.  The  Babels
he  piles  up  may  indeed  survive  his  person,  but  they
are  themselves  vain  and  without  issue,  while  his
brief  life  has  been  meantime  spent  in  slavery  and
his  mind  cramped  with  cant  and  foolish  ambitions.
The  voluptuary  is  like  some  roving  creature,  brow¬
sing  on  nettles  and  living  by  chance ;  the  worldling
is  like  a  beast  of  burden,  now  ill-used  and  over-


202


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


worked,  now  fatted,  stalled,  and  richly  caparisoned.
iEsop  might  well  have  described  their  relative
happiness  in  a  fable  about  the  wild  ass  and  the
mule.

Thus,  even  if  the  voluptuary  is  sometimes  a  poet
and  the  worldling  often  an  honest  man,  they  both
lack  reason  so  entirely  that  reflection  revolts
equally  against  the  life  of  both.  Vanity,  vanity,
is  their  common  epitaph.  Now,  at  the  souks  chris¬
tening  and  initiation  into  the  Life  of  Reason,  the
first  vow  must  always  be  to  “  renounce  the  pomps
and  vanities  of  this  wicked  world.”  A  person  to
whom  this  means  nothing  is  one  to  whom,  in  the
end,  nothing  has  meaning.  He  has  not  conceived
Upshot  of  a  highest  good,  no  ultimate  goal  is
worldly  within  his  horizon,  and  it  has  never
wisdom.  occurred  to  him  to  ask  what  he  is  liv¬
ing  for.  With  all  his  pompous  soberness,  the
worldly  man  is  fundamentally  frivolous;  with  all
his  maxims  and  cant  estimations  he  is  radically
inane.  He  conforms  to  religion  without  suspect¬
ing  what  religion  means,  not  being  in  the  least
open  to  such  an  inquiry.  He  judges  art  like  a
parrot,  without  having  ever  stopped  to  evoke  an
image.  He  preaches  about  service  and  duty  with¬
out  any  recognition  of  natural  demands  or  any
standard  of  betterment.  His  moral  life  is  one
vast  anacoluthon  in  which  the  final  term  is  left
out  that  might  have  given  sense  to  the  whole,  one
vast  ellipsis  in  which  custom  seems  to  bridge  the
chasm  left  between  ideas.  He  denies  the  values  of


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  203


sense  because  they  tempt  to  truancies  from  me¬
chanical  activity;  the  values  of  reason  he  necessa¬
rily  ignores  because  they  lie  beyond  his  scope.  He
adheres  to  conventional  maxims  and  material  quan¬
titative  standards;  his  production  is  therefore,  as
far  as  he  himself  is  concerned,  an  essential  waste
and  his  activity  an  essential  tedium.  If  at  least,
like  the  sensualist,  he  enjoyed  the  process  and
expressed  his  fancy  in  his  life,  there  would  be  some¬
thing  gained;  and  this  sort  of  gain,  though  over¬
looked  in  the  worldlings  maxims,  all  of  which
have  a  categorical  tone,  is  really  what  often  lends
his  life  some  propriety  and  spirit.  Business
and  war  and  any  customary  task  may  come  to
form,  so  to  speak,  an  organ  whose  natural  func¬
tion  will  be  just  that  operation,  and  the  most  ab¬
stract  and  secondary  activity,  like  that  of  adding
figures  or  reading  advertisements,  may  in  this  way
become  the  one  function  proper  to  some  soul.
There  are  Nibelungen  dwelling  by  choice  under¬
ground  and  happy  pedants  in  the  upper  air.

Facts  are  not  wanting  for  these  pillars  of
society  to  take  solace  in,  if  they  wish  to  defend
their  philosophy.  The  time  will  come,  astrono¬
mers  say,  when  life  will  be  extinct  upon  this  weary
planet.  All  the  delights  of  sense  and  imagination
will  be  over.  It  is  these  that  will  have  turned  out
to  be  vain.  But  the  masses  of  matter  which  the
worldlings  have  transformed  with  their  machinery,
and  carried  from  one  place  to  another,  will  remain
to  bear  witness  of  them.  The  collocation  of  atoms


204


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


will  never  be  what  it  would  have  been  if  their
feet  had  less  continually  beaten  the  earth.  They
may  have  the  proud  happiness  of  knowing  that,
when  nothing  that  the  spirit  values  endures,  the
earth  may  still  sometimes,  because  of  them,  cast  a
slightly  different  shadow  across  the  moon’s  craters.

There  is  no  more  critical  moment  in  the  life
of  a  man  and  a  nation  than  that  in  which  they

Two  supposed  are  conscience-stricken  and  con-

escapes  from  victed  of  vanity.  Failure,  exhaustion,

contusion  of  aims,  or  whatever  else  it
be  that  causes  a  revulsion,  brings  them  before  a
serious  dilemma.  Has  the  vanity  of  life  hitherto
been  essential  or  incidental?  Are  we  to  look  for
a  new  ambition,  free  from  all  the  illusions  of  natu¬
ral  impulse,  or  are  we  rather  to  renounce  all  will
indiscriminately  and  fall  back  upon  conformity
and  consummate  indifference?  As  this  question
is  answered  in  one  way  or  the  other,  two  different
types  of  unworldly  religion  arise.

The  first,  which  heralds  a  new  and  unimpeach¬
able  special  hope,  a  highest  duty  finally  recognised
and  driving  out  all  lesser  motives  and

fanaticism,  .  «  .  ,  ,  £

satisfactions  from  the  soul,  refers  van¬
ity  to  perversity,  to  error,  to  a  sort  of  original  mis¬
understanding  of  our  own  nature  which  has  led
us,  in  pursuing  our  worldly  interests,  to  pursue
in  truth  our  own  destruction.  The  vanity  of  life,
according  to  this  belief,  has  been  accidental.  The
taint  of  existence  is  not  innate  vanity  but  casual
sin;  what  has  misled  us  is  not  the  will  in  general


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  205


but  only  the  false  and  ignorant  direction  of  a  will
not  recognising  its  only  possible  satisfaction.  What
religion  in  this  case  opposes  to  the  world  is  a
special  law,  a  special  hope,  a  life  intense,  ambi¬
tious,  and  aggressive,  but  excluding  much  which
to  an  ingenuous  will  might  seem  excellent  and
tempting.  Worldliness,  in  a  word,  is  here  met  by
fanaticism.

The  second  type  of  unworldly  religion  does  not
propose  to  overwhelm  the  old  Adam  by  single-
and  minded  devotion  to  one  selected  inter¬

mysticism.  eg^  nor  ^oes  ft  refer  yanity  to  an  acci¬
dental  error.  On  the  contrary,  it  conceives  that
any  special  interest,  any  claim  made  by  a  finite
and  mortal  creature  upon  an  infinite  world,  is
bound  to  be  defeated.  It  is  not  special  acts,  it
conceives,  which  are  sinful,  but  action  and  will
themselves  that  are  intrinsically  foolish.  The  cure
lies  in  rescinding  the  passionate  interests  that  tor¬
ment  us,  not  in  substituting  for  them  another  arti¬
ficial  passion  more  imperious  and  merciless  than
the  natural  passions  it  comes  to  devour.  This  form
of  religion  accordingly  meets  worldliness  with  mys¬
ticism.  Holiness  is  not  placed  in  conformity  to  a
prescriptive  law,  in  pursuit  of  a  slightly  regener¬
ated  bliss,  nor  in  advancing  a  special  institution
and  doctrine.  Holiness  for  the  mystic  consists
rather  in  universal  mildness  and  insight;  in  free¬
dom  from  all  passion,  bias,  and  illusion;  in  a  dis¬
embodied  wisdom  which  accepts  the  world,  dom¬
inates  its  labyrinths,  and  is  able  to  guide  others


206


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


through  it,  without  pursuing,  for  its  own  part,
any  hope  or  desire.

If  these  two  expedients  of  the  conscience  con¬
victed  of  vanity  were  to  be  subjected  to  a  critical
Both  are  judgment,  they  would  both  be  con-
lrrationaL  victed  of  vanity  themselves.  The  case
of  fanaticism  is  not  doubtful,  for  the  choice  it
makes  of  a  special  law  or  institution  or  posthu¬
mous  hope  is  purely  arbitrary,  and  only  to  be  justi¬
fied  by  the  satisfaction  it  affords  to  those  very
desires  which  it  boasts  to  supplant.  An  oracular
morality  or  revealed  religion  can  hope  to  support
its  singular  claims  only  by  showing  its  general
conformity  to  natural  reason  and  its  perfect  benefi¬
cence  in  the  world.  Where  such  justification  is
wanting  the  system  fanatically  embraced  is  sim¬
ply  an  epidemic  mania,  a  social  disease  for  the
philosopher  to  study  and,  if  possible,  to  cure.
Every  strong  passion  tends  to  dislodge  the  others,
so  that  fanaticism  may  often  involve  a  certain
austerity,  impetuosity,  and  intensity  of  life.  This
vigour,  however,  is  seldom  lasting;  fanaticism  dries
its  own  roots  and  becomes,  when  traditionally  es¬
tablished,  a  convention  as  arbitrary  as  any  fashion
and  the  nest  for  a  new  brood  of  mean  and  sinister
habits.  The  Pharisee  is  a  new  worldling,  only
his  little  world  is  narrowed  to  a  temple,  a  tribe,
and  a  clerical  tradition.

Mysticism,  as  its  meditative  nature  comports,  is
never  so  pernicious,  nor  can  it  be  brought  so  easily
round  to  worldliness  again.  That  its  beneficent


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  207


element  is  purely  natural  and  inconsistent  with
a  denial  of  will,  we  shall  have  occasion  elsewhere
to  observe.  Suffice  it  here  to  point  out,  that  even
if  a  moral  nihilism  could  be  carried  through  and
all  definite  interests  abandoned,  the  vanity  of  life
would  not  be  thereby  corrected,  but  merely  ex¬
posed.  When  our  steps  had  been  retraced  to  the
very  threshold  of  being,  nothing  better  worth
doing  would  have  been  discovered  on  the  way.
That  to  suffer  illusion  is  a  bad  thing  might  ordi¬
narily  be  taken  for  an  axiom,  because  ordinarily
we  assume  that  true  knowledge  and  rational  voli¬
tion  are  possible;  but  if  this  assumption  is  denied,
the  value  of  retracting  illusions  is  itself  impeached.
Wlien  vanity  is  represented  as  universal  and  sal¬
vation  as  purely  negative,  every  one  is  left  free
to  declare  that  it  is  vain  to  renounce  vanity  and
sinful  to  seek  salvation.

This  result,  fantastic  though  it  may  at  first  sight
appear,  is  one  which  mysticism  actually  comes  to
under  certain  circumstances.  Absolute  pessimism
and  absolute  optimism  are  opposite  sentiments  at¬
tached  to  a  doctrine  identically  the  same.  In
either  case  no  improvement  is  possible,  and  the
authority  of  human  ideals  is  denied.  To  escape,
to  stanch  natural  wounds,  to  redeem  society  and
the  private  soul,  are  then  mistaken  and  pitiable
ambitions,  adding  to  their  vanity  a  certain  touch
of  impiety.  One  who  really  believes  that  the
world’s  work  is  all  providentially  directed  and  that
whatever  happens,  no  matter  how  calamitous  or


208


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


shocking,  happens  by  divine  right,  has  a  qnietistic
excuse  for  license;  to  check  energy  by  reason,  and
seek  to  limit  and  choose  its  path,  seems  to  him
a  puny  rebellion  against  omnipotence,  which  works
through  madness  and  crime  in  man  no  less  than
through  cataclysms  in  outer  nature.  Every  par¬
ticular  desire  is  vain  and  bound,  perhaps,  to  be
defeated;  but  the  mystic,  when  caught  in  the  ex¬
pansive  mood,  accepts  this  defeat  itself  as  needful.
Thus  a  refusal  to  discriminate  rationally  or  to  ac¬
cept  human  interests  as  the  standard  of  right  may
culminate  in  a  convulsive  surrender  to  passion,  just
as,  when  caught  in  the  contractile  phase,  the  same
mysticism  may  lead  to  universal  abstention.

/  Must  unworldliness  be  either  fanatical  or  mys¬
tical?  That  is  a  question  of  supreme  importance

is  there  a  to  the  moral  philosopher.  On  the  an-
third  course?  swer  it  hangs  the  rationality  of  a

spiritual  life;  nay,  the  existence  of  spirituality
itself  among  the  types  of  human  activity.  For  the
fanatic  and  mystic  are  only  spiritual  in  appear¬
ance  because  they  separate  themselves  from  the
prevalent  interests  of  the  world,  the  one  by  a  spe¬
cial  persistent  aggression,  the  other  by  a  general
passivity  and  unearthly  calm.  The  fanatic  is,  not¬
withstanding,  nothing  but  a  worldling  too  narrow
and  violent  to  understand  the  world,  while  the
mystic  is  a  sensualist  too  rapt  and  voluptuous  to
rationalise  his  sensations.  Both  represent  arrested
forms  of  common-sense,  partial  developments  of
a  perfectly  usual  sensibility.  There  is  no  divine


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  209


inspiration  in  having  only  one  passion  left,  nor  in
dreamfully  accepting  or  renouncing  all  the  pas¬
sions  together.  Spirituality,  if  identified  with  such
types,  might  justly  he  called  childish.  There  is
an  innocent  and  incredulous  childishness,  with  its
useless  eyes  wide  open,  just  as  there  is  a  malevolent
and  peevish  childishness,  eaten  up  with  some  mis¬
chievous  whim.  The  man  of  experience  and  af¬
fairs  can  very  quickly  form  an  opinion  on  such
phenomena.  He  has  no  reason  to  expect  superior
wisdom  in  those  quarters.  On  the  contrary,  his
own  customary  political  and  humane  stand-point
gives  him  the  only  authoritative  measure  of  their
merits  and  possible  uses.  “  These  sectaries  and
dreamers,”  *he  will  say  to  himself,  “  cannot  under¬
stand  one  another  nor  the  role  thev  themselves
play  in  society.  It  is  for  us  to  make  the  best  of
them  we  can,  taking  such  prudent  measures  as  are
possible  to  enlist  the  forces  they  represent  in  works
of  common  utility.”

The  philosopher’s  task,  in  these  premisses,  is  to
discover  an  escape  from  worldliness  which  shall
Yes;  for  offer  a  rational  advance  over  it,  such

experience  ag  fanaticism  and  mysticism  cannot
has  intrinsic  .

inalienable  afford.  Does  the  Life  of  Reason  differ
values.  from  that  of  convention?  Is  there  a

spirituality  really  wiser  than  common-sense  ?  That
there  is  appears  in  many  directions.  Worldliness
is  arrest  and  absorption  in  the  instrumentalities  of
life;  hut  instrumentalities  cannot  exist  without
ultimate  purposes,  and  it  suffices  to  lift  the  eyes


)


210


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


to  those  purposes  and  to  question  the  will  sincerely
about  its  essential  preferences,  to  institute  a  cata¬
logue  of  rational  goods,  by  pursuing  any  of  which
we  escape  worldliness.  Sense  itself  is  one  of  these
goods.  The  sensualist  at  least  is  not  worldly,  and
though  his  nature  be  atrophied  in  all  its  higher
part,  there  is  not  lacking,  as  we  have  seen,  a  cer¬
tain  internal  and  abstract  spirituality  in  his  ex¬
perience.  He  is  a  sort  of  sprightly  and  incidental
mystic,  treating  his  varied  succession  of  little
worlds  as  the  mystic  does  his  monotonous  uni¬
verse.  Sense,  moreover,  is  capable  of  many  refine¬
ments,  by  which  physical  existence  becomes  its
own  reward.  In  the  disciplined  play  of  fancy
which  the  fine  arts  afford,  the  mind’s  free  action
justifies  itself  and  becomes  intrinsically  delightful.
Science  not  only  exercises  in  itself  the  intellectual
powers,  but  assimilates  nature  to  the  mind,  so  that
all  things  may  nourish  it.  In  love  and  friendship
the  liberal  life  extends  also  to  the  heart.  All  these
interests,  which  justify  themselves  by  their  intrin¬
sic  fruits,  make  so  many  rational  episodes  and
patches  in  conventional  life;  but  it  must  be  con¬
fessed  in  all  candour  that  these  are  but  oases  in
the  desert,  and  that  as  the  springs  of  life  are  irra¬
tional,  so  its  most  vehement  and  prevalent  inter¬
ests  remain  irrational  to  the  end.  When  the  pleas¬
ures  of  sense  and  art,  of  knowledge  and  sympathy,
are  stretched  to  the  utmost,  what  part  will  they
cover  and  justify  of  our  passions,  our  industry,
our  governments,  our  religion?


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  211


It  was  a  signal  error  in  those  rationalists  who
attributed  their  ideal  retrospectively  to  nature
that  they  grotesquely  imagined  that  people  were
hungry  so  that  they  might  enjoy  eating,  or  curious
in  order  to  delight  in  discovering  the  truth,  or
in  love  the  better  to  live  in  conscious  harmony.
Such  a  view  forgets  that  all  the  forces  of  life
work  originally  and  fundamentally  a  ter  go,  thatf
experience  and  reason  are  not  the  ground  of  pref¬
erence  but  its  result.  In  order  to  live  men  will*
work  disproportionately  and  eat  all  manner  of  filth
without  pleasure;  curiosity  as  often  as  not  leads
to  illusion,  and  argument  serves  to  foster  hatred
of  the  truth;  finally,  love  is  notoriously  a  great
fountain  of  bitterness  and  frequently  a  prelude  to
crime  and  death.  When  we  have  skimmed  from
life  its  incidental  successes,  when  we  have  har¬
vested  the  moments  in  which  existence  justifies
itself,  its  profound  depths  remain  below  in  their
obscure  commotion,  depths  that  breed  indeed  a
rational  efflorescence,  but  which  are  far  from  ex¬
hausted  in  producing  it,  and  continually  threaten,
on  the  contrary,  to  engulf  it.

The  spiritual  man  needs,  therefore,  something
more  than  a  cultivated  sympathy  with  the  brighter
scintillation  of  things.  He  needs  to
refer  that  scintillation  to  some  essen¬
tial  light,  so  that  in  reviewing  the  mot¬
ley  aspects  of  experience  he  may  not
be  reduced  to  culling  superciliously  the
flowers  that  please  him,  but  may  view  in  them  all


For  these
the  religious
imagination
must  supply
an  ideal
standard.


212


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


only  images  and  varied  symbols  of  some  eternal
good.  Spirituality  has  never  flourished  apart  from
religion,  except  momentarily,  perhaps,  in  some
master-mind,  whose  original  intuitions  at  once  be¬
came  a  religion  to  his  followers.  For  it  is  religion
that  knows  how  to  interpret  the  casual  rationalities
in  the  world  and  isolate  their  principle,  setting  this
principle  up  in  the  face  of  nature  as  nature’s  stand¬
ard  and  model.  This  ideal  synthesis  of  all  that  is
good,  this  consciousness  that  over  earth  floats  its
congenial  heaven,  this  vision  of  perfection  which
gilds  beauty  and  sanctifies  grief,  has  taken  form,
for  the  most  part,  in  such  grossly  material  images,
in  a  mythology  so  opaque  and  pseudo-physical,  that
its  ideal  and  moral  essence  has  been  sadly  obscured;
nevertheless,  every  religion  worthy  of  the  name
has  put  into  its  gods  some  element  of  real  good¬
ness,  something  by  which  they  become  representa¬
tive  of  those  scattered  excellences  and  self-justify¬
ing  bits  of  experience  in  which  the  Life  of  Reason
consists.

That  happy  constitution  which  human  life  has
at  its  best  moments — that,  says  Aristotle,  the  di¬
vine  life  has  continually.  The  philosopher  thus
expressed  with  absolute  clearness  the  principle
1  which  the  poets  had  been  clumsily  trying  to  em¬
body  from  the  beginning.  Burdened  as  traditional
faiths  might  be  with  cosmological  and  fanciful
matter,  they  still  presented  in  a  conspicuous  and
permanent  image  that  which  made  all  good  things
good,  the  ideal  and  standard  of  all  excellence.  By


/


SPIRITUALITY  AND  ITS  CORRUPTIONS  213

the  help  of  such  symbols  the  spiritual  man  could
steer  and  steady  his  judgment;  he  could  say,  ac¬
cording  to  the  form  religion  had  taken  in  his
country,  that  the  truly  good  was  what  God  com¬
manded,  or  what  made  man  akin  to  the  divine,
or  what  led  the  soul  to  heaven.  Such  expressions,
though  taken  more  or  less  literally  by  a  meta¬
physical  intellect,  did  not  wholly  forfeit  their  prac¬
tical  and  moral  meaning.  God,  for  a  long  time,
was  understood  to  command  what  in  fact  was  truly
important,  the  divine  was  long  the  truly  noble  and
beautiful,  heaven  hardly  ever  ceased  to  respond  to
impersonal  and  ideal  aspirations.  Under  those
figures,  therefore,  the  ideals  of  life  could  confront
life  with  clearness  and  authority.  The  spiritual
man,  fixing  his  eyes  on  them,  could  live  in  the  j
presence  of  ultimate  purposes  and  ideal  issues.  Be¬
fore  each  immediate  task,  each  incidental  pleasure,
each  casual  success,  he  could  retain  his  sweetness
and  constancy,  accepting  what  good  these  moments  /
brought  and  laying  it  on  the  altar  of  what  they
ought  to  bring.


CHAPTER  XII


CHARITY


Those  whom  a  genuine  spirituality  has  freed
from  the  foolish  enchantment  of  words  and  con-
possibie  ventions  and  brought  back  to  a  natu-
tyranny  of  ral  ideal,  have  still  another  illusion  to
reason.  vanquish,  one  into  which  the  very

concentration  and  deepening  of  their  life  might
lead  them.  This  illusion  is  that  they  and  their
chosen  interests  alone  are  important  or  have  a
legitimate  place  in  the  moral  world.  Having  dis¬
covered  what  is  really  good  for  themselves,  they
assume  that  the  like  is  good  for  everybody.  Hav¬
ing  made  a  tolerable  synthesis  and  purification
of  their  own  natures,  they  require  every  other  na¬
ture  to  be  composed  of  the  same  elements  simi¬
larly  combined.  What  they  have  vanquished  in
themselves  they  disregard  in  others ;  and  the  con¬
sequence  sometimes  is  that  an  impossibly  simpli¬
fied  and  inconsiderate  regimen  is  proposed  to
mankind,  altogether  unrepresentative  of  their
total  interests.  Spiritual  men,  in  a  word,  may
fall  into  the  aristocrat’s  fallacy;  they  may  forget
the  infinite  animal  and  vulgar  life  which  remains

214


CHARITY


215


quite  disjointed,  impulsive,  and  short-winded,  but
which  nevertheless  palpitates  with  joys  and  sor¬
rows,  and  makes  after  all  the  bulk  of  moral  values
in  this  democratic  world.

After  adopting  an  ideal  it  is  necessary,  there¬
fore,  without  abandoning  it,  to  recognise  its  rela-

Everything  tivity.  The  right  path  is  in  such  a
has  its  rights.  matter  rather  difficult  to  keep  to.  On

the  one  hand  lies  fanatical  insistence  on  an
ideal  once  arrived  at,  no  matter  how  many  in¬
stincts  and  interests  (the  basis  of  all  ideals)  are
thereby  outraged  in  others  and  ultimately  also  in
one’s  self.  On  the  other  hand  lies  mystical
disintegration,  which  leads  men  to  feel  so  keenly
the  rights  of  everything  in  particular  and  of
the  All  in  general,  that  they  retain  no  hearty  al¬
legiance  to  any  human  interest.  Between  these
two  abysses  winds  the  narrow  path  of  charity  and
valour.  The  ultimate  ideal  is  absolutely  authori¬
tative,  because  if  any  ground  were  found  to  relax
allegiance  to  it  in  any  degree  or  for  any  consid¬
eration,  that  ground  would  itself  be  the  ideal,
found  to  be  more  nearly  absolute  and  ultimate
than  the  one,  hastily  so  called,  which  it  corrected.
The  ultimate  ideal,  in  order  to  maintain  its  final¬
ity  and  preclude  the  possibility  of  an  appeal
which  should  dislodge  it  from  its  place  of  author¬
ity,  must  have  taken  all  interests  into  considera¬
tion;  it  must  be  universally  representative.  Now,
to  take  an  interest  into  consideration  and  repre¬
sent  it  means  to  intend,  as  far  as  possible,  to


216


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


secure  the  particular  good  which  that  particular
interest  looks  to,  and  never,  whatever  measures
may  be  adopted,  to  cease  to  look  back  on  the  ele¬
mentary  impulse  as  upon  something  which  ought,
if  possible,  to  have  been  satisfied,  and  which  we
should  still  go  back  and  satisfy  now,  if  circum¬
stances  and  the  claims  of  rival  interests  permitted.

Justice  and  charity  are  identical.  To  deny  the
initial  right  of  any  impulse  is  not  morality  but
fanaticism.  However  determined  may  be  the
prohibition  which  reason  opposes  to  some  wild
instinct,  that  prohibition  is  never  reckless;  it  is
never  inconsiderate  of  the  very  impulse  which  it
suppresses.  It  suppresses  that  impulse  unwill¬
ingly,  pitifully,  under  stress  of  compulsion  and
force  majeure;  for  reason,  in  representing  this
impulse  in  the  context  of  life  and  in  relation  to
every  other  impulse  which,  in  its  operation,  it
would  affect  mechanically,  rejects  and  condemns
it ;  hut  it  condemns  it  not  by  antecedent  hate  but
by  supervening  wisdom.  The  texture  of  the
natural  world,  the  conflict  of  interests  in  the  soul
and  in  society,  all  of  which  cannot  be  satisfied
together,  is  accordingly  the  ground  for  moral  re¬
strictions  and  compromises.  Whatever  the  up¬
shot  of  the  struggle  may  be,  whatever  the  verdict
pronounced  by  reason,  the  parties  to  the  suit
must  in  justice  all  be  heard,  and  heard  sympa¬
thetically.

Herein  lies  the  great  difference  between  first¬
hand  and  second-hand  morality.  The  retailers


CHARITY


217


of  moral  truth,  the  town-criers  that  go  shouting
in  the  streets  some  sentence  passed  long  ago  in

Primary  and  reason’s  court  against  some  inadmis-
secondary  sible  desire,  know  nothing  of  justice

morality.

or  mercy  or  reason — three  principles
essentially  identical.  They  thunder  conclusions
without  remembering  the  premisses,  and  expose
their  precepts,  daily,  of  course,  grown  more  thin
and  unrepresentative,  to  the  aversion  and  neglect
of  all  who  genuinely  love  what  is  good.  The  mas¬
ters  of  life,  on  the  contrary,  the  first  framers  and
discoverers  of  moral  ideals,  are  persons  who  dis¬
regard  those  worn  conventions  and  their  profes¬
sional  interpreters:  they  are  persons  who  have  a
fresh  sense  for  the  universal  need  and  cry  of
human  souls,  and  reconstruct  the  world  of  duty
to  make  it  fit  better  with  the  world  of  desire  and
of  possible  happiness.  'Primary  morality,  in¬
spired  by  love  of  something  naturally  good,  is
accordingly  charitable  and  ready  to  forgive ;  while
secondary  morality,  founded  on  prejudice,  is
fanatical  and  ruthless.

As  virtue  carries  with  it  a  pleasure  which  per¬
fects  it  and  without  which  virtue  would  evidently

Uncharitable  spurious  and  merely  compulsory,  so
pagan  justice  justice  carries  with  it  a  charity  which

is  not  iust«  •  •  j  i  •  _ •  j  *i  j  _ i  •  i

is  its  highest  expression,  without  which
justice  remains  only  an  organised  wrong.  Of
justice  without  charity  we  have  a  classic  illus¬
tration  in  Plato’s  Republic  and  in  general  in  the
pagan  world.  An  end  is  assumed,  in  this  case


218


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


an  end  which  involves  radical  injustice  toward
every  interest  not  included  in  it;  and  then  an
organism  is  developed  or  conceived  that  shall  sub¬
serve  that  end,  and  political  justice  is  defined  as
the  harmonious  adjustment  of  powers  and  func¬
tions  within  that  organism.  Reason  and  art  suf¬
fice  to  discover  the  right  methods  for  reaching
the  chosen  end,  and  the  polity  thus  established,
with  all  its  severities  and  sacrifices  of  personal
will,  is  rationally  grounded.  The  chosen  end,
however,  is  arbitrary,  and,  in  fact,  perverse;  for
to  maintain  a  conventional  city  with  stable  insti¬
tutions  and  perpetual  military  efficiency  would
not  secure  human  happiness;  nor  (to  pass  to  the
individual  virtue  symbolised  by  such  a  state)
would  the  corresponding  discipline  of  personal
habits,  in  the  service  of  vested  interests  and  bodily
life,  truly  unfold  the  potentialities  of  the  human
spirit.

Plato  himself,  in  passing,  acknowledges  that
his  political  ideal  is  secondary  and  not  ideal
at  all,  since  only  luxury,  corruption,  and  physical
accidents  make  a  military  state  necessary;  but
his  absorption  in  current  Greek  questions  made
him  neglect  the  initial  question  of  all,  namely,
how  a  non-military  and  non-competitive  state
might  be  established,  or  rather  how  the  remedial
functions  of  the  state  might  be  forestalled  by
natural  justice  and  rendered  unnecessary.  The
violence  which  such  a  fallen  ideal,  with  its  in¬
iquitous  virtues,  does  to  humanity  appeared  only


CHARITY


219


too  clearly  in  the  sequel,  when  Platonism  took
refuge  in  the  supernatural.  The  whole  pagan
world  was  convicted  of  injustice  and  the  cities
for  whose  glory  the  greatest  heroes  had  lived  and
died  were  abandoned  with  horror.  Only  in  a
catacomb  or  a  hermitage  did  there  seem  to  be
any  room  for  the  soul.  This  revulsion,  perverse
in  its  own  way,  expressed  rightly  enough  the  per¬
versity  of  that  unjust  justice,  those  worldly  and
arbitrary  virtues,  and  that  sad  happiness  which
had  enslaved  the  world.

Plato  could  never  have  answered  the  question
whether  his  Republic  had  a  right  to  exist  and  to
The  doom  brush  aside  all  other  commonwealths ;
of  ancient  he  could  never  have  justified  the  ways

republics*  />  lit  j  />  i  •

oi  man  to  the  rest  oi  creation  nor
(what  is  more  pertinent)  to  man’s  more  plastic
and  tenderer  imagination.  The  initial  impulses
on  which  his  Republic  is  founded,  which  make
war,  defensive  and  aggressive,  the  first  business
of  the  state,  are  not  irresistible  impulses,  they  do
not  correspond  to  ultimate  ends.  Physical  life
cannot  justify  itself;  it  cannot  be  made  the  pur¬
pose  of  those  rational  faculties  which  it  gener¬
ates;  these,  on  the  contrary,  are  its  own  end.
The  purpose  of  war  must  be  peace;  the  purpose
of  competition  a  more  general  prosperity;  the
purpose  of  personal  life  ideal  achievements.  A
polity  which  should  not  tend  to  abolish  private
lusts,  competition,  and  war  would  be  an  irrational
polity.  The  organisation  which  the  ancients  in-


220


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sisted  on  within  each  state,  the  sacrifices  they  im¬
posed  on  each  class  in  the  community  for  the  gen¬
eral  welfare,  have  to  be  repeated  in  that  greater
commonwealth  of  which  cities  and  nations  are  cit¬
izens;  for  their  own  existence  and  prosperity  de¬
pends  on  conciliating  inwardly  all  that  may  affect
them  and  turning  foreign  forces,  when  contact
with  them  is  inevitable,  into  friends.  Duty  and
co-operation  must  extend  as  far  as  do  physical
bonds,  the  function  of  reason  being  to  bring  life
into  harmony  with  its  conditions,  so  as  to  render
it  self-perpetuating  and  free.  This  end  can  never
be  attained  while  the  scope  of  moral  fellowship
is  narrower  than  that  of  physical  interplay.  An¬
cient  civilisation,  brilliant  in  proportion  to  its
inner  integration,  was  brief  in  proportion  to  its
outer  injustice.  By  defying  the  external  forces
on  which  also  a  commonwealth  depends,  those
commonwealths  came  to  premature  extinction.

There  is  accordingly  a  justice  deeper  and
milder  than  that  of  pagan  states,  a  universal  jus-
Rationai  tice  called  charity,  a  kind  of  all-pene-

charity.  trating  courtesy,  by  which  the  limits

of  personal  or  corporate  interests  are  transgressed
in  imagination.  Value  is  attributed  to  rival
forms  of  life;  something  of  the  intensity  and
narrowness  inherent  in  the  private  will  is  sur¬
rendered  to  admiration  and  solicitude  for  what  is
most  alien  and  hostile  to  one’s  self.  When  this
imaginative  expansion  ends  in  neutralising  the
will  altogether,  we  have  mysticism;  but  when  it


CHARITY


221


serves  merely  to  eo-ordinate  felt  interests  with
other  actual  interests  conceived  sympathetically,
and  to  make  them  converge,  we  have  justice  and
charity.  Charity  is  nothing  but  a  radical  and
imaginative  justice.  So  the  Buddhist  stretches
his  sympathy  to  all  real  beings  and  to  many  im¬
aginary  monsters;  so  the  Christian  chooses  for
his  love  the  diseased,  the  sinful,  the  unlovely.
His  own  salvation  does  not  seem  to  either  com¬
plete  unless  every  other  creature  also  is  redeemed
and  forgiven.

Such  universal  solicitude  is  rational,  however,
only  when  the  beings  to  which  it  extends  are  in
its  limits.  practical  efficient  relations  with  the
life  that  would  co-operate  with  theirs.  In  other
words,  charity  extends  only  to  physical  and  dis¬
coverable  creatures,  whose  destiny  is  interwoven
dynamically  with  our  own.  Absolute  and  irre¬
sponsible  fancy  can  be  the  basis  of  no  duty.  If
not  to  take  other  real  forces  and  interests  into
account  made  classic  states  unstable  and  unjust,
to  take  into  consideration  purely  imaginary  forces
yields  a  polity  founded  on  superstition,  one  un¬
just  to  those  who  live  under  it.  A  compromise
made  with  non-existent  or  irrelevant  interests  is  a
wrong  to  the  real  interests  on  which  that  sacrifice
is  imposed  gratuitously.  All  sacrifices  exacted
by  mere  religion  have  accordingly  been  inhuman;
at  best  they  have  unintentionally  made  some
amends  by  affording  abstract  discipline  or  artis¬
tic  forms  of  expression.  The  sacrifice  must  be


222


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


fruitful  in  the  end  and  bring  happiness  to  some¬
body:  otherwise  it  cannot  long  remain  tender  or
beautiful.

Charity  is  seldom  found  uncoloured  by  fables
which  illustrate  it  and  lend  it  a  motive  by  which
its  mythical  it  can  justify  itself  verbally.  Metem-
supports.  psychosis,  heaven  and  hell,  Christ’s
suffering  for  every  sinner,  are  notions  by  which
charity  has  often  been  guided  and  warmed.  Like
myth  everywhere,  these  notions  express  judg¬
ments  which  they  do  not  originate,  although  they
may  strengthen  or  distort  them  in  giving  them
expression.  The  same  myths,  in  cruel  hands,  be¬
come  goads  to  fanaticism.  That  natural  sensi¬
tiveness  in  which  charity  consists  has  many  de¬
grees  and  many  inequalities;  the  spirit  bloweth
where  it  listeth.  Incidental  circumstances  deter¬
mine  its  phases  and  attachments  in  life.  Chris¬
tian  charity,  for  instance,  has  two  chief  parts:
first,  it  hastens  to  relieve  the  body;  then,  forget¬
ting  physical  economy  altogether,  it  proceeds  to
redeem  the  soul.  The  bodily  works  of  mercy
which  Christians  perform  with  so  much  tact  and
devotion  are  not  such  as  philanthropy  alone
would  inspire;  they  are  more  and  less  than  that.*
They  are  more,  because  they  are  done  with  a  cer¬
tain  disproportionate  and  absolute  solicitude,
quite  apart  from  ultimate  benefit  or  a  thought
of  the  best  distribution  of  energies;  they  are  also
less,  because  they  stop  at  healing,  and  cannot
pass  beyond  the  remedial  and  incidental  phase


CHARITY


223


without  ceasing  to  be  Christian.  The  poor,  says
Christian  charity,  we  have  always  with  us ;  every
man  must  be  a  sinner — else  what  obligation
should  he  have  to  repent? — and,  in  fine,  this
world  is  essentially  the  kingdom  of  Satan.  Char¬
ity  comes  only  to  relieve  the  most  urgent  bodily
needs,  and  then  to  wean  the  heart  altogether
from  mortal  interests.  Thus  Christianity  covers
the  world  with  hospitals  and  orphanages;  but
its  only  positive  labours  go  on  in  churches  and
convents,  nor  will  it  found  schools,  if  left  to  itself,
to  teach  anything  except  religion.  These  offices
may  be  performed  with  more  or  less  success,  with
more  or  less  appeal  to  the  miraculous;  but,  with
whatever  mixture  of  magic  and  policy,  Christian
charity  has  never  aimed  at  anything  but  healing
the  body  and  saving  the  soul.

Christ  himself,  we  may  well  feel,  did  not  affect
publicans  and  sinners,  ignorant  people  and  chil-

There  is  dren,  in  order  to  save  them  in  the
intelligence  regimental  and  prescriptive  fashion
m  chanty.  adopted  by  the  Church.  He  com¬
manded  those  he  forgave  to  sin  no  more  and  those
he  healed  to  go,  as  custom  would  have  it,  to  the
priest.  He  understood  the  bright  good  that  each
sinner  was  following  when  he  stumbled  into  the
pit.  For  this  insight  he  was  loved.  To  be  re¬
buked  in  that  sympathetic  spirit  was  to  be  com¬
forted;  to  be  punished  by  such  a  hand  was  to  be
made  whole.  The  Magdalene  was  forgiven  be¬
cause  she  had  loved  much;  an  absolution  which


224


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


rehabilitates  the  primary  longing  that  had  driven
her  on,  a  longing  not  insulted  but  comprehended
in  such  an  absolution,  and  purified  by  that  com¬
prehension.  It  is  a  charitable  salvation  which
enables  the  newly  revealed  deity  to  be  absolutely
loved.  Charity  has  this  art  of  making  men  aban¬
don  their  errors  without  asking  them  to  forget
their  ideals.

In  Buddhism  the  same  charity  wears  a  more
speculative  form.  All  beings  are  to  be  redeemed

Buddhist  and  from  the  illusion  which  is  the  foun-
Christian  tain  of  their  troubles.  None  is  to  be

forms  of  it.  nij_  •  i  •  11

compelled  to  assume  irrationally  an
alien  set  of  duties  or  other  functions  than  his
own.  Spirit  is  not  to  be  incarcerated  perpetually
in  grotesque  and  accidental  monsters,  but  to  be
freed  from  all  fatality  and  compulsion.  The  goal
is  not  some  more  flattering  incarnation,  but  es¬
cape  from  incarnation  altogether.  Ignorance  is
to  be  enlightened,  passion  calmed,  mistaken  des¬
tiny  revoked;  only  what  the  inmost  being  desid¬
erates,  only  what  can  really  quiet  the  longings
embodied  in  any  particular  will,  is  to  occupy  the
redeemed  mind.  Here,  though  creative  reason  is
wholly  wanting,  charity  is  truly  understood;  for
it  avails  little  to  make  of  kindness  a  vicarious
selfishness  and  to  use  neighbourly  offices  to
plunge  our  neighbour  deeper  into  his  favourite
follies.  Such  servile  sympathy  would  make  men
one  another's  accomplices  rather  than  friends.
It  would  treat  them  with  a  weak  promiscuous


CHARITY


225


favour,  not  with  true  mercy  and  justice.  In
charity  there  can  be  nothing  to  repent  of,  as  there
so  often  is  in  natural  love  and  in  partisan  propa¬
ganda.  Christians  have  sometimes  interpreted
charity  as  zeal  to  bring  men  into  their  particular
fold;  or,  at  other  times,  when  enthusiasm  for
doctrine  and  institutes  has  cooled,  they  have  in¬
terpreted  charity  to  be  mere  blind  co-operation,  no
matter  in  what.

The  Buddhists  seem  to  have  shown  a  finer  sense
in  their  ministry,  knowing  how  to  combine  uni¬
versal  sympathy  with  perfect  spirituality.  There
was  no  brow-beating  in  their  call  to  conversion,
no  new  tyranny  imposed  of  sanctioned  by  their
promised  deliverance.  If  they  could  not  rise  to
a  positive  conception  of  natural  life,  this  inabil¬
ity  but  marks  the  well-known  limitations  of
Oriental  fancy,  which  has  never  been  able  to  dis¬
tinguish  steadily  that  imagination  which  rests  on
and  expresses  material  life  from  that  which,  in
its  import,  breaks  loose  from  the  given  conditions
of  life  altogether,  and  is  therefore  monstrous  and
dreamful.  But  at  least  Buddhism  knew  how  to
sound  the  heart  and  pierce  to  the  genuine  prin¬
ciples  of  happiness  and  misery.  If  it  did  not
venture  to  interpret  reason  positively,  it  at  least
forbore  to  usurp  its  inward  and  autonomous
authority,  and  did  not  set  up,  in  the  name
of  salvation,  some  new  partiality,  some  new
principle  of  distress  and  illusion.  In  destroying
worldliness  this  religion  avoided  imposture.  The


226


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


clearing  it  made  in  the  soul  was  soon  overgrown
again  by  the  inexorable  Indian  jungle;  but  had
a  virile  intellect  been  at  hand,  it  would  have  been
free  to  raise  something  solid  and  rational  in  the
space  so  happily  swept  clean  of  all  accumulated
rubbish.

Against  avarice,  lust,  and  rancour,  against
cruel  and  vain  national  ambitions,  tenderer  and
Apparent  more  recollected  minds  have  always
division  of  sought  some  asylum;  but  they  have

and  the  seldom  possessed  enough  knowledge

natural.  0f  nature  and  of  human  life  to  dis¬

tinguish  clearly  the  genuine  and  innocent  goods
which  they  longed  for,  and  their  protest  against
“the  world ”  has  too  often  taken  on  a  mystical
and  irrational  accent.  Charity,  for  instance,  in
its  profounder  deliverances,  has  become  a  protest
against  the  illusion  of  personality;  whereby  exist¬
ence  and  action  seem  to  be  wholly  condemned
after  their  principle  has  been  identified  with  self¬
ishness.  An  artificial  puzzle  is  thus  created,  the
same  concept,  selfishness  or  an  irrational  partial¬
ity  and  injustice  in  the  will,  being  applied  to  two
principles  of  action,  the  one  wrong  and  the  other
necessary.  Every  man  is  necessarily  the  seat  of
his  own  desires,  which,  if  truly  fulfilled,  would
bring  him  satisfaction;  but  the  objects  in  which
that  satisfaction  may  be  found,  and  the  forces
that  must  co-operate  to  secure  it,  lie  far  afield,
and  his  life  will  remain  cramped  and  self¬
destructive  so  long  as  he  does  not  envisage  its


CHARITY


227


whole  basis  and  co-operate  with  all  his  potential
allies.

The  rationality  which  would  then  be  attained  is
so  immensely  exalted  above  the  microscopic  vision
and  punctiform  sensibility  of  those  who  think
themselves  practical,  that  speculative  natures
seem  to  be  proclaiming  another  set  of  interests,
another  and  quite  miraculous  life,  when  they  at¬
tempt  to  thaw  6ut  and  vivify  the  vulgar  mechan¬
ism;  and  the  sense  of  estrangement  and  contra¬
diction  often  comes  over  the  spiritually  minded
themselves,  making  them  confess  sadly  that  the
kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  of  this  world.  As  com¬
mon  morality  itself  falls  easily  into  mythical  ex¬
pressions  and  speaks  of  a  fight  between  conscience
and  nature,  reason  and  the  passions,  as  if  these
were  independent  in  their  origin  or  could  be
divided  in  their  operation,  so  spiritual  life  even
more  readily  opposes  the  ideal  to  the  real,  the
revealed  and  heavenly  truth  to  the  extant  reality,
as  if  the  one  could  be  anything  but  an  expression
and  fulfilment  of  the  other.  Being  equally  con¬
vinced  that  spiritual  life  is  authoritative  and
possible,  and  that  it  is  opposed  to  all  that  earthly
experience  has  as  yet  supplied,  the  prophet  almost
inevitably  speaks  of  another  world  above  the
clouds  and  another  existence  beyond  the  grave;
he  thus  seeks  to  clothe  in  concrete  and  imaginable
form  the  ideal  to  which  natural  existence  seems
to  him  wholly  rebellious.  Spiritual  life  comes  to
mean  life  abstracted  from  politics,  from  art,  from


228


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sense,  even  in  the  end  from  morality.  Natural

motives  and  natural  virtues  are  contrasted  with

%

those  which  are  henceforth  called  supernatural,
and  all  the  grounds  and  sanctions  of  right  living
are  transferred  to  another  life.  A  doctrine  of  im¬
mortality  thus  becomes  the  favourite  expression
of  religion.  By  its  variations  and  greater  or  less
transparency  and  ideality  we  can  measure  the
degree  of  spiritual  insight  which  has  been  reached
at  any  moment.


CHAPTER  XIII


THE  BELIEF  IN*  A  FUTURE  LIFE


At  no  point  are  the  two  ingredients  of  religion,

superstition  and  moral  truth,  more  often  confused

The  length  than  in  the  doctrine  of  immortality,

of  life  a  sub-  yet  ^  none  are  they  more  clearly  dis¬
ject  for  *  "

natural  tinguishable.  Ideal  immortality  is  a

science.  principle  revealed  to  insight ;  it  is

seen  by  observing  the  eternal  quality  of  ideas
and  validities,  and  the  affinity  to  them  native  to
reason  or  the  cognitive  energy  of  mind.  A  fu¬
ture  life,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  matter  for  faith
or  presumption;  it  is  a  prophetic  hypothesis  re¬
garding  occult  existences.  This  latter  question
is  scientific  and  empirical,  and  should  be  treated
as  such.  A  man  is,  forensically  speaking,  the
same  man  after  the  nightly  break  in  his  con¬
sciousness.  After  many  changes  in  his  body  and
after  long  oblivion,  parcels  of  his  youth  may  be
revived  and  may  come  to  figure  again  among  the
factors  in  his  action.  Similarly,  if  evidence  to
that  effect  were  available,  we  might  establish  the
resurrection  of  a  given  soul  in  new  bodies  or  its
activity  in  remote  places  and  times.  Evidence

229


230


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


of  this  sort  has  in  fact  always  been  offered  copi¬
ously  by  rumour  and  superstition.  The  opera¬
tion  of  departed  spirits,  like  that  of  the  gods,
has  been  recognised  in  many  a  dream,  or  message,
or  opportune  succour.  The  Dioscuri  and  Saint
James  the  Apostle  have  appeared — preferably  on
white  horses — in  sundry  battles.  Spirits  duly  in¬
voked  have  repeated  forgotten  gossip  and  revealed
the  places  where  crimes  had  been  committed  or
treasure  buried.  More  often,  perhaps,  ghosts
have  walked  the  night  without  any  ostensible  or
useful  purpose,  apparently  in  obedience  to  some
ghastly  compulsion  that  crept  over  them  in  death,
as  if  a  hesitating  sickle  had  left  them  still  hang¬
ing  to  life  by  one  attenuated  fibre.

The  mass  of  this  evidence,  ancient  and  modern,
traditional  and  statistical,  is  beneath  considera-
"Psychicai”  tion;  the  palpitating  mood  in  which  it
phenomena.  gathered  and  received,  even  when

ostensibly  scientific,  is  such  that  gullibility  and
fiction  play  a  very  large  part  in  the  report;  for  it
is  not  to  be  assumed  that  a  man,  because  he  speaks
in  the  first  person  and  addresses  a  learned  society,
has  lost  the  primordial  faculty  of  lying.  When
due  allowance  has  been  made,  however,  for  legend
and  fraud,  there  remains  a  certain  residuum  of
clairvoyance  and  telepathy,  and  an  occasional
abnormal  obedience  of  matter  to  mind  which
might  pass  for  magic.  There  are  unmistakable
indications  that  in  these  regions  we  touch  lower
and  more  rudimentary  faculties.  There  seems  to


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  231


be,  as  is  quite  natural,  a  sub-human  sensibility  in
man,  wherein  ideas  are  connected  together  by
bonds  so  irrational  and  tenacious  that  they  seem
miraculous  to  a  mind  already  trained  in  practical
and  relevant  thinking.  This  sub-human  sense,
far  from  representing  important  truths  more
clearly  than  ordinary  apprehension  can,  reduces
consciousness  again  to  a  tangle  of  trivial  impres¬
sions,  shots  of  uncertain  range,  as  if  a  skin  had
not  yet  formed  over  the  body.  It  emerges  in
tense  and  disorganised  moments.  Its  reports  are
the  more  trifling  the  more  startingly  literal
their  veracity.  It  seems  to  represent  a  stratum
of  life  beneath  moral  or  intellectual  functions,
and  beneath  all  personality.  When  proof  has
been  found  that  a  ghost  has  actually  been  seen,
proof  is  required  that  the  phantom  has  been
rightly  recognised  and  named;  and  this  imputed
identity  is  never  demonstrable  and  in  most  cases
impossible.  So  in  the  magic  cures  which  from
time  immemorial  have  been  recorded  at  shrines
of  all  religions,  and  which  have  been  attributed
to  wonder-workers  of  every  sect:  the  one  thing
certain  about  them  is  that  they  prove  neither  the
truth  of  whatever  myth  is  capriciously  associated
with  them,  nor  the  goodness  or  voluntary  power
of  the  miracle-worker  himself.  Healer  and
medium  are  alike  vehicles  for  some  elemental  en¬
ergy  they  cannot  control,  and  which  as  often  as
not  misses  fire;  at  best  they  feel  a  power  going
out  of  them  which  they  themselves  undergo,  and


232


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


which  radiates  from  them  like  electricity,  to
work,  as  chance  will  have  it,  good  or  evil  in  the
world.  The  whole  operation  lies,  in  so  far  as  it
really  takes  place  at  all,  on  the  lowest  levels  of
unintelligence,  in  a  region  closely  allied  to  mad¬
ness  in  consciousness  and  to  sporadic  organic  im¬
pulses  in  the  physical  sphere.

Among  the  blind,  the  retina  having  lost  its
function,  the  rest  of  the  skin  is  said  to  recover
Hypertrophies  its  primordial  sensitiveness  to  dis-
of  sense.  tance  and  light,  so  that  the  sightless
have  a  clearer  premonition  of  objects  about  them
than  seeing  people  could  have  in  the  dark.  So
when  reason  and  the  ordinary  processes  of  sense
are  in  abeyance  a  certain  universal  sensibility
seems  to  return  to  the  soul;  influences  at  other
times  not  appreciable  make  then  a  sensible  im¬
pression,  and  automatic  reactions  may  be  run
through  in  response  to  a  stimulus  normally  quite
insufficient.  Now  the  complexity  of  nature  is
prodigious;  everything  that  happens  leaves,  like
buried  cities,  almost  indelible  traces  which  an
eye,  by  chance  attentive  and  duly  prepared,  can
manage  to  read,  recovering  for  a  moment  the
image  of  an  extinct  life.  Symbols,  illegible  to
reason,  can  thus  sometimes  read  themselves  out  in
trance  and  madness.  Faint  vestiges  may  be  found
in  matter  of  forms  which  it  once  wore,  or  which,
like  a  perfume,  impregnated  and  got  lodgment
within  it.  Slight  echoes  may  suddenly  reconsti¬
tute  themselves  in  the  mind’s  silence;  and  a  half-


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  233


stunned  consciousness  may  catch  brief  glimpses  of
long-lost  and  irrelevant  things.  Real  ghosts  are
such  reverberations  of  the  past,  exceeding  ordi¬
nary  imagination  and  discernment  both  in  vivid¬
ness  and  in  fidelity;  they  may  not  be  explicable
without  appealing  to  material  influences  subtler
than  those  ordinarily  recognised,  as  they  are
obviously  not  discoverable  without  some  derange¬
ment  and  hypertrophy  of  the  senses.

That  such  subtler  influences  should  exist  is
entirely  consonant  with  reason  and  experience;

These  possi-  but  only  a  hankering  tenderness  for
biiities  affect  superstition,  a  failure  to  appreciate

existence  the  function  both  of  religion  and  of
only.  science,  can  lead  to  reverence  for

such  oracular  gibberish  as  these  influences  pro¬
voke.  The  world  is  weary  of  experimenting
with  magic.  In  utter  seriousness  and  with  im¬
mense  solemnity  whole  races  have  given  them¬
selves  up  to  exploiting  these  shabby  mysteries;
and  while  a  new  survey  of  the  facts,  in  the  light
of  natural  science  and  psychology,  is  certainly  not
superfluous,  it  can  be  expected  to  lead  to  nothing
but  a  more  detailed  and  conscientious  description
of  natural  processes.  The  thought  of  employing
such  investigations  to  save  at  the  last  moment
religious  doctrines  founded  on  moral  ideas  is  a
pathetic  blunder;  the  obscene  supernatural  has
nothing  to  do  with  rational  religion.  If  it  were
discovered  that  wretched  echoes  of  a  past  life
could  be  actually  heard  by  putting  one’s  ear  long


234


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


enough  to  a  tomb,  and  if  ( per  impossibile)  those
echoes  could  be  legitimately  attributed  to  another
mind,  and  to  the  very  mind,  indeed,  whose  former
body  was  interred  there,  a  melancholy  chapter
would  indeed  be  added  to  man’s  earthly  fortunes,
since  it  would  appear  that  even  after  death  he
retained,  under  certain  conditions,  a  fatal  attach¬
ment  to  his  dead  body  and  to  the  other  material
instruments  of  his  earthly  life.  Obviously  such
a  discovery  would  teach  us  more  about  dying
than  about  immortality;  the  truths  disclosed,
since  they  would  be  disclosed  by  experiment  and
observation,  would  be  psycho-physical  truths,  im¬
plying  nothing  about  what  a  truly  disembodied
life  might  be,  if  one  were  attainable;  for  a  dis¬
embodied  life  could  by  no  possibility  betray  itself
in  spectres,  rum1"1  mgs,  and  spasms.  Actual  thun¬
ders  from  Sinai  and  an  actual  discovery  of  two
stone  tables  would  have  been  utterly  irrelevant  to
the  moral  authority  of  the  ten  commandments  or
to  the  existence  of  a  truly  supreme  being.  No
less  irrelevant  to  a  supramundane  immortality
is  the  length  of  time  during  which  human  spirits
may  be  condemned  to  operate  on  earth  after  their
bodies  are  quiet.  In  other  words,  spectral  sur¬
vivals  would  at  most  enlarge  our  conception  of
the  soul’s  physical  basis,  spreading  out  the  area
of  its  manifestations;  they  could  not  possibly,  see¬
ing  the  survivals  are  physical,  reveal  the  disem¬
bodied  existence  of  the  soul.

Such  a  disembodied  existence,  removed  by  its


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  235


nature  from  the  sphere  of  empirical  evidence,
Moral  might  nevertheless  be  actual,  and

grounds  for  grounds  of  a  moral  or  metaphysical

The  necessary  mlght  be  SOUght  for  postulating

assumption  its  reality.  Life  and  the  will  to  live
of  a  future.  are  bottom  identical.  Experience

itself  is  transitive  and  can  hardly  arise  apart  from
a  forward  effort  and  prophetic  apprehension  by
which  adjustments  are  made  to  a  future  unmis¬
takably  foreseen.  This  premonition,  by  which
action  seeks  to  justify  and  explain  itself  to  reflec¬
tion,  may  be  analysed  into  a  group  of  memories
and  sensations  of  movement,  generating  ideal  ex¬
pectations  which  might  easily  be  disappointed;
but  scepticism  about  the  future  can  hardly  be
maintained  in  the  heat  of  action.  A  postulate
acted  on  is  an  act  of  genuine  and  dogmatic  faith.
I  not  only  postulate  a  morrow  when  I  prepare  for
it,  but  ingenuously  and  heartily  believe  that  the
morrow  will  come.  This  faith  does  not  amount
to  certitude;  I  may  confess,  if  challenged,  that
before  to-morrow  I  and  the  world  and  time  itself
might  conceivably  come  to  an  end  together;  but
that  idle  possibility,  so  long  as  it  does  not  slacken
action,  will  not  disturb  belief.  Every  moment  of
life  accordingly  trusts  that  life  will  continue;  and
this  prophetic  interpretation  of  action,  so  long
as  action  lasts,  amounts  to  continual  faith  in
futurity.

A  sophist  might  easily  transform  this  psycho¬
logical  necessity  into  a  dazzling  proof  of  immor-


236


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tality.  To  believe  anything,  he  might  say,  is  to
be  active;  but  action  involves  faith  in  a  future
^  and  in  the  fruits  of  action;  and  as

assumption  no  living  moment  can  be  without

no  evidence*  i  i  *»  •  p  •  ••  *  •

this  confidence,  beliei  m  extinction
would  be  self-contradictory  and  at  no  moment  a
possible  belief.  The  question,  however,  is  not
whether  every  given  moment  has  or  has  not  a
specious  future  before  it  to  which  it  looks  forward,
but  whether  the  realisation  of  such  foresight,  a
realisation  which  during  waking  life  is  roughly
usual,  is  incapable  of  failing.  Now  expectation,
never  without  its  requisite  antecedents  and  natu¬
ral  necessity,  often  lacks  fulfilment,  and  never
finds  its  fulfilment  entire;  so  that  the  necessity
of  a  postulate  gives  no  warrant  for  its  verifica¬
tion.  Expectation  and  action  are  constantly
suspended  together;  and  what  happens  whenever
thought  loses  itself  or  stumbles,  what  happens
whenever  in  its  shifts  it  forgets  its  former  objects,
might  well  happen  at  crucial  times  to  that  train
of  intentions  which  we  call  a  particular  life  or  the
life  of  humanity.  The  prophecy  involved  in  ac¬
tion  is  not  insignificant,  but  it  is  notoriously  falli¬
ble  and  depends  for  its  fulfilment  on  external
conditions.  The  question  accordingly  really  is
whether  a  man  expecting  to  live  for  ever  or  one
expecting  to  die  in  his  time  has  the  more  rep¬
resentative  and  trustworthy  notion  of  the  future.
The  question,  so  stated,  cannot  be  solved  by  an
appeal  to  evidence,  which  is  necessarily  all  on


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  237


one  side,  but  only  by  criticising  the  value  of  evi¬
dence  as  against  instinct  and  hope,  and  by  ascer¬
taining  the  relative  status  which  assumption  and
observation  have  in  experience.

The  transcendental  compulsion  under  which
action  labours  of  envisaging  a  future,  and  the
animal  instinct  that  clings  to  life  and  flees  from
death  as  the  most  dreadful  of  evils  are  the  real
grounds  why  immortality  seems  initially  natural
and  good.  Confidence  in  living  for  ever  is  ante¬
rior  to  the  discovery  that  all  men  are  mortal  and
to  the  discovery  that  the  thinker  is  himself  a
man.  These  discoveries  flatly  contradict  that
confidence,  in  the  form  in  which  it  originally  pre¬
sents  itself,  and  all  doctrines  of  immortality
which  adult  philosophy  can  entertain  are  more  or
less  subterfuges  and  after-thoughts  by  which  the
observed  fact  of  mortality  and  the  native  incon¬
ceivability  of  death  are  more  or  less  clumsily
reconciled.

The  most  lordly  and  genuine  fashion  of  assert¬
ing  immortality  would  be  to  proclaim  one’s  self
an  exception  to  the  animal  race  and  to  point  out
that  the  analogy  between  one’s  singular  self  and
others  is  altogether  lame  and  purely  conventional.
Asoiipsistic  Any  proud  barbarian,  with  a  tincture
argument.  0f  transcendental  philosophy,  might

adopt  this  tone.  “  Creatures  that  perish,”  he
might  say,  “  are  and  can  be  nothing  but  puppets
and  painted  shadows  in  my  mind.  My  conscious
will  forbids  its  own  extinction;  it  scorns  to  level


238


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


itself  with  its  own  objects  and  instruments.  The
world,  which  I  have  never  known  to  exist  with¬
out  me,  exists  by  my  co-operation  and  consent;
it  can  never  extinguish  what  lends  it  being.  The
death  prophetically  accepted  by  weaklings,  with
such  small  insight  and  courage,  I  mock  and  alto¬
gether  defy :  it  can  never  touch  me.”

Such  solipsistic  boasts  may  not  have  been  heard
in  historic  times  from  the  lips  of  men  speaking  in
their  own  persons.  Language  has  an  irresistible
tendency  to  make  thought  communistic  and
ideally  transferable  to  others.  It  forbids  a  man
to  say  of  himself  what  it  would  be  ridiculous  to
hear  from  another.  Now  solipsism  in  another
man  is  a  comic  thing :  and  a  mind,  prompted  per¬
haps  by  hell  and  heaven  to  speak  solipsistically,
is  stopped  by  the  laughable  echo  of  its  own
words,  when  it  remembers  its  bold  sayings.  Lan¬
guage,  being  social,  resists  a  virgin  egotism  and
forbids  it  to  express  itself  publicly,  no  matter
how  well  grounded  it  may  be  in  transcendental
logic  and  in  animal  instinct.  Social  convention  is
necessarily  materialistic,  since  the  beginning  of
all  moral  reasonableness  consists  in  taming  the
transcendental  conceit  native  to  a  living  mind,
in  attaching  it  to  its  body,  and  bringing  the  will
that  thought  itself  absolute  down  to  the  rank  of
animals  and  men.  Otherwise  no  man  would  ac¬
knowledge  another's  rights  or  even  conceive  his
existence.  ♦

Primeval  solipsism — the  philosophy  of  untamed


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  239


animal  will — has  accordingly  taken  to  the  usual
by-paths  and  expressed  itself  openly  only  in  myth
or  by  a  speculative  abstraction  in  which  the
transcendental  spirit,  for  which  all  the  solipsistic
privileges  were  still  claimed,  was  distinguished
from  the  human  individual.  The  gods,  it  was

Absoluteness  said,  were  immortal ;  and  although
and  immor-  on  earth  spirit  must  submit  to  the

tality  trans-  A  .

ferred  to  the  yoke  and  service  of  matter,  on  whose
gods.  occasions  it  must  wait,  yet  there  ex¬

isted  in  the  ether  other  creatures  more  normally
and  gloriously  compounded,  since  their  forms
served  and  expressed  their  minds,  which  ruled
also  over  the  elements  and  feared  no  assault  from
time.  With  the  advent  of  this  mythology  experi¬
ence  and  presumption  divided  their  realms;  ex¬
perience  was  allowed  to  shape  men’s  notions  of
vulgar  reality,  but  presumption,  which  could  not
be  silenced,  was  allowed  to  suggest  a  second  sphere,
thinly  and  momentarily  veiled  to  mortal  sense,  in
which  the  premonitions  of  will  were  abundantly
realised.

This  expedient  had  the  advantage  of  endowing
the  world  with  creatures  that  really  satisfied
human  aspirations,  such  as  at  any  moment  they
might  be.  The  gods  possessed  longevity,  beauty,
magic  celerity  of  movement,  leisure,  splendour  of
life,  indefinite  strength,  and  practical  omnis¬
cience.  When  the  gods  were  also  expressions  for
natural  forces,  this  function  somewhat  prejudiced
their  ideality,  and  they  failed  to  correspond  per-


240


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


fectly  to  what  their  worshippers  would  have  most
esteemed;  but  religious  reformers  tended  to  ex¬
punge  naturalism  from  theology  and  to  represent
the  gods  as  entirely  admirable.  The  Greek  gods,
to  be  sure,  always  continued  to  have  genealogies,
and  the  fact  of  having  been  born  is  a  bad  augury
for  immortality;  but  other  religions,  and  finally
the  Greek  philosophers  themselves,  conceived
unbegotten  gods,  in  whom  the  human  rebellion
against  mutability  was  expressed  absolutely.

Thus  a  place  was  found  in  nature  for  the  con¬
stant  and  perpetual  element  which  crude  expe¬
rience  seems  to  contain  or  at  least  to  suggest.
Unfortunately  the  immortal  and  the  human  were
in  this  mythology  wholly  divorced,  so  that  while
immortality  was  vindicated  for  something  in  the
universe  it  was  emphatically  denied  to  man  and
to  his  works.  Contemplation,  to  be  satisfied  with
this  situation,  had  to  be  heroically  unselfish  and
resigned;  the  gods5  greatness  and  glory  had  to
furnish  sufficient  solace  for  all  mortal  defeats.
At  the  same  time  all  criticism  had  to  be  depre¬
cated,  for  reflection  would  at  once  have  pointed
out  that  the  divine  life  in  question  was  either  a
personification  of  natural  processes  and  thus
really  in  flux  and  full  of  oblivion  and  imperfec¬
tion,  or  else  a  hypostasis  of  certain  mental  func¬
tions  and  ideals,  which  could  not  really  be  con¬
ceived  apart  from  the  natural  human  life  which
they  informed  and  from  which  they  had  been
violently  abstracted.


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  241


Another  expedient  was  accordingly  found,  es¬
pecially  by  mystics  and  critical  philosophers,  for
Or  to  a  uniting  the  mortal  and  immortal  in
dpie  in  an"  existence  while  still  distinguishing
beings.  them  in  essence.  Cur  Deus  Homo
might  be  said  to  be  the  theme  of  all  such  specula¬
tions.  Plato  had  already  found  the  eternal  in  the
form  which  the  temporal  puts  on,  or,  if  the
phrase  be  preferred,  had  seen  in  the  temporal
and  existential  nothing  but  an  individuated  case
of  the  ideal.  The  soul  was  immortal,  unbegotten,
impassible;  the  bodies  it  successively  inhabited
and  the  experience  it  gathered  served  merely  to
bring  out  its  nature  with  greater  or  less  com¬
pleteness.  To  somewhat  the  same  effect  the  Ger¬
man  transcendentalists  identified  and  distin¬
guished  the  private  and  the  universal  spirit.
What  lived  in  each  man  and  in  each  moment  was
the  Absolute — for  nothing  else  could  really  exist
— and  the  expression  which  the  Absolute  there
took  on  was  but  a  transitional  phase  of  its  total
self-expression,  which,  could  it  be  grasped  in  its
totality,  wojild  no  longer  seem  subject  to  contra¬
diction  and  flux.  An  immortal  agent  therefore
went  through  an  infinite  series  of  acts,  each  tran¬
sitory  and  relative  to  the  others,  but  all  possessed
of  inalienable  reality  and  eternal  significance.
In  such  formulations  the  divorce  was  avoided
between  the  intellectual  and  the  sensuous  factor  in
experience — a  divorce  which  the  myth  about  im¬
mortal  gods  and  mortal  men  had  introduced.  On


242


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


the  other  hand  existential  immortality  was  aban¬
doned;  only  an  ideal  permanence,  only  signifi¬
cance,  was  allowed  to  any  finite  being,  and  the
better  or  future  world  of  which  ancient  poets  had
dreamt,  Olympus,  and  every  other  heaven,  was
altogether  abolished.  There  was  an  eternal  uni¬
verse  where  everything  was  transitory  and  a  sin¬
gle  immortal  spirit  at  no  two  moments  the  same.
The  world  of  idealism  realised  no  particular  ideal,
and  least  of  all  the  ideal  of  a  natural  and  per¬
sonal  immunity  from  death.

First,  then,  a  man  may  refuse  to  admit  that  he
must  die  at  all;  then,  abashed  at  the  arrogance
of  that  assertion,  he  may  consider  the  immortal
life  of  other  creatures,  like  the  earth  and  stars,
which  seem  subject  to  no  extinction,  and  he  may
ascribe  to  these  a  perpetual  consciousness  and
personality.  Finally,  confessing  the  fabulous  char¬
acter  of  those  deities,  he  may  distinguish  an  im¬
mortal  agent  or  principle  within  himself,  iden-
in  neither  tify  it  with  the  inner  principle  of  all

individual  other  beings,  and  contrast  it  with  its
immortal.  varying  and  conditioned  expressions.
But  scarcely  is  this  abstraction  attained  when  he
must  perceive  its  worthlessness,  since  the  natural
life,  the  concrete  aims,  and  the  personal  career
which  immortality  was  intended  to  save  from  dis¬
solution  are  wholly  alien  to  a  nominal  entity
which  endures  through  all  change,  however  fun¬
damental,  and  cohabits  with  every  nature,  how¬
ever  hostile  and  odious  to  humanity.  If  immor-


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  243


tality  is  to  be  genuine,  what  is  immortal  must  be
something  definite,  and  if  this  immortality  is  to
concern  life  and  not  mere  significance  or  ideal
definition,  that  which  endures  must  be  an  indi¬
vidual  creature  with  a  fixed  nucleus  of  habits  and
demands,  so  that  its  persistence  may  contain
progress  and  achievement.

Herewith  we  may  dismiss  the  more  direct  at¬
tempts  to  conceive  and  assert  a  future  life.
Their  failure  drives  us  to  a  consideration  of  indi¬
rect  attempts  to  establish  an  unobservable  but
real  immortality  through  revelation  and  dogma.
Such  an  immortality  would  follow  on  transmigra¬
tion  or  resurrection,  and  would  be  assigned  to  a
supernatural  sphere,  a  second  empirical  world
present  to  the  soul  after  death,  where  her  fortunes
would  not  be  really  conceivable  without  a  recon¬
stituted  body  and  a  new  material  environment.

Many  a  man  dies  too  soon  and  some  are  born
in  the  wrong  age  or  station.  Could  these  per-

possibie  sons  drink  the  fountain,  of  youth  at
forms  of  least  once  more  they  might  do  them-
survivai.  selves  fuller  justice  and  cut  a  better

figure  at  last  in  the  universe.  Most  people  think
they  have  stuff  in  them  for  greater  things  than
time  suffers  them  to  perform.  To  imagine  a  sec¬
ond  career  is  a  pleasing  antidote  for  ill-fortune;
the  poor  soul  wants  another  chance.  But  how
should  a  future  life  be  constituted  if  it  is  to  satisfy
this  demand,  and  how  long  need  it  last  ?  It  would
evidently  have  to  go  on  in  an  environment  closely


244


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


analogous  to  earth ;  I  could  not,  for  instance,  write
in  another  world  the  epics  which  the  necessity  of
earning  my  living  may  have  stifled  here,  did  that
other  world  contain  no  time,  no  heroic  struggles,
or  no  metrical  language.  Nor  is  it  clear  that  my
epics,  to  be  perfect,  would  need  to  be  quite  end¬
less.  If  what  is  foiled  in  me  is  really  poetic
genius  and  not  simply  a  tendency  toward  per¬
petual  motion,  it  would  not  help  me  if  in  heaven,
in  lieu  of  my  dreamt-of  epics,  I  were  allowed  to
beget  several  robust  children.  In  a  word,  if  here¬
after  I  am  to  be  the  same  man  improved  I  must
find  myself  in  the  same  world  corrected.  Were
I  transformed  into  a  cherub  or  transported  into
a  timeless  ecstasy,  it  is  hard  to  see  in  what  sense
I  should  continue  to  exist.  Those  results  might
be  interesting  in  themselves  and  might  enrich  the
universe;  they  would  not  prolong  my  life  nor  re¬
trieve  my  disasters.

For  this  reason  a  future  life  is  after  all  best
represented  by  those  frankly  material  ideals  which
most  Christians — being  Platonists — are  wont  to
despise.  It  would  be  genuine  happiness  for  a  Jew
to  rise  again  in  the  flesh  and  live  for  ever  in
Ezekiel’s  New  Jerusalem,  with  its  ceremonial
glories  and  civic  order.  It  would  be  truly  agree¬
able  for  any  man  to  sit  in  Tvell-watered  gardens
with  Mohammed,  clad  in  green  silks,  drinking  de¬
licious  sherbets,  and  transfixed  by  the  gazelle-like
glance  of  some  young  girl,  all  innocence  and  fire.
Amid  such  scenes  a  man  might  remain  himself


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  245


and  might  fulfil  hopes  that  he  had  actually  cher¬
ished  on  earth.  He  might  also  find  his  friends
again,  which  in  somewhat  generous  minds  is  per¬
haps  the  thought  that  chiefly  sustains  interest  in
a  posthumous  existence.  But  to  recognise  his
friends  a  man  must  find  them  in  their  bodies,  with
their  familiar  habits,  voices,  and  interests;  for  it
is  surely  an  insult  to  affection  to  say  that  he  could
find  them  in  an  eternal  formula  expressing  their
idiosyncrasy.  When,  however,  it  is  clearly  seen
that  another  life,  to  supplement  this  one,  must
closely  resemble  it,  does  not  the  magic  of  immor¬
tality  altogether  vanish?  Is  such  a  reduplication
of  earthly  society  at  all  credible?  And  the  pros¬
pect  of  awakening  again  among  houses  and  trees,
among  children  and  dotards,  among  wars  and  ru¬
mours  of  wars,  still  fettered  to  one  personality  and
one  accidental  past,  still  uncertain  of  the  future,
is  not  this  prospect  wearisome  and  deeply  repul¬
sive?  Having  passed  through  these  things  once
and  bequeathed  them  to  posterity,  is  it  not  time
for  each  soul  to  rest?  The  universe  doubtless
contains  all  sorts  of  experiences,  better  and  worse
than  the  human;  but  it  is  idle  to  attribute  to  a
particular  man  a  life  divorced  from  his  circum¬
stances  and  from  his  body.

Dogmas  about  such  a  posthumous  experience
Arguments  find  some  shadowy  support  in  various

from  retnbu-  t  i  •  i  •  j  1  •

tion  and  need  illusions  and  superstitions  that  sur-
of  opportunity,  round  ‘death,  but  they  are  developed
into  articulate  prophecies  chiefly  by  certain  moral


246


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


demands.  One  of  these  requires  rewards  and
punishments  more  emphatic  and  sure  than  those
which  conduct  meets  with  in  this  world.  An¬
other  requires  merely  a  more  favourable  and  com¬
plete  opportunity  for  the  souTs  development.
Considerations  like  these  are  pertinent  to  moral
philosophy.  It  touches  the  notion  of  duty
whether  an  exact  hedonistic  retribution  is  to  be
demanded  for  what  is  termed  merit  and  guilt:
so  that  without  such  supernatural  remuneration
virtue,  perhaps,  would  be  discredited  and  deprived
of  a  motive.  It  likewise  touches  the  ideality  and
nobleness  of  life  whether  human  aims  can  be
realised  satisfactorily  only  in  the  agent’s  singular
person,  so  that  the  fruits  of  effort  would  be  forth¬
with  missed  if  the  labourer  himself  should  dis¬
appear.

To  establish  justice  in  the  world  and  furnish
an  adequate  incentive  to  virtue  was  once  thought
the  chief  business  of  a  future  life.
The  Hebraic  religions  somewhat  over¬
reached  themselves  on  these  points :
for  the  grotesque  alternative  between  hell  and
heaven  in  the  end  only  aggravated  the  injustice
it  was  meant  to  remedy.  Life  is  unjust  in  that
it  subordinates  individuals  to  a  general  mechan¬
ical  law,  and  the  deeper  and  longer  hold  fate  has
on  the  soul,  the  greater  that  injustice.  A  per¬
petual  life  would  be  a  perpetual  subjection  to  ar¬
bitrary  power,  while  a  last  judgment  would  be
but  a  last  fatality.  That  hell  may  have  fright-


Ignoble
temper  of
bo  tli.


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  247


ened  a  few  villains  into  omitting  a  crime  is  per¬
haps  credible;  bnt  the  embarrassed  silence  which
the  churches,  in  a  more  sensitive  age,  prefer  to
maintain  on  that  wholesome  doctrine — once,  as
they  taught,  the  only  rational  basis  for  virtue —
shows  how  their  teaching  has  to  follow  the  inde¬
pendent  progress  of  morals.  Nevertheless,  per¬
sons  are  not  wanting,  apparently  free  from  ec¬
clesiastical  constraint,  who  still  maintain  that  the
value  of  life  depends  on  its  indefinite  prolonga¬
tion.  By  an  artifice  of  reflection  they  substitute
vanity  for  reason,  and  selfish  for  ingenuous  in¬
stincts  in  man.  Being  apparently  interested  in
nothing  but  their  own  careers,  they  forget  that  a
man  may  remember  how  little  he  counts  in  the
world  and  suffer  that  rational  knowledge  to  in¬
spire  his  purposes.  Intense  morality  has  always
envisaged  earthly  goods  and  evils,  and  even  when
a  future  life  has  been  accepted  vaguely,  it  has
never  given  direction  to  human  will  or  aims,
which  at  best  it  could  only  proclaim  more  em¬
phatically.  It  may  indeed  be  said  that  no  man  of
any  depth  of  soul  has  made  his  prolonged  exist¬
ence  the  touchstone  of  his  enthusiasms.  Such  an
instinct  is  carnal,  and  if  immortality  is  to  add  a
higher  inspiration  to  life  it  must  not  be  an  im¬
mortality  of  selfishness.  What  a  despicable  crea¬
ture  must  a  man  be,  and  how  sunk  below  the  level
of  the  most  barbaric  virtue,  if  he  cannot  bear  to
live  for  his  children,  for  his  art,  or  for  country!

To  turn  these  moral  questions,  however,  into


248


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


arguments  for  a  physical  speculation,  like  that
about  human  longevity,  resurrection,  or  metempsy-
Faise  opti-  chosis,  a  hybrid  principle  is  required :
mistic  postti-  thus,  even  if  we  have  answered  those

late  involved.  ,  , .  .  ,  •  ■,

moral  questions  in  the  conventional
way  and  satisfied  ourselves  that  personal  immor¬
tality  is  a  postulate  of  ethics,  we  cannot  infer
that  immortality  therefore  exists  unless  we  im¬
port  into  the  argument  a  tremendous  optimistic
postulate,  to  the  effect  that  what  is  requisite  for
moral  rationality  must  in  every  instance  be  real¬
ised  in  experience.

Such  an  optimistic  postulate,  however,  as  the
reader  must  have  repeatedly  observed,  is  made  *
not  only  despite  all  experience  but  in  ignorance
of  the  conditions  under  which  alone  ideals  are
framed  and  retain  their  significance.  Every
ideal  expresses  individual  and  specific  tendencies,
proper  at  some  moment  to  some  natural  creature ;
every  ideal  therefore  has  for  its  basis  a  part  only
of  the  dynamic  world,  so  that  its  fulfilment  is
problematical  and  altogether  adventitious  to  its
existence  and  authority.  To  decide  whether  an
ideal  can  be  or  will  be  fulfilled  we  must  examine
the  physical  relation  between  such  organic  forces
as  that  ideal  expresses  and  the  environment  in
which  those  forces  operate;  we  may  then  perceive
how  far  a  realisation  of  the  given  aims  is  possi¬
ble,  how  far  it  must  fail,  and  how  far  the  aims
in  question,  by  a  shfft  in  their  natural  basis,  will
lapse  and  yield  to  others,  possibly  more  capable


THE  BELIEF  IN  A  FUTURE  LIFE  249


of  execution  and  more  stable  in  the  world.  The
question  of  success  is  a  question  of  physics.  To
say  that  an  ideal  will  be  inevitably  fulfilled  sim¬
ply  because  it  is  an  ideal  is  to  say  something  gra¬
tuitous  and  foolish.  Pretence  cannot  in  the  end
avail  against  experience.

Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  define  ideals
even  before  their  realisation  is  known  to  be  pos-
Transition  sible,  because  they  constitute  one  of
to  ideality.  the  two  factors  whose  interaction  and

adjustment  is  moral  life,  factors  which  are  com¬
plementary  and  diverse  in  function  and  may  be
independently  ascertained.  The  value  of  exist¬
ences  is  wholly  borrowed  from  their  ideality,  with¬
out  direct  consideration  of  their  fate,  while  the
existence  of  ideals  is  wholly  determined  by  natu¬
ral  forces,  without  direct  relation  to  their  fulfil¬
ment.  Existence  and  ideal  value  can  therefore
be  initially  felt  and  observed  apart,  although  of
course  a  complete  description  would  lay  bare
physical  necessity  in  the  ideals  entertained  and
inevitable  ideal  harmonies  among  the  facts  dis¬
covered.  Human  life,  lying  as  it  does  in  the  midst
of  a  larger  process,  will  surely  not  be  without  some
congruity  with  the  universe.  Every  creature  lends
potential  values  to  a  world  in  which  it  can  satisfy
some  at  least  of  its  demands  and  learn,  perhaps,
to  modify  the  others.  Happiness  is  always  a  nat¬
ural  and  an  essentially  possible  thing,  and  a  total
despair,  since  it  ignores  those  goods  which  are
attainable,  can  express  only  a  partial  experience.


250


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


But  before  considering  in  what  ways  a  disci¬
plined  soul  might  make  its  peace  with  reality,  we
may  consider  what  an  undisciplined  soul  in  the
first  instance  desires ;  and  from  this  starting-
point  we  may  trace  her  chastening  and  educa¬
tion,  observing  the  ideal  compensations  which
may  console  her  for  lost  illusions.


CHAPTER  XIV


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


In  order  to  give  the  will  to  live  frank  and  direct
satisfaction,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  solve
Olympian  the  problem  of  perpetual  motion  in  the
immortality  animal  body,  as  nature  has  approxi-

the  first  ideal.  ,  ^  ,

mately  solved  it  m  the  solar  system.
Nutrition  should  have  continually  repaired  all
waste,  so  that  the  cycle  of  youth  and  age  might
have  repeated  itself  yearly  in  every  individual,  like
summer  and  winter  on  the  earth.  Nor  are  some
hints  of  such  an  equilibrium  altogether  wanting.
Convalescence,  sudden  good  fortune,  a  belated
love,  and  even  the  April  sunshine  or  morning  air,
bring  about  a  certain  rejuvenescence  in  man  pro¬
phetic  of  what  is  not  ideally  impossible — perpetu¬
ity  and  constant  reinforcement  in  his  vital  powers.
Had  nature  furnished  the  elixir  of  life,  or  could
art  have  discovered  it,  the  whole  face  of  human
society  would  have  been  changed.  The  earth  once
full,  no  more  children  would  have  been  begotten
and  parental  instincts  would  have  been  atrophied
for  want  of  function.  All  men  would  have  been
contemporaries  and,  having  all  time  before  them
for  travel  and  experiment,  would  have  allied  them¬
selves  eventually  with  what  was  most  congenial  to

251


252


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


them  and  would  have  come  to  be  bound  only  by
free  and  friendly  ties.  They  would  all  have  been
well  known  and  would  have  acted  perpetually  in
their  ultimate  and  true  character,  like  the  immor¬
tal  gods.  One  might  have  loved  fixity,  like  Hestia,
and  another  motion,  like  Hermes;  a  third  might
have  been  untiring  in  the  plastic  arts,  like  He¬
phaestus,  or,  like  Apollo,  in  music;  while  the  in¬
finite  realms  of  mathematics  and  philosophy  would
have  lain  open  to  spirits  of  a  quality  not  repre¬
sented  in  Homer’s  pantheon.

That  man’s  primary  and  most  satisfying  ideal
is  something  of  this  sort  is  clear  in  itself,  and
attested  by  mythology;  for  the  great  use  of  the
gods  is  that  they  interpret  the  human  heart  to
us,  and  help  us,  while  we  conceive  them,  to  dis¬
cover  our  inmost  ambition  and,  while  we  emulate
them,  to  pursue  it.  Christian  fancy,  because  of  its
ascetic  meagreness  and  fear  of  life,  has  not  known
how  to  fill  out  the  picture  of  heaven  and  has  left
it  mystical  and  vague;  but  whatever  paradise  it  has
ventured  to  imagine  has  been  modelled  on  the
same  primary  ideal.  It  has  represented  a  society
of  eternal  beings  among  which  there  was  no  mar¬
riage  nor  giving  in  marriage  and  where  each  found
his  congenial  mansion  and  that  perfected  activity
which  brings  inward  peace.

After  this  easy  fashion  were  death  and  birth
conquered  in  the  myths,  which  truly  interpreted
the  will  to  live  according  to  its  primary  intention,
but  in  reality  such  direct  satisfaction  was  impossi-


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


253


ble.  A  total  defeat,  on  the  other  hand,  would  have
extinguished  the  will  itself  and  obliterated  every
human  impulse  seeking  expression.  Man’s  exist¬
ence  is  proof  enough  that  nature  was  not  altogether
unpropitious,  but  offered,  in  an  unlooked-for  di¬
rection,  some  thoroughfare  to  the  soul.  Round¬
about  imperfect  methods  were  discovered  by  which
something  at  least  of  what  was  craved  might  be
secured.  The  individual  perished,  yet  not  without
having  segregated  and  detached  a  certain  portion
of  himself  capable  of  developing  a  second  body  and
mind.  The  potentialities  of  this  seminal  portion,
having  been  liberated  long  after  the  parent  body
had  begun  to  feel  the  shock  of  the  world,  could
reach  full  expression  after  the  parent  body  had
begun  to  decay;  and  the  offspring  needed  not  itself
to  succumb  before  it  had  launched  a  third  gener¬
ation.  A  cyclical  life  or  arrested  death,  a  contin¬
ual  motion  by  little  successive  explosions,  could
thus  establish  itself  and  could  repeat  from  gen¬
eration  to  generation  a  process  not  unlike  nutri¬
tion;  only  that,  while  in  nutrition  the  individual
form  remains  and  the  inner  substance  is  renewed
insensibly,  in  reproduction  the  form  is  renewed
openly  and  the  inner  substance  is  insensibly  con¬
tinuous.

Reproduction  seems,  from  the  will's  point  of
its  indirect  view,  a  marvellous  expedient  involving

byi^produc-  a  cllrious  mixture  of  failure  and  suc¬
tion.  cess.  The  individual,  who  alone  is  the

seat  and  principle  of  will,  is  thereby  sacrificed,


254


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


so  that  reproduction  is  no  response  to  his  original
hopes  and  aspirations;  yet  in  a  double  way  he  is
enticed  and  persuaded  to  be  almost  satisfied:  first,
in  that  so  like  a  counterfeit  of  himself  actually
survives,  a  creature  to  which  all  his  ideal  interests
may  be  transmitted;  and  secondly,  because  a  new
and  as  it  were  a  rival  aim  is  now  insinuated  into
his  spirit.  For  the  impulse  toward  reproduction
has  now  become  no  less  powerful,  even  if  less  con¬
stant,  than  the  impulse  toward  nutrition ;  in  other
words,  the  will  to  live  finds  itself  in  the  uncon¬
genial  yet  inevitable  company  of  the  will  to  have
an  heir.  Reproduction  thus  partly  entertains  the
desire  to  be  immortal  by  giving  it  a  vicarious  ful¬
filment,  and  partly  cancels  it  by  adding  an  im¬
pulse  and  joy  which,  when  you  think  of  it,  accepts
mortality.  For  love,  whether  sexual,  parental,  or
fraternal,  is  essentially  sacrificial,  and  prompts  a
man  to  give  his  life  for  his  friends.  In  thus
losing  his  life  gladly  he  in  a  sense  finds  it  anew,
since  it  has  now  become  a  part  of  his  function  and
ideal  to  yield  his  place  to  others  and  to  live  after¬
wards  only  in  them.  While  the  primitive  and  ani¬
mal  side  of  him  may  continue  to  cling  to  existence
at  all  hazards  and  to  find  the  thought  of  extinction
intolerable,  his  reason  and  finer  imagination  will
build  a  new  ideal  on  reality  better  understood,  and
be  content  that  the  future  he  looks  to  should  be
enjoyed  by  others.  When  we  consider  such  a  natu¬
ral  transformation  and  discipline  of  the  will,  when
we  catch  even  a  slight  glimpse  of  nature's  resources


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


255


and  mysteries,  how  thin  and  verbal  those  belated  1
hopes  must  seem  which  would  elude  death  and
abolish  sacrifice!  Such  puerile  dreams  not  only
miss  the  whole  pathos  of  human  life,  but  ignore
those  specifically  mortal  virtues  which  might  con-  ,
sole  us  for  not  being  so  radiantly  divine  as  we
may  at  first  have  thought  ourselves.  Nature,  in
denying  us  perennial  youth,  has  at  least  invited
us  to  become  unselfish  and  noble.

A  first  shift  in  aspiration,  a  capacity  for  radical
altruism,  thus  supervenes  upon  the  lust  to  live  and
accompanies  parental  and  social  interests.  The
new  ideal,  however,  can  never  entirely  obliterate
the  old  and  primary  one,  because  the  initial  func¬
tions  which  the  old  Adam  exclusively  represented
remain  imbedded  in  the  new  life,  and  are  its  phys¬
ical  basis.  If  the  nutritive  soul  ceased  to  operate,
the  reproductive  soul  could  never  arise;  to  be  al¬
truistic  we  must  first  be,  and  spiritual  interests
can  never  abolish  or  cancel  the  material  existence
on  which  they  are  grafted.  The  consequence  is
that  death,  even  when  circumvented  by  reproduc¬
tion  and  relieved  by  surviving  impersonal  interests,
remains  an  essential  evil.  It  may  be  accepted  as
inevitable,  and  the  goods  its  intrusion  leaves  stand¬
ing  may  be  heartily  appreciated  and  pursued;  but
something  pathetic  and  incomplete  will  always  at¬
tach  to  a  life  that  looks  to  its  own  termination.

The  effort  of  physical  existence  is  not  to  accom¬
plish  anything  definite  but  merely  to  persist  for
ever.  The  will  has  its  first  law  of  motion,  corre-


256


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sponding  to  that  of  matter;  its  initial  tendency  is
to  continue  to  operate  in  the  given  direction  and
in  the  given  manner.  Inertia  is,  in  this  sense,  the
essence  of  vitality.  To  be  driven  from  that  per¬
petual  course  is  somehow  to  be  checked,  and  an
external  and  hostile  force  is  required  to  change
a  habit  or  an  instinct  as  much  as  to  deflect  a  star.
Indeed,  nutrition  itself,  hunting,  feeding,  and  di¬
gestion,  are  forced  activities,  and  the  basis  of  pas¬
sions  not  altogether  congenial  nor  ideal.  Hunger
is  an  incipient  faintness  and  agony,  and  an  animal
that  needs  to  hunt,  gnaw,  and  digest  is  no  immor¬
tal,  free,  or  essentially  victorious  creature.  His
will  is  already  driven  into  by-paths  and  expedi¬
ents;  his  primitive  beatific  vision  has  to  be  inter¬
rupted  by  remedial  action  to  restore  it  for  a  while,
since  otherwise  it  would  obviously  degenerate  rap¬
idly  through  all  stages  of  distress  until  its  total
extinction.

The  tasks  thus  imposed  upon  the  protoplasmic
will  raise  it,  we  may  say,  to  a  higher  level;  to  hunt
Moral  is  better  sport,  and  more  enlightening,

of  this  com-  than  i°  lie  imbibing  sunshine  and  air;
promise.  and  to  eat  is,  we  may  well  think,  a  more
positive  and  specific  pleasure  than  merely  to  be.
Such  judgments,  however,  show  a  human  bias.
They  arise  from  incapacity  to  throw  off  acquired
organs.  Those  necessities  which  have  led  to  the
forms  of  life  which  we  happen  to  exemplify,  and
in  terms  of  which  our  virtues  are  necessarily  ex¬
pressed,  seem  to  us,  in  retrospect,  happy  necessi-


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


257


ties,  since  without  them  our  conventional  goods
would  not  have  come  to  appeal  to  us.  These  con¬
ventional  goods,  however,  are  only  compromises
with  evil,  and  the  will  would  never  have  taken  to
pursuing  them  if  it  had  not  been  dislodged  and
beaten  back  from  its  primary  aims.  Even  food  is,
for  this  reason,  no  absolute  blessing;  it  is  only  the
first  and  most  necessary  of  comforts,  of  restora¬
tions,  of  truces  and  reprieves  in  that  battle  with
death  in  which  an  ultimate  defeat  is  too  plainly
inevitable;  for  the  pitcher  that  goes  often  to  the
well  is  at  last  broken,  and  a  creature  that  is  forced
to  resist  his  inward  collapse  by  adventitious  aids
will  some  day  find  that  these  aids  have  failed  him,
and  that  inward  dissolution  has  become,  for  some
mechanical  reason,  quite  irresistible.  It  is  there¬
fore  not  only  the  lazy  or  mystical  will  that  chafes
at  the  need  of  material  supports  and  deprecates
anxieties  about  the  morrow;  the  most  conventional
and  passionate  mind,  when  it  attains  any  refine¬
ment,  confesses  the  essential  servitude  involved  in
such  preoccupations  by  concealing  or  ignoring
them  as  much  as  may  be.  We  study  to  eat  as
if  we  were  not  ravenous,  to  win  as  if  we  were
willing  to  lose,  and  to  treat  personal  wants  in
general  as  merely  compulsory  and  uninteresting
matters.  Why  dwell,  we  say  to  ourselves,  on  our
stammerings  and  failures?  The  intent  is  all,  and
the  bungling  circumlocutions  we  may  be  driven  to
should  be  courteously  ignored,  like  a  stammerer’s
troubles,  when  once  our  meaning  has  been  conveyed.


258


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Even  animal  passions  are,  in  this  way,  after¬
thoughts  and  expedients,  and  although  in  a  brutal
age  they  seem  to  make  up  the  whole  of  life,  later
it  appears  that  they  would  he  gladly  enough  out¬
grown,  did  the  material  situation  permit  it.  In¬
tellectual  life  returns,  in  its  freedom,  to  the  atti¬
tude  proper  to  primitive  will,  except  that  through
the  new  machinery  underlying  reason  a  more
stable  equilibrium  has  been  established  with  ex¬
ternal  forces,  and  the  freedom  originally  absolute
has  become  relative  to  certain  underlying  ad¬
justments,  adjustments  which  may  be  ignored
but  cannot  be  abandoned  with  impunity.  Orig¬
inal  action,  as  seen  in  the  vegetable,  is  purely
spontaneous.  On  the  animal  level  instrumen¬
tal  action  is  added  and  chiefly  attended  to,  so
that  the  creature,  without  knowing  what  it  lives
for,  finds  attractive  tasks  and  a  sort  of  glory  in
the  chase,  in  love,  and  in  labour.  In  the  Life  of
Reason  this  instrumental  activity  is  retained,  for
it  is  a  necessary  basis  for  human  prosperity  and
power,  but  the  value  of  life  is  again  sought  in  the
supervening  free  activity  which  that  adjustment
to  physical  forces,  or  dominion  over  them,  has
made  possible  on  a  larger  scale.  Every  free  activ¬
ity  would  gladly  persist  for  ever;  and  if  any  be
found  that  involves  and  aims  at  its  own  arrest  or
transformation,  that  activity  is  thereby  proved  to
be  instrumental  and  servile,  imposed  from  without
and  not  ideal.

Not  only  is  man’s  original  effort  aimed  at  living


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


269


for  ever  in  his  own  person,  but,  even  if  he  could
renounce  that  desire,  the  dream  of  being  repre-
Bven  sented  perpetually  by  posterity  is  no

vicarious  Less  doomed.  Reproduction,  like  nu-

intrinsically  trition,  is  a  device  not  ultimately  suc-
impossibie.  cessful.  If  extinction  does  not  defeat

it,  evolution  will.  Doubtless  the  fertility  of  what¬
ever  substance  may  have  produced  us  will  not  be
exhausted  in  this  single  effort;  a  potentiality  that
has  once  proved  efficacious  and  been  actualised  in
life,  though  it  should  sleep,  will  in  time  revive
again.  In  some  form  and  after  no  matter  what
intervals,  nature  may  be  expected  always  to  pos¬
sess  consciousness.  But  beyond  this  planet  and
apart  from  the  human  race,  experience  is  too  little
imaginable  to  be  interesting.  No  definite  plan  or
ideal  of  ours  can  find  its  realisation  except  in  our¬
selves.  Accordingly,  a  vicarious  physical  immor¬
tality  always  remains  an  unsatisfactory  issue;  what
is  thus  to  be  preserved  is  but  a  counterfeit  of  our
being,  and  even  that  counterfeit  is  confronted  by
omens  of  a  total  extinction  more  or  less  remote.
A  note  of  failure  and  melancholy  must  always
dominate  in  the  struggle  against  natural  death.

This  defeat  is  not  really  problematical,  or  to  be
eluded  by  reviving  ill-digested  hopes  resting  en¬
tirely  on  ignorance,  an  ignorance  which  these  hopes
will  wish  to  make  eternal.  We  need  not  wait  for
our  total  death  to  experience  dying;  we  need  not
borrow  from  observation  of  others'  demise  a  proph¬
ecy  of  our  own  extinction.  Every  moment  cele-


260


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


brates  obsequies  over  the  virtues  of  its  predeces¬
sor;  and  the  possession  of  memory,  by  which  we
somehow  survive  in  representation,  is  the  most  un¬
mistakable  proof  that  we  are  perishing  in  reality.
In  endowing  us  with  memory,  nature  has  revealed
to  us  a  truth  utterly  unimaginable  to  the  unflective
creation,  the  truth  of  mortality.  Everything  moves
in  the  midst  of  death,  because  it  indeed  moves;
but  it  falls  into  the  pit  unawares  and  by  its
own  action  unmakes  and  disestablishes  itself,
until  a  wonderful  visionary  faculty  is  added,
so  that  a  ghost  remains  of  what  has  perished  to
reveal  that  lapse  and  at  the  same  time  in  a  certain
sense  to  neutralise  it.  The  more  we  reflect,  the
more  we  live  in  memory  and  idea,  the  more  con¬
vinced  and  penetrated  we  shall  be  by  the  ex¬
perience  of  death;  yet,  without  our  knowing  it,

intellectual  perhaps,  this  very  conviction  and  ex-
victory  over  perience  will  have  raised  us,  in  a  way,
change.  above  mortality.  That  was  a  heroic  and
divine  oracle  which,  in  informing  us  of  our  decay,
made  us  partners  of  the  gods’  eternity,  and  by
giving  us  knowledge  poured  into  us,  to  that  ex¬
tent,  the  serenity  and  balm  of  truth.  As  it  is
memory  that  enables  us  to  feel  that  we  are  dying
and  to  know  that  everything  actual  is  in  flux,  so  it
is  memory  that  opens  to  us  an  ideal  immortality,
unacceptable  and  meaningless  to  the  old  Adam,
but  genuine  in  its  own  way  and  undeniably  true.
It  is  an  immortality  in  representation — a  repre¬
sentation  which  envisages  things  in  their  truth  as


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


261


they  have  in  their  own  day  possessed  themselves
in  reality.  It  is  no  subterfuge  or  superstitious
effrontery,  called  to  disguise  or  throw  off  the  les¬
sons  of  experience;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  experience
itself,  reflection  itself,  and  knowledge  of  mortality.
Memory  does  not  reprieve  or  postpone  the  changes
which  it  registers,  nor  does  it  itself  possess  a  per¬
manent  duration;  it  is,  if  possible,  less  stable  and
more  mobile  than  primary  sensation.  It  is,  in  point
of  existence,  only  an  internal  and  complex  kind  of
sensibility.  But  in  intent  and  by  its  significance
it  plunges  to  the  depths  of  time;  it  looks  still  on
the  departed  and  bears  witness  to  the  truth  that,
though  absent  from  this  part  of  experience,  and
incapable  of  returning  to  life,  they  nevertheless
existed  once  in  their  own  right,  were  as  living  and
actual  as  experience  is  to-day,  and  still  help  to
make  up,  in  company  with  all  past,  present,  and
future  mortals,  the  filling  and  value  of  the  world.

As  the  pathos  and  heroism  of  life  consists  in  ac¬
cepting  as  an  opportunity  the  fate  that  makes  our
own  death,  partial  or  total,  serviceable  to  others,
so  the  glory  of  life  consists  in  accepting  the  knowl¬
edge  of  natural  death  as  an  opportunity  to  live
in  the  spirit.  The  sacrifice,  the  self-surrender,  1
remains  real;  for,  though  the  compensation  is  real,
too,  and  at  moments,  perhaps,  apparently  over¬
whelming,  it  is  always  incomplete  and  leaves  be¬
neath  an  incurable  sorrow.  Yet  life  can  never  con-  )
tradict  its  basis  or  reach  satisfactions  essentially
excluded  by  its  own  conditions.  Progress  lies  in  1


262


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


moving  forward  from  the  given  situation,  and  sat¬
isfying  as  well  as  may  be  the  interests  that  exist.
And  if  some  initial  demand  has  proved  hopeless,
there  is  the  greater  reason  for  cultivating  other
sources  of  satisfaction,  possibly  more  abundant  and
lasting.  Now,  reflection  is  a  vital  function;  mem¬
ory  and  imagination  have  to  the  full  the  rhythm
and  force  of  life.  But  these  faculties,  in  envisaging
The  glory  the  past  or  the  ideal,  envisage  the  eter-
of  nal,  and  the  man  in  whose  mind  they

predominate  is  to  that  extent  detached  in  his  affec¬
tions  from  the  world  of  flux,  from  himself,  and
from  his  personal  destiny.  This  detachment  will
not  make  him  infinitely  long-lived,  nor  absolutely
happy,  but  it  may  render  him  intelligent  and  just,
and  may  open  to  him  all  intellectual  pleasures  and
all  human  sympathies.

There  is  accordingly  an  escape  from  death  open
to  man;  one  not  found  by  circumventing  nature,
but  by  making  use  of  her  own  expedients  in  cir¬
cumventing  her  imperfections.  Memory,  nay,  per¬
ception  itself,  is  a  first  stage  in  this  escape,  which
coincides  with  the  acquisition  and  possession  of
reason.  When  the  meaning  of  successive  percep¬
tions  is  recovered  with  the  last  of  them,  when  a
survey  is  made  of  objects  whose  constitutive  sensa¬
tions  first  arose  independently,  this  synthetic  mo¬
ment  contains  an  object  raised  above  time  on  a
pedestal  of  reflection,  a  thought  indefeasibly  true
in  its  ideal  deliverance,  though  of  course  fleeting
in  its  psychic  existence.  Existence  is  essentially-


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


263


temporal  and  life  foredoomed  to  be  mortal,  since
its  basis  is  a  process  and  an  opposition;  it  floats  in
the  stream  of  time,  never  to  return,  never  to  be
recovered  or  repossessed.  But  ever  since  substance
became  at  some  sensitive  point  intelligent  and  re¬
flective,  ever  since  time  made  room  and  pause  for
memory,  for  history,  for  the  consciousness  of  time,
a  god,  as  it  were,  became  incarnate  in  mortality
and  some  vision  of  truth,  some  self-forgetful  satis¬
faction,  became  a  heritage  that  moment  could  trans¬
mit  to  moment  and  man  to  man.  This  heritage
is  humanity  itself,  the  presence  of  immortal  reason
in  creatures  that  perish.  Apprehension,  which
makes  man  so  like  a  god,  makes  him  in  one  respect
immortal;  it  quickens  his  numbered  moments  with
a  vision  of  what  never  dies,  the  truth  of  those  mo¬
ments  and  their  inalienable  values.

To  participate  in  this  vision  is  to  participate  at
once  in  humanity  and  in  divinity,  since  all  other
Reason  makes  bonds  are  material  and  perishable,  but
man’s  the  bond  between  two  thoughts  that

divinity,  have  grasped  the  same  truth,  of  two

instants  that  have  caught  the  same  beauty,  is  a
spiritual  and  imperishable  bond.  It  is  imperish¬
able  simply  because  it  is  ideal  and  resident  merely
in  import  and  intent.  The  two  thoughts,  the  two
instants,  remain  existentially  different;  were  they
not  two  they  could  not  come  from  different  quar¬
ters  to  unite  in  one  meaning  and  to  behold  one
object  in  distinct  and  conspiring  acts  of  apprehen¬
sion.  Being  independent  in  existence,  they  can


264


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


be  united  by  the  identity  of  their  burden,  by  the
common  worship,  so  to  speak,  of  the  same  god.
Were  this  ideal  goal  itself  an  existence,  it  would
be  incapable  of  uniting  anything;  for  the  same
gulf  which  separated  the  two  original  minds  would
open  between  them  and  their  common  object.  But
being,  as  it  is,  purely  ideal,  it  can  become  the  meet¬
ing-ground  of  intelligences  and  render  their  union
ideally  eternal.  Among  the  physical  instruments
of  thought  there  may  be  rivalry  and  impact — the
two  thinkers  may  compete  and  clash — but  this  is
because  each  seeks  his  own  physical  survival  and
does  not  love  the  truth  stripped  of  its  accidental
associations  and  provincial  accent.  Doctors  dis¬
agree  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  truly  doctors,  but,
as  Plato  would  say,  seek,  like  sophists  and  wage-
earners,  to  circumvent  and  defeat  one  another.
The  conflict  is  physical  and  can  extend  to  the
subject-matter  only  in  so  far  as  this  is  tainted  by
individual  prejudice  and  not  wholly  lifted  from
the  sensuous  to  the  intellectual  plane.  In  the
ether  there  are  no  winds  of  doctrine.  The  intel¬
lect,  being  the  organ  and  source  of  the  divine,  is
divine  and  single;  if  there  were  many  sorts  of  in¬
tellect,  many  principles  of  perspective,  they  would
fix  and  create  incomparable  and  irrelevant  worlds.

|  Reason  is  one  in  that  it  gravitates  toward  an
object,  called  truth,  which  could  not  have  the
function  it  has,  of  being  a  focus  for  mental  activi¬
ties,  if  it  were  not  one  in  reference  to  the  opera¬
tions  which  converge  upon  it.


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


265


This  unity  in  truth,  as  in  reason,  is  of  course
functional  only,  not  physical  or  existential.  The
beats  of  thought  and  the  thinkers  are  innumerable;
indefinite,  too,  the  variations  to  which  their  en¬
dowment  and  habits  may  be  subjected.  But  the
condition  of  spiritual  communion  or  ideal  rele¬
vance  in  these  intelligences  is  their  possession  of
a  method  and  grammar  essentially  identical.  Lan¬
guage,  for  example,  is  significant  in  proportion  to
the  constancy  in  meaning  which  words  and  locu¬
tions  preserve  in  a  speaker’s  mind  at  various  times,
or  in  the  minds  of  various  persons.  This  constancy
is  never  absolute.  Therefore  language  is  never
wholly  significant,  never  exhaustively  intelligible.
There  is  always  mud  in  the  well,  if  we  have  drawn
up  enough  water.  Yet  in  peaceful  rivers,  though
they  flow,  there  is  an  appreciable  degree  of  trans-
lucency.  So,  from  moment  to  moment,  and  from
man  to  man,  there  is  an  appreciable  element  of
unanimity,  of  constancy  and  congruity  of  intent.
On  this  abstract  and  perfectly  identical  function
science  rests  together  with  every  rational  forma¬
tion.

The  same  function  is  the  seat  of  human  immor- ,
tality.  Reason  lifts  a  larger  or  smaller  element  in
and  his  each  man  to  the  plane  of  ideality  ac-
immortaiity.  cording  as  reason  more  or  less  thor¬
oughly  leavens  and  permeates  the  lump.  No  man
is  wholly  immortal,  as  no  philosophy  is  wholly  true
and  no  language  wholly  intelligible;  but  only  in  so
far  as  intelligible  is  a  language  a  language  rather


266


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


than  a  noise,  only  in  so  far  as  true  is  a  philosophy
more  than  a  vent  for  cerebral  humours,  and  only
in  so  far  as  a  man  is  rational  and  immortal  is  he
a  man  and  not  a  sensorium.

It  is  hard  to  convince  people  that  they  have
such  a  gift  as  intelligence.  If  they  perceive  its
animal  basis  they  cannot  conceive  its  ideal  affini¬
ties  or  understand  what  is  meant  by  calling  it
divine;  if  they  perceive  its  ideality  and  see  the
immortal  essences  that  swum  into  its  ken,  they
hotly  deny  that  it  is  an  animal  faculty,  and  invent
ultramundane  places  and  bodiless  persons  in  which
it  is  to  reside;  as  if  those  celestial  substances  could
be,  in  respect  to  thought,  any  less  material  than
matter  or,  in  respect  to  vision  and  life,  any  less
instrumental  than  bodily  organs.  It  never  occurs
to  them  that  if  nature  has  added  intelligence  to
animal  life  it  is  because  they  belong  together.  In¬
telligence  is  a  natural  emanation  of  vitality.  If
eternity  could  exist  otherwise  than  as  a  vision  in
time,  eternity  would  have  no  meaning  for  men  in
the  world,  while  the  world,  men,  and  time  would
have  no  vocation  or  status  in  eternity.  The  travail
of  existence  wrould  be  without  excuse,  without  issue
or  consummation,  while  the  conceptions  of  truth
and  of  perfection  wrould  be  without  application  to
experience,  pure  dreams  about  things  preternatu¬
ral  and  unreal,  vacantly  conceived,  and  illogically
supposed  to  have  something  to  do  with  living  is¬
sues.  But  truth  and  perfection,  for  the  very  reason
that  they  are  not  problematic  existences  but  in-


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


267


herent  ideals,  cannot  be  banished  from  discourse.
Experience  may  lose  any  of  its  data;  it  cannot
lose,  while  it  endures,  the  terms  with  which  it  op¬
erates  in  becoming  experience.  Now,  truth  is  rele¬
vant  to  every  opinion  which  looks  to  truth  for  its
standard,  and  perfection  is  envisaged  in  every  cry
for  relief,  in  every  effort  at  betterment.  Opinions,
volitions,  and  passionate  refusals  fill  human  life.
So  that  when  the  existence  of  truth  is  denied,
truth  is  given  the  only  status  which  it  ever  re¬
quired — it  is  conceived.

Nor  can  any  better  defense  be  found  for  the
denial  that  nature  and  her  life  have  a  status  in
it  is  the  eternity.  This  statement  may  not  be

locus  of  an  understood,  but  if  grasped  at  all  it  will

not  be  questioned.  By  having  a  status
in  eternity  is  not  meant  being  parts  of  an  eternal
existence,  petrified  or  congealed  into  something
real  but  motionless.  What  is  meant  is  only  that
whatever  exists  in  time,  when  bathed  in  the  light
of  reflection,  acquires  an  indelible  character  and
discloses  irreversible  relations;  every  fact,  in  being
recognised,  takes  its  place  in  the  universe  of  dis¬
course,  in  that  ideal  sphere  of  truth  which  is  the
common  and  unchanging  standard  for  all  asser¬
tions.  Language,  science,  art,  religion,  and  all
ambitious  dreams  are  compacted  of  ideas.  Life
is  as  much  a  mosaic  of  notions  as  the  firmament
is  of  stars;  and  these  ideal  and  transpersonal  ob¬
jects,  bridging  time,  fixing  standards,  establishing
values,  constituting  the  natural  rewards  of  all  liv-


268


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


in g,  are  the  very  furniture  of  eternity,  the  goals
and  playthings  of  that  reason  which  is  an  instinct
in  the  heart  as  vital  and  spontaneous  as  any  other.
Or  rather,  perhaps,  reason  is  a  supervening  instinct
by  which  all  other  instincts  are  interpreted,  just
as  the  sensus  communis  or  transcendental  unity  of
psychology  is  a  faculty  by  which  all  perceptions
are  brought  face  to  face  and  compared.  So  that
immortality  is  not  a  privilege  reserved  for  a  part
only  of  experience,  but  rather  a  relation  pervading
every  part  in  varying  measure.  We  may,  in  leav¬
ing  the  subject,  mark  the  degrees  and  phases  of
this  idealisation.

Animal  sensation  is  related  to  eternity  only  by
the  truth  that  it  has  taken  place.  The  fact,  fleet-
Epicurean  ing  as  it  is,  is  registered  in  ideal  his-
immortaiity,  tory,  and  no  inventory  of  the  world’s

truth  riches,  no  true  confession  of  its  crimes,

of  existence.  Would  ever  be  complete  that  ignored

that  incident.  This  indefeasible  character  in  ex¬
perience  makes  a  first  sort  of  ideal  immortality,
one  on  which  those  rational  philosophers  like  to
dwell  who  have  not  speculation  enough  to  feel
quite  certain  of  any  other.  It  was  a  consolation
to  the  Epicurean  to  remember  that,  however  brief
and  uncertain  might  be  his  tenure  of  delight,  the
past  was  safe  and  the  present  sure.  “  He  lives
happy,”  says  Horace,  “  and  master  over  himself,
who  can  say  daily,  I  have  lived.  To-morrow  let
Jove  cover  the  sky  with  black  clouds  or  flood
it  with  sunshine;  he  shall  not  thereby  render


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


269


vain  what  lies  behind,  he  shall  not  delete  and
make  never  to  have  existed  what  once  the  hour
has  brought  in  its  flight.”  Such  self-concen¬
tration  and  hugging  of  the  facts  has  no  power
to  improve  them;  it  gives  to  pleasure  and  pain
an  impartial  eternity,  and  rather  tends  to  in¬
trench  in  sensuous  and  selfish  satisfactions  a
mind  that  has  lost  faith  in  reason  and  that
deliberately  ignores  the  difference  in  scope  and
dignity  which  exists  among  various  pursuits.  Yet
the  reflection  is  staunch  and  in  its  way  heroic;  it
meets  a  vague  and  feeble  aspiration,  that  looks  to
the  infinite,  with  a  just  rebuke;  it  points  to  real
satisfactions,  experienced  successes,  and  asks  us  to
be  content  with  the  fulfilment  of  our  own  wills.
If  you  have  seen  the  world,  if  you  have  played
your  game  and  won  it,  what  more  would  you  ask
for?  If  you  have  tasted  the  sweets  of  existence,
you  should  be  satisfied;  if  the  experience  has  been
bitter,  you  should  be  glad  that  it  comes  to  an  end.

Of  course,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is  a  primary
demand  in  man  which  death  and  mutation  con¬
tradict  flatly,  so  that  no  summons  to  cease  can
ever  be  obeyed  with  complete  willingness.  Even
the  suicide  trembles  and  the  ascetic  feels  the  stings
of  the  flesh.  It  is  the  part  of  philosophy,  however,
to  pass  over  those  natural  repugnances  and  over¬
lay  them  with  as  much  countervailing  rationality
as  can  find  lodgment  in  a  particular  mind.  The
Epicurean,  having  abandoned  politics  and  religion
and  being  afraid  of  any  far-reaching  ambition.


270


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


applied  philosophy  honestly  enough  to  what  re¬
mained.  Simple  and  healthy  pleasures  are  the
reward  of  simple  and  healthy  pursuits;  to  chafe
against  them  because  they  are  limited  is  to  import
a  foreign  and  disruptive  element  into  the  case;  a
healthy  hunger  has  its  limit,  and  its  satisfaction
reaches  a  natural  term.  Philosophy,  far  from
alienating  us  from  those  values,  should  teach  us
to  see  their  perfection  and  to  maintain  them  in
our  ideal.  In  other  words,  the  happy  filling  of
a  single  hour  is  so  much  gained  for  the  universe
at  large,  and  to  find  joy  and  sufficiency  in  the
flying  moment  is  perhaps  the  only  means  open  to
us  for  increasing  the  glory  of  eternity.

Moving  events,  wdiile  remaining  enshrined  in
this  fashion  in  their  permanent  setting,  may  con-
Logicai  tain  other  and  less  external  relations  to
immortality,  the  immutable.  They  may  represent  it.

objects  of  If  the  pleasures  of  sense  are  not  can-
thought.  celled  when  they  cease,  but  continue  to
satisfy  reason  in  that  they  once  satisfied  natural
desires,  much  more  will  the  pleasures  of  reflection
retain  their  worth,  when  we  consider  that  what
they  aspired  to  and  reached  was  no  momentary
physical  equilibrium  but  a  permanent  truth.  As
Archimedes,  measuring  the  hypothenuse,  was  lost
to  events,  being  engaged  in  an  event  of  much
greater  transcendence,  so  art  and  science  interrupt
the  sense  for  change  by  engrossing  attention  in  its
issues  and  its  laws.  Old  age  often  turns  pious  to
look  away  from  ruins  to  some  world  where  youth


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


271


endures  and  where  what  ought  to  have  been  is  not
overtaken  by  decay  before  it  has  quite  come  to
maturity.  Lost  in  such  abstract  contemplations,
the  mind  is  weaned  from  mortal  concerns.  It  for¬
gets  for  a  few  moments  a  world  in  which  it  has
so  little  more  to  do  and  so  much,  perhaps,  still
to  suffer.  As  a  sensation  of  pure  light  would  not
be  distinguishable  from  light  itself,  so  a  contem¬
plation  of  things  not  implicating  time  in  their
structure  becomes,  so  far  as  its  own  deliverance
goes,  a  timeless  existence.  Unconsciousness  of
temporal  conditions  and  of  the  very  flight  of  time
makes  the  thinker  sink  for  a  moment  into  identity
with  timeless  objects.  And  so  immortality,  in  a
second  ideal  sense,  touches  the  mind.

The  transitive  phases  of  consciousness,  however,
have  themselves  a  reference  to  eternal  things.

Ethical  They  yield  a  generous  enthusiasm  and

immortality,  jove  g00(j  which  is  richer  in  conso-

through  °

types  of  lation  than  either  Epicurean  self-con-

excellence.  centration  or  mathematical  ecstasy.

Events  are  more  interesting  than  the  terms  we
abstract  from  them,  and  the  forward  movement
of  the  will  is  something  more  intimately  real  than
is  the  catalogue  of  our  past  experiences.  Now  the
forward  movement  of  the  will  is  an  avenue  to  the
eternal.  What  would  you  have?  What  is  the  goal
of  your  endeavour?  It  must  be  some  success,  the
establishment  of  some  order,  the  expression  of
some  experience.  These  points  once  reached,  we
are  not  left  merely  with  the  satisfaction  of  ab-


272


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


stract  success  or  the  consciousness  of  ideal  immor¬
tality.  Being  natural  goals,  these  ideals  are  re¬
lated  to  natural  functions.  Their  attainment  does
not  exhaust  but  merely  liberates,  in  this  instance,
the  function  concerned,  and  so  marks  the  perpetual
point  of  reference  common  to  that  function  in
all  its  fluctuations.  Every  attainment  of  perfec¬
tion  in  an  art — as  for  instance  in  government —
makes  a  return  to  perfection  easier  for  posterity,
since  there  remains  an  enlightening  example,  to¬
gether  with  faculties  predisposed  by  discipline  to
recover  their  ancient  virtue.  The  better  a  man
evokes  and  realises  the  ideal  the  more  he  leads  the
life  that  all  others,  in  proportion  to  their  worth,
will  seek  to  live  after  him,  and  the  more  he  helps
them  to  live  in  that  nobler  fashion.  His  presence
in  the  society  of  immortals  thus  becomes,  so  to
speak,  more  pervasive.  He  not  only  vanquishes
time  by  his  own  rationality,  living  now  in  the  eter¬
nal,  but  he  continually  lives  again  in  all  rational
beings.

Since  the  ideal  has  this  perpetual  pertinence
to  mortal  struggles,  he  who  lives  in  the  ideal
and  leaves  it  expressed  in  society  or  in  art  en¬
joys  a  double  immortality.  The  eternal  has  ab¬
sorbed  him  while  he  lived,  and  when  he  is  dead  his
influence  brings  others  to  the  same  absorption,
making  them,  through  that  ideal  identity  with  the
best  in  him,  reincarnations  and  perennial  seats  of
all  in  him  which  he  could  rationally  hope  to  rescue
from  destruction.  He  can  say,  without  any  subter-


IDEAL  IMMORTALITY


273


fuge  or  desire  to  delude  himself,  that  he  shall  not
wholly  die;  for  he  will  have  a  better  notion  than
the  vulgar  of  what  constitutes  his  being.  By  be¬
coming  the  spectator  and  confessor  of  his  own
death  and  of  universal  mutation,  he  will  have  iden¬
tified  himself  with  what  is  spiritual  in  all  spirits
and  masterful  in  all  apprehension;  and  so  conceiv¬
ing  himself,  he  may  truly  feel  and  know  that  he
is  eternal.


CHAPTER  XV


CONCLUSION

The  preceding  analysis  of  religion,  although  it
is  illustrated  mainly  by  Christianity,  may  enable
us  in  a  general  way  to  distinguish  the  rational
goal  of  all  religious  life.  In  no  sphere  is  the  con¬
trast  clearer  between  wisdom  and  folly;  in  none,
perhaps,  has  there  been  so  much  of  both.  It  was
The  failure  a  prodigious  delusion  to  imagine  that
of  magic,  work  could  be  done  by  magic ;  and

the  desperate  appeal  which  human  weakness  has
made  to  prayer,  to  castigations,  to  miscellaneous
fantastic  acts,  in  the  hope  of  thereby  bending
nature  to  greater  sympathy  with  human  necessi¬
ties,  is  a  pathetic  spectacle;  all  the  more  pathetic
in  that  here  the  very  importunity  of  evil,  which
distracted  the  mind  and  allowed  it  no  choice  or
deliberation,  prevented  very  often  those  practical
measures  which,  if  lighted  upon,  would  have  in¬
stantly  relieved  the  situation.  Religion  when  it
has  tried  to  do  man’s  work  for  him  has  not  only
cheated  hope,  but  consumed  energy  and  drawn
away  attention  from  the  true  means  of  success.

No  less  useless  and  retarding  has  been  the

274


CONCLUSION


275


effort  to  give  religion  the  function  of  science.
Mythology,  in  excogitating  hidden  dramatic  causes
and  of  for  natural  phenomena,  or  in  attrib-
mythoiogy.  uting  events  to  the  human  values
which  they  might  prevent  or  secure,  has  pro¬
foundly  perverted  and  confused  the  intellect;  it
has  delayed  and  embarrassed  the  discovery  of
natural  forces,  at  the  same  time  fostering  pre¬
sumptions  which,  on  being  exploded,  tended  to
plunge  men,  by  revulsion,  into  an  artificial  de¬
spair.  At  the  same  time  this  experiment  in
Their  mythology  involved  wonderful  crea-

imaginative  tions  which  have  a  poetic  value  of
value*  their  own,  to  offset  their  uselessness  in

some  measure  and  the  obstruction  they  have  oc¬
casioned.  In  imagining  human  agents  behind
every  appearance  fancy  has  given  appearances
some  kinship  to  human  life;  it  has  made  nature
a  mass  of  hieroglyphics  and  enlarged  to  that  ex¬
tent  the  means  of  human  expression.  While  ob¬
jects  and  events  were  capriciously  moralised,  the
mind’s  own  plasticity  has  been  developed  by  its
great  exercise  in  self -projection.  To  imagine
himself  a  thunder-cloud  or  a  river,  thQ  dispenser
of  silent  benefits  and  the  contriver  cf  deep-
seated  universal  harmonies,  has  actually  stimu¬
lated  man’s  moral  nature :  he  has  grown  larger  by
thinking  himself  so  large.

Through  the  dense  cloud  of  false  thought  and
bad  habit  in  which  religion  thus  wrapped  the
world,  some  rays  broke  through  from  the  begin-


276


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ning;  for  mythology  and  magic  expressed  life
and  sought  to  express  its  conditions.  Human
needs  and  human  ideals  went  forth  in  these  forms
to  solicit  and  to  conquer  the  world;  and  since
these  imaginative  methods,  for  their  very  inepti¬
tude,  rode  somewhat  lightly  over  particular  issues
and  envisaged  rather  distant  goods,  it  was  possi¬
ble  through  them  to  give  aspiration  and  reflection
greater  scope  than  the  meaner  exigencies  of  life
would  have  permitted.  Where  custom  ruled  mor¬
als  and  a  narrow  empiricism  bounded  the  field  of
knowledge,  it  was  partly  a  blessing  that  imagina¬
tion  should  be  given  an  illegitimate  sway.  With¬
out  misunderstanding,  there  might  have  been  no

understanding  at  all;  without  confidence  in  su¬
pernatural  support,  the  heart  might  never  have
uttered  its  own  oracles.  So  that  in  close  associa¬
tion  with  superstition  and  fable  we  find  piety  and
spirituality  entering  the  world.

Rational  religion  has  these  two  phases:  piety,
or  loyalty  to  necessary  conditions,  and  spiritual-

Piety  and  ity,  or  devotion  to  ideal  ends.  These
spirituality  simple  sanctities  make  the  core  of  all
justified.  the  others.  Piety  drinks  at  the  deep,
elemental  sources  of  power  and  order:  it  studies
nature,  honours  the  past,  appropriates  and  con¬
tinues  its  mission.  Spirituality  uses  the  strength
thus  acquired,  remodelling  all  it  receives,  and
looking  to  the  future  and  the  ideal.  True  religion
is  entirely  human  and  political,  as  was  that  of  the
ancient  Hebrews,  Romans,  and  Greeks.  Super-


CONCLUSION


277


natural  machinery  is  either  symbolic  of  natural
conditions  and  moral  aims  or  else  is  worthless.

There  is  one  other  phase  or  possible  overtone
of  religion  about  which  a  word  might  be  added  in
Mysticism  a  conclusion.  What  is  called  mysticism
pnmordiai  a  ceT^n  genial  loosening  of  con-

feeiing.  vention,  whether  rational  or  mythical;
the  mystic  smiles  at  science  and  plays  with  theol¬
ogy,  undermining  both  by  force  of  his  insight  and
inward  assurance.  He  is  all  faith,  all  love,  all
vision,  but  he  is  each  of  these  things  in  vacuo,  and
in  the  absence  of  any  object.

Mysticism  can  exist,  in  varied  degrees,  at  any
stage  of  rational  development.  Its  presence  is
therefore  no  indication  of  the  worth  or  worthless¬
ness  of  its  possessor.  This  circumstance  tends  to
obscure  its  nature,  which  would  otherwise  be  ob¬
vious  enough.  Seeing  the  greatest  saints  and
philosophers  grow  mystical  in  their  highest
flights,  an  innocent  observer  might  imagine  that
mysticism  was  an  ultimate  attitude,  which  only
his  own  incapacity  kept  him  from  understanding.
But  exactly  the  opposite  is  the  case.  Mysticism  is  |
the  most  primitive  of  feelings  and  only  visits
formed  minds  in  moments  of  intellectual  arrest
and  dissolution.  It  can  exist  in  a  child,  very  like¬
ly  in  an  animal;  indeed,  to  parody  a  phrase  of
Hegel’s,  the  only  pure  mystics  are  the  brutes.
WTien  articulation  fails  in  the  face  of  experience;
when  instinct  guides  without  kindling  any  pro¬
phetic  idea  to  which  action  may  be  inwardly  re-


278


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


f erred ;  when  life  and  hope  and  joy  flow  through
the  soul  from  an  unknown  region  to  an  unknown
end,  then  consciousness  is  mystical.  Such  an  ex¬
perience  may  suffuse  the  best  equipped  mind,  if
its  primordial  energies,  its  will  and  emotions,
much  outrun  its  intelligence.  Just  as  at  the  be¬
ginning  pure  inexperience  may  flounder  intellec¬
tually  and  yet  may  have  a  sense  of  not  going
astray,  a  sense  of  being  carried  by  earth  and  sky,
by  contagion  and  pleasure,  into  its  animal  para¬
dise;  so  at  the  end,  if  the  vegetative  forces  still
predominate,  all  articulate  experience  may  be
lifted  up  and  carried  down-stream  bodily  by  the
elementary  flood  rising  from  beneath.

Every  religion,  all  science,  all  art,  is  accord¬
ingly  subject  to  incidental  mysticism;  but  in  no

it  may  recur  case  can  mysticism  stand  alone  and  be
at  any  stage  the  body  or  basis  of  anything.  In  the

of  culture.  -i-  •  p  «  -p«  •  ■  •  •«  x

Life  of  Reason  it  is,  it  I  may  say  so,  a.
normal  disease,  a  recurrent  manifestation  of  lost
equilibrium  and  interrupted  growth ;  but  in
these  pauses,  when  the  depths  rise  to  the  surface
and  obliterate  what  scratches  culture  may  have
made  there,  the  rhythm  of  life  may  be  more  pow¬
erfully  felt,  and  the  very  disappearance  of  intel¬
lect  may  be  taken  for  a  revelation^  Both  in  a  so¬
cial  and  a  psychological  sense  revelations  come
from  beneath,  like  earthquakes  and  volcanic  erup¬
tions;  and  while  they  fill  the  spirit  with  con¬
tempt  for  those  fragile  structures  which  they  so
easily  overwhelm,  they  are  utterly  incapable  of


CONCLUSION


279


raising  anything  on  the  ruins.  If  they  leave  some¬
thing  standing  it  is  only  by  involuntary  accident,
and  if  they  prepare  the  soil  for  anything,  it  is
commonly  only  for  wild-flowers  and  weeds.
Revelations  are  seldom  beneficent,  therefore,  un¬
less  there  is  more  evil  in  the  world  to  destroy  than
good  to  preserve;  and  mysticism,  under  the  same
circumstances,  may  also  liberate  and  relieve  the
spirit.

The  feelings  which  in  mysticism  rise  to  the
surface  and  speak  in  their  own  name  are  simply
the  ancient,  overgrown  feelings  of  vitality,  de¬
pendence,  inclusion;  they  are  the  background  of
consciousness  coming  forward  and  blotting  out
the  scene.  What  mysticism  destroys  is,  in  a  sense,
its  only  legitimate  expression.  The  Life  of  Rea¬
son,  in  so  far  as  it  is  life,  contains  the  mystic’s
primordial  assurances,  and  his  rudimentary  joys;
i?  ^  •  hut  in  so  far  as  it  is  rational  it  has

rorm  gives


substance  its  discovered  what  those  assurances  rest
Ufe  and  value.  on^  wkat  direction  they  may  be

trusted  to  support  action  and  thought;  and  it  has
given  those  joys  distinction  and  connexion,  turn¬
ing  a  dumb  momentary  ecstasy  into  a  many-col¬
oured  and  natural  happiness.


I


•  *


1
