The Life of Reason, Vol. II: Reason in Society (George Santayana, 1905)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/lifeofreasonorph02sant_0). Vol. II: reason in society — love, the family, industry, government, and war.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  UNIVERSITY
OF  ILLINOIS
LIBRARY


From  the  library  of
Hugh  Mackay  Fletcher  *26
Presented  in  1932
By  Mrs.  Fletcher

191

5a5-e

V.2  ocro-fo


#


i'tl'LL,


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


BY  GEORGE  SANTAYANA


The  Life  of  Reason:  or  the  Phases  of
Human  Progress

I.  Introduction  and  Reason  in  Common  Sense

II.  Reason  in  Society

III.  Reason  in  Religion

IV.  Reason  in  Art

V.  Reason  in  Science

The  Sense  of  Beauty
Interpretations  of  Poetry  and  Religion
A  Hermit  of  Carmel  and  Other  Poems
Winds  of  Doctrine

Character  and  Opinion  in  the  United
States

Little  Essays  Drawn  from  the  Works  of
George  Santayana.  By  Logan  Pearsall
Smith,  with  the  collaboration  of  the  Author.
1 2  mo.


CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS


\


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

OR  THE

PHASES  OF  HUMAN  PROGRESS


BY

GEORGE  SANTAYANA


REASON  IN


€A.


%

SOCIETY


VJ.


<01


\


/  /V


T)  yap  vov  evepyeia  for)


NEW  YORK

CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS

1922


Copyright,  1905,  by
CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America


Published  February,  1905


7S  3zl


\  ^  ^

•<i

CONTENTS

BOOK  II.— RE ASON  IN  SOCIETY

CHAPTER  I

LOVE

Fluid  existences  have  none  but  ideal  goals. — Nutrition
and  reproduction. — Priority  of  the  latter. — Love  cele¬
brates  the  initial  triumph  of  form  and  is  deeply  ideal. —
Difficulty  in  describing  love. — One-sided  or  inverted
theories  about  it. — Sexual  functions  its  basis. — Structure
the  ground  of  faculty  and  faculty  of  duty. — Glory  of
animal  love. — Its  degradation  when  instincts  become
numerous  and  competitive. — Moral  censure  provoked. —
The  heart  alienated  from  the  world. — Childish  ideals. —
Their  light  all  focussed  on  the  object  of  love. — Three
environments  for  love. — Subjectivity  of  the  passion. —
Machinery  regulating  choice. — The  choice  unstable. — In¬
stinctive  essence  of  love. — Its  ideality. — Its  universal
scope. — Its  euthanasia . Pages  3-34

CHAPTER  II

THE  FAMILY

The  family  arises  spontaneously. — It  harmonises  natural
interests. — Capacity  to  be  educated  goes  with  immaturity
at  birth. — The  naturally  dull  achieve  intelligence. — It  is
more  blessed  to  save  than  to  create. — Parental  instinct
regards  childhood  only. — Handing  on  the  torch  of  life. —
Adventitious  functions  assumed  by  the  family. — Inertia
in  human  nature. — Family  tyrannies. — Difficulty  in  ab¬
stracting  from  the  family. — Possibility  of  substitutes. —
Plato’s  heroic  communism. — Opposite  modern  tenden¬
cies. — Individualism  in  a  sense  rational. — The  family
tamed.  —  Possible  readjustments  and  reversions.  —  The
ideal  includes  generation. — Inner  values  already  lodged
in  this  function. — Outward  beneficence  might  be  secured
by  experiment . Pages  35-59

v


807243


vi


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  III

INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR

Patriarchal  economy. — Origin  of  the  state. — Three  uses
of  civilisation. — Its  rationality  contingent. — Sources  of
wealth. — Excess  of  it  possible. — Irrational  industry. — Its
jovial  and  ingenious  side. — Its  tyranny. — An  impossible
remedy. — Basis  of  government. — How  rationality  accrues.
— Ferocious  but  useful  despotisms. — Occasional  advantage
of  being  conquered. — Origin  of  free  governments. — Their
democratic  tendencies. — Imperial  peace. — Nominal  and
real  status  of  armies. — Their  action  irresponsible. — Pug¬
nacity  human. — Barrack-room  philosophy. — Military  vir¬
tues. — They  are  splendid  vices. — Absolute  value  in  strife.
— Sport  a  civilised  way  of  preserving  it. — Who  shall  found
the  universal  commonwealth? . Pages  60-87

CHAPTER  IV

THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL

Eminence,  once  existing,  grows  by  its  own  operation. —
Its  causes  natural  and  its  privileges  just. — Advantage  of
inequality. — Fable  of  the  belly  and  the  members. — Fallacy
in  it. — Theism  expresses  better  the  aristocratic  ideal. — A
heaven  with  many  mansions. — If  God  is  defined  as  the
human  ideal,  apotheosis  the  only  paradise. — When  natures
differ  perfections  differ  too. — Theory  that  stations  actually
correspond  to  faculty. — Its  falsity. — Feeble  individuality
the  rule. — Sophistical  envy. — Inequality  is  not  a  griev¬
ance;  suffering  is. — Mutilation  by  crowding. — A  hint  to
optimists. — How  aristocracies  might  do  good. — Man  adds
wrong  to  nature’s  injury. — Conditions  of  a  just  inequal¬
ity  . Pages  88-113


CHAPTER  V

DEMOCRACY

Democracy  as  an  end  and  as  a  means. — Natural  de¬
mocracy  leads  to  monarchy. — Artificial  democracy  is  an
extension  of  privilege. — Ideals  and  expedients. — Well-
founded  distrust  of  rulers.  Yet  experts,  if  rational,  would
serve  common  interests. — People  jealous  of  eminence. — It


CONTENTS


Vll

Is  representative,  but  subject  to  decay. — Ancient  citizen¬
ship  a  privilege. — Modern  democracy  industrial. — Dangers
to  current  civilisation. — Is  current  civilisation  a  good? —
Horrors  of  materialistic  democracy. — Timocracy  or  social¬
istic  aristocracy. — The  difficulty  the  same  as  in  all  So¬
cialism. — The  masses  would  have  to  be  plebeian  in  posi¬
tion  and  patrician  in  feeling.-^-Organisation  for  ideal  ends
breeds  fanaticism. — Public  spirit  the  life  of  democracy.

Pages  114-136


CHAPTER  VI

FREE  SOCIETY

Primacy  of  nature  over  spirit. — All  experience  at  bot¬
tom  liberal. — Social  experience  has  its  ideality  too. — The
self  an  ideal. — Romantic  egotism. — Vanity. — Ambiguities
of  fame. — Its  possible  ideality. — Comradeship. — External
conditions  of  friendship. — Identity  in  sex  required,  and
in  age. — Constituents  of  friendship. — Personal  liking. —
The  refracting  human  medium  for  ideas. — Affection  based
on  the  refraction. — The  medium  must  also  be  trans¬
parent. — Common  interests  indispensable. — Friendship
between  man  and  wife. — Between  master  and  disciple. —
Conflict  between  ideal  and  natural  allegiance. — Auto¬
matic  idealisation  of  heroes . Pages  137-159

CHAPTER  VII

PATRIOTISM

The  creative  social  environment,  since  it  eludes  sense,
must  be  represented  symbolically. — Ambiguous  limits  of
a  native  country,  geographical  and  moral. — Sentimental
and  political  patriotism. — The  earth  and  the  race  the
first  objects  of  rational  loyalty. — Race,  when  distinct,  the
greatest  of  distinctions. — “Pure”  races  may  be  morally
sterile. — True  nationality  direction  on  a  definite  ideal. —
Country  well  represented  by  domestic  and  civic  religion. —
Misleading  identification  of  country  with  government.
— Sporting  or  belligerent  patriotism. — Exclusive  patriot¬
ism  rational  only  when  the  government  supported  is  univer¬
sally  beneficent. — Accidents  of  birth  and  training  affect
the  ideal. — They  are  conditions  and  may  contribute  some¬
thing. — They  are  not  ends. — The  symbol  for  country  may
be  a  man  and  may  become  an  idol. — Feudal  represen ta-


CONTENTS


•  •  •

Vlll

tion  sensitive  but  partial. — Monarchical  representation
comprehensive  but  treacherous. — Impersonal  symbols  no
advantage. — Patriotism  not  self-interest,  save  to  the  social
man  whose  aims  are  ideal . . . Pages  160-183

CHAPTER  VIII

IDEAL  SOCIETY

The  gregarious  instinct  all  social  instincts  in  suspense.
— It  gives  rise  to  conscience  or  sympathy  with  the  pub¬
lic  voice. — Guises  of  public  opinion. — Oracles  and  revela¬
tions. — The  ideal  a  measure  for  all  existences  and  no
existence  itself. — Contrast  between  natural  and  intellect¬
ual  bonds. — Appeal  from  man  to  God,  from  real  to  ideal
society. — Significant  symbols  revert  to  the  concrete. —
Nature  a  symbol  for  destiny. — Representative  notions
have  also  inherent  values. — Religion  and  science  indirectly
cognitive  and  directly  ideal. — Their  opposite  outlook. —
In  translating  existence  into  human  terms  they  give  hu¬
man  nature  its  highest  exercise. — Science  should  be  mathe¬
matical  and  religion  anthropomorphic. — Summary  of  this
book . Pages  184-205


REASON  IN  SOCIETY


t


CHAPTER  I


LOYE


If  man  were  a  static  or  intelligible

enceshave  being,  such  as  angels  are  thought  to
none  but  be  his  life  would  have  a  single  guid-

ideal  irnals  °  0

ing  interest,  under  which  ali  other
interests  would  be  subsumed.  His  acts  would
explain  themselves  without  looking  beyond  his
given  essence,  and  his  soul  would  be  like  a  mus¬
ical  composition,  which  once  written  out  cannot
grow  different  and  once  rendered  can  ask  for
nothing  but,  at  most,  to  be  rendered  over  again.
In  truth,  however,  man  is  an  animal,  a  portion
of  the  natural  flux  :  and  the  consequence  is  that
his  nature  has  a  moving  centre,  his  functions  an
external  reference,  and  his  ideal  a  true  ideality.
What  he  strives  to  preserve,  in  preserving  himself,
is  something  which  he  never  has  been  at  any  par¬
ticular  moment.  He  maintains  his  equilibrium
by  motion.  His  goal  is  in  a  sense  beyond  him,
since  it  is  not  his  experience,  but  a  form  which  all
experience  ought  to  receive.  The  inmost  texture
of  his  being  is  propulsive,  and  there  is  nothing
more  intimately  bound  up  with  his  success  than
mobility  and  devotion  to  transcendent  aims.  If

3


4


THE  LIFE  OF  KEASON


there  is  a  transitive  function  in  knowledge  and
an  unselfish  purpose  in  love,  that  is  only  because,
at  bottom,  there  is  a  self-reproductive,  flying  es¬
sence  in  all  existence.

If  the  equilibrium  of  man’s  being  were  stable
he  would  need  neither  nutrition,  reproduction,  nor
sense.  As  it  is,  sense  must  renew  his  ideas  and
guide  his  instincts  otherwise  than  as  their  inner
evolution  would  demand;  and  regenerative  proc¬
esses  must  strive  to  repair  beneath  the  constant
irreparable  lapse  of  his  substance.  His  business
is  to  create  and  remodel  those  organisms  in  which
ideals  are  bred.  In  order  to  have  a  soul  to  save

v

he  must  perpetually  form  it  anew;  he  must,  so  to
speak,  earn  his  own  living.  In  this  vital  labour,
we  may  ask,  is  nutrition  or  reproduction  the
deeper  function?  Or,  to  put  the  corresponding
moral  question,  is  the  body  or  the  state  the  pri¬
mary  good?


Nutrition  and  If  we  view  the  situation  from  the
reproduction,  individual’s  side,  as  self-consciousness

might  view  it,  we  may  reply  that  nutrition  is
fundamental,  for  if  the  body  were  not  nourished
every  faculty  would  decay.  Could  nutrition  only
succeed  and  keep  the  body  young,  reproduction
would  be  unnecessary,  with  its  poor  pretence  at
maintaining  the  mobile  human  form  in  a  series
of  examples.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  view
the  matter  from  above,  as  science  and  philosophy
should,  we  may  say  that  nutrition  is  but  germina¬
tion  of  a  pervasive  sort,  that  the  body  is  a  taber-


LOVE


5


nacle  in  which  the  transmissible  human  spirit
is  carried  for  a  while,  a  shell  for  the  immortal
seed  that  dwells  in  it  and  has  created  it.  This
seed,  however,  for  rational  estimation,  is  merely
a  means  to  the  existence  and  happiness  of  indi¬
viduals.  Transpersonal  and  continuous  in  its  own
fluid  being,  the  potential  grows  personal  in  its
ideal  fulfilments.  In  other  words,  this  potential¬
ity  is  material  (though  called  sometimes  an  idea)
and  has  its  only  value  in  the  particular  creatures
it  may  produce.

Priority  of  the  Reproduction  is  accordingly  pri-
latter.  mary  and  more  completely  instru¬

mental  than  nutrition  is,  since  it  serves  a  soul
as  yet  non-existent,  while  nutrition  is  useful  to
a  soul  that  already  has  some  actuality.  Reproduc¬
tion  initiates  life  and  remains  at  life’s  core,  a  func-
tion  without  which  no  other, 'in  the  end,  would
be  possible.  It  is  more  central,  crucial,  and
representative  than  nutrition,  which  is  in  a  way
peripheral  only;  it  is  a  more  typical  and  rudi¬
mentary  act,  marking  the  ideal’s  first  victory  over
the  universal  flux,  before  any  higher  function
than  reproduction  itself  has  accrued  to  the  ani¬
mal.  To  nourish  an  existing  being  is  to  presup¬
pose  a  pause  in  generation;  the  nucleus,  before
it  dissolves  into  other  individuals,  gathers  about
itself,  for  its  own  glory,  certain  temporal  and
personal  faculties.  It  lives  for  itself;  while  in
procreation  it  signs  its  own  death-warrant,  makes
its  will,  and  institutes  its  heir.


6


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Love  cele-


This  situation  has  its  counterpart


brates  the  ini-  in  feeling.  Replenishment  is  a  sort

tial  triumph  of  j*  t  i  i  i  ± i  •  •  p  i  i  •  -j

form  and  is  °f  delayed  breathing,  as  if  the  animal
deeply  ideal,  had  to  hunt  for  air  i  it  necessitates

more  activity  than  it  contains;  it  engages  ex¬
ternal  senses  in  its  service  and  promotes  intelli¬
gence.  After  securing  a  dumb  satisfaction,  or
even  in  preparing  it,  it  leaves  the  habits  it
employed  free  for  observation  and  ideal  exercise.
Reproduction,  on  the  contrary,  depletes;  it  is  an
expense  of  spirit,  a  drag  on  physical  and  mental
life;  it  entangles  rather  than  liberates;  it  fuses
the  soul  again  into  the  impersonal,  blind  flux.
Yet,  since  it  constitutes  the  primary  and  central
triumph  of  life,  it  is  in  itself  more  ideal  and
.  generous  than  nutrition;  it  fascinates  the  will  in
an  absolute  fashion,  and  the  pleasures  it  brings
are  largely  spiritual.  For  though  the  instru¬


mentalities  of  reproduction  may  seem  gross  and
trivial  from  a  conventional  point  of  view,  its  es¬
sence  is  really  ideal,  the  perfect  type,  indeed,  of


*  f  ideality,  since  form  and  an  identical  life  are
therein  sustained  successfully  by  a  more  rhyth-
S  mical  flux  of  matter.

It  may  seem  fanciful,  even  if  not  unmeaning,
to  say  that  a  man’s  soul  more  truly  survives  in  his
son’s  youth  than  in  his  own  decrepitude;  but  this
principle  grows  more  obvious  as  we  descend  to
simpler  beings,  in  which  individual  life  is  less
elaborated  and  has  not  intrenched  itself  in  so
many  adventitious  and  somewhat  permanent  or-


LOVE


gans.  In  vegetables  soul  and  seed  go  forth  to¬
gether  and  leave  nothing  but  a  husk  behind.  In
the  human  individual  love  may  seem  a  mere  inci¬
dent  of  youth  and  a  sentimental  madness;  but
that  episode,  if  we  consider  the  race,  is  indis¬
pensable  to  the  whole  drama;  and  if  we  look  to
the  order  in  which  ideal  interests  have  grown
up  and  to  their  superposition  in  moral  experience,
love  will  seem  the  truly  primitive  and  initiatory
passion.  Consciousness,  amused  ordinarily  by  the
most  superficial  processes,  itself  bears  witness  to
the  underlying  claims  of  reproduction  and  is  drawn
by  it  for  a  moment  into  life’s  central  vortex;  and
love,  while  it  betrays  its  deep  roots  by  the  im¬
perative  force  it  exerts  and  the  silence  it  imposes
on  all  current  passions,  betrays  also  its  ideal  mis¬
sion  by  casting  an  altogether  novel  and  poetic  spell
over  the  mind.

Difficulty  in  The  conscious  quality  of  this  pas-
descnbing  lore,  sion  differs  so  much  in  various  races

and  individuals,  and  at  various  points  in  the
same  life,  that  no  account  of  it  will  ever  satisfy
everybody.*  Poets  and  novelists  never  tire  of


*  The  wide  uses  of  the  English  word  love  add  to  the  diffi¬
culty.  I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  limiting  the  term  here  to
imaginatire  passion,  to  being  in  lore,  excluding  all  other
ways  of  loving.  It  follows  that  lore — like  its  shadow,  jeal¬
ousy — will  often  be  merely  an  ingredient  in  an  actual  state
of  feeling;  friendship  and  confidence,  with  satisfaction  at
being  liked  in  return,  will  often  be  mingled  with  it.  We
shall  have  to  separate  physiologically  things  which  in  con¬
sciousness  exist  undivided,  since  a  philosophic  description  is


8


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


depicting  it  anew;  but  although  the  experience
they  tell  of  is  fresh  and  unparalleled  in  every
individual,  their  rendering  suffers,  on  the  whole,
from  a  great  monotony.  Love’s  gesture  and  symp¬
toms  are  noted  and  unvarying;  its  vocabulary
is  poor  and  worn.  Even  a  poet,  therefore,  can
give  of  love  but  a  meagre  expression,  while  the
philosopher,  who  renounces  dramatic  representa¬
tion,  is  condemned  to  be  avowedly  inadequate.
Love,  to  the  lover,  is  a  noble  and  immense  in¬
spiration;  to  the  naturalist  it  is  a  thin  veil  and
prelude  to  the  self-assertion  of  lust.  This  opposi¬
tion  has  prevented  philosophers  from  doing  jus¬
tice  to  the  subject.  Two  things  need  to  be  ad¬
mitted  by  anyone  who  would  not  go  wholly  astray
in  such  speculation:  one,  that  love  has  an  animal
basis;  the  other,  that  it  has  an  ideal  object.  Since
these  two  propositions  have  usually  been  thought
contradictory,  no  writer  has  ventured  to  present
more  than  half  the  truth,  and  that  half  out  of  its
true  relations.


Plato,  who  gave  eloquent  expres¬
sion  to  the  ideal  burden  of  the  pas¬
sion,  and  divined  its  political  and  cos¬
mic  message,  passed  over  its  natural  history  with
a  few  mythical  fancies;  and  Schopenhauer,  into


One-sided  or
inverted  the¬
ories  about  it.


bound  to  be  analytic  and  cannot  render  everything  at  once.
Where  a  poet  might  conceive  a  new  composite,  making  it
live,  a  moralist  must  dissect  the  experience  and  rest  in  its
eternal  elements.


LOYE


9


whose  system  a  naturalistic  treatment  would  have
fitted  so  easily,  allowed  his  metaphysics  to  carry
him  at  this  point  into  verbal  inanities;  while,  of
course,  like  all  profane  writers  on  the  subject,
he  failed  to  appreciate  the  oracles  which  Plato
had  delivered.  In  popular  feeling,  where  senti¬
ment  and  observation  must  both  make  themselves
felt  somehow  or  other,  the  tendency  is  to  imagine
that  love  is  an  absolute,  non-natural  energy  which,
for  some  unknown  reason,  or  for  none  at  all,
lights  upon  particular  persons,  and  rests  there
eternally,  as  on  its  ultimate  goal.  In  other
words,  it  makes  the  origin  of  love  divine  and  its
object  natural:  which  is  the  exact  opposite  of  the
truth.  If  it  were  once  seen,  however,  that  every
ideal  expresses  some  natural  function,  and  that
no  natural  function  is  incapable,  in  its  free  exer¬
cise,  of  evolving  some  ideal  and  finding  justifica¬
tion,  not  in  some  collateral  animal,  but  in  an  in¬
herent  operation  like  life  or  thought,  which  being
transmissible  in  its  form  is  also  eternal,  then
the  philosophy  of  love  should  not  prove  perma¬
nently  barren.  For  love  is  a  brilliant  illustration
of  a  principle  everywhere  discoverable:  namely,
that  human  reason  lives  by  turning  the  friction
of  material  forces  into  the  light  of  ideal  goods.
There  can  be  no  philosophic  interest  in  disguis¬
ing  the  animal  basis  of  love,  or  in  denying  its
spiritual  sublimations,  since  all  life  is  animal  in
its  origin  and  all  spiritual  in  its  possible  fruits.


10


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Sexual  func-  *  Plastic  matter,  in  transmitting  its
tions  its  basis,  organisation,  takes  various  courses

which  it  is  the  part  of  natural  history  to  de¬
scribe.  Even  after  reproduction  has  become  sex¬
ual,  it  will  offer  no  basis  for  love  if  it  does  not
require  a  union  of  the  two  parent  bodies.  Did
germinal  substances,  unconsciously  diffused,  meet
by  chance  in  the  external  medium  and  unite
there,  it  is  obvious  that  whatever  obsessions  or
pleasures  maturity  might  bring  they  would  not
have  the  quality  which  men  call  love.  But  when
an  individual  of  the  opposite  sex  must  be  met
with,  recognised,  and  pursued,  and  must  prove
responsive,  then  each  is  haunted  by  the  possible
other.  Each  feels  in  a  generic  way  the  presence
and  attraction  of  his  fellows ;  he  vibrates  to  their
touch,  he  dreams  of  their  image,  he  is  restless
and  wistful  if  alone.  When  the  vague  need  that
solicits  him  is  met  by  the  presence  of  a  possible
mate  it  is  extraordinarily  kindled.  Then,  if  it
reaches  fruition,  it  subsides  immediately,  and
after  an  interval,  perhaps,  of  stupor  and  vital
recuperation,  the  animal  regains  his  independ¬
ence,  his  peace,  and  his  impartial  curiosity.  You
might  think  him  on  the  way  to  becoming  intelli¬
gent;  but  the  renewed  nutrition  and  cravings  of
the  sexual  machinery  soon  engross  his  attention
again;  all  his  sprightly  indifference  vanishes  be-
fore  nature's  categorical  imperative.  That  fierce
and  turbid  pleasure,  by  which  his  obedience  is
rewarded,  hastens  his  dissolution;  every  day  the


LOVE


11


ensuing  lassitude  and  emptiness  give  him  a
clearer  premonition  of  death.  It  is  not  figura¬
tively  only  that  his  soul  has  passed  into  his  off¬
spring.  The  vocation  to  produce  them  was  a
chief  part  of  his  being,  and  when  that  function
Is  sufficiently  fulfilled  he  is  superfluous  in  the
world  and  becomes  partly  superfluous  even  to
himself.  The  confines  of  his  dream  are  narrowed.
He  moves  apathetically  and  dies  forlorn.

Some  echo  of  the  vital  rhythm  which  pervades
not  merely  the  generations  of  animals,  but  the
seasons  and  the  stars,  emerges  sometimes  in  con¬
sciousness  ;  on  reaching  the  tropics  in  the  mortal
ecliptic,  which  the  human  individual  may  touch
many  times  without  much  change  in  his  outer
fortunes,  the  soul  may  occasionally  divine  that  it
is  passing  through  a  supreme  crisis.  Passion,
when  vehement,  may  bring  atavistic  sentiments.
When  love  is  absolute  it  feels  a  profound  impulse
to  welcome  death,  and  even,  by  a  transcendental
confusion,  to  invoke  the  end  of  the  universe.*
The  human  soul  reverts  at  such  a  moment  to
what  an  ephemeral  insect  might  feel,  buzzing  till
it  finds  its  mate  in  the  noon.  Its  whole  destiny

*  One  example,  among  a  thousand,  is  the  cry  of  Siegfried
and  Briinhilde  in  Wagner :

Lachend  lass’  uns  verderben
Lachend  zu  Grunde  geh’n.

Fahr  hin,  Walhall’s
Lenchtende  Welt !  .  .  .

Leb’  \rohl,  pragende
Gotter  Pracht !

Ende  in  Wonne,

Du  ewig  Geschlecht !


12


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


was  wooing,  and,  that  mission  accomplished,  it
sings  its  Nunc  dimittis ,  renouncing  heartily  all
irrelevant  things,  now  that  the  one  fated  and  all-
satisfying  good  has  been  achieved.  Where  pa¬
rental  instincts  exist  also,  nature  soon  shifts  her
loom:  a  milder  impulse  succeeds,  and  a  satisfac¬
tion  of  a  gentler  sort  follows  in  the  birth  of  chil¬
dren.  The  transcendental  illusion  is  here  cor¬
rected,  and  it  is  seen  that  the  extinction  the
lovers  had  accepted  needed  not  to  be  complete.
The  death  they  welcomed  was  not  without  its
little  resurrection.  The  feeble  worm  they  had
generated  bore  their  immortality  within  it.

The  varieties  of  sexual  economy  are  many  and
to  each  may  correspond,  for  all  we  know,  a  spe¬
cial  sentiment.  Sometimes  the  union  established
is  intermittent;  sometimes  it  crowns  the  end  of
life  and  dissolves  it  altogether;  sometimes  it
remains,  while  it  lasts,  monogamous;  sometimes
the  sexual  and  social  alertness  is  constant  in  the
male,  only  periodic  in  the  female.  Sometimes
the  group  established  for  procreation  endures
throughout  the  seasons,  and  from  year  to  year;
sometimes  the  males  herd  together,  as  if  nor¬
mally  they  preferred  their  own  society,  until  the
time  of  rut  comes,  when  war  arises  between  them
for  the  possession  of  what  they  have  just  dis¬
covered  to  be  the  fair.

structure  the  A  naturalist  not  ashamed  to  in-

uity  and  fac-  dulge  his  poetic  imagination  might
uity  of  duty,  easily  paint  for  us  the  drama  of  these


LOVE


13


diverse  loves.  It  suffices  for  our  purpose  to  ob¬
serve  that  the  varying  passions  and  duties  which
life  can  contain  depend  upon  the  organic  func¬
tions  of  the  animal.  A  fish  incapable  of  coi¬
tion,  absolved  from  all  care  for  its  young,  which
it  never  sees  or  never  distinguishes  from  the
casual  swimmers  darting  across  its  path,  such  a
fish,  being  without  social  faculties  or  calls  to  co¬
operation,  cannot  have  the  instincts,  perceptions,
or  emotions  which  belong  to  social  beings.  A
male  of  some  higher  species  that  feels  only  once
a  year  the  sudden  solicitations  of  love  cannot
be  sentimental  in  all  the  four  seasons:  his  head¬
long  passion,  exhausted  upon  its  present  object
and  dismissed  at  once  without  remainder,  leaves
his  senses  perfectly  free  and  colourless  to  scru¬
tinise  his  residual  world.  Whatever  further  fears
or  desires  may  haunt  him  will  have  nothing
mystical  or  sentimental  about  them.  He  will
be  a  man  of  business  all  the  year  round,  and
a  lover  only  on  May-day.  A  female  that  does
not  suffice  for  the  rearing  of  her  young  will  ex¬
pect  and  normally  receive  her  mate’s  aid  long
after  the  pleasures  of  love  are  forgotten  by  him.
Disinterested  fidelity  on  his  part  will  then  be  her
right  and  his  duty.  But  a  female  that,  once  preg¬
nant,  needs,  like  the  hen,  no  further  co-operation
on  the  male’s  part  will  turn  from  him  at  once  with
absolute  indifference  to  brood  perpetually  on  her
eggs,  undisturbed  by  the  least  sense  of  solitude
or  jealousy.  And  the  chicks  that  at  first  follow


14


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


her  and  find  shelter  under  her  wings  will  soon  be
forgotten  also  and  relegated  to  the  mechanical
landscape.  There  is  no  pain  in  the  timely  snap¬
ping  of  the  dearest  bonds  where  society  has  not
become  a  permanent  organism,  and  perpetual
friendship  is  not  one  of  its  possible  modes.

Transcendent  and  ideal  passions  may  well
judge  themselves  to  have  an  incomparable  dignity.
Yet  that  dignity  is  hardly  more  than  what  every
passion,  were  it  articulate,  would  assign  to  itself
and  to  its  objects.  The  dumbness  of  a  passion
may  accordingly,  from  one  point  of  view,  be  called
the  index  of  its  baseness;  for  if  it  cannot  ally  it¬
self  with  ideas  its  affinities  can  hardly  lie  in  the
rational  mind  nor  its  advocates  be  among  the
poets.  But  if  we  listen  to  the  master-passion
itself  rather  than  to  the  loquacious  arts  it  may
have  enlisted  in  its  service,  we  shall  understand
that  it  is  not  self-condemned  because  it  is  silent,
nor  an  anomaly  in  nature  because  inharmonious
with  human  life.  The  fish’s  heartlessness  is  his
virtue;  the  male  bee’s  lasciviousness  is  his  voca¬
tion;  and  if  these  functions  were  retrenched  or
encumbered  in  order  to  assimilate  them  to  human
excellence  they  would  be  merely  dislocated.  We
should  not  produce  virtue  where  there  was  vice,
but  defeat  a  possible  arrangement  which  would
have  had  its  own  vitality  and  order.

Glory  of  Animal  love  is  a  marvellous  force ;

animal  1ot».  and  while  it  issues  in  acts  that  may


LOVE


15


be  followed  by  a  revulsion  of  feeling,  it  yet
deserves  a  more  sympathetic  treatment  than  art
and  morals  have  known  how  to  accord  it.  Erotic
poets,  to  hide  their  want  of  ability  to  make  the
dumb  passion  speak,  have  played  feebly  with  veiled
insinuations  and  comic  effects;  while  more  seri¬
ous  sonneteers  have  harped  exclusively  on  sec¬
ondary  and  somewhat  literary  emotions,  abstractly
conjugating  the  verb  to  love.  Lucretius,  in  spite
of  his  didactic  turns,  has  been  on  this  subject,
too,  the  most  ingenuous  and  magnificent  of  poets,
although  he  chose  to  confine  his  description  to
the  external  history  of  sexual  desire.  It  is  a  pity
that  he  did  not  turn,  with  his  sublime  sincerity,
to  the  inner  side  of  it  also,  and  write  the  drama
of  the  awakened  senses,  the  poignant  suasion  of
beauty,  when  it  clouds  the  brain,  and  makes  the
conventional  earth,  seen  through  that  bright  haze,
seem  a  sorry  fable.  Western  poets  should  not
have  despised  what  the  Orientals,  in  their  fugitive
stanzas,  seem  often  to  have  sung  most  exquisitely :
the  joy  of  gazing  on  the  beloved,  of  following
or  being  followed,  of  tacit  understandings  and
avowals,  of  flight  together  into  some  solitude  to
people  it  with  those  ineffable  confidences  which
so  naturally  follow  the  outward  proofs  of  love.
All  this  makes  the  brightest  page  of  many  a  life,
the  only  bright  page  in  the  thin  biography  of
many  a  human  animal ;  while  if  the  beasts  could
speak  they  would  give  us,  no  doubt,  endless  ver-


16


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sions  of  the  only  joy  in  which,  as  we  may  fancy,
the  blood  of  the  universe  flows  consciously
through  their  hearts.

The  darkness  which  conventionally  covers  this
passion  is  one  of  the  saddest  consequences  of
Adam’s  fall.  It  was  a  terrible  misfortune  in
man’s  development  that  he  should  not  have  been
able  to  acquire  the  higher  functions  without  de¬
ranging  the  lower.  Why  should  the  depths  of  his
being  be  thus  polluted  and  the  most  delightful  of
nature’s  mysteries  be  an  occasion  not  for  com¬
munion  with  her,  as  it  should  have  remained,  but
for  depravity  and  sorrow  ?

Its  degradation  This  question,  asked  in  moral  per-
when  instincts  plexity,  admits  of  a  scientific  answer.

ous  and  com-  Man,  m  becoming  more  complex,  be-
petitive.  comes  less  stably  organised.  His  sex¬
ual  instinct,  instead  of  being  intermittent,  but
violent  and  boldly  declared,  becomes  practically
constant,  but  is  entangled  in  many  cross-currents
of  desire,  in  many  other  equally  imperfect  adapta¬
tions  of  structure  to  various  ends.  Indulgence  in
any  impulse  can  then  easily  become  excessive  and
thwart  the  rest;  for  it  may  be  aroused  artificially
and  maintained  from  without,  so  that  in  turn  it
disturbs  its  neighbours.  Sometimes  the  sexual
instinct  may  be  stimulated  out  of  season  by  ex¬
ample,  by  a  too  wakeful  fancy,  by  language,  by
pride — for  all  these  forces  are  now  working  in
the  same  field  and  intermingling  their  sugges¬
tions.  At  the  same  time  the  same  instinct  may


LOVE


17


derange  others,  and  make  them  fail  at  their
proper  and  pressing  occasions.

Moral  censure  In  consequence  of  such  derange-
provoked.  ments,  reflection  and  public  opinion

will  come  to  condemn  what  in  itself  was  per¬
fectly  innocent.  The  corruption  of  a  given  in¬
stinct  by  others  and  of  others  by  it,  becomes  the
ground  for  long  attempts  to  suppress  or  enslave
it.  With  the  haste  and  formalism  natural  to  lan¬
guage  and  to  law,  external  and  arbitrary  limits
are  set  to  its  operation.  As  no  inward  adjust¬
ment  can  possibly  correspond  to  these  conven¬
tional  barriers  and  compartments  of  life,  a  war
between  nature  and  morality  breaks  out  both  in
society  and  in  each  particular  bosom — a  war  in
which  every  victory  is  a  sorrow  and  every  de¬
feat  a  dishonour.  As  one  instinct  after  another
becomes  furious  or  disorganised,  cowardly  or  crim¬
inal,  under  these  artificial  restrictions,  the  pub¬
lic  and  private  conscience  turns  against  it  all  its
forces,  necessarily  without  much  nice  discrimina¬
tion;  the  frank  passions  of  youth  are  met  with
a  grimace  of  horror  on  all  sides,  with  rumores
senum  severiorum,  with  an  insistence  on  reticence
and  hypocrisy.  Such  suppression  is  favourable
to  corruption:  the  fancy  with  a  sort  of  idiotic
ingenuity  comes  to  supply  the  place  of  experi¬
ence  ;  and  nature  is  rendered  vicious  and  overlaid
with  pruriency,  artifice,  and  the  love  of  novelty.
Hereupon  the  authorities  that  rule  in  such  mat¬
ters  naturally  redouble  their  vigilance  and  exag-
vol.  n.— 2


18


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


gerate  their  reasonable  censure:  chastity  begins
to  seem  essentially  holy  and  perpetual  virginity
ends  by  becoming  an  absolute  ideal.  Thus  the
disorder  in  man’s  life  and  disposition,  when  grown
intolerable,  leads  him  to  condemn  the  very  ele¬
ments  out  of  which  order  might  have  been  consti¬
tuted,  and  to  mistake  his  total  confusion  for  his
total  depravity.

_  _  Banished  from  the  open  day,  cov-

Tne  heart  A  ^

alienated  from  ered  with  mockery,  and  publicly  ig-
the  world.  nored,  this  necessary  pleasure  flour¬
ishes  none  the  less  in  dark  places  and  in  the
secret  soul.  Its  familiar  presence  there,  its  inti¬
mate  habitation  in  what  is  most  oneself,  helps
to  cut  the  world  in  two  and  to  separate  the  inner
from  the  outer  life.  In  that  mysticism  which
cannot  disguise  its  erotic  affinities  this  disrup¬
tion  reaches  an  absolute  and  theoretic  form;  but
in  many  a  youth  little  suspected  of  mysticism
it  produces  estrangement  from  the  conventional
moralising  world,  which  he  instinctively  regards
as  artificial  and  alien.  It  prepares  him  for  ex¬
cursions  into  a  private  fairy-land  in  which  un-
thought-of  joys  will  blossom  amid  friendlier
magic  forces.  The  truly  good  then  seems  to  be
the  fantastic,  the  sensuous,  the  prodigally  unreal.
He  gladly  forgets  the  dreary  world  he  lives  in
to  listen  for  a  thousand  and  one  nights  to  his
dreams.

This  is  the  region  where  those  who

Childish  ideals.  0  _  . ,  _  . ,

have  no  conception  of  the  Life  of


LOVE


19


Reason  place  the  ideal;  and  an  ideal  is  indeed
there  but  the  ideal  of  a  single  and  inordinate  im¬
pulse.  A  rational  mind,  on  the  contrary,  moves
by  preference  in  the  real  world,  cultivating  all
human  interests  in  due  proportion.  The  love¬
sick  and  luxurious  dream-land  dear  to  irrational
poets  is  a  distorted  image  of  the  ideal  world;  but
this  distortion  has  still  an  ideal  motive,  since  it
is  made  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  a  forgotten  part
of  the  soul  and  to  make  a  home  for  those  ele¬
ments  in  human  nature  which  have  been  denied
overt  existence.  If  the  ideal  is  meantime  so
sadly  caricatured,  the  fault  lies  with  the  circum¬
stances  of  life  that  have  not  allowed  the  sane
will  adequate  exercise.  Lack  of  strength  and  of
opportunity  makes  it  impossible  for  man  to  pre¬
serve  all  his  interests  in  a  just  harmony;  and  his
conscious  ideal,  springing  up  as  it  too  often  does
in  protest  against  suffering  and  tyranny,  has  not
scope  and  range  enough  to  include  the  actual
opportunities  for  action.  Nature  herself,  by
making  a  slave  of  the  body,  has  thus  made  a
tyrant  of  the  soul.

Fairy-land  and  a  mystical  heaven  contain  many
other  factors  besides  that  furnished  by  unsatis¬
fied  and  objectless  love.  All  sensuous  and  verbal
images  may  breed  after  their  own  kind  in  an  emp¬
ty  brain;  but  these  fantasies  are  often  supported
and  directed  by  sexual  longings  and  vaguely  luxu¬
rious  thoughts.  An  Oriental  Paradise,  with  its
delicate  but  mindless  aestheticism,  is  above  every-


20


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


thing  a  garden  for  love.  To  brood  on  such  an
Elysium  is  a  likely  prelude  and  fertile  prepa-
rheir  light  all  ration  for  romantic  passion.  When

the'dibject  of  Pass^on  tekes  form  it  calls  fancy

love.  back  from  its  loose  reveries  and  fixes

it  upon  a  single  object.  Then  the  ideal  seems
at  last  to  have  been  brought  down  to  earth.  Its
embodiment  has  been  discovered  amongst  the  chil¬
dren  of  men.  Imagination  narrows  her  range.
Instead  of  all  sorts  of  flatteries  to  sense  and  im¬
probable  delicious  adventures,  the  lover  imagines
but  a  single  joy:  to  be  master  of  his  love  in  body
and  soul.  Jealousy  pursues  him.  Even  if  he
dreads  no  physical  betrayal,  he  suffers  from  terror
and  morbid  sensitiveness  at  every  hint  of  mental
estrangement.

This  attachment  is  often  the  more  absorbihg
the  more  unaccountable  it  seems;  and  as  in  hyp¬
notism  the  subject  is  dead  to  all  influences  but
that  of  the  operator,  so  in  love  the  heart  sur-
renders  itself  entirely  to  the  one  being  that  has
known  how  to  touch  it.  That  being  is  not  selected ;
it  is  recognised  and  obeyed.  Pre-arranged  reac-
tions  in  the  system  respond  to  whatever  stimu¬
lus,  at  a  propitious  moment,  happens  to  break
through  and  arouse  them  pervasively.  Nature
has  opened  various  avenues  to  that  passion  in
whose  successful  operation  she  has  so  much  at
stake.  Sometimes  the  magic  influence  asserts
itself  suddenly,  sometimes  gently  and  unawares.
One  approach,  which  in  poetry  has  usurped  more


LOVE


21


than  its  share  of  attention,  is  through  beauty;
another,  less  glorious,  but  often  more  efficacious,

Three  environ-  through  surprised  sense  and  premoni-
ments  for  love,  tions  of  pleasure;  a  third  through  so¬
cial  sympathy  and  moral  affinities.  Contempla¬
tion,  sense,  and  association  are  none  of  them
the  essence  nor  even  the  seed  of  love;  but  any
of  them  may  be  its  soil  and  supply  it  with  a
propitious  background.  It  would  be  mere  soph¬
istry  to  pretend,  for  instance,  that  love  is  or
should  be  nothing  but  a  moral  bond,  the  sym¬
pathy  of  two  kindred  spirits  or  the  union  of  two
lives.  For  such  an  effect  no  passion  would  be
needed,  as  none  is  needed  to  perceive  beauty  or  to
feel  pleasure.

What  Aristotle  calls  friendships  of  utility,  pleas¬
ure,  or  virtue,  all  resting  on  common  interests
of  some  impersonal  sort,  are  far  from  possess¬
ing  the  quality  of  love,  its  thrill,  flutter,  and
absolute  sway  over  happiness  and  misery.  But
it  may  well  fall  to  such  influences  to  awaken  or
feed  the  passion  where  it  actually  arises.  What¬
ever  circumstances  pave  the  way,  love  does  not
itself  appear  until  a  sexual  affinity  is  declared.
When  a  woman,  for  instance,  contemplating  mar¬
riage,  asks  herself  whether  she  really  loves  her
suitor  or  merely  accepts  him,  the  test  is  the  pos¬
sibility  of  awakening  a  sexual  affinity.  For  this
reason  women  of  the  world  often  love  their  hus¬
bands  more  truly  than  they  did  their  lovers,  be¬
cause  marriage  has  evoked  an  elementary  feeling


22


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


which  before  lay  smothered  under  a  heap  of  coquet¬
ries,  vanities,  and  conventions.

Subjectivity  of  Man,  011  the  contrary,  is  polyga-
the  passion.  mous  by  instinct,  although  often  kept

faithful  by  habit  no  less  than  by  duty.  If  his
fancy  is  left  free,  it  is  apt  to  wander.  We  ob¬
serve  this  in  romantic  passion  no  less  than  in  a
life  of  mere  gallantry  and  pleasure.  Sentimental
illusions  may  become  a  habit,  and  the  shorter  the
dream  is  the  more  often  it  is  repeated,  so  that
any  susceptible  poet  may  find  that  he,  like  Alfred
de  Musset,  “  must  love  incessantly,  who  once  has
loved.”  Love  is  indeed  much  less  exacting  than
it  thinks  itself.  Nine-tenths  of  its  cause  are  in
the  lover,  for  one-tenth  that  may  be  in  the  object.
Were  the  latter  not  accidentally  at  hand,  an
almost  identical  passion  would  probably  have  been
felt  for  someone  else;  for  although  with  acquaint¬
ance  the  quality  of  an  attachment  naturally  adapts
itself  to  the  person  loved,  and  makes  that  per¬
son  its  standard  and  ideal,  the  first  assault  and
mysterious  glow  of  the  passion  is  much  the  same
for  every  object.  What  really  affects  the  charac¬
ter  of  love  is  the  lover’s  temperament,  age,  and
experience.  The  objects  that  appeal  to  each  man
reveal  his  nature ;  but  those  unparalleled  virtues
and  that  unique  divinity  which  the  lover  discovers
there  are  reflections  of  his  own  adoration,  things
that  ecstasy  is  very  cunning  in.  He  loves  what  he
imagines  and  worships  what  he  creates.

Those  who  do  not  consider  these  matters  so


LOVE


23


curiously  may  feel  that  to  refer  love  in  this  way
chiefly  to  inner  processes  is  at  once  ignominious
„  ..  and  fantastic.  But  nothing  could  be

regulating  more  natural ;  the  soul  accurately  ren-

choice.  ders,  in  this  experience,  what  is  going

on  in  the  body  and  in  the  race.  Nature  had  a
problem  to  solve  in  sexual  reproduction  which
would  have  daunted  a  less  ruthless  experimenter.
She  had  to  bring  together  automatically,  and  at
the  dictation,  as  they  felt,  of  their  irresponsible
wills,  just  the  creatures  that  by  uniting  might  re¬
produce  the  species.  The  complete  sexual  reac¬
tion  had  to  be  woven  together  out  of  many  incom-
.plete  reactions  to  various  stimuli,  reactions  not
specifically  sexual.  The  outer  senses  had  to  be
engaged,  and  many  secondary  characters  found  in
bodies  had  to  be  used  to  attract  attention,  until
the  deeper  instinctive  response  should  have  time
to  gather  itself  together  and  assert  itself  openly.
Many  mechanical  preformations  and  reflexes  must
conspire  to  constitute  a  determinate  instinct.  We
name  this  instinct  after  its  ultimate  function,
looking  forward  to  the  uses  we  observe  it  to  have;
and  it  seems  to  us  in  consequence  an  inexplicable
anomaly  that  many  a  time  the  instinct  is  set  in
motion  when  its  alleged  purpose  cannot  be  ful¬
filled;  as  when  love  appears  prematurely  or  too
late,  or  fixes  upon  a  creature  of  the  wrong  age
or  sex.  These  anomalies  show  us  how  nature  is
built  up  and,  far  from  being  inexplicable,  are
hints  that  tend  to  make  everything  clear,  when


24


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


once  a  verbal  and  mythical  philosophy  has  been
abandoned.

Responses  which  we  may  call  sexual  in  view  of
results  to  which  they  may  ultimately  lead  are  thus
often  quite  independent,  and  exist  before  they
are  drawn  into  the  vortex  of  a  complete  and  actu¬
ally  generative  act.  External  stimulus  and  pres¬
ent  idea  will  consequently  be  altogether  inade¬
quate  to  explain  the  profound  upheaval  which
may  ensue,  if,  as  we  say,  we  actually  fall  in  love.
That  the  senses  should  be  played  upon  is  nothing,
if  no  deeper  reaction  is  aroused.  All  depends  on
the  juncture  at  which,  so  to  speak,  the  sexual
circuit  is  completed  and  the  emotional  currents
begin  to  circulate.  Whatever  object,  at  such  a
critical  moment,  fills  the  field  of  consciousness
becomes  a  signal  and  associate  for  the  whole
sexual  mood.  It  is  breathlessly  devoured  in  that
pause  and  concentration  of  attention,  that  re¬
arrangement  of  the  soul,  which  love  is  conceived
in;  and  the  whole  new  life  which  that  image
is  engulfed  in  is  foolishly  supposed  to  be  its
effect.  For  the  image  is  in  consciousness,  but
not  the  profound  predispositions  which  gave  it
place  and  power.

The  choice  This  association  between  passion
unstable.  and  its  signals  may  be  merely  moment¬
ary,  or  it  may  be  perpetual:  a  Don  Juan  and  a
Dante  are  both  genuine  lovers.  In  a  gay  soci¬
ety  the  gallant  addresses  every  woman  as  if  she
charmed  him,  and  perhaps  actually  finds  any


LOVE


25


kind  of  beauty,  or  mere  femininity  anywhere,  a
sufficient  spur  to  his  desire.  These  momentary
fascinations  are  not  necessarily  false:  they  may
for  an  instant  he  quite  absorbing  and  irresisti¬
ble;  they  may  genuinely  suffuse  the  whole  mind.
Such  mercurial  fire  will  indeed  require  a  certain
imaginative  temperament;  and  there  are  many
persons  who,  short  of  a  life-long  domestic  attach¬
ment,  can  conceive  of  nothing  but  sordid  vice.
But  even  an  inconstant  flame  may  burn  brightly,
if  the  soul  is  naturally  combustible.  Indeed  these
sparks  and  glints  of  passion,  just  because  they
come  and  vary  so  quickly,  offer  admirable  illus¬
trations  of  it,  in  which  it  may  be  viewed,  so  to
speak,  under  the  microscope  and  in  its  forma¬
tive  stage.

Thus  Plato  did  not  hesitate  to  make  the  love
of  all  wines,  under  whatever  guise,  excuse,  or  oc¬
casion,  the  test  of  a  true  taste  for  wine  and  an
unfeigned  adoration  of  Bacchus;  and,  like  Lu¬
cretius  after  him,  he  wittily  compiled  a  list  of
names,  by  which  the  lover  will  flatter  the  most
opposite  qualities,  if  they  only  succeed  in  arous¬
ing  his  inclination.  To  be  omnivorous  is  one  pole
of  true  love:  to  be  exclusive  is  the  other.  A  man
whose  heart,  if  I  may  say  so,  lies  deeper,  hidden
under  a  thicker  coat  of  mail,  will  have  less  play
of  fancy,  and  will  be  far  from  finding  every  charm
charming,  or  every  sort  of  beauty  a  stimulus  to
love.  Yet  he  may  not  be  less  prone  to  the  tender
passion,  and  when  once  smitten  may  be  so  pene-


26


THE  LIFE  OF  SEASON


trated  by  an  unimagined  tenderness  and  joy,  that
he  will  declare  himself  incapable  of  ever  loving
again,  and  may  actually  be  so.  Having  no  rivals
and  a  deeper  soil,  love  can  ripen  better  in  such  a
constant  spirit ;  it  will  not  waste  itself  in  a  contin¬
ual  patter  of  little  pleasures  and  illusions.  But
unless  the  passion  of  it  is  to  die  down,  it  must
somehow  assert  its  universality:  what  it  loses  in
diversity  it  must  gain  in  applicability.  It  must
become  a  principle  of  action  and  an  influence
colouring  everything  that  is  dreamt  of ;  otherwise
it  would  have  lost  its  dignity  and  sunk  into  a  dead
memory  or  a  domestic  bond.

True  love,  it  used  to  be  said,  is
love  at  first  sight.  Manners  have
much  to  do  with  such  incidents,  and
the  race  which  happens  to  set,  at  a  given  time,
the  fashion  in  literature  makes  its  temperament
public  and  exercises  a  sort  of  contagion  over  all
men’s  fancies.  If  women  are  rarely  seen  and  or¬
dinarily  not  to  be  spoken  to;  if  all  imagination
has  to  build  upon  is  a  furtive  glance  or  casual
motion,  people  fall  in  love  at  first  sight.  For
they  must  fall  in  love  somehow,  and  any  stimulus
is  enough  if  none  more  powerful  is  forthcoming.
When  society,  on  the  contrary,  allows  constant
and  easy  intercourse  between  the  sexes,  a  first
impression,  if  not  reinforced,  will  soon  be  hid¬
den  and  obliterated  by  others.  Acquaintance  be¬
comes  necessary  for  love  when  it  is  necessary  for
memory.  But  what  makes  true  love  is  not  the


Instinctive
essence
of  love.


LOVE


27


information  conveyed  by  acquaintance,  not  any
circumstantial  charms  that  may  be  therein  dis¬
covered:  it  is  still  a  deep  and  dumb  instinctive
affinity,  an  inexplicable  emotion  seizing  the  heart,
an  influence  organising  the  world,  like  a  luminous
crystal,  about  one  magic  point.  So  that  although
love  seldom  springs  up  suddenly  in  these  days
into  anything  like  a  full-blown  passion,  it  is  sight,
it  is  presence,  that  makes  in  time  a  conquest  over
the  heart;  for  all  virtues,  sympathies,  confidences
will  fail  to  move  a  man  to  tenderness  and  to  wor¬
ship,  unless  a  poignant  effluence  from  the  object
•envelop  him,  so  that  he  begins  to  walk,  as  it  were,
in  a  dream.

Not  to  believe  in  love  is  a  great  sign  of  dulness.
There  are  some  people  so  indirect  and  lumbering
that  they  think  all  real  affection  must  rest  on
circumstantial  evidence.  But  a  finely  constituted
being  is  sensitive  to  its  deepest  affinities.  This
is  precisely  what  refinement  consists  in,  that  we
may  feel  in  things  immediate  and  infinitesimal  a
sure  premonition  of  things  ultimate  and  impor¬
tant.  Fine  senses  vibrate  at  once  to  harmonies
which  it  may  take  long  to  verify;  so  sight  is
finer  than  touch,  and  thought  than  sensation.
Well-bred  instinct  meets  reason  half-way,  and  is
prepared  for  the  consonances  that  may  follow.
Beautiful  things,  when  taste  is  formed,  are  obvi¬
ously  and  unaccountably  beautiful.  The  grounds
we  may  bring  ourselves  to  assign  for  our  prefer¬
ences  are  discovered  by  analysing  those  prefer-


28


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


enees,  and  articulate  judgments  follow  upon
emotions  which  they  ought  to  express,  but  which
they  sometimes  sophisticate.  So,  too,  the  reasons
we  give  for  love  either  express  what  it  feels  or
else  are  insincere,  attempting  to  justify  at  the
bar  of  reason  and  convention  something  which  is
far  more  primitive  than  they  and  underlies  them
both.  True  instinct  can  dispense  with  such  ex¬
cuses.  It  appeals  to  the  event  and  is  justified  by
the  response  which  nature  makes  to  it.  It  is,  of
course,  far  from  infallible;  it  cannot  dominate
circumstances,  and  has  no  discursive  knowledge;
but  it  is  presumably  true,  and  what  it  foreknows
is  always  essentially  possible.  Unrealisable  it
may  indeed  be  in  the  jumbled  context  of  this
world,  where  the  Fates,  like  an  absent-minded
printer,  seldom  allow  a  single  line  to  stand  per¬
fect  and  unmarred.

The  profoundest  affinities  are  those  most  read¬
ily  felt,  and  though  a  thousand  later  considera¬
tions  may  overlay  and  override  them,  they  remain
a  background  and  standard  for  all  happiness.  If
we  trace  them  out  we  succeed.  If  we  put  them  by,
although  in  other  respects  we  may  call  ourselves
happy,  we  inwardly  know  that  we  have  dismissed
the  ideal,  and  all  that  was  essentially  possible  has
not  been  realised.  Love  in  that  case  still  owns
a  hidden  and  potential  object,  and  we  sanctify,
perhaps,  whatever  kindnesses  or  partialities  we
indulge  in  by  a  secret  loyalty  to  something  im¬
personal  and  unseen.  Such  reserve,  such  relig-


LOVE


29


ion,  would  not  have  been  necessary  had  things
responded  to  our  first  expectations.  We  might
then  have  identified  the  ideal  with  the  object  that
happened  to  call  it  forth.  The  Life  of  Reason
might  have  been  led  instinctively,  and  we  might
have  been  guided  by  nature  herself  into  the
ways  of  peace.

As  it  is,  circumstances,  false  steps,
its  ideality.  Qr  the  mere  lapse  of  time,  force  us  to

shuffle  our  affections  and  take  them  as  they
come,  or  as  we  are  suffered  to  indulge  them.  A
mother  is  followed  by  a  boyish  friend,  a  friend
by  a  girl,  a  girl  by  a  wife,  a  wife  by  a  child,  a  child
by  an  idea.  A  divinity  passes  through  these  vari¬
ous  temples ;  they  may  all  remain  standing,  and  we
may  continue  our  cult  in  them  without  outward
change,  long  after  the  god  has  fled  from  the  last
into  his  native  heaven.  We  may  try  to  convince
ourselves  that  we  have  lost  nothing  when  we  have
lost  all.  We  may  take  comfort  in  praising  the
mixed  and  perfunctory  attachments  which  cling
to  us  by  force  of  habit  and  duty,  repeating  the
empty  names  of  creatures  that  have  long  ceased
to  be  what  we  once  could  love,  and  assuring  our¬
selves  that  we  have  remained  constant,  without
admitting  that  the  world,  which  is  in  irreparable
flux,  has  from  the  first  been  betraying  us.

Ashamed  of  being  so  deeply  deceived,  we  may
try  to  smile  cynically  at  the  glory  that  once  shone
upon  us,  and  call  it  a  dream.  But  cynicism  is
wasted  on  the  ideal.  There  is  indeed  no  idol  ever


30


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


identified  with  the  ideal  which  honest  experience,
even  without  cynicism,  will  not  some  day  unmask
and  discredit.  Every  real  object  must  cease  to  be
what  it  seemed,  and  none  could  ever  be  what  the
whole  soul  desired.  Yet  what  the  soul  desires  is
nothing  arbitrary.  Life  is  no  objectless  dream,
but  continually  embodies,  with  varying  success,
the  potentialities  it  contains  and  that  prompt
desire.  Everything  that  satisfies  at  all,  even  if
partially  and  for  an  instant,  justifies  aspiration
and  rewards  it.  Existence,  however,  cannot  be
arrested;  and  only  the  transmissible  forms  of
things  can  endure,  to  match  the  transmissible
faculties  which  living  beings  hand  down  to  one
another.  The  ideal  is  accordingly  significant,
perpetual,  and  as  constant  as  the  nature  it  ex¬
presses;  but  it  can  never  itself  exist,  nor  can  its
particular  embodiments  endure.

Its  universal  L°ve  is  accordingly  only  half  an
scope.  illusion;  the  lover,  but  not  his  love,

is  deceived.  His  madness,  as  PLito  taught,  is
divine;  for  though  it  be  folly  to  identify  the  idol
with  the  god,  faith  in  the  god  is  inwardly  justi¬
fied.  That  egregious  idolatry  may  therefore  be
interpreted  ideally  and  given  a  symbolic  scope
worthy  of  its  natural  causes  and  of  the  mystery  it
comes  to  celebrate.  The  lover  knows  much  more
about  absolute  good  and  universal  beauty  than  any
logician  or  theologian,  unless  the  latter,  too,  be
lovers  in  disguise.  Logical  universals  are  terms
in  discourse,  without  vital  ideality,  while  tradi-


LOVE


31


tional  gods  are  at  best  natural  existences,  more
or  less  indifferent  facts.  What  the  lover  come6
upon,  on  the  contrary,  is  truly  persuasive,  and
witnesses  to  itself,  so  that  he  worships  from  the
heart  and  beholds  what  he  worships.  That  the
true  object  is  no  natural  being,  but  an  ideal  form
essentially  eternal  and  capable  of  endless  embodi¬
ments,  is  far  from  abolishing  its  worth;  on  the
contrary,  this  fact  makes  love  ideally  relevant  to
generation,  by  which  the  human  soul  and  body
may  be  for  ever  renewed,  and  at  the  same  time
makes  it  a  thing  for  large  thoughts  to  be  focussed
upon,  a  thing  representing  all  rational  aims.

Whenever  this  ideality  is  absent  and  a  lover  sees
nothing  in  his  mistress  but  what  everyone  else
may  find  in  her,  loving  her  honestly  in  her  unvar¬
nished  and  accidental  person,  there  is  a  friendly
and  humorous  affection,  admirable  in  itself,  but
no  passion  or  bewitchment  of  love ;  she  is  a  mem¬
ber  of  his  group,  not  a  spirit  in  his  pantheon.
Such  an  affection  may  be  altogether  what  it  should
be;  it  may  bring  a  happiness  all  the  more  stable
because  the  heart  is  quite  whole,  and  no  divine
shaft  has  pierced  it.  It  is  hard  to  stanch  wounds
inflicted  by  a  god.  The  glance  of  an  ideal  love  is
terrible  and  glorious,  foreboding  death  and  im¬
mortality  together.  Love  could  not  be  called
divine  without  platitude  if  it  regarded  nothing
but  its  nominal  object;  to  be  divine  it  must  not
envisage  an  accidental  good  but  the  principle  of
goodness,  that  which  gives  other  goods  their  ulti-


32  THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

»

mate  meaning,  and  makes  all  functions  useful.
Love  is  a  true  natural  religion;  it  has  a  visible
cult,  it  is  kindled  by  natural  beauties  and  bows
to  the  best  symbol  it  may  find  for  its  hope;  it
sanctifies  a  natural  mystery;  and,  finally,  when
understood,  it  recognises  that  what  it  worshipped
under  a  figure  was  truly  the  principle  of  all  good.

The  loftiest  edifices  need  the  deepest  founda¬
tions.  Love  would  never  take  so  high  a  flight
unless  it  sprung  from  something  profound  and
elementary.  It  is  accordingly  most  truly  love
when  it  is  irresistible  and  fatal.  The  substance
of  all  passion,  if  we  could  gather,  it  together,
would  be  the  basis  of  all  ideals,  to  which  all
goods  would  have  to  refer.  Love  actually  accom¬
plishes  something  of  the  sort;  being  primordial
it  underlies  other  demands,  and  can  be  wholly
satisfied  only  by  a  happiness  which  is  ultimate
and  comprehensive.  Lovers  are  vividly  aware
of  this  fact:  their  ideal,  apparently  so  inarticu¬
late,  seems  to  them  to  include  everything.  It
shares  the  mystical  quality  of  all  primitive  life.
Sophisticated  people  can  hardly  understand  how
vague  experience  is  at  bottom,  and  how  truly  that
vagueness  supports  whatever  clearness  is  after¬
ward  attained.  They  cling  to  the  notion  that
nothing  can  have  a  spiritual  scope  that  does  not
spring  from  reflection.  But  in  that  case  life  itself,
which  brings  reflection  about,  would  never  support
spiritual  interests,  and  all  that  is  moral  would  be
unnatural  and  consequently  self-destructive.  In


LOVE


33


truth,  all  spiritual  interests  are  supported  by
animal  life;  in  this  the  generative  function  is
fundamental;  and  it  is  therefore  no  paradox,  but
something  altogether  fitting,  that  if  that  function
realised  all  it  comprises,  nothing  human  would  re¬
main  outside.  Such  an  ultimate  fulfilment  would
differ,  of  course,  from  a  first  satisfaction,  just
as  all  that  reproduction  reproduces  differs  from
the  reproductive  function  itself,  and  vastly  ex¬
ceeds  it.  All  organs  and  activities  which  are  in¬
herited,  in  a  sense,  grow  out  of  the  reproductive
process  and  serve  to  clothe  it;  so  that  when  the
generative  energy  is  awakened  all  that  can  ever
be  is  virtually  called  up  and,  so  to  speak,  made
consciously  potential;  and  love  yearns  for  the
universe  of  values.

This  secret  is  gradually  revealed  to

Its  euthanasia.

those  who  are  inwardly  attentive  and
allow  love  to  teach  them  something.  A  man  who
has  truly  loved,  though  he  may  come  to  recognise
the  thousand  incidental  illusions  into  which  love
may  have  led  him,  will  not  recant  its  essential
faith.  He  will  keep  his  sense  for  the  ideal  and
his  power  to  worship.  The  further  objects  by
which  these  gifts  will  be  entertained  will  vary
with  the  situation.  A  philosopher,  a  soldier,  and
a  courtesan  will  express  the  same  religion  in  dif¬
ferent  ways.  In  fortunate  cases  love  may  glide
imperceptibly  into  settled  domestic  affections,  giv¬
ing  them  henceforth  a  touch  of  ideality ;  for  when
love  dies  in  the  odour  of  sanctity  people  venerate
vol.  n.— 3


34


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


his  relics.  In  other  eases  allegiance  to  the  ideal
may  appear  more  sullenly,  breaking  out  in  whims,
or  in  little  sentimental  practices  which  might  seem
half-conventional.  Again  it  may  inspire  a  relig¬
ious  conversion,  charitable  works,  or  even  artistic
labours.  In  all  these  ways  people  attempt  more
or  less  seriously  to  lead  the  Life  of  Eeason,  ex¬
pressing  outwardly  allegiance  to  whatever  in  their
minds  has  come  to  stand  for  the  ideal.  If  to
create  was  love’s  impulse  originally,  to  create  is
its  effort  still,  after  it  has  been  chastened  and
has  received  some  rational  extension.  The  ma¬
chinery  which  serves  reproduction  thus  finds  kin¬
dred  but  higher  uses,  as  every  organ  does  in  a
liberal  life;  and  what  Plato  called  a  desire  for
birth  in  beauty  may  be  sublimated  even  more,
until  it  yearns  for  an  ideal  immortality  in  a  trans¬
figured  world,  a  world  made  worthy  of  that  love
which  its  children  have  so  often  lavished  on  it  in
their  dreams.


CHAPTER  II


THE  FAMILY


The  family  Love  is  but  a  prelude  to  life,  an
arises  sponta-  overture  in  which  the  theme  of  the
neousiy.  impending  work  is  exquisitely  hinted
at,  but  which  remains  nevertheless  only  a  symbol
a  and  a  promise.  What  is  to  follow,  if  all  goes
well,  begins  presently  to  appear.  Passion  settles
down  into  possession,  courtship  into  partnership,
pleasure  into  habit.  A  child,  half  mystery  and
half  plaything,  comes  to  show  us  what  we  have
done  and  to  make  its  consequences  perpetual.
We  see  that  by  indulging  our  inclinations  we
have  woven  about  us  a  net  from  which  we  cannot
escape :  our  choices,  bearing  fruit,  begin  to  mani¬
fest  our  destiny.  That  life  which  once  seemed
to  spread  out  infinitely  before  us  is  narrowed  to
one  mortal  career.  We  learn  that  in  morals  the
infinite  is  a  chimera,  and  that  in  accomplishing
anything  definite  a  man  renounces  everything
else.  He  sails  henceforth  for  one  point  of  the
compass.

.  .  The  family  is  one  of  nature’s  mas-

It  harmonises  J

natural  inter-  terpieces.  It  would  be  hard  to  con-
ests  ceive  a  system  of  instincts  more  nicely

adjusted,  where  the  constituents  should  represent

35


36


THE  LIFE  OF  KEASON


or  support  one  another  better.  The  husband  has
an  interest  in  protecting  the  wife,  she  in  serving
the  husband.  The  weaker  gains  in  authority  and
safety,  the  wilder  and  more  unconcerned  finds  a
help-mate  at  home  to  take  thought  for  his  daily
necessities.  Parents  lend  children  their  experi¬
ence  and  a  vicarious  memory;  children  endow
their  parents  with  a  vicarious  immortality.

The  long  childhood  in  the  human

Cflpscity  to  bo  i  t  •  i  i  *i  *  i

educated  goes  race  ^as  made  it  possible  and  needful

with  immatur-  to  transmit  acquired  experience :  pos-

ity  at  birth.  because  the  child^s  brain,  being

immature,  allows  instincts  and  habits  to  be
formed  after  birth,  under  the  influence  of  that
very  environment  in  which  they  are  to  operate;
and  also  needful,  since  children  are  long  incapa¬
ble  of  providing  for  themselves  and  compel  their
parents,  if  the  race  is  not  to  die  out,  to  continue
their  care,  and  to  diversify  it.  To  be  born  half-
made  is  an  immense  advantage.  Structure  per¬
formed  is  formed  blindly;  the  a  priori  is  as  dan¬
gerous  in  life  as  in  philosophy.  Only  the  cruel
workings  of  compulsion  and  extermination  keep
what  is  spontaneous  in  any  creature  harmonious
with  the  world  it  is  called  upon  to  live  in.  Noth¬
ing  but  casual  variations  could  permanently  im¬
prove  such  a  creature;  and  casual  variations  will
seldom  improve  it.  But  if  experience  can  co¬
operate  in  forming  instincts,  and  if  human  nature
can  be  partly  a  work  of  art,  mastery  can  be  carried


THE  FAMILY


37


quickly  to  much  greater  lengths.  This  is  the
secret  of  man*s  pre-eminence.  His  liquid  brain
is  unfit  for  years  to  control  action  advantageously.
He  has  an  age  of  play  which  is  his  apprenticeship ;
and  he  is  formed  unawares  by  a  series  of  selective
experiments,  of  curious  gropings,  while  he  is  still
under  tutelage  and  suffers  little  by  his  mistakes.

The  naturally  Had  intelligence  been  developed
dull  achieve  in  the  womb,  as  it  might  have  been,
intelligence.  nothing  essential  could  have  been

learned  afterward.  Mankind  would  have  con¬
tained  nothing  but  doctrinaires,  and  the  arts
’would  have  stood  still  for  ever.  Capacity  to  learn
comes  with  dependence  on  education;  and  as  that
animal  which  at  birth  is  most  incapable  and  im¬
mature  is  the  most  teachable,  so  too  those  human
races  which  are  most  precocious  are  most  incorri¬
gible,  and  while  they  seem  the  cleverest  at  first
prove  ultimately  the  least  intelligent.  They  de¬
pend  less  on  circumstances,  but  do  not  respond  to
them  so  well.  In  some  nations  everybody  is  by  na¬
ture  so  astute,  versatile,  and  sympathetic  that  edu¬
cation  hardly  makes  any  difference  in  manners
or  mind;  and  it  is  there  precisely  that  generation
follows  generation  without  essential  progress,  and
no  one  ever  remakes  himself  on  a  better  plan.  It
is  perhaps  the  duller  races,  with  a  long  childhood
and  a  brooding  mind,  that  bear  the  hopes  of  the
world  within  them,  if  only  nature  avails  to  exe¬
cute  what  she  has  planned  on  so  great  a  scale.


38


THE  LIFE  OF  SEASON


_  s  Generation  answers  no  actual  de-

It  is  more

blessed  to  save  mand  except  that  existing  in  the  pa-
than  to  create.  ren^  an(j  establishes  a  new  demand

without  guaranteeing  its  satisfaction.  Birth  is  a
benefit  only  problematically  and  by  anticipation,
on  the  presumption  that  the  faculties  newly  em¬
bodied  are  to  be  exercised  successfully.  The  sec¬
ond  function  of  the  family,  to  rear,  is  therefore
higher  than  the  first.  To  foster  and  perfect  a
life  after  it  has  been  awakened,  to  co-operate
with  a  will  already  launched  into  the  world,  is  a
positive  good  work.  It  has  a  moral  quality  and
is  not  mere  vegetation;  for  in  expressing  the
agent  and  giving  him  ideal  employment,  it  helps
the  creature  affected  to  employ  itself  better,  too,
and  to  find  expression.  In  propagating  and  sow-
ing  broadcast  precarious  beings  there  is  fertility
only,  such  as  plants  and  animals  may  have;  but
there  is  charity  in  furthering  what  is  already
rooted  in  existence  and  is  striving  to  live.

This  principle  is  strikingly  illustrated  in  relig¬
ion.  When  the  Jews  had  become  spiritual  they
gave  the  name  of  Father  to  Jehovah,  who  had  be¬
fore  been  only  the  Lord  of  Armies  or  the  architect
of  the  cosmos.  A  mere  source  of  being  would  not
deserve  to  be  called  father,  unless  it  shared  its
creatures5  nature  and  therefore  their  interests.
A  deity  not  so  much  responsible  for  men’s  exist¬
ence  or  situation  as  solicitous  for  their  welfare,
who  pitied  a  weakness  he  could  not  have  intended
and  was  pleased  by  a  love  he  could  not  command.


I


THE  FAMILY


39


might  appropriately  be  called  a  father.  It  then
becomes  possible  to  conceive  moral  intercourse
and  mutual  loyalty  between  God  and  man,  such  as
Hebrew  religion  so  earnestly  insisted  on;  for  both
then  have  the  same  interests  in  the  world  and
look  toward  the  same  consummations.  So  the
natural  relations  subsisting  between  parents  and
children  become  moral  when  it  is  not  merely  deri¬
vation  that  unites  them,  but  community  of  pur¬
pose.  The  father  then  represents  his  children
while  they  are  under  his  tutelage,  and  afterward
they  represent  him,  carrying  on  his  arts  and  in-
.  heriting  his  mind.

These  arts  in  some  cases  are  little  more  than
retarded  instincts,  faculties  that  ripen  late  and
that  manifest  themselves  without  special  instruc¬
tion  when  the  system  is  mature.  So  a  bird  feeds
her  young  until  they  are  fledged  and  can  pro¬
vide  for  themselves.  Parental  functions  in  such

Parental  in  cases  are  limited  to  nursing  the  ex-
stinct  regards  tremely  young.  This  phase  of  the  in-
chiidhood  only.  s^nc^  being  the  most  primitive  and

fundamental,  is  most  to  be  relied  upon  even  in
man.  Especially  in  the  mother,  care  for  the  chil¬
dren’s  physical  well-being  is  unfailing  to  the  end.
She  understands  the  vegetative  soul,  and  the  first
lispings  of  sense  and  sentiment  in  the  child  have
an  absorbing  interest  for  her.  In  that  region  her
skill  and  delights  are  miracles  of  nature;  but  her
insight  and  keenness  gradually  fade  as  the  chil¬
dren  grow  older.  Seldom  is  the  private  and  ideal


40


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


life  of  a  young  son  or  daughter  a  matter  in  which
the  mother  shows  particular  tact  or  for  which
she  has  instinctive  respect.  Even  rarer  is  any
genuine  community  in  life  and  feeling  between
parents  and  their  adult  children.  Often  the  pa¬
rent’s  influence  comes  to  be  felt  as  a  dead  con¬
straint,  the  more  cruel  that  it  cannot  be  thrown
off  without  unkindness ;  and  what  makes  the
parents’  claim  at  once  unjust  and  pathetic  is  that
it  is  founded  on  passionate  love  for  a  remembered
being,  the  child  once  wholly  theirs,  that  no  longer
exists  in  the  man.

To  train  character  and  mind  would  seem  to  be
a  father’s  natural  office,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact
he  commonly  delegates  that  task  to  society.  The
fledgling  venturing  for  the  first  time  into  the  air
may  learn  of  his  father  and  imitate  his  style  of
flight;  but  once  launched  into  the  open  it  will
find  the  whole  sky  full  of  possible  masters.  The
one  ultimately  chosen  will  not  necessarily  be  the
nearest ;  in  reason  it  should  be  the  most  congenial,
from  whom  most  can  be  learned.  To  choose  an
imitable  hero  is  the  boy’s  first  act  of  freedom;
his  heart  grows  by  finding  its  elective  affinities,
and  it  grows  most  away  from  home.  It  will  grow
also  by  returning  there,  when  home  has  become
a  part  of  the  world  or  a  refuge  from  it;  but  even
then  the  profoundest  messages  will  come  from  re¬
ligion  and  from  solitary  dreams.  A  consequence
is  that  parental  influence,  to  be  permanent,  re¬
quires  that  the  family  should  be  hedged  about


THE  FAMILY


41


with  high  barriers  and  that  the  father  be  en¬
dowed  with  political  and  religious  authority.  He
can  then  exercise  the  immense  influence  due  to
all  tradition,  which  he  represents,  and  all  law,
which  he  administers;  but  it  is  not  his  bare  in¬
stincts  as  a  father  that  give  him  this  ascendency.
It  is  a  social  system  that  has  delegated  to  him
most  of  its  functions,  so  that  all  authority  flows
through  him,  and  he  retails  justice  and  knowl¬
edge,  besides  holding  all  wealth  in  his  hand.
When  the  father,  apart  from  these  official  pre¬
rogatives,  is  eager  and  able  to  mould  his  children’s
minds,  a  new  relation  half  natural  and  half  ideal,
which  is  friendship,  springs  up  between  father
and  son.  In  this  ties  of  blood  merely  furnish
the  opportunity,  and  what  chiefly  counts  is  a
moral  impulse,  on  the  one  side,  to  beget  children
in  the  spirit,  and  on  the  other  a  youthful  hunger
for  experience  and  ideas.

w  ^  If  Nunc  dimittis  is  a  psalm  for  love

Handing  on  r

the  torch  of  to  sing,  it  is  even  more  appropriate
Ufc*  for  parental  piety.  On  seeing  heirs

and  representatives  of  ours  already  in  the  world,
we  are  inclined  to  give  them  place  and  trust  them
to  realise  our  foiled  ambitions.  They,  we  fancy,
will  be  more  fortunate  than  we;  we  shall  have
screened  them  from  whatever  has  most  maimed
our  own  lives.  Their  purer  souls,  as  we  imagine,
will  reach  better  things  than  are  now  possible  to
ours,  distracted  and  abused  so  long.  We  commit
the  blotted  manuscript  of  our  lives  more  willingly


42


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


to  the  flames,  when  we  find  the  immortal  text
already  half  engrossed  in  a  fairer  copy.  In  all
this  there  is  undoubtedly  a  measure  of  illusion,
since  little  clear  improvement  is  ordinarily  possi¬
ble  in  the  world,  and  while  our  children  may  im¬
prove  upon  us  in  some  respects,  the  devil  will  catch
them  unprepared  in  another  quarter.  Yet  the
hope  in  question  is  a  transcript  of  primary  im¬
personal  functions  to  which  nature,  at  certain
levels,  limits  the  animal  will.  To  keep  life  going
was,  in  the  beginning,  the  sole  triumph  of  life.
Even  when  nothing  but  reproduction  was  aimed
at  or  attained,  existence  was  made  possible  and
ideally  stable  by  securing  so  much;  and  when  the
ideal  was  enlarged  so  as  to  include  training  and
rearing  the  new  generation,  life  was  even  better
intrenched  and  protected.  Though  further  ma¬
terial  progress  may  not  be  made  easier  by  this
development,  since  more  dangers  become  fatal  as
beings  grow  complex  and  mutually  dependent,  a
great  step  in  moral  progress  has  at  any  rate  been
taken.

In  itself,  a  desire  to  see  a  child  grow  and
prosper  is  just  as  irrational  as  any  other  absolute
desire;  but  since  the  child  also  desires  his  own
happiness,  the  child’s  will  sanctions  and  supports
the  father’s.  Thus  two  irrationalities,  when  they
conspire,  make  one  rational  life.  The  father’s
instinct  and  sense  of  duty  are  now  vindicated
experimentally  in  the  child’s  progress,  while  the
son,  besides  the  joy  of  living,  has  the  pious  func-


THE  FAMILY


43


tion  of  satisfying  his  parent's  hopes.  Even  if  life
could  achieve  nothing  more  than  this,  it  would
have  reached  something  profoundly  natural  and
perfectly  ideal.  In  patriarchal  ages  men  feel  it
is  enough  to  have  inherited  their  human  patri¬
mony,  to  have  enjoyed  it,  and  to  hand  it  down
unimpaired.  He  who  is  not  childless  goes  down
to  his  grave  in  peace.  Reason  may  afterward
come  to  larger  vistas  and  more  spiritual  aims,
but  the  principle  of  love  and  responsibility  will
not  be  altered.  It  will  demand  that  wills  be  made
harmonious  and  satisfactions  compatible.

Life  is  experimental,  and  whatever

Adventitious  .  ~  . .

functions  as-  performs  some  necessary  function,
sumed  by  the  and  cannot  be  discarded,  is  a  safe  nu-
famiiy.  cleus  for  many  a  parasite,  a  starting-

point  for  many  new  experiments.  So  the  family,
in  serving  to  keep  the  race  alive,  becomes  a  point
of  departure  for  many  institutions.  It  assumes
offices  which  might  have  been  allotted  to  some
other  agency,  had  not  the  family  pre-empted
them,  profiting  by  its  established  authority  and
annexing  them  to  its  domain.  In  no  civilised
community,  for  instance,  has  the  union  of  man
and  wife  been  limited  to  its  barely  necessary
period.  It  has  continued  after  the  family  was
reared  and  has  remained  life-long;  it  has  com¬
monly  involved  a  common  dwelling  and  religion
and  often  common  friends  and  property.  Again,
the  children's  emancipation  has  been  put  off  in¬
definitely.  The  Roman  father  had  a  perpetual


44


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


jurisdiction  and  such  absolute  authority  that,  in
the  palmy  days  of  the  Roman  family,  no  other
subsisted  over  it.  He  alone  was  a  citizen  and
responsible  to  the  state,  while  his  household  were
subject  to  him  in  law,  as  well  as  in  property  and
religion.  In  simple  rural  communities  the  fami-
ily  has  often  been  also  the  chief  industrial  unit,
almost  all  necessaries  being  produced  under  do¬
mestic  economy.

Now  the  instincts  and  delights  which  nature
associates  with  reproduction  cannot  stretch  so  far.
Their  magic  fails,  and  the  political  and  industrial
family,  which  still  thinks  itself  natural,  is  in  truth
casual  and  conventional.  There  is  no  real  instinct
to  protect  those  who  can  already  protect  them¬
selves;  nor  have  they  any  profit  in  obeying  nor,
in  the  end,  any  duty  to  do  so.  A  patria  potestas
much  prolonged  or  extended  is  therefore  an  abuse
and  prolific  in  abuses.  The  chieftain’s  mind,  not
being  ruled  by  paternal  instincts,  will  pursue
arbitrary  personal  ends,  and  it  is  hardly  to  be
expected  that  his  own  wealth  or  power  or  ideal
interests  will  correspond  with  those  of  his  sub¬
jects.  The  government  and  supervision  required
by  adults  is  what  we  call  political;  it  should
stretch  over  all  families  alike.  To  annex  this

inertia  in  hu-  political  control  to  fatherhood  is  to
man  nature,  confess  that  social  instinct  is  singu¬
larly  barren,  and  that  the  common  mind  is  not
plastic  enough  to  devise  new  organs  appropriate
to  the  functions  which  a  large  society  involves.


THE  FAMILY


45


After  all,  the  family  is  an  early  expedient  and
in  many  ways  irrational.  If  the  race  had  devel-
oped  a  special  sexless  class  to  be  nurses,  peda¬
gogues,  and  slaves,  like  the  workers  among  ants
and  bees,  and  if  lovers  had  never  been  tied  to¬
gether  by  a  bond  less  ethereal  than  ideal  pas¬
sion,  then  the  family  would  have  been  unneces¬
sary.  Such  a  division  of  labour  would  doubtless
have  involved  evils  of  its  own,  but  it  would  have
obviated  some  drags  and  vexations  proper  to  the
family.  For  we  pay  a  high  price  for  our  con¬
quests  in  this  quarter,  and  the  sweets  of  home

m

are  balanced  not  only  by  its  tenderer  sorrows,  but
*>y  a  thousand  artificial  prejudices,  enmities,  and
restrictions.  It  takes  patience  to  appreciate  do¬
mestic  bliss;  volatile  spirits  prefer  unhappiness.
Young  men  escape  as  soon  as  they  can,  at  least
in  fancy,  into  the  wide  world;  all  prophets  are
homeless  and  all  inspired  artists;  philosophers
think  out  some  communism  or  other,  and  monks
put  it  in  practice.  There  is  indeed  no  more  irra¬
tional  ground  for  living  together  than  that  we
have  sprung  from  the  same  loins.  They  say  blood
is  thicker  than  water;  yet  similar  forces  easily
compete  while  dissimilar  forces  may  perhaps  co¬
operate.  It  is  the  end  that  is  sacred,  not  the
beginning.  A  common  origin  unites  reasonable
creatures  only  if  it  involves  common  thoughts  and
purposes;  and  these  may  bind  together  individ¬
uals  of  the  most  remote  races  and  ages,  when  once
they  have  discovered  one  another.  It  is  difficul-


46


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ties  of  access,  ignorance,  and  material  confinement
that  shut  in  the  heart  to  its  narrow  loyalties ;  and
perhaps  greater  mobility,  science,  and  the  min¬
gling  of  nations  will  one  day  reorganise  the  moral
world.  It  was  a  pure  spokesman  of  the  spirit
who  said  that  whosoever  should  do  the  will  of
his  Father  who  was  in  heaven,  the  same  was  his
brother  and  sister  and  mother.

Family  tyran-  The  fanuly  also  perpetuates  acci-
mes-  dental  social  differences,  exaggerating

and  making  them  hereditary ;  it  thus  defeats  that
just  moiety  of  the  democratic  ideal  which  de¬
mands  that  all  men  should  have  equal  opportuni¬
ties.  In  human  society  chance  only  decides  what
education  a  man  shall  receive,  what  wealth  and
influence  he  shall  enjoy,  even  what  religion  and
profession  he  shall  adopt.  People  shudder  at  the
system  of  castes  which  prevails  in  India;  but  is
not  every  family  a  little  caste?  Was  a  man  as¬
signed  to  his  family  because  he  belonged  to  it  in
spirit,  or  can  he  choose  another  ?  Half  the  poten¬
tialities  in  the  human  race  are  thus  stifled,  half
its  incapacities  fostered  and  made  inveterate.
The  family,  too,  is  largely  responsible  for  the
fierce  prejudices  that  prevail  about  women,  about
religion,  about  seemly  occupations,  about  war,
death,  and  honour.  In  all  these  matters  men
judge  in  a  blind  way,  inspired  by  a  feminine  pas¬
sion  that  has  no  mercy  for  anything  that  eludes
the  traditional  household,  not  even  for  its  mem¬
bers’  souls.


THE  FAMILY


47


At  the  same  time  there  are  insuper-

ab^mcting11  able  difficulties  in  proposing  any  sub-
from  the  stitute  f or  the  family.  In  the  first

family.  place,  all  society  at  present  rests  on

this  institution,  so  that  we  cannot  easily  discern
which  of  our  habits  and  sentiments  are  parcels
of  it,  and  which  are  attached  to  it  adventitiously
and  have  an  independent  basis.  A  reformer  hew¬
ing  so  near  to  the  tree’s  root  never  knows  how
much  lie  may  be  felling.  Possibly  his  own  ideal
would  lose  its  secret  support  if  what  it  condemns
had  wholly  disappeared.  For  instance,  it  is  con¬
ceivable  that  a  communist,  abolishing  the  family
in  order  to  make  opportunities  equal  and  remove
the  more  cruel  injustices  of  fortune,  might  be
drying  up  that  milk  of  human  kindness  which
had  fed  his  own  enthusiasm;  for  the  foundlings
which  he  decreed  were  to  people  the  earth  might
at  once  dkown  all  socialism  and  prove  a  brood  of
inhuman  ejoists.  Or,  as  not  wholly  contemptible
theories  hive  maintained,  it  might  happen  that
if  fathers  vere  relieved  of  care  for  their  children
and  children  of  all  paternal  suasion,  human  virtue
would  lose  its  two  chief  stays.

Possibility  of  On  the  other  hand,  an  opposite
substitutes.  danger  is  present  in  this  sort  of  specu¬
lation.  Thiigs  now  associated  with  the  family
may  not  depend  upon  it,  but  might  flourish
equally  well  n  a  different  soil.  The  family  being
the  earliest  and  closest  society  into  which  men
enter,  it  assumes  the  primary  functions  which


48


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


all  society  can  exercise.  Possibly  if  any  other
institution  had  been  first  in  the  field  it  might
have  had  a  comparable  moral  influence.  One  of
the  great  lessons,  for  example,  which  society  has
to  teach  its  members  is  that  society  exists.  The
child,  like  the  animal,  is  a  colossal  egoist,  not
from  a  want  of  sensibility,  but  through  his  deep
transcendental  isolation.  The  mind  is  naturally
its  own  world  and  its  solipsism  needs  to  be  broken
down  by  social  influence.  The  child  must  learn
to  sympathise  intelligently,  to  be  considerate,
rather  than  instinctively  to  love  and  hate:  his
imagination  must  become  cognitive  and  dramati¬
cally  just,  instead  of  remaining,  as  it  nattrally  is,
sensitively,  selfishly  fanciful.  j

To  break  down  transcendental  conceit  s  a  func¬
tion  usually  confided  to  the  family,  anl  yet  the
family  is  not  well  fitted  to  perform  it.  To  moth¬
ers  and  nurses  their  darlings  are  always  excep¬
tional;  even  fathers  and  brothers  teach  a  child
that  he  is  very  different  from  other  creatures  and
of  infinitely  greater  consequence,  since  he  lies
closer  to  their  hearts  and  may  expect  from  them
all  sorts  of  favouring  services.  The  wiole  house¬
hold,  in  proportion  as  it  spreads  about,  the  child  a
brooding  and  indulgent  atmosphere,  nurses  wil¬
fulness  and  illusion.  For  this  reason  the  noblest
and  happiest  children  are  those  brought  up,  as  in
Greece  or  England,  under  simple  general  con¬
ventions  by  persons  trained  and  hred  for  the
purpose.  The  best  training  in  character  is  found


THE  FAMILY


49


in  very  large  families  or  in  schools,  where  boys
educate  one  another.  Priceless  in  this  regard  is
athletic  exercise;  for  here  the  test  of  ability  is
visible,  the  comparison  not  odious,  the  need  of
co-operation  clear,  and  the  consciousness  of  power
genuine  and  therefore  ennobling.^  Socratic  dia¬
lectic  is  not  a  better  means  of  learning  to  know
oneself,  j)  Such  self-knowledge  is  objective  and
free  from  self-consciousness;  it  sees  the  self  in  a
general  medium  and  measures  it  by  a  general  law.

Even  the  tenderer  associations  of  home  might,
under  other  circumstances,  attach  to  other  ob¬
jects.  Consensus  of  opinion  has  a  distorting  ef¬
fect,  sometimes,  on  ideal  values.  A  thing  which
almost  everyone  agrees  in  prizing,  because  it  has
played  some  part  in  every  life,  tends  to  be  valued
above  more  important  elements  in  personal  happi¬
ness  that  may  not  have  been  shared.  So  wealth,
religion,  military  victory  have  more  rhetorical
than  efficacious  worth.  The  family  might  well  be,
to  some  extent,  a  similar  idol  of  the  tribe.  Every¬
one  has  had  a  father  and  a  mother;  but  how  many
have  had  a  friend  ?  Everyone  likes  to  remember
many  a  joy  and  even  sorrow  of  his  youth  which
was  linked  with  family  occasions;  but  to  name  a
mam’s  more  private  memories,  attached  to  special
surroundings,  would  awaken  no  response  in  other
minds.  Yet  these  other  surroundings  may  have
been  no  less  stimulating  to  emotion,  and  if  fa¬
miliar  to  all  might  be  spoken  of  with  as  much
conventional  effect.  This  appears  so  soon  as  any
V ol.  IL— 4


50


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


experience  is  diffused  enough  to  enable  a  tradi¬
tion  to  arise,  so  that  the  sentiment  involved  can
find  a  social  echo.  Thus  there  is  a  loyalty,  very
powerful  in  certain  quarters,  toward  school,  col¬
lege,  club,  regiment,  church,  and  country.  Who
shall  say  that  such  associations,  had  they  sprung
up  earlier  and  been  more  zealously  cultivated,  or
were  they  now  reinforced  by  more  general  sym¬
pathy,  would  not  breed  all  the  tenderness  and  in¬
fuse  all  the  moral  force  which  most  men  now  de¬
rive  from  the  family?

Plato's  heroic  Nevertheless,  no  suggested  substi-
communism.  tute  for  the  family  is  in  the  least

satisfactory.  Plato’s  is  the  best  grounded  in  rea¬
son;  but  to  succeed  it  would  have  to  count  on  a
degree  of  virtue  absolutely  unprecedented  in  man.
To  be  sure,  the  Platonic  regimen,  if  it  demands
heroism  for  its  inception,  provides  in  its  scientific
breeding  and  education  a  means  of  making  hero¬
ism  perpetual.  But  to  submit  to  such  reforming
regulations  men  would  first  have  to  be  reformed;
it  would  not  suffice,  as  Plato  suggested,  merely  to
enslave  them  and  to  introduce  scientific  institu¬
tions  by  despotic  decrees.  For  in  such  a  case
there  would  be  all  manner  of  evasions,  rebellions,
and  corruptions.  If  marriage  founded  on  in¬
clination  and  mutual  consent  is  so  often  broken
surreptitiously  or  by  open  divorce,  what  should
we  expect  amongst  persons  united  and  separated
by  governmental  policy?  The  love  of  home  is  a
human  instinct.  Princes  who  marry  for  political


THE  FAMILY


51


reasons  often  find  a  second  household  necessary
to  their  happiness,  although  every  motive  of
honour,  policy,  religion,  and  patriotism  makes
with  overwhelming  force  against  such  irregulari¬
ties;  and  the  celibate  priesthood,  presumably  tak¬
ing  its  vows  freely  and  under  the  influence  of
religious  zeal,  often  revert  in  practice  to  a  sort  of
natural  marriage.  It  is  true  that  Plato’s  citizens
were  not  to  be  celibates,  and  the  senses  would
have  had  no  just  cause  for  rebellion;  but  would
the  heart  have  been  satisfied?  Could  passion  or
habit  submit  to  such  regulation?

Even  when  every  concession  is  made  to  the  god¬
like  simplicity  and  ardour  which  that  Platonic
race  was  to  show,  a  greater  difficulty  appears.  Ap¬
parently  the  guardians  and  auxiliaries,  a  small
minority  in  the  state,  were  alone  to  submit  to  this
regimen :  the  rest  of  the  people,  slaves,  tradesmen,
and  foreigners,  were  to  live  after  their  own  de¬
vices  and  were,  we  may  suppose,  to  retain  the  fam¬
ily.  So  that,  after  all,  Plato  in  this  matter  pro¬
poses  little  more  than  what  military  and  monastic
orders  have  actually  done  among  Christians:  to
institute  a  privileged  unmarried  class  in  the  midst
of  an  ordinary  community.  Such  a  proposal,  there¬
fore,  does  not  abolish  the  family.

Opposite  mod-  Those  forms  of  free  love  or  facile
era  tendencies,  divorce  to  which  radical  opinion  and

practice  incline  in  these  day6  tend  to  transform
the  family  without  abolishing  it.  Many  unions
might  continue  to  be  lasting,  and  the  children


52


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


in  any  case  would  remain  with  one  or  the  other
parent.  The  family  has  already  suffered  greater
transformations  than  that  suggested  by  this  sect.
Polygamy  persists,  involving  its  own  type  of  mor¬
als  and  sentiment,  and  savage  tribes  show  even
more  startling  conventions.  Nor  is  it  reason¬
able  to  dismiss  all  ideals  but  the  Christian  and
then  invoke  Christian  patience  to  help  us  endure
the  consequent  evils,  which  are  thus  declared  to
be  normal.  No  evil  is  normal.  Of  course  virtue
is  the  cure  for  every  abuse;  but  the  question
is  the  true  complexion  of  virtue  and  the  regimen
needful  to  produce  it.  Christianity,  with  its
non-political  and  remedial  prescriptions,  in  the
form  of  prayer,  penance,  and  patience,  has  left
the  causes  of  every  evil  untouched.  It  has  so
truly  come  to  call  the  sinner  to  repentance  that  its
occupation  would  be  gone  if  once  the  sin  could
be  abolished.

While  a  desirable  form  of  society

Individualism  b  J

in  a  sense  ra-  entirely  without  the  family  is  hard  to
tion&i.  conceive,  yet  the  general  tendency  in

historic  times,  and  the  marked  tendency  in  periods
of  ripe  development,  has  been  toward  individu¬
alism.  Individualism  is  in  one  sense  the  only
possible  ideal;  for  whatever  social  order  may  be
most  valuable  can  be  valuable  only  for  its  effect
on  conscious  individuals.  Man  is  of  course  a
social  animal  and  needs  society  first  that  he  may
come  safely  into  being,  and  then  that  he  may
have  something  interesting  to  do.  But  society


THE  FAMILY


53


itself  is  no  animal  and  has  neither  instincts,  in¬
terests,  nor  ideals.  To  talk  of  such  things  is
either  to  speak  metaphorically  or  to  think  mythi¬
cally;  and  myths,  the  more  currency  they  acquire,
pass  the  more  easily  into  superstitions.  It  would
be  a  gross  and  pedantic  superstition  to  venerate
any  form  of  society  in  itself,  apart  from  the  safety,
breadth,  or  sweetness  which  it  lent  to  individual
happiness.  If  the  individual  may  be  justly  subor¬
dinated  to  the  state,  not  merely  for  the  sake  of
a  future  freer  generation,  but  permanently  and
in  the  ideal  society,  the  reason  is  simply  that  such
subordination  is  a  part  of  man’s  natural  devotion
to  things  rational  and  impersonal,  in  the  presence
of  which  alone  he  can  be  personally  happy.  Soci¬
ety,  in  its  future  and  its  past,  is  a  natural  object
of  interest  like  art  or  science ;  it  exists,  like  them,
because  only  when  lost  in  such  rational  objects
can  a  free  soul  be  active  and  immortal.  But  all
these  ideals  are  terms  in  some  actual  life,  not  alien
ends,  important  to  nobody,  to  which,  notwithstand¬
ing,  everybody  is  to  be  sacrificed.

Individualism  is  therefore  the  only  ideal  possi¬
ble.  The  excellence  of  societies  is  measured  by
what  they  provide  for  their  members.  A  cum¬
brous  and  sanctified  social  order  manifests  dul-
ness,  and  cannot  subsist  without  it.  It  immerses
man  in  instrumentalities,  weighs  him  down  with
atrophied  organs,  and  by  subjecting  him  eternal¬
ly  to  fruitless  sacrifices  renders  him  stupid  and
superstitious  and  ready  to  be  himself  tyrannical


54


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


when  the  opportunity  occurs.  A  sure  sign  of  hav¬
ing  escaped  barbarism  is  therefore  to  feel  keenly
the  pragmatic  values  belonging  to  all  institutions,
to  look  deep  into  the  human  sanctions  of  things.
Greece  was  on  this  ground  more  civilised  than
Rome,  and  Athens  more  than  Sparta.  Ill-governed
communities  may  be  more  intelligent  than  well-
governed  ones,  when  people  feel  the  motive  and
partial  advantage  underlying  the  abuses  they
tolerate  (as  happens  where  slavery  or  nepotism  is
prevalent),  but  when  on  the  other  hand  no  reason
is  perceived  for  the  good  laws  which  are  estab¬
lished  (as  when  law  is  based  on  revelation).  The
effort  to  adjust  old  institutions  suddenly  to  felt
needs  may  not  always  be  prudent,  because  the
needs  most  felt  may  not  be  the  deepest,  yet  so
far  as  it  goes  the  effort  is  intelligent.

The  family  The  family  in  a  barbarous  age

tamed*  remains  sacrosanct  and  traditional ;
nothing  in  its  law,  manners,  or  ritual  is  open  to
amendment.  The  unhappiness  which  may  conse¬
quently  overtake  individuals  is  hushed  up  or  posi¬
tively  blamed,  with  no  thought  of  tinkering  with
the  holv  institutions  which  are  its  cause.  Civil-
ised  men  think  more  and  cannot  endure  object¬
less  tyrannies.  It  is  inevitable,  therefore,  that  as
barbarism  recedes  the  family  should  become  more
sensitive  to  its  members’  personal  interests.  Hus¬
band  and  wife,  when  they  are  happily  matched,
are  in  liberal  communities  more  truly  united  than
before,  because  such  closer  friendship  expresses


THE  FAMILY


55


their  personal  inclination.  Children  are  still  cared
for,  because  love  of  them  is  natural,  but  they  are
ruled  less  and  sooner  suffered  to  choose  their  own
associations.  They  are  more  largely  given  in
charge  to  persons  not  belonging  to  the  family,
especially  fitted  to  supply  their  education.  The
whole,  in  a  word,  exists  more  and  more  for  the
sake  of  the  parts,  and  the  closeness,  duration,  and
scope  of  family  ties  comes  to  vary  greatly  in  dif¬
ferent  households.  Barbaric  custom,  imposed  in
all  cases  alike  without  respect  of  persons,  yields  to
a  regimen  that  dares  to  be  elastic  and  will  take
.pains  to  be  just.

_  J  How  far  these  liberties  should  ex-

Possxble  read¬
justments  and  tend  and  where  they  would  pass  into

reversions.  license  and  undermine  rational  life,
is  another  question.  The  pressure  of  circuit-
stances  is  what  ordinarily  forces  governments  to
be  absolute.  Political  liberty  is  a  sign  of  moral
and  economic  independence.  The  family  may
safely  weaken  its  legal  and  customary  authority
so  long  as  the  individual  can  support  and  satisfy
himself.  Children  evidently  never  can;  conse¬
quently  they  must  remain  in  a  family  or  in  some
artificial  substitute  for  it  which  would  be  no  less
coercive.  But  to  what  extent  men  and  women,
in  a  future  age,  may  need  to  rely  on  ties  of  con¬
sanguinity  or  marriage  in  order  not  to  grow  soli¬
tary,  purposeless,  and  depraved,  is  for  prophets
only  to  predict.  If  changes  continue  in  the  pres¬
ent  direction  much  that  is  now  in  bad  odour  may


56


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


come  to  be  accepted  as  normal.  It  might  hap¬
pen,  for  instance,  as  a  consequence  of  woman’s  in¬
dependence,  that  mothers  alone  should  be  their
children's  guardians  and  sole  mistresses  in  their
houses;  the  husband,  if  he  were  acknowledged  at
all,  having  at  most  a  pecuniary  responsibility  for
his  offspring.  Such  an  arrangement  would  make
a  stable  home  for  the  children,  while  leaving  mar¬
riage  dissoluble  at  the  will  of  either  party.

It  may  well  be  doubted,  however,  whether
women,  if  given  every  encouragement  to  establish
and  protect  themselves,  would  not  in  the  end  fly
again  into  man’s  arms  and  prefer  to  be  drudges
and  mistresses  at  home  to  living  disciplined  and
submerged  in  some  larger  community.  Indeed,
the  effect  of  women's  emancipation  might  well
prove  to  be  the  opposite  of  what  was  intended.
Eeally  free  and  equal  competition  between  men
and  women  might  reduce  the  weaker  sex  to  such
graceless  inferiority  that,  deprived  of  the  defer¬
ence  and  favour  they  now  enjoy,  they  should  find
themselves  entirely  without  influence.  In  that
case  they  would  have  to  begin  again  at  the  bottom
and  appeal  to  arts  of  seduction  and  to  men's  fond¬
ness  in  order  to  regain  their  lost  social  position.

The  ideal  in-  There  is  a  certain  order  in  progress
cindes  genera-  which  it  is  impossible  to  retract.  An
taon’  advance  must  not  subvert  its  own

basis  nor  revoke  the  interest  which  it  furthers.
While  hunger  subsists  the  art  of  ploughing  is
rational;  had  agriculture  abolished  appetite  it


THE  FAMILY


57


would  have  destroyed  its  own  rationality.  Simi¬
larly  no  state  of  society  is  to  be  regarded  as  ideal
in  which  those  bodily  functions  are  supposed  to
be  suspended  which  created  the  ideal  by  suggest¬
ing  their  own  perfect  exercise.  If  old  age  and
death  were  abolished,  reproduction,  indeed,  would
become  unnecessary :  its  pleasures  would  cease  to
charm  the  mind,  and  its  results — pregnancy,  child¬
birth,  infancy — would  seem  positively  horrible.
But  so  long  as  reproduction  is  necessary  the  ideal
of  life  must  include  it.  Otherwise  we  should  be
constructing  not  an  ideal  of  life  but  some  dream
of  non-human  happiness,  a  dream  whose  only
remnant  of  ideality  would  be  borrowed  from  such
actual  human  functions  as  it  still  expressed  indi¬
rectly.  The  true  ideal  must  speak  for  all  nec¬
essary  and  compatible  functions.  Man  being  an
inevitably  reproductive  animal  his  reproductive
function  must  be  included  in  his  perfect  life,
inner  values  Now,  any  function  to  reach  perfec-
alr**dy,lodged  tion  it  must  fulfil  two  conditions:  it
tion.  must  be  delightful  in  itself,  endowing

its  occasions  and  results  with  ideal  interest,  and
it  must  also  co-operate  harmoniously  with  all
other  functions  so  that  life  may  be  profitable
and  happy.  In  the  matter  of  reproduction  na¬
ture  has  already  fulfilled  the  first  of  these  con¬
ditions  in  its  essentials.  It  has  indeed  super¬
abundantly  fulfilled  them,  and  not  only  has  love
appeared  in  man’s  soul,  the  type  and  symbol
of  all  vital  perfection,  but  a  tenderness  and


58


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


charm,  a  pathos  passing  into  the  frankest  joy,  has
been  spread  over  pregnancy,  birth,  and  childhood.
If  many  pangs  and  tears  still  prove  how  tentative
and  violent,  even  here,  are  nature’s  most  brilliant
feats,  science  and  kindness  may  strive  not  unsuc¬
cessfully  to  diminish  or  abolish  those  profound
traces  of  evil.  But  reproduction  will  not  be  per¬
fectly  organised  until  the  second  condition  is
fulfilled  as  well,  and  here  nature  has  as  yet  been
more  remiss.  Family  life,  as  Western  nations
possess  it,  is  still  regulated  in  a  very  bungling,
painful,  and  unstable  manner.  Hence,  in  the
first  rank  of  evils,  prostitution,  adultery,  divorce,
improvident  and  unhappy  marriages;  and  in  the
second  rank,  a  morality  compacted  of  three  inhar-
monious  parts,  with  incompatible  ideals,  each  in
its  way  legitimate:  I  mean  the  ideals  of  passion,
of  convention,  and  of  reason;  add,  besides,  genius
and  religion  thwarted  by  family  ties,  single  lives
empty,  wedded  lives  constrained,  a  shallow  gal¬
lantry,  and  a  dull  virtue.

Outward  be-  How  to  surround  the  natural  sancti-
neficence  ties  of  wedlock  with  wise  custom  and

cured  by  ex-  law,  how  to  combine  the  maximum  of
periment.  spiritual  freedom  with  the  maximum
of  moral  cohesion,  is  a  problem  for  experiment
to  solve.  It  cannot  be  solved,  even  ideally,  in  a
Utopia.  For  each  interest  in  play  has  its  rights
and  the  prophet  neither  knows  what  interests  may
at  a  given  future  time  subsist  in  the  world,  nor
what  relative  force  they  may  have,  nor  what  me-


THE  FAMILY


69


chanical  conditions  may  control  their  expression.
The  statesman  in  his  sphere  and  the  individual
in  his  must  find,  as  they  go,  the  best  practi¬
cal  solutions.  All  that  can  be  indicated  before¬
hand  is  the  principle  which  improvements  in  this
institution  would  comply  with  if  they  were  really
improvements.  They  would  reform  and  perfect
the  function  of  reproduction  without  discarding
it;  they  would  maintain  the  family  unless  they
could  devise  some  institution  that  combined  in¬
trinsic  and  representative  values  better  than  does
that  natural  artifice,  and  they  would  recast  either
*  the  instincts  or  the  laws  concerned,  or  both  simul-
taneously,  until  the  family  ceased  to  clash  seri¬
ously  with  any  of  these  three  things:  natural
affection,  rational  nurture,  and  moral  freedom.


CHAPTER  III


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR

Patriarchal  We  ^ave  seen  that  the  family,  an
economy.  association  useful  in  rearing  the  young,

may  become  a  means  of  further  maintenance  and
defence.  It  is  the  first  economic  and  the  first  mili¬
tary  group.  Children  become  servants,  and  ser¬
vants,  being  adopted  and  brought  up  in  the  fam¬
ily,  become  like  other  children  and  supply  the
family’s  growing  wants.  It  was  no  small  part  of
the  extraordinary  longing  for  progeny  shown  by
patriarchal  man  that  children  were  wealth,  and
that  by  continuing  in  life-long  subjection  to  their
father  they  lent  prestige  and  power  to  his  old  age.
The  daughters  drew  water,  the  wives  and  concu¬
bines  spun,  wove,  and  prepared  food.  A  great
family  was  a  great  estate.  It  was  augmented
further  by  sheep,  goats,  asses,  and  cattle.  This
numerous  household,  bound  together  by  personal
authority  and  by  common  fortunes,  was  sufficient
to  carry  on  many  rude  industries.  It  wandered
from  pasture  to  pasture,  practised  hospitality,
watched  the  stars,  and  seems  (at  least  in  poetic
retrospect)  to  have  been  not  unhappy.  A  Roman
adage  has  declared  that  to  know  the  world  one

60


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  61


household  suffices;  and  one  patriarchal  family,  in
its  simplicity  and  grandeur,  seems  to  have  given
scope  enough  for  almost  all  human  virtues.  And
those  early  men,  as  Vico  says,  were  sublime  poets.
Origin  of  the  Nevertheless,  such  a  condition  can
state.  only  subsist  in  deserts  where  those

who  try  to  till  the  soil  cannot  grow  strong  enough
to  maintain  themselves  against  marauding  herds¬
men.  Whenever  agriculture  yields  better  returns
and  makes  the  husbandman  rich  enough  to  sup¬
port  a  protector,  patriarchal  life  disappears.  The
fixed  occupation  of  land  turns  a  tribe  into  a  state.
Plato  has  given  the  classic  account  of  such  a  pas¬
sage  from  idyllic  to  political  conditions.  Growth
in  population  and  in  requirements  forces  an  Arca¬
dian  community  to  encroach  upon  its  neighbours ;
this  encroachment  means  war ;  and  war,  when  there
are  fields  and  granaries  to  protect,  and  slaves  and
artisans  to  keep  at  their  domestic  labours,  means
fortifications,  an  army,  and  a  general.  And  to
match  the  army  in  the  field  another  must  be  main¬
tained  at  home,  composed  of  judges,  priests,  build¬
ers,  cooks,  barbers,  and  doctors.  Such  is  the  in¬
ception  of  what,  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word,
may  be  called  civilisation.

Civilisation  secures  three  chief  advantages :
greater  wealth,  greater  safety,  and  greater  variety

Three  uses  of  experience.  Whether,  in  spite  of
civilisation.  this,  there  is  a  real — that  is,  a  moral

— advance  is  a  question  impossible  to  answer  off¬
hand,  because  wealth,  safety,  and  variety  are  not


62


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


absolute  goods,  and  their  value  is  great  or  small
according  to  the  further  values  they  may  help  to
secure.  This  is  obvious  in  the  case  of  riches.
But  safety  also  is  only  good  when  there  is  some¬
thing  to  preserve  better  than  courage,  and  when
the  prolongation  of  life  can  serve  to  intensify  its
excellence.  An  animal's  existence  is  not  improved
when  made  safe  by  imprisonment  and  domestica¬
tion  ;  it  is  only  degraded  and  rendered  passive  and
melancholy.  The  human  savage  likewise  craves  a
freedom  and  many  a  danger  inconsistent  with  civ¬
ilisation,  because  independent  of  reason.  He  does
not  yet  identify  his  interests  with  any  persistent
and  ideal  harmonies  created  by  reflection.  And
when  reflection  is  absent,  length  of  life  is  no  bene¬
fit  :  a  quick  succession  of  generations,  with  a  small
chance  of  reaching  old  age,  is  a  beautiful  thing
in  purely  animal  economy,  where  vigour  is  the
greatest  joy,  propagation  the  highest  function,
and  decrepitude  the  sorriest  woe.  The  value  of
safety,  accordingly,  hangs  on  the  question  whether
life  has  become  reflective  and  rational.  But  the
fact  that  a  state  arises  does  not  in  itself  imply
rationality.  It  makes  rationality  possible,  but
leaves  it  potential.

its  rationality  Similar  considerations  apply  to
contingent.  variety.  To  increase  the  number  of

instincts  and  functions  is  probably  to  produce  con¬
fusion  and  to  augment  that  secondary  and  rever¬
berating  kind  of  evil  which  consists  in  expecting
pain  and  regretting  misfortune.  On  the  other


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  63


hand,  a  perfect  life  could  never  be  accused  of
monotony.  */  All  desirable  variety  lies  within  the
circle  of  perfection.  Thus  we  do  not  tire  of  pos¬
sessing  two  legs  nor  wish,  for  the  sake  of  variety,
to  be  occasionally  lunatics.  Accordingly,  an  in¬
crease  in  variety  of  function  Is  a  good  only  if  a
unity  can  still  be  secured  embracing  that  variety;
otherwise  it  would  have  been  better  that  the  irrele¬
vant  function  should  have  been  developed  by  in¬
dependent  individuals  or  should  not  have  arisen
at  all.  The  function  of  seeing  double  adds  more
to  the  variety  than  to  the  spice  of  life.  Whether
civilisation  is  a  blessing  depends,  then,  on  its
ulterior  uses.  Judged  by  those  interests  which
already  exist  when  it  arises,  it  is  very  likely  a
burden  and  oppression.  The  birds*  instinctive
economy  would  not  be  benefited  by  a  tax-gather¬
er,  a  recruiting-sergeant,  a  sect  or  two  of  theolo¬
gians,  and  the  other  usual  organs  of  human  polity.

For  the  Life  of  Reason,  however,  civilisation
is  a  necessary  condition.  Although  animal  life,
within  man  and  beyond  him,  has  its  wild  beauty
and  mystic  justifications,  yet  that  specific  form  of
life  which  we  call  rational,  and  which  is  no  less
natural  than  the  rest,  would  never  have  arisen
without  an  expansion  of  human  faculty,  an  in¬
crease  in  mental  scope,  for  which  civilisation  is
necessary.  Wealth,  safety,  variety  of  pursuits,  are
all  requisite  if  memory  and  purpose  are  to  be
trained  increasingly,  and  if  a  steadfast  art  of  liv¬
ing  is  to  supervene  upon  instinct  and  dream.


64


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Sources  of
wealth.


Wealth  is  itself  expressive  of  reason
for  it  arises  whenever  men,  instead  of
doing  nothing  or  beating  about  casually  in  the
world,  take  to  gathering  fruits  of  nature  which
they  may  have  uses  for  in  future,  or  fostering  their
growth,  or  actually  contriving  their  appearance.
Such  is  man’s  first  industrial  habit,  seen  in  graz¬
ing,  agriculture,  and  mining.  Among  nature’s
products  are  also  those  of  man’s  own  purposeless
and  imitative  activity,  results  of  his  idle  ingenu¬
ity  and  restlessness.  Some  of  these,  like  nature’s
other  random  creations,  may  chance  to  have  some
utility.  They  may  then  become  conspicuous  to
reflection,  be  strengthened  by  the  relations  which
they  establish  in  life,  and  be  henceforth  called
works  of  human  art.  They  then  constitute  a  sec¬
ond  industrial  habit  and  that  other  sort  of  riches
which  is  supplied  by  manufacture.

Excess  of  it  The  amount  of  wealth  man  can
possible.  produce  is  apparently  limited  only  by

time,  invention,  and  the  material  at  hand.  It  can
very  easily  exceed  his  capacity  for  enjoyment.  As
the  habits  which  produce  wealth  were  originally
spontaneous  and  only  crystallised  into  reasonable
processes  by  mutual  checks  and  the  gradual  set¬
tling  down  of  the  organism  into  harmonious
action,  so  also  the  same  habits  may  outrun  their
uses.  The  machinery  to  produce  wealth,  of  which
man’s  own  energies  have  become  a  part,  may  well
work  on  irrespective  of  happiness.  Indeed,  the  in¬
dustrial  ideal  would  be  an  international  commu-


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  65

nity  with  universal  free  trade,  extreme  division  of
labour,  and  no  unproductive  consumption.  Such
an  arrangement  would  undoubtedly  produce  a
maximum  of  riches,  and  any  objections  made  to
it,  if  intelligent,  must  be  made  on  other  than  uni¬
versal  economic  grounds.  Free  trade  may  be  op¬
posed,  for  instance  (while  patriotism  takes  the
invidious  form  of  jealousy  and  while  peace  is  not
secure),  on  the  ground  that  it  interferes  with
vested  interests  and  settled  populations  or  with
national  completeness  and  self-sufficiency,  or  that
absorption  in  a  single  industry  is  unfavourable  to
intellectual  life.  The  latter  is  also  an  obvious  ob¬
jection  to  any  great  division  of  labour,  even  in
liberal  fields ;  while  any  man  with  a  tender  heart
and  traditional  prejudices  might  hesitate  to  con¬
demn  the  irresponsible  rich  to  extinction,  together
with  all  paupers,  mystics,  and  old  maids  living
on  annuities.

Such  attacks  on  industrialism,  however,  are
mere  skirmishes  and  express  prejudices  of  one  sort
or  another.  The  formidable  judgment  industrial¬
ism  has  to  face  is  that  of  reason,  which  demands
that  the  increase  and  specification  of  labour  be  •

justified  by  benefits  somewhere  actually  realised
and  integrated  in  individuals.  Wealth  must  jus¬
tify  itself  in  happiness.  Someone  must  live  better
for  having  produced  or  enjoyed  these  possessions.

And  he  would  not  live  better,  even  granting  that
the  possessions  were  in  themselves  advantages,  if
these  advantages  were  bought  at  too  high  a  price
Vol.  II.—6


66


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  removed  other  greater  opportunities  or  bene¬
fits.  The  belle  must  not  sit  so  long  prinking  be¬
fore  the  glass  as  to  miss  the  party,  and  man  must
not  work  so  hard  and  burden  himself  with  so  many
cares  as  to  have  no  breath  or  interest  left  for
things  free  and  intellectual.  Work  and  life  too
often  are  contrasted  and  complementary  things;
but  they  would  not  be  contrasted  nor  even  sepa¬
rable  if  work  were  not  servile,  for  of  course  man
can  have  no  life  save  in  occupation,  and  in  the
exercise  of  his  faculties;  contemplation  itself  can
deal  only  with  what  practice  contains  or  discloses.
But  the  pursuit  of  wealth  is  a  pursuit  of  instru¬
ments.  The  division  of  labour  when  extreme  does
violence  to  natural  genius  and  obliterates  natural
distinctions  in  capacity.  What  is  properly  called
industry  is  not  art  or  self -justifying  activity,  but
on  the  contrary  a  distinctly  compulsory  and  mere¬
ly  instrumental  labour,  which  if  justified  at  all
must  be  justified  by  some  ulterior  advantage  which
it  secures.  In  regard  to  such  instrumental  activi¬
ties  the  question  is  always  pertinent  whether  they
do  not  produce  more  than  is  useful,  or  prevent
the  existence  of  something  that  is  intrinsically
good.

Occidental  society  has  evidently  run  in  this  di-
irrationai  m-  section  into  great  abuses,  complicating
dustry.  life  prodigiously  without  ennobling  the

mind.  It  has  put  into  rich  men's  hands  facilities
and  luxuries  which  they  trifle  with  without  achiev¬
ing  any  dignity  or  true  magnificence  in  living,


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  67


while  the  poor,  if  physically  more  comfortable  than
formerly,  are  not  meantime  notably  wiser  or  mer¬
rier.  Ideal  distinction  has  been  sacrificed  in  the
best  men,  to  add  material  comforts  to  the  worst.
Things,  as  Emerson  said,  are  in  the  saddle  and
ride  mankind.  The  means  crowd  out  the  ends
and  civilisation  reverts,  when  it  least  thinks  it,
to  barbarism.

The  acceptable  side  of  industrialism,  which  is

its  jovial  and  supposed  to  be  inspired  exclusively  by
ingenious  side,  utility,  is  not  utility  at  all  but  pure

achievement.  If  we  wish  to  do  such  an  age  justice
we  must  judge  it  as  we  should  a  child  and  praise
its  feats  without  inquiring  after  its  purposes.  That
is  its  own  spirit :  a  spirit  dominant  at  the  present
time,  particularly  in  America,  where  industrialism
appears  most  free  from  alloy.  There  is  a  curious
delight  in  turning  things  over,  changing  their
shape,  discovering  their  possibilities,  making  of
them  some  new  contrivance.  Use,  in  these  experi¬
mental  minds,  as  in  nature,  is  only  incidental.
There  is  an  irrational  creative  impulse,  a  zest  in
novelty,  in  progression,  in  beating  the  other  man,
or,  as  they  say,  in  breaking  the  record.  There  is
also  a  fascination  in  seeing  the  world  unbosom
itself  of  ancient  secrets,  obey  man’s  coaxing,  and
take  on  unheard-of  shapes.  The  highest  building,
the  largest  steamer,  the  fastest  train,  the  book
reaching  the  widest  circulation  have,  in  America,
a  clear  title  to  respect.  When  the  just  functions
of  things  are  as  yet  not  discriminated,  the  super-


68


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


lative  in  any  direction  seems  naturally  admirable.
Again,  many  possessions,  if  they  do  not  make  a
man  better,  are  at  least  expected  to  make  his  chil¬
dren  happier;  and  this  pathetic  hope  is  behind
many  exertions.  An  experimental  materialism,
spontaneous  and  divorced  from  reason  and  from
everything  useful,  is  also  confused  in  some  minds
with  traditional  duties;  and  a  school  of  popular
hierophants  is  not  lacking  that  turns  it  into  a  sort
of  religion  and  perhaps  calls  it  idealism.  Impulse
is  more  visible  in  all  this  than  purpose,  imagina¬
tion  more  than  judgment;  but  it  is  pleasant  for
the  moment  to  abound  in  invention  and  effort  and
to  let  the  future  cash  the  account.

Wealth  is  excessive  when  it  reduces  a  man  to  a

middleman  and  a  jobber,  when  it  pre-

Its  tyranny.  ,  1  .  .  •,  .  , .  .

vents  him,  m  his  preoccupation  with
material  things,  from  making  his  spirit  the  meas¬
ure  of  them.  There  are  Nibelungen  who  toil  un¬
derground  over  a  gold  they  will  never  use,  and  in
their  obsession  with  production  begrudge  them¬
selves  all  holidays,  all  concessions  to  inclination,
to  merriment,  to  fancy ;  nay,  they  would  even  cur¬
tail  as  much  as  possible  the  free  years  of  their
youth,  when  they  might  see  the  blue,  before  ren¬
dering  up  their  souls  to  the  Leviathan.  Visible
signs  of  such  unreason  soon  appear  in  the  re¬
lentless  and  hideous  aspect  which  life  puts  on;
for  those  instruments  which  somehow  emancipate
themselves  from  their  uses  soon  become  hateful.
In  nature  irresponsible  wildness  can  be  turned


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  69


to  beauty,  because  every  product  can  be  recom¬
posed  into  some  abstract  manifestation  of  force
or  form;  but  the  monstrous  in  man  himself  and
in  his  works  immediately  offends,  for  here  every¬
thing  is  expected  to  symbolise  its  moral  relations.
The  irrational  in  the  human  has  something  about
it  altogether  repulsive  and  terrible,  as  we  see  in
the  maniac,  the  miser,  the  drunkard,  or  the  ape.
A  barbaric  civilisation,  built  on  blind  impulse  and
ambition,  should  fear  to  awaken  a  deeper  detesta¬
tion  than  could  ever  be  aroused  by  those  more
beautiful  tyrannies,  chivalrous  or  religious,  against
which  past  revolutions  have  been  directed.

An  impossible  Both  the  sordidness  and  the  luxury
remedy.  which  industrialism  may  involve,  could
be  remedied,  however,  by  a  better  distribution  of
the  product.  The  riches  now  created  by  labour
•would  probably  not  seriously  debauch  mankind
if  each  man  had  only  his  share;  and  such  a  pro¬
portionate  return  would  enable  him  to  perceive
directly  how  far  his  interests  required  him  to
employ  himself  in  material  production  and  how
far  he  could  allow  himself  leisure  for  spontane¬
ous  things — religion,  play,  art,  study,  conversa¬
tion.  In  a  world  composed  entirely  of  philoso¬
phers  an  hour  or  two  a  day  of  manual  labour — a
very  welcome  quantity — would  provide  for  mate¬
rial  wants;  the  rest  could  then  be  all  the  more
competently  dedicated  to  a  liberal  life ;  for  a
healthy  soul  needs  matter  quite  as  much  for  an
object  of  interest  as  for  a  means  of  sustenance.


Stases'*


70


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


But  philosophers  do  not  yet  people  nor  even  gov¬
ern  the  world,  and  so  simple  a  Utopia  which  rea¬
son,  if  it  had  direct  efficacy,  would  long  ago  have
reduced  to  act,  is  made  impossible  by  the  cross¬
currents  of  instinct,  tradition,  and  fancy  which
variously  deflect  affairs.

Basis  of  gov-  What  are  called  the  laws  of  nature
eminent.  are  so  many  observations  made  by  man
on  a  way  things  have  of  repeating  themselves  by
replying  always  to  their  old  causes  and  never,
as  reason’s  prejudice  would  expect,  to  their  new
opportunities.  This  inertia,  which  physics  reg¬
isters  in  the  first  law  of  motion,  natural  history
and  psychology  call  habit.  Habit  is  a  physical
law.  It  is  the  basis  and  force  of  all  morality,
but  is  not  morality  itself.  In  society  it  takes
the  form  of  custom  which,  when  codified,  is
called  law  and  when  enforced  is  called  govern¬
ment.  Government  is  the  political  representative
of  a  natural  equilibrium,  of  custom,  of  inertia ;  it
is  by  no  means  a  representative  of  reason.  But,
like  any  mechanical  complication,  it  may  become
rational,  and  many  of  its  forms  and  operations
may  be  defended  on  rational  grounds.  All  natural
organisms,  from  protoplasm  to  poetry,  can  exer¬
cise  certain  ideal  functions  and  symbolise  in  their
structure  certain  ideal  relations.  Protoplasm
tends  to  propagate  itself,  and  in  so  doing  may
turn  into  a  conscious  ideal  the  end  it  already  tends
to  realise;  hut  there  could  be  no  desire  for  self-
preservation  were  there  not  already  a  self  pre-


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  71


served.  So  government  can  by  its  existence  define
the  commonwealth  it  tends  to  preserve,  and  its
acts  may  be  approved  from  the  point  of  view  of
those  eventual  interests  which  they  satisfy.  But
government  neither  subsists  nor  arises  because  it
is  good  or  useful,  but  solely  because  it  is  inevitable.
It  becomes  good  in  so  far  as  the  inevitable  adjust¬
ment  of  political  forces  which  it  embodies  is  also
a  just  provision  for  all  the  human  interests  which
it  creates  or  affects.

Suppose  a  cold  and  hungry  savage,  failing  to
find  berries  and  game  enough  in  the  woods,  should
descend  into  some  meadow  where  a  flock  of  sheep
were  grazing  and  pounce  upon  a  lame  lamb  which
could  not  run  away  with  the  others,  tear  its  flesh,
suck  up  its  blood,  and  dress  himself  in  its  skin.
All  this  could  not  be  called  an  affair  undertaken
in  the  sheep’s  interest.  And  yet  it  might  well
conduce  to  their  interest  in  the  end.  For  the

How  rational-  savage,  finding  himself  soon  hungry
ity  accrues.  again,  and  insufficiently  warm  in  that

scanty  garment,  might  attack  the  flock  a  second
time,  and  thereby  begin  to  accustom  himself,  and
also  his  delighted  family,  to  a  new  and  more  sub¬
stantial  sort  of  raiment  and  diet.  Suppose,  now,
a  pack  of  wolves,  or  a  second  savage,  or  a  dis¬
ease  should  attack  those  unhappy  sheep.  Would
not  their  primeval  enemy  defend  them?  Would
he  not  have  identified  himself  with  their  inter¬
ests  to  this  extent,  that  their  total  extinction
or  discomfiture  would  alarm  him  also?  And  in


72


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


so  far  as  he  provided  for  their  well-being,  would
he  not  have  become  a  good  shepherd?  If,  now,
some  philosophic  wether,  a  lover  of  his  kind,  rea¬
soned  with  his  fellows  upon  the  change  in  their
condition,  he  might  shudder  indeed  at  those  early
episodes  and  at  the  contribution  of  lambs  and
fleeces  which  would  not  cease  to  be  levied  by  the
new  government ;  but  he  might  also  consider  that
such  a  contribution  was  nothing  in  comparison
with  what  was  formerly  exacted  by  wolves,  dis¬
eases,  frosts,  and  casual  robbers,  when  the  flock
was  much  smaller  than  it  had  now  grown  to  be,
and  much  less  able  to  withstand  decimation.  And
he  might  even  have  conceived  an  admiration  for
the  remarkable  wisdom  and  beauty  of  that  great
shepherd,  dressed  in  such  a  wealth  of  wool;  and
he  might  remember  pleasantly  some  occasional
caress  received  from  him  and  the  daily  trough
filled  with  water  by  his  providential  hand.  And
he  might  not  be  far  from  maintaining  not  only
the  rational  origin,  but  the  divine  right  of  shep¬
herds.

Such  a  savage  enemy,  incidentally  turned  into
a  useful  master,  is  called  a  conqueror  or  king.
Only  in  human  experience  the  case  is  not  so  sim¬
ple  and  harmony  is  seldom  established  so  quickly.
The  history  of  Asia  is  replete  with  examples  of
conquest  and  extortion  in  which  a  rural  popula¬
tion  living  in  comparative  plenty  is  attacked  by
some  more  ferocious  neighbour  who,  after  a  round
of  pillage,  establishes  a  quite  unnecessary  govern-


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  73


ment,  raising  taxes  and  soldiers  for  purposes  abso¬
lutely  remote  from  the  conquered  people’s  inter¬
ests.  Such  a  government  is  nothing  but  a  chronic
raid,  mitigated  by  the  desire  to  leave  the  inhab¬
itants  prosperous  enough  to  be  continually  de¬
spoiled  afresh.  Even  this  modicum  of  protection,
however,  can  establish  a  certain  moral  bond  be¬
tween  ruler  and  subject;  an  intelligent  govern¬
ment  and  an  intelligent  fealty  become  conceivable.
_  .  Not  only  may  the  established  regime

Ferocious  but  j  j  o

useful  despot-  be  superior  to  any  other  that  could  be
isms.  substituted  for  it  at  the  time,  but  some

security  against  total  destruction,  and  a  certain
opportunity  for  the  arts  and  for  personal  ad¬
vancement  may  follow  subjugation.  A  moderate
decrease  in  personal  independence  may  be  compen¬
sated  by  a  novel  public  grandeur ;  palace  and  tem¬
ple  may  make  amends  for  hovels  somewhat  more
squalid  than  before.  Hence,  those  who  cannot
conceive  a  rational  polity,  or  a  co-operative  great¬
ness  in  the  state,  especially  if  they  have  a  luxuri¬
ous  fancy,  can  take  pleasure  in  despotism;  for  it
does  not,  after  all,  make  so  much  difference  to  an
ordinary  fool  whether  what  he  suffers  from  is  an¬
other’s  oppression  or  his  own  lazy  improvidence;
and  he  can  console  himself  by  saying  with  Gold¬
smith  :

How  small,  of  all  that  human  hearts  endure,

The  part  which  laws  or  kings  can  cause  or  cure.

At  the  same  time  a  court  and  a  hierarchy,  with
their  interesting  pomp  and  historic  continuity,


74


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


with  their  combined  appeal  to  greed  and  imag¬
ination,  redeem  human  existence  from  pervasive
vulgarity  and  allow  somebody  at  least  to  strut
proudly  over  the  earth.  Serfs  are  not  in  a  worse
material  condition  than  savages,  and  their  spirit¬
ual  opportunities  are  infinitely  greater;  for  their
eye  and  fancy  are  fed  with  visions  of  human  great¬
ness,  and  even  if  they  cannot  improve  their  out¬
ward  estate  they  can  possess  a  poetry  and  a  re¬
ligion.  It  suffices  to  watch  an  Oriental  rabble  at
prayer,  or  listening  in  profound  immobility  to
some  wandering  story-teller  or  musician,  to  feel
how  much  such  a  people  may  have  to  ruminate
upon,  and  how  truly  Arabian  days  and  Arabian
Nights  go  together.  The  ideas  evolved  may  be
wild  and  futile  and  the  emotions  savagely  sensu¬
ous,  yet  they  constitute  a  fund  of  inner  experi¬
ence,  a  rich  soil  for  better  imaginative  growths.
To  such  Oriental  cogitations,  for  instance,  car¬
ried  on  under  the  shadow  of  uncontrollable  des¬
potisms,  mankind  owes  all  its  greater  religions.

A  government’s  origin  has  nothing  to  do  with
its  legitimacy ;  that  is,  with  its  representative  oper¬
ation.  An  absolutism  based  on  conquest  or  on  re¬
ligious  fraud  may  wholly  lose  its  hostile  function.
It  may  become  the  nucleus  of  a  national  organ¬
isation  expressing  justly  enough  the  people’s  re¬
quirements.  Such  a  representative  character  is
harder  to  attain  when  the  government  is  foreign,
for  diversity  in  race  language  and  local  ties  makes
the  ruler  less  apt  involuntarily  to  represent  his


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  75

subjects;  his  measures  must  subserve  their  inter¬
ests  intentionally,  out  of  sympathy,  policy,  and  a
sense  of  duty,  virtues  which  are  seldom  efficacious
for  any  continuous  period.  A  native  government,
even  if  based  on  initial  outrage,  can  more  easily
drift  into  excellence :  for  when  a  great  man  mounts
the  throne  he  has  only  to  read  his  own  soul  and
follow  his  instinctive  ambitions  in  order  to  make
himself  the  leader  and  spokesman  of  his  nation.
An  Alexander,  an  Alfred,  a  Peter  the  Great,  are
examples  of  persons  who  with  varying  degrees  of
virtue  were  representative  rulers :  their  policy,
however  irrationally  inspired,  happened  to  serve
their  subjects  and  the  world.  Besides,  a  native
government  is  less  easily  absolute.  Many  influ¬
ences  control  the  ruler  in  his  aims  and  habits,
such  as  religion,  custom,  and  the  very  language
he  speaks,  by  which  praise  and  blame  are  assigned
automatically  to  the  objects  loved  or  hated  by  the
people.  He  cannot,  unless  he  be  an  intentional
monster,  oppose  himself  wholly  to  the  common
soul.

For  this  very  reason,  however,  native  govern-
^  J  ments  are  little  fitted  to  redeem  or

Occasional  ad¬
vantage  of  be-  transform  a  people,  and  all  great  up-

mg  conquered.  heavais  an(j  regenerations  have  been
brought  about  by  conquest,  by  the  substitution  of
one  race  and  spirit  for  another  in  the  counsels
of  the  world.  What  the  Orient  owes  to  Greece,
the  Occident  to  Borne,  India  to  England,  native
America  to  Spain,  is  a  civilisation  incomparably


76


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


better  than  that  which  the  conquered  people  could
ever  have  provided  for  themselves.  Conquest  is  a
good  means  of  recasting  those  ideals,  perhaps  im¬
practicable  and  ignorant,  which  a  native  govern¬
ment  at  its  best  would  try  to  preserve.  Such
inapt  ideals,  it  is  true,  would  doubtless  remodel
themselves  if  they  could  be  partly  realised.  Prog¬
ress  from  within  is  possible,  otherwise  no  progress
would  be  possible  for  humanity  at  large.  But
conquest  gives  at  once  a  freer  field  to  those  types
of  polity  which,  since  they  go  with  strength,  pre¬
sumably  represent  the  better  adjustment  to  natu¬
ral  conditions,  and  therefore  the  better  ideal.
Though  the  substance  of  ideals  is  the  will,  their
mould  must  be  experience  and  a  true  discernment
of  opportunity;  so  that  while  all  ideals,  regarded
in  vacuo ,  are  equal  in  ideality,  they  are,  under
given  circumstances,  very  diverse  in  worth.

Origin  of  free  When  not  founded  on  conquest,

governments,  which  is  the  usual  source  of  despot¬
ism,  government  is  ordinarily  based  on  traditional
authority  vested  in  elders  or  patriarchal  kings.
This  is  the  origin  of  the  classic  state,  and  of
all  aristocracy  and  freedom.  The  economic  and
political  unit  is  a  great  household  with  its  lord,
his  wife  and  children,  clients  and  slaves.  In  the
interstices  of  these  households  there  may  be  a  cer¬
tain  floating  residuum — freedmen,  artisans,  mer¬
chants,  strangers.  These  people,  while  free,  are
without  such  rights  as  even  slaves  possess;  they
have  no  share  in  the  religion,  education,  and  re-


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  77


sources  of  any  established  family.  For  purposes
of  defence  and  religion  the  heads  of  houses  gather
together  in  assemblies,  elect  or  recognise  some
chief,  and  agree  upon  laws,  usually  little  more
than  extant  customs  regulated  and  formally  sanc¬
tioned.

Such  a  state  tends  to  expand  in  two  directions.
In  the  first  place,  it  becomes  more  democratic;

Their  demo  that  is,  it  tends  to  recognise  other  in-
cratic  tenden-  fluences  than  that  which  heads  of  f  am-
eies.  ilies — patres  ccmscripti — possess.  The

people  without  such  fathers,  those  who  are  not
patricians,  also  have  children  and  come  to  imitate
on  a  smaller  scale  the  patriarchal  economy.  These
plebeians  are  admitted  to  citizenship.  But  they
have  no  such  religious  dignity  and  power  in  their
little  families  as  the  patricians  have  in  theirs ;  they
are  scarcely  better  than  loose  individuals,  repre¬
senting  nothing  but  their  own  sweet  wills.  This
individualism  and  levity  is  not,  however,  confined
to  the  plebeians ;  it  extends  to  the  patrician
houses.  Individualism  is  the  second  direction  in
which  a  patriarchal  society  yields  to  innovation.
As  the  state  grows  the  family  weakens ;  and  while
in  early  Borne,  for  instance,  only  the  pater  familias
was  responsible  to  the  city,  and  his  children  and
slaves  only  to  him,  in  Greece  we  find  from  early
times  individuals  called  to  account  before  public
judges.  A  federation  of  households  thus  became
a  republic.  The  king,  that  chief  who  enjoyed  a
certain  hereditary  precedence  in  sacrifices  or  in


78


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


war,  yields  to  elected  generals  and  magistrates
whose  power,  while  it  lasts,  is  much  greater;  for
no  other  comparable  power  now  subsists  in  the
levelled  state.

Modern  Europe  has  seen  an  almost  parallel  de¬
velopment  of  democracy  and  individualism,  to¬
gether  with  the  establishment  of  great  artificial
governments.  Though  the  feudal  hierarchy  was
originally  based  on  conquest  or  domestic  subjec¬
tion,  it  came  to  have  a  fanciful  or  chivalrous
or  political  force.  But  gradually  the  plebeian
classes — the  burghers — grew  in  importance,  and
military  allegiance  was  weakened  by  being  divided
between  a  number  of  superposed  lords,  up  to  the
king,  emperor,  or  pope.  The  stronger  rulers  grew
into  absolute  monarchs,  representatives  of  great
states,  and  the  people  became,  in  a  political  sense,
a  comparatively  level  multitude.  Where  parlia¬
mentary  government  was  established  it  became  pos¬
sible  to  subordinate  or  exclude  the  monarch  and
his  court;  but  the  government  remains  an  invol¬
untary  institution,  and  the  individual  must  adapt
himself  to  its  exigencies.  The  church  which  once
overshadowed  the  state  has  now  lost  its  coercive
authority  and  the  single  man  stands  alone  before
an  impersonal  written  law,  a  constitutional  gov¬
ernment,  and  a  widely  diffused  and  contagious
public  opinion,  characterised  by  enormous  inertia,
incoherence,  and  blindness.  Contemporary  na¬
tional  units  are  strongly  marked  and  stimulate  on
occasion  a  perfervid  artificial  patriotism ;  but  they


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  79


are  strangely  unrepresentative  of  either  personal
or  universal  interests  and  may  yield  in  turn  to
new  combinations,  if  the  industrial  and  intellect¬
ual  solidarity  of  mankind,  every  day  more  obvi¬
ous,  ever  finds  a  fit  organ  to  express  and  to  de¬
fend  it.

A  despotic  military  government  founded  on

alien  force  and  aiming  at  its  own  mag-

Imperial  peace.  •  p  •  p *  ^  •  j

nificence  is  otten  more  efficient  m
defending  its  subjects  than  is  a  government  ex¬
pressing  only  the  people’s  energies,  as  the  preda¬
tory  shepherd  and  his  dog  prove  better  guardians
for  a  flock  than  its  own  wethers.  The  robbers
that  at  their  first  incursion  brought  terror  to  mer¬
chant  and  peasant  may  become  almost  imme¬
diately  representative  organs  of  society — an  army
and  a  judiciary.  Disputes  between  subjects  are
naturally  submitted  to  the  invader,  under  whose
laws  and  good-will  alone  a  practical  settlement
can  now  be  effected;  and  this  alien  tribunal,  being
exempt  from  local  prejudices  and  interested  in
peace  that  taxes  may  be  undiminished,  may  ad¬
minister  a  comparatively  impartial  justice,  until
corrupted  by  bribes.  The  constant  compensation
tyranny  brings,  which  keeps  it  from  at  once  ex¬
hausting  its  victims,  is  the  silence  it  imposes  on
their  private  squabbles.  One  distant  universal
enemy  is  less  oppressive  than  a  thousand  un¬
checked  pilferers  and  plotters  at  home.  For  this
reason  the  reader  of  ancient  history  so  often  has
occasion  to  remark  what  immense  prosperity


80


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Asiatic  provinces  enjoyed  between  the  periods
when  their  successive  conquerors  devastated
them.  They  flourished  exceedingly  the  moment
peace  and  a  certain  order  were  established  in
them.

Tyranny  not  only  protects  the  subject  against
his  kinsmen,  thus  taking  on  the  functions  of  law
and  police,  but  it  also  protects  him  against  mili¬
tary  invasion,  and  thus  takes  on  the  function  of
„  .  f  ,  an  army.  An  army,  considered

Nominal  and  J

real  status  of  ideally,  is  an  organ  for  the  state’s
armies.  protection;  but  it  is  far  from  being

such  in  its  origin,  since  at  first  an  army  is  nothing
but  a  ravenous  and  lusty  horde  quartered  in  a
conquered  country;  yet  the  cost  of  such  an  incu¬
bus  may  come  to  be  regarded  as  an  insurance
against  further  attack,  and  so  what  is  in  its  real
basis  an  inevitable  burden  resulting  from  a
chance  balance  of  forces  may  be  justified  in  after¬
thought  as  a  rational  device  for  defensive  pur¬
poses.  Such  an  ulterior  justification  has  nothing
to  do,  however,  with  the  causes  that  maintain
armies  or  military  policies :  and  accordingly  those
virginal  minds  that  think  things  originated  in  the
uses  they  may  have  acquired,  have  frequent  cause
to  be  pained  and  perplexed  at  the  abuses  and  over¬
development  of  militarism.  An  insurance  capi¬
talised  may  exceed  the  value  of  the  property
insured,  and  the  drain  caused  by  armies  and
navies  may  be  much  greater  than  the  havoc  they
prevent.  The  evils  against  which  they  are  sup-


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  81


posed  to  be  directed  are  often  evils  only  in  a  cant
and  conventional  sense,  since  the  events  depre¬
cated  (like  absorption  by  a  neighbouring  state)
might  be  in  themselves  no  misfortune  to  the  peo¬
ple,  but  perhaps  a  singular  blessing.  And  those
dreaded  possibilities,  even  if  really  evil,  may  well
be  less  so  than  is  the  hateful  actuality  of  military
taxes,  military  service,  and  military  arrogance.

Their  action  ir-  Nor  this  all  i  the  military  classes,
responsible.  since  they  inherit  the  blood  and  habits

of  conquerors,  naturally  love  war  and  their  irra¬
tional  combativeness  is  reinforced  by  interest;  for
in  war  officers  can  shine  and  rise,  while  the  danger
of  death,  to  a  brave  man,  is  rather  a  spur  and
a  pleasing  excitement  than  a  terror.  /A  military
class  is  therefore  always  recalling,  foretelling,

and  meditating  war ;  it  fosters  artificial  and  sense-

#

less  jealousies  toward  other  governments  that
possess  armies;  and  finally,  as  often  as  not,  it
precipitates  disaster  by  bringing  about  the  object¬
less  struggle  on  which  it  has  set  its  heart./

These  natural  phenomena,  unintelligently  re¬
garded  as  anomalies  and  abuses,  are  the  appanage

Pugnacity  hu-  war  ^  pristine  and  proper  form,
man.  To  fight  is  a  radical  instinct;  if  men

have  nothing  else  to  fight  over  they  will  fight
over  words,  fancies,  or  women,  or  they  will  fight
because  they  dislike  each  other's  looks,  or
because  they  have  met  walking  in  opposite  direc¬
tions.  To  knock  a  thing  down,  especially  if  it
is  cocked  at  an  arrogant  angle,  is  a  deep  delight
Vol.  II. —6


82


THE  LIFE  OF  SEASON


to  the  blood.  To  fight  for  a  reason  and  in  a  calcu¬
lating  spirit  is  something  your  true  warrior
despises;  even  a  coward  might  screw  his  courage
up  to  such  a  reasonable  conflict.  The  joy  and
glory  of  fighting  lie  in  its  pure  spontaneity  and
consequent  generosity;  you  are  not  fighting  for
gain,  but  for  sport  and  for  victory.  Victory,  no
doubt,  has  its  fruits  for  the  victor.  If  fighting
were  not  a  possible  means  of  livelihood  the  belli¬
cose  instinct  could  never  have  established  itself
in  any  long-lived  race.  A  few  men  can  live  on
plunder,  just  as  there  is  room  in  the  world  for
some  beasts  of  prey;  other  men  are  reduced  to
living  on  industry,  just  as  there  are  diligent  bees,
ants,  and  herbivorous  kine.  But  victory  need
have  no  good  fruits  for  the  people  whose  army  is
victorious.  That  it  sometimes  does  so  is  an  ulte¬
rior  and  blessed  circumstance  hardly  to  be  reck¬
oned  upon.

Since  barbarism  has  its  pleasures  it  naturally

Barrack-room  ^as  its  apologists.  There  are  pane-
phiiosophy.  gyrists  of  war  who  say  that  without
a  periodical  bleeding  a  race  decays  and  loses  its
manhood.  Experience  is  directly  opposed  to
this  shameless  assertion.  It  is  war  that  wastes
a  nation’s  wealth,  chokes  its  industries,  kills
its  flower,  narrows  its  sympathies,  condemns  it
to  be  governed  by  adventurers,  and  leaves  the
puny,  deformed,  and  unmanly  to  breed  the  next
generation.  Internecine  war,  foreign  and  civil,
brought  about  the  greatest  set-back  which  the


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  83


Life  of  Eeason  has  ever  suffered;  it  exterminated
the  Greek  and  Italian  aristocracies.  Instead  of
being  descended  from  heroes,  modern  nations  are
descended  from  slaves;  and  it  is  not  their  bodies
only  that  show  it.  After  a  long  peace,  if  the
conditions  of  life  are  propitious,  we  observe  a
people’s  energies  bursting  their  barriers;  they  be¬
come  aggressive  on  the  strength  they  have  stored
up  in  their  remote  and  unchecked  development.
It  is  the  unmutilated  race,  fresh  from  the  strug¬
gle  with  nature  (in  which  the  best  survive,  while
in  war  it  is  often  the  best  that  perish)  that
descends  victoriously  into  the  arena  of  nations
and  conquers  disciplined  armies  at  the  first  blow,
becomes  the  military  aristocracy  of  the  next  epoch
and  is  itself  ultimately  sapped  and  decimated  by
luxury  and  battle,  and  merged  at  last  into  the
ignoble  conglomerate  beneath.  Then,  perhaps,
in  some  other  virgin  country  a  genuine  humanity
is  again  found,  capable  of  victory  because  unbled
by  war.  To  call  war  the  soil  of  courage  and  vir¬
tue  is  like  calling  debauchery  the  soil  of  love.

Military  institutions,  adventitious  and  ill-
adapted  excrescences  as  they  usually  are,  can  ac¬
quire  rational  values  in  various  ways..  Besides
occasional  defence,  they  furnish  a  profession


congenial  to  many,  and  a  spectacle  and  emotion


Military

virtues.

a  certain


interesting  to  all.  Blind  courage  is
an  animal  virtue  indispensable  in  a
world  full  of  dangers  and  evils  where
insensibility  and  dash  are  requisite  to


84


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


skirt  the  precipice  without  vertigo.  Such  animal
courage  seems  therefore  beautiful  rather  than
desperate  or  cruel,  and  being  the  lowest  and  most
instinctive  of  virtues  it  is  the  one  most  widely
and  sincerely  admired.  In  the  form  of  steadiness
under  risks  rationally  taken,  and  perseverance  so
long  as  there  is  a  chance  of  success,  courage  is  a
true  virtue ;  but  it  ceases  to  be  one  when  the  love
of  danger,  a  useful  passion  when  danger  is  un¬
avoidable,  begins  to  lead  men  into  evils  which  it
was  unnecessary  to  face.  Bravado,  provocative¬
ness,  and  a  gambler’s  instinct,  with  a  love  of
hitting  hard  for  the  sake  of  exercise,  is  a  temper
which  ought  already  to  be  counted  among  the
vices  rather  than  the  virtues  of  man.  To  delight
in  war  is  a  merit  in  the  soldier,  a  dangerous  qual¬
ity  in  the  captain,  and  a  positive  crime  in  the
statesman.

Discipline,  or  the  habit  of  obedience,  is  a  better
sort  of  courage  which  military  life  also  requires.
Discipline  is  the  acquired  faculty  of  surrender¬
ing  an  immediate  personal  good  for  the  sake  of
a  remote  and  impersonal  one  of  greater  value.
This  difficult  wisdom  is  made  easier  by  training
in  an  army,  because  the  great  forces  of  habit,
example,  and  social  suasion  are  there  enlisted  in
its  service.  But  these  natural  aids  make  it  lose
its  conscious  rationality,  so  that  it  ceases  to  be
a  virtue  except  potentially;  for  to  resist  an  im¬
pulse  by  force  of  habit  or  external  command  may
or  may  not  be  to  follow  the  better  course.


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  85


Besides  fostering  these  rudimentary  virtues
the  army  gives  the  nation’s  soul  its  most  festive
and  flaunting  embodiment.  Popular  heroes,  stir¬
ring  episodes,  obvious  turning-points  in  history,
commonly  belong  to  military  life.

They  are  spien-  Nevertheless  the  panegyrist  of  war
did  vices.  places  himself  on  the  lowest  level  on

which  a  moralist  or  patriot  can  stand  and  shows
as  great  a  want  of  refined  feeling  as  of  right
reason.  For  the  glories  of  war  are  all  blood¬
stained,  delirious,  and  infected  with  crime;  the
combative  instinct  is  a  savage  prompting  by
which  one  man’s  good  is  found  in  another’s
evil.  The  existence  of  such  a  contradiction  in
\  the  moral  world  is  the  original  sin  of  nature,
whence  flows  every  other  wrong.  He  is  a  will¬
ing  accomplice  of  that  perversity  in  things  who
delights  in  another’s  discomfiture  or  in  his  own,
and  craves  the  blind  tension  of  plunging  into  dan¬
ger  without  reason,  or  the  idiot’s  pleasure  in  facing
a  pure  chance.  To  find  joy  in  another’s  trouble
is,  as  man  is  constituted,  not  unnatural,  though
it  is  wicked;  and  to  find  joy  in  one’s  own  trouble,
though  it  be  madness,  is  not  yet  impossible  for
man.  These  are  the  chaotic  depths  of  that  dream¬
ing  nature  out  of  which  humanity  has  to  grow.

Absolute  value  If  war  could  be  abolished  and  the
in  strife.  defence  of  all  interests  intrusted  to
courts  of  law,  there  would  remain  unsatisfied  a
primary  and  therefore  ineradicable  instinct — a
love  of  conflict,  of  rivalry,  and  of  victory.  If


86


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


we  desire  to  abolish  war  because  it  tries  to  do
good  by  doing  harm,  we  must  not  ourselves  do
an  injury  to  human  nature  while  trying  to  smooth
it  out.  Now  the  test  and  limit  of  all  necessary
reform  is  vital  harmony.  No  impulse  can  be
condemned  arbitrarily  or  because  some  other  im¬
pulse  or  group  of  interests  is,  in  a  Platonic  way,
out  of  sympathy  with  it.  An  instinct  can  be  con¬
demned  only  if  it  prevents  the  realisation  of  other
instincts,  and  only  in  so  far  as  it  does  so.  War,
which  has  instinctive  warrant,  must  therefore  be
transformed  only  in  so  far  as  it  does  harm  to
other  interests.  The  evils  of  war  are  obvious
enough ;  could  not  the  virtues  of  war,  animal  cour¬
age,  discipline,  and  self-knowledge,  together  with
gaiety  and  enthusiasm,  find  some  harmless  occa¬
sion  for  their  development?

Such  a  harmless  simulacrum  of  war  is  seen  in
n  M  sport.  The  arduous  and  competitive

Sport  a  civil-  1  L

ised  way  of  element  in  sport  is  not  harmful,  if  the
preserving  it.  discipline  involved  brings  no  loss  of

faculty  or  of  right  sensitiveness,  and  the  rivalry
no  rancour.  In  war  states  wish  to  be  efficient  in
order  to  conquer,  but  in  sport  men  wish  to  prove
their  excellence  because  they  wish  to  have  it.  If
this  excellence  does  not  exist,  the  aim  is  missed,
and  to  discover  that  failure  is  no  new  misfortune.
To  have  failed  unwittingly  would  have  been  worse ;
and  to  recognise  superiority  in  another  is  consist¬
ent  with  a  relatively  good  and  honourable  per¬
formance,  so  that  even  nominal  failure  may  be  a


INDUSTRY,  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WAR  87


substantial  success.  And  merit  in  a  rival  should
bring  a  friendly  delight  even  to  the  vanquished
if  they  are  true  lovers  of  sport  and  of  excellence.
Sport  is  a  liberal  form  of  war  stripped  of  its  com¬
pulsions  and  malignity;  a  rational  art  and  the
expression  of  a  civilised  instinct.

The  abolition  of  war,  like  its  inception,  can  only

be  brought  about  by  a  new  collocation

Who  shall  ,  ®  .  A  x-L

found  the  uni-  °I  material  forces.  As  the  suppres-

versai  com-  sion  0f  some  nest  of  piratical  tribes  by

monwealth  ?  .  ,  ...  .

a  greats  emperor  substitutes  judicial
for  military  sanctions  among  them,  so  the  con¬
quest  of  all  warring  nations  by  some  imperial  peo¬
ple  could  alone  establish  general  peace.  The
Eomans  approached  this  ideal  because  their  vast
military  power  stood  behind  their  governors  and
praetors.  Science  and  commerce  might  conceiv¬
ably  resume  that  lost  imperial  function.  If  at  the
present  day  two  or  three  powerful  governments
could  so  far  forget  their  irrational  origin  as  to
renounce  the  right  to  occasional  piracy  and  could
unite  in  enforcing  the  decisions  of  some  interna¬
tional  tribunal,  they  would  thereby  constitute  that
tribunal  the  organ  of  a  universal  government  and
render  war  impossible  between  responsible  states./
But  on  account  of  their  irrational  basis  all  gov¬
ernments  largely  misrepresent  the  true  interests  of
those  who  live  under  them.  They  pursue  conven¬
tional  and  captious  ends  to  which  alone  public
energies  can  as  yet  be  efficiently  directed.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  AKISTOCBATIC  IDEAL


cc


■n  .  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,”

Eminence,  once  ©  7

existing,  grows  says  the  Gospel,  representing  as  a  prin-

operation11  ciple  of  divine  justice  one  that  un¬
doubtedly  holds  in  earthly  economy.
A  not  dissimilar  observation  is  made  in  the  prov¬
erb  :  “  Possession  is  nine-tenths  of  the  law.”  In¬
deed,  some  trifling  acquisition  often  gives  an  ani¬
mal  an  initial  advantage  which  may  easily  roll  up
and  increase  prodigiously,  becoming  the  basis  of
prolonged  good  fortune.  Sometimes  this  initial
advantage  is  a  matter  of  natural  structure,  like
talent,  strength,  or  goodness;  sometimes  an  acci¬
dental  accretion,  like  breeding,  instruction,  or
wealth.  Such  advantages  grow  by  the  opportuni¬
ties  they  make;  and  it  is  possible  for  a  man
launched  into  the  world  at  the  right  moment
with  the  right  equipment  to  mount  easily  from
eminence  to  eminence  and  accomplish  very  great
thing*'  without  doing  more  than  genially  follow
his  i  itincts  and  respond  with  ardour,  like  an
Alexander  or  a  Shakespeare,  to  his  opportunities.
A  great  endowment,  doubled  by  great  good  for-

88


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


89


tune,  raises  men  like  these  into  supreme  represen¬
tatives  of  mankind.

It  is  no  loss  of  liberty  to  subordinate  ourselves
to  a  natural  leader.  On  the  contrary,  we  thereby
seize  an  opportunity  to  exercise  our  freedom,  avail¬
ing  ourselves  of  the  best  instrument  obtainable  to
accomplish  our  ends.  A  man  may  be  a  natural

Its  causes  nat-  leader  either  by  his  character  or  by  his
urai  and  its  position.  The  advantages  a  man  draws
privileges  just.  .j?rom  peculiar  structure  of  his

brain  which  renders  him,  for  instance,  a  ready
speaker  or  an  ingenious  mathematician,  are  by
common  consent  regarded  as  legitimate  advan¬
tages.  The  public  will  use  and  reward  such  abil¬
ity  without  jealousy  and  with  positive  delight.  In
an  unsophisticated  age  the  same  feeling  prevails
in  regard  to  those  advantages  which  a  man  may
draw  from  more  external  circumstances.  If  a
traveller,  having  been  shipwrecked  in  some  expe¬
dition,  should  learn  the  secrets  of  an  unknown
land,  its  arts  and  resources,  his  fellow-citizens,
on  his  return,  would  not  hesitate  to  follow  his
direction  in  respect  to  those  novel  matters.  It
would  be  senseless  folly  on  their  part  to  begrudge
him  his  adventitious  eminence  and  refuse  to  es¬
teem  him  of  more  consequence  than  their  unin¬
itiated  selves.  Yet  when  people,  ignoring  the  nat¬
ural  causes  of  all  that  is  called  artificial,  think
that  but  for  an  unlucky  chance  they,  too,  might
have  enjoyed  the  advantages  which  raise  other
men  above  them,  they  sometimes  affect  not  to  rec-


90


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ognise  actual  distinctions  and  abilities,  or  study
enviously  the  means  of  annulling  them.  So  long,
however,  as  by  the  operation  of  any  causes  what¬
ever  some  real  competence  accrues  to  anyone,  it  is
for  the  general  interest  that  this  competence  should
bear  its  natural  fruits,  diversifying  the  face  of
society  and  giving  its  possessor  a  corresponding
distinction.

Variety  in  the  world  is  an  unmixed  blessing  so

Advantage  of  l°ng  as  eac^  distinct  function  can  be
inequality.  exercised  without  hindrance  to  any
other.  There  is  no  greater  stupidity  or  mean¬
ness  than  to  take  uniformity  for  an  ideal,  as  if
it  were  not  a  benefit  and  a  joy  to  a  man,  being
what  he  is,  to  know  that  many  are,  have  been,
and  will  be  better  than  he.  Grant  that  no  one
is  positively  degraded  by  the  great  man’s  great¬
ness  and  it  follows  that  everyone  is  exalted  by  it.
Beauty,  genius,  holiness,  even  power  and  extraor¬
dinary  wealth,  radiate  their  virtue  and  make  the
world  in  which  they  exist  a  better  and  a  more
joyful  place  to  live  in.  Hence  the  insatiable  vul¬
gar  curiosity  about  great  people,  and  the  strange
way  in  which  the  desire  for  fame  (by  which  the
distinguished  man  sinks  to  the  common  level)  is
met  and  satisfied  by  the  universal  interest  in  what¬
ever  is  extraordinary.  This  avidity  not  to  miss
knowledge  of  things  notable,  and  to  enact  vicari¬
ously  all  singular  roles,  shows  the  need  men  have
of  distinction  and  the  advantage  they  find  even  in
conceiving  it.  For  it  is  the  presence  of  variety


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


91


and  a  nearer  approach  somewhere  to  just  and  ideal
achievement  that  gives  men  perspective  in  their
judgments  and  opens  vistas  from  the  dull  fore¬
ground  of  their  lives  to  sea,  mountain,  and  stars.

No  merely  idle  curiosity  shows  itself  in  this
instinct ;  rather  a  mark  of  human  potentiality  that
recognises  in  what  is  yet  attained  a  sad  caricature
of  what  is  essentially  attainable.  For  man's  spirit
is  intellectual  and  naturally  demands  dominion
and  science;  it  craves  in  all  things  friendliness
and  beauty.  The  least  hint  of  attainment  in  these
directions  fills  it  with  satisfaction  and  the  sense
of  realised  expectation.  So  much  so  that  when
no  inkling  of  a  supreme  fulfilment  is  found  in
the  world  or  in  the  heart,  men  still  cling  to  the
notion  of  it  in  God  or  the  hope  of  it  in  heaven,
and  religion,  when  it  entertains  them  with  that
ideal,  seems  to  have  reached  its  highest  height.
Love  of  uniformity  would  quench  the  thirst  for
new  outlets,  for  perfect,  even  if  alien,  achieve¬
ments,  and  this,  so  long  as  perfection  had  not
been  actually  attained,  would  indicate  a  mind
dead  to  the  ideal.

Menenius  Agrippa  expressed  very  well  the  aris-

Fabie  of  the  tocratic  theory  of  society  when  he
belly  and  the  compared  the  state  to  a  human  body
members.  the  common  people  were  the

hands  and  feet,  and  the  nobles  the  belly.  The
people,  when  they  forgot  the  conditions  of  their
own  well-being,  might  accuse  themselves  of  folly
and  the  nobles  of  insolent  idleness,  for  the  poor


92


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


spent  their  lives  in  hopeless  labour  that  others
who  did  nothing  might  enjoy  all.  But  there  was
a  secret  circulation  of  substance  in  the  body  poli¬
tic,  and  the  focussing  of  all  benefits  in  the  few
was  the  cause  of  nutrition  and  prosperity  to  the
many.  Perhaps  the  truth  might  be  even  better
expressed  in  a  physiological  figure  somewhat  more
modern,  by  saying  that  the  brain,  which  consumes
much  blood,  well  repays  its  obligations  to  the
stomach  and  members,  for  it  co-ordinates  their
motions  and  prepares  their  satisfactions.  Yet
there  is  this  important  difference  between  the
human  body  and  the  state,  a  difference  which
renders  Agrippa’s  fable  wholly  misleading:  the

hands  and  feet  have  no  separate  con-

Fallacy  in  it.  .  n  n  1  . .  .

sciousness,  and  it  they  are  ill  used  it  is
the  common  self  that  feels  the  weariness  and  the
bruises.  But  in  the  state  the  various  members
have  a  separate  sensibility,  and,  although  their  ul¬
timate  interests  lie,  no  doubt,  in  co-operation  and
justice,  their  immediate  instinct  and  passion  may
lead  them  to  oppress  one  another  perpetually.  At
one  time  the  brain,  forgetting  the  members,  may
feast  on  opiates  and  unceasing  music;  and  again,
the  members,  thinking  they  could  more  econom¬
ically  shift  for  themselves,  may  starve  the  brain
and  reduce  the  body  politic  to  a  colony  of  vege¬
tating  microbes.  In  a  word,  the  consciousness  in¬
habiting  the  brain  embodies  the  functions  of  all
the  body’s  organs,  and  responds  in  a  general  way
to  all  their  changes  of  fortune,  but  in  the  state


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


93


every  cell  has  a  separate  brain,  and  the  greatest
citizen,  by  his  existence,  realises  only  his  own
happiness.

For  an  ideal  aristocracy  we  should  not  look  to
Plato’s  Republic,  for  that  Utopia  is  avowedly  the
ideal  only  for  fallen  and  corrupt  states,  since  lux¬
ury  and  injustice,  we  are  told,  first  necessitated
t  war,  and  the  guiding  idea  of  all  the  Platonic  regi¬
men  is  military  efficiency.  Aristocracy  finds  a

more  ideal  expression  in  theism;  for

Theism  ex-  .  .  . .  ,  m

presses  better  theism  imagines  the  values  of  exist-
the  aristocratic  ence  to  be  divided  into  two  unequal

parts:  on  the  one  hand  the  infinite
value  of  God’s  life,  on  the  other  the  finite  values
of  all  the  created  hierarchy.  According  to  theistic
cosmology,  there  was  a  metaphysical  necessity,  if
creatures  were  to  exist  at  all,  that  they  should
be  in  some  measure  inferior  to  godhead;  other¬
wise  they  would  have  been  indistinguishable  from
the  godhead  itself  according  to  the  principle  called
the  identity  of  indiscernibles,  which  declares  that
two  beings  exactly  alike  cannot  exist  without  col¬
lapsing  into  an  undivided  unit.  The  propagation
of  life  involved,  then,  declension  from  pure  vital¬
ity,  and  to  diffuse  being  meant  to  dilute  it  with
nothingness.  This  declension  might  take  place  in
infinite  degrees,  each  retaining  some  vestige  of  per¬
fection  mixed,  as  it  were,  with  a  greater  and  great¬
er  proportion  of  impotence  and  nonentity.  Below
God  stood  the  angels,  below  them  man,  and  below
man  the  brute  and  inanimate  creation.  Each


94


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sphere,  as  it  receded,  contained  a  paler  adumbra¬
tion  of  the  central  perfection;  yet  even  at  the  last
confines  of  existence  some  feeble  echo  of  divinity
would  still  resound.  This  inequality  in  dignity
would  be  not  only  a  beauty  in  the  whole,  to  whose
existence  and  order  such  inequalities  would  be
essential,  but  also  no  evil  to  the  creature  and  no
injustice;  for  a  modicum  of  good  is  not  made  evil
simply  because  a  greater  good  is  elsewhere  possi¬
ble.  On  the  contrary,  by  accepting  that  appointed
place  and  that  specific  happiness,  each  servant  of
the  universal  harmony  could  feel  its  infinite  value
and  could  thrill  the  more  profoundly  to  a  music
which  he  helped  to  intone.

a  heaven  with  Dante  has  expressed  this  thought
many  man-  with  great  simplicity  and  beauty.  He

sl0ns*  asks  a  friend’s  spirit,  which  he  finds

lodged  in  the  lowest  circle  of  paradise,  if  a  desire
to  mount  higher  does  not  sometimes  visit  him;
and  the  spirit  replies :

“  Brother,  the  force  of  charity  quiets  our  will,
making  us  wish  only  for  what  we  have  and  thirst
for  nothing  more.  If  we  desired  to  be  in  a  sub-
limer  sphere,  our  desires  would  be  discordant  with
the  will  of  him  who  here  allots  us  our  divers  sta¬
tions — something  which  you  will  see  there  is  no
room  for  in  these  circles,  if  to  dwell  in  charity
be  needful  here,  and  if  you  consider  duly  the  na¬
ture  of  charity.  For  it  belongs  to  the  essence  of
that  blessed  state  to  keep  within  the  divine  pur¬
poses,  that  our  own  purposes  may  become  one  also.


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


95


Thus,  the  manner  in  which  we  are  ranged  from
step  to  step  in  this  kingdom  pleases  the  whole
kingdom,  as  it  does  the  king  who  gives  us  will  to
will  with  him.  And  his  will  is  our  peace;  it  is
that  sea  toward  which  all  things  move  that  his
will  creates  and  that  nature  fashions.”  *

Such  pious  resignation  has  in  it  something  pa-
if  God  is  de-  thetic  and  constrained,  which  Dante
fined  as  the  could  not  or  would  not  disguise.  For

human  ideal,  .  .  ,

apotheosis  the  a  theism  which,  like  Aristotle’s  and
only  paradise.  Dante’s,  has  a  Platonic  essence,  God

is  really  nothing  but  the  goal  of  human  aspiration
embodied  imaginatively.  This  fact  makes  these
philosophers  feel  that  whatever  falls  short  of  divin¬
ity  has  something  imperfect  about  it.  God  is  what
man  ought  to  be ;  and  man,  while  he  is  still  him¬
self,  must  yearn  for  ever,  like  Aristotle’s  cosmos,
making  in  his  perpetual  round  a  vain  imitation
of  deity,  and  an  eternal  prayer.  Hence,  a  latent
minor  strain  in  Aristotle’s  philosophy,  the  hope¬
less  note  of  paganism,  and  in  Dante  an  undertone
of  sorrow  and  sacrifice,  inseparable  from  Christian
feeling.  In  both,  virtue  implies  a  certain  sense  of
defeat,  a  fatal  unnatural  limitation,  as  if  a  pristine
ideal  had  been  surrendered  and  what  remained
were  at  best  a  compromise.  Accordingly  we  need
not  be  surprised  if  aspiration,  in  all  these  men,
finally  takes  a  mystical  turn;  and  Dante’s  ghost¬
ly  friends,  after  propounding  their  aristocratic
philosophy,  to  justify  God  in  other  men’s  eyes,

*  Paradiso.  Canto  III. ,  70-87.


96


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


are  themselves  on  the  point  of  quitting  the  lower
sphere  to  which  God  had  assigned  them  and  plung¬
ing  into  the  “  sea  ”  of  his  absolute  ecstasy.  For,
if  the  word  God  stands  for  man's  spiritual  ideal,
heaven  can  consist  only  in  apotheosis.  This  the
Greeks  knew  very  well.  They  instinctively  ignored
or  feared  any  immortality  which  fell  short  of  deifi¬
cation  ;  and  the  Christian  mystics  reached  the  same
goal  by  less  overt  courses.  They  merged  the  popu¬
lar  idea  of  a  personal  God  in  their  foretaste  of
peace  and  perfection ;  and  their  whole  religion  was
an  effort  to  escape  humanity.

.  It  is  true  that  the  theistic  cosmol-

When  natures

differ  perfec-  ogy  might  bear  a  different  interpreta¬
tions  differ  too.  j.jon  jf  we  mean  not  man’s

ideal — intellectual  or  sensuous — but  the  total  cos¬
mic  order,  then  the  universal  hierarchy  may  be  un¬
derstood  naturalistically  so  that  each  sphere  gives
scope  for  one  sort  of  good.  God,  or  the  highest
being,  would  then  be  simply  the  life  of  nature  as
a  whole,  if  nature  has  a  conscious  life,  or  that  of
its  noblest  portion.  The  supposed  “  metaphysical
evil”  involved  in  finitude  would  then  be  no  evil
at  all,  but  the  condition  of  every  good.  In  real¬
ising  his  own  will  in  his  own  way,  each  creature
would  be  perfectly  happy,  without  yearning  or
pathetic  regrets  for  other  forms  of  being.  Such
forms  of  being  would  all  be  unpalatable  to  him,
even  if  conventionally  called  higher,  because  their
body  was  larger,  and  their  soul  more  complex.
Nor  would  divine  perfection  itself  be  in  any  sense


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


97


perfection  unless  it  gave  expression  to  some  defi¬
nite  nature,  the  entelechy  either  of  the  celestial
spheres,  or  of  scientific  thought,  or  of  some  other
actual  existence.  Under  these  circumstances,  in¬
habitants  even  of  the  lowest  heaven  would  be  un¬
reservedly  happy,  as  happy  in  their  way  as  those
of  the  seventh  heaven  could  be  in  theirs.  No  pa¬
thetic  note  would  any  longer  disquiet  their  fini-
tude.  They  would  not  have  to  renounce,  in  sad
conformity  to  an  alien  will,  what  even  for  them
would  have  been  a  deeper  joy.  They  would  be
asked  to  renounce  nothing  but  what,  for  them,
would  be  an  evil.  The  overruling  providence
would  then  in  truth  be  fatherly,  by  providing  for
each  being  that  which  it  inwardly  craved.  Per¬
sons  of  one  rank  would  not  be  improved  by  pass¬
ing  into  the  so-called  higher  sphere,  any  more  than
the  ox  would  be  improved  by  being  transformed
into  a  lark,  or  a  king  into  a  poet.

Man  in  such  a  system  could  no  more  pine  to  be
God  than  he  could  pine  to  be  the  law  of  gravity,
or  Spinoza’s  substance,  or  Hegel’s  dialectical  idea.
Such  naturalistic  abstractions,  while  they  perhaps
express  some  element  of  reality  or  its  total  form,
are  not  objects  corresponding  to  man’s  purposes
and  are  morally  inferior  to  his  humanity.  Every
man’s  ideal  lies  within  the  potentialities  of  his
nature,  for  only  by  expressing  his  nature  can  ideals
possess  authority  or  attraction  over  him.  Heaven
accordingly  has  really  many  mansions,  each  truly
heavenly  to  him  who  would  inhabit  it,  and  there
Vol.  H— 7


98


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


is  really  no  room  for  discord  in  those  rounds.
One  ideal  can  no  more  conflict  with  another  than
truth  can  jostle  truth;  but  men,  or  the  disorgan¬
ised  functions  within  a  given  individual,  may  be
in  physical  conflict,  as  opinion  may  wrestle  with
opinion  in  the  world’s  arena  or  in  an  ignorant
brain.  Among  ideals  themselves  infinite  variety  is
consistent  with  perfect  harmony,  but  matter  that
has  not  yet  developed  or  discovered  its  organic
affinities  may  well  show  groping  and  contradic¬
tory  tendencies.  When,  however,  these  embryonic
disorders  are  once  righted,  each  possible  life
knows  its  natural  paradise,  and  what  some  unin¬
telligent  outsider  might  say  in  dispraise  of  that
ideal  will  never  wound  or  rufHe  the  self -justified
creature  whose  ideal  it  is,  any  more  than  a  cat’s
aversion  to  water  will  disturb  a  fish’s  plan  of
life.

An  aristocratic  society  might  accordingly  be  a
perfect  heaven  if  the  variety  and  su-

Theory  that  ...  »  . .  .  . .  n

stations  actu-  perposition  of  functions  m  it  expressed
ally  correspond  a  corresponding  diversity  in  its  mem-
to  faculty.  facilities  and  ideals.  And,  in¬

deed,  what  aristocratic  philosophers  have  always
maintained  is  that  men  really  differ  so  much  in
capacity  that  one  is  happier  for  being  a  slave,
another  for  being  a  shopkeeper,  and  a  third  for
being  a  king.  All  professions,  they  say,  even  the
'  lowest,  are  or  may  be  vocations.  Some  men,  Aris¬
totle  tells  us,  are  slaves  by  nature;  only  physical
functions  are  spontaneous  in  them.  So  long  as


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


99


they  are  humanely  treated,  it  is,  we  may  infer,  a
benefit  for  them  to  be  commanded ;  and  the  contri¬
bution  their  labour  makes  toward  rational  life  in
their  betters  is  the  highest  dignity  they  can  at¬
tain,  and  should  be  prized  by  them  as  a  sufficient
privilege.

Such  assertions,  coming  from  lordly  lips,  have
a  suspicious  optimism  about  them;  yet  the  faith¬
ful  slave,  such  as  the  nurse  we  find  in  the  trage¬
dies,  may  sometimes  have  corresponded  to  that
description.  In  other  regions  it  is  surely  true
that  to  advance  in  conventional  station  would
often  entail  a  loss  in  true  dignity  and  happi¬
ness.  It  would  seldom  benefit  a  musician  to  be
appointed  admiral  or  a  housemaid  to  become  a
prima  donna.  Scientific  breeding  might  conceiv¬
ably  develop  much  more  sharply  the  various  tem¬
peraments  and  faculties  needed  in  the  state;  and
then  each  caste  or  order  of  citizens  would  not  be
more  commonly  dissatisfied  with  its  lot  than  men
or  women  now  are  with  their  sex.  One  tribe  would
run  errands  as  persistently  as  the  ants;  another
would  sing  like  the  lark;  a  third  would  show  a
devil’s  innate  fondness  for  stoking  a  fiery  furnace.

Aristocracy  logically  involves  castes.  But  such
castes  as  exist  in  India,  and  the  social  classes  we
find  in  the  western  world,  are  not  now
based  on  any  profound  difference  in
race,  capacity,  or  inclination.  They  are  based
probably  on  the  chances  of  some  early  war,  rein¬
forced  by  custom  and  perpetuated  by  inheritance.


Its  falsity.


100


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


A  certain  circulation,  corresponding  in  part  to
proved  ability  or  disability,  takes  place  in  the  body
politic,  and,  since  the  French  Revolution,  has  taken
place  increasingly.  Some,  by  energy  and  perse¬
verance,  rise  from  the  bottom ;  some,  by  ill  fortune
or  vice,  fall  from  the  top.  But  these  readjustments
are  insignificant  in  comparison  with  the  social  in¬
ertia  that  perpetuates  all  the  classes,  and  even  such
shifts  as  occur  at  once  re-establish  artificial  condi¬
tions  for  the  next  generation.  As  a  rule,  men’s
station  determines  their  occupation  without  their
gifts  determining  their  station.  Thus  stifled  abil¬
ity  in  the  lower  orders,  and  apathy  or  pampered
incapacity  in  the  higher,  unite  to  deprive  society
of  its  natural  leaders.

It  would  be  easy,  however,  to  exaggerate  the

Feeble  indi-  havoc  wrought  by  such  artificial  con-
viduaiity  the  ditions.  The  monotony  we  observe  in

rule*  mankind  must  not  be  charged  to  the

oppressive  influence  of  circumstances  crushing  the
individual  soul.  It  is  not  society’s  fault  that  most
men  seem  to  miss  their  vocation.  Most  men  have
no  vocation;  and  society,  in  imposing  on  them
some  chance  language,  some  chance  religion,  and
some  chance  career,  first  plants  an  ideal  in  their
bosoms  and  insinuates  into  them  a  sort  of  racial
or  professional  soul.  Their  only  character  is  com¬
posed  of  the  habits  they  have  been  led  to  acquire.
Some  little  propensities  betrayed  in  childhood
may  very  probably  survive;  one  man  may  prove
by  his  dying  words  that  he  was  congenitally  witty,


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


101


another  tender,  another  brave.  But  these  native
qualities  will  simply  have  added  an  ineffectual
tint  to  some  typical  existence  or  other;  and  the
vast  majority  will  remain,  as  Schopenhauer  said,
Fabrikwaaren  der  Natur.

Variety  in  human  dreams,  like  personality  among
savages,  may  indeed  be  inwardly  very  great,  but
it  is  not  efficacious.  To  be  socially  important  and
expressible  in  some  common  medium,  initial  dif¬
ferences  in  temper  must  be  organised  into  cus¬
tom  and  become  cumulative  by  being  imitated
and  enforced.  The  only  artists  who  can  show
great  originality  are  those  trained  in  distinct  and
established  schools ;  for  originality  and  genius
must  be  largely  fed  and  raised  on  the  shoulders
of  some  old  tradition.  A  rich  organisation  and
heritage,  while  they  predetermine  the  core  of  all
possible  variations,  increase  their  number,  since
every  advance  opens  up  new  vistas ;  and  growth,
in  extending  the  periphery  of  the  substance  or¬
ganised,  multiplies  the  number  of  points  at  which
new  growths  may  begin.  Thus  it  is  only  in  re¬
cent  times  that  discoveries  in  science  have  been
frequent,  because  natural  science  until  lately
possessed  no  settled  method  and  no  considerable
fund  of  acquired  truths.  So,  too,  in  political
society,  statesmanship  is  made  possible  by  tradi¬
tional  policies,  generalship  by  military  institu¬
tions,  great  financiers  by  established  commerce.

If  we  ventured  to  generalise  these  observations
we  might  say  that  such  an  unequal  distribution


41 r


t

t


102


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


of  capacity  as  might  justify  aristocracy  should  be
looked  for  only  in  civilised  states.  Savages  are
born  free  and  equal,  but  wherever  a  complex  and
highly  specialised  environment  limits  the  loose
freedom  of  those  born  into  it,  it  also  stimulates
their  capacity.  Under  forced  culture  remarkable
growths  will  appear,  bringing  to  light  possibilities
in  men  which  might,  perhaps,  not  even  have  been
possibilities  had  they  been  left  to  themselves;  for
mulberry  leaves  do  not  of  themselves  develop  into
brocade.  A  certain  personal  idiosyncrasy  must  be
assumed  at  bottom,  else  cotton  damask  would  be
as  good  as  silk  and  all  men  having  like  oppor¬
tunities  would  be  equally  great.  This  idiosyn¬
crasy  is  brought  out  by  social  pressure,  while  in
u  state  of  nature  it  might  have  betrayed  itself
only  in  trivial  and  futile  ways,  as  it  does  among
barbarians.

Distinction  is  thus  in  one  sense  artificial,  since
it  cannot  become  important  or  practical  unless  a
certain  environment  gives  play  to  individual  tal¬
ent  and  preserves  its  originality;  but  distinction
nevertheless  is  perfectly  real,  and  not  merely  im-
Sophisticai  puted.  In  vain  does  the  man  in  the
envy.  street  declare  that  he,  too,  could  have

been  a  king  if  he  had  been  born  in  the  purple;
for  that  potentiality  does  not  belong  to  him  as  he
is,  but  only  as  he  might  have  been,  if  per  impossi¬
ble  he  had  not  been  himself.  There  is  a  strange
metaphysical  illusion  in  imagining  that  a  man
might  change  his  parents,  his  body,  his  early  en-


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


103


vironment,  and  yet  retain  his  personality.  In  its
higher  faculties  his  personality  is  produced  by  his
special  relations.  If  Shakespeare  had  been  born
in  Italy  he  might,  if  you  will,  have  been  a  great
poet,  but  Shakespeare  he  could  never  have  been.
Nor  can  it  be  called  an  injustice  to  all  of  us  who
are  not  Englishmen  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  time  that
Shakespeare  had  that  advantage  and  was  thereby
enabled  to  exist.

The  sense  of  injustice  at  unequal  opportunities
arises  only  when  the  two  environments  compared
are  really  somewhat  analogous,  so  that  the  illu¬
sion  of  a  change  of  roles  without  a  change  of
characters  may  retain  some  colour.  It  was  a  just
insight,  for  instance,  in  the  Christian  fable  to
make  the  first  rebel  against  God  the  chief  among
the  angels,  the  spirit  occupying  the  position  near¬
est  to  that  which  he  tried  to  usurp.  Lucifer’s
fallacy  consisted  in  thinking  natural  inequality
artificial.  His  perversity  lay  in  rebelling  against
himself  and  rejecting  the  happiness  proper  to  his
nature.  This  was  the  maddest  possible  way  of  re¬
belling  against  his  true  creator ;  for  it  is  our  par¬
ticular  finitude  that  creates  us  and  makes  us  be.
No  one,  except  in  wilful  fancy,  would  envy  the
peculiar  advantages  of  a  whale  or  an  ant,  of  an
Inca  or  a  Grand  Lama.  An  exchange  of  places
with  such  remote  beings  would  too  evidently  leave
each  creature  the  very  same  that  it  was  before;
for  after  a  nominal  exchange  of  places  each  office
would  remain  filled  and  no  trace  of  a  change  would


104


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


be  perceptible.  But  the  penny  that  one  man  finds
and  another  misses  would  not,  had  fortune  been
reversed,  have  transmuted  each  man  into  the
other.  So  adventitious  a  circumstance  seems
easily  transferable  without  undermining  that  per¬
sonal  distinction  which  it  had  come  to  embitter.
Yet  the  incipient  fallacy  lurking  even  in  such  sup¬
positions  becomes  obvious  when  we  inquire  whether
so  blind  an  accident,  for  instance,  as  sex  is  also
adventitious  and  ideally  transferable  and  whether
Jack  and  Jill,  remaining  themselves,  could  have
exchanged  genders.

What  extends  these  invidious  comparisons  be¬
yond  all  tolerable  bounds  is  the  generic  and  vague
nature  proper  to  language  and  its  terms.  The
first  personal  pronoun  “  I  ”  is  a  concept  so  thor¬
oughly  universal  that  it  can  accompany  any  ex¬
perience  whatever,  yet  it  is  used  to  designate  an
individual  who  is  really  definable  not  by  the  for¬
mal  selfhood  which  he  shares  with  every  other
thinker,  but  by  the  special  events  that  make  up  his
life.  Each  man’s  memory  embraces  a  certain  field,
and  if  the  landscape  open  to  his  vision  is  sad  and
hateful  he  naturally  wishes  it  to  shift  and  become
like  that  paradise  in  which,  as  he  fancies,  other
men  dwell.  A  legitimate  rebellion  against  evil  in
his  own  experience  becomes  an  unthinkable  sup¬
position  about  what  his  experience  might  have
been  had  he  enjoyed  those  other  men’s  opportuni¬
ties  or  even  (so  far  can  unreason  wander)  had  he
possessed  their  character.  The  wholly  different


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


105


creature,  a  replica  of  that  envied  ideal,  which
would  have  existed  in  that  case  would  still  have
called  itself  “  I  ” ;  and  so,  the  dreamer  imagines,
that  creature  would  have  been  himself  in  a  dif¬
ferent  situation.

If  a  new  birth  could  still  be  called  by  a  man’s
own  name,  the  reason  would  be  that  the  concrete
faculties  now  present  in  him  are  the  basis  for  the
ideal  he  throws  out,  and  if  these  particular  fac¬
ulties  came  to  fruition  in  a  new  being,  he  would
call  that  being  himself,  inasmuch  as  it  realised
his  ideal.  The  poorer  the  reality,  therefore,  the
meaner  and  vaguer  the  ideal  it  is  able  to  project.
Man  is  so  tied  to  his  personal  endowment  (essen¬
tial  to  him  though  an  accident  in  the  world)  that
even  his  uttermost  ideal,  into  which  he  would  fly
out  of  himself  and  his  finitude,  can  be  nothing  but
the  fulfilment  of  his  own  initial  idiosyncrasies.
Whatever  other  wills  and  other  glories  may  exist
in  heaven  lie  not  within  his  universe  of  aspiration.
Even  his  most  perversely  metaphysical  envy  can
begrudge  to  others  only  what  he  instinctively
craves  for  himself.

It  is  not  mere  inequality,  therefore,
not^griev-8  that  can  t>e  a  reproach  to  the  aristo-
ance;  suffer-  cratic  or  theistic  ideal.  Could  each

mg

person  fulfil  his  own  nature  the  most
striking  differences  in  endowment  and  fortune
would  trouble  nobody’s  dreams.  The  true  re¬
proach  to  which  aristocracy  and  theism  are  open
is  the  thwarting  of  those  unequal  natures  and  the


106


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


consequent  suffering  imposed  on  them  all.  In¬
justice  in  this  world  is  not  something  compara¬
tive;  the  wrong  is  deep,  clear,  and  absolute  in
each  private  fate.  A  bruised  child  wailing  in  the
street,  his  small  world  for  the  moment  utterly
black  and  cruel  before  him,  does  not  fetch  his  un¬
happiness  from  sophisticated  comparisons  or  irra¬
tional  envy ;  nor  can  any  compensations  and  celes¬
tial  harmonies  supervening  later  ever  expunge  or
justify  that  moment’s  bitterness.  The  pain  may
be  whistled  away  and  forgotten ;  the  mind  may  be
rendered  by  it  only  a  little  harder,  a  little  coarser,
a  little  more  secretive  and  sullen  and  familiar
with  unrightable  wrong.  But  ignoring  that  pain
will  not  prevent  its  having  existed;  it  must  re¬
main  for  ever  to  trouble  God’s  omniscience  and
be  a  part  of  that  hell  which  the  creation  too  truly
involves.

The  same  curse  of  suffering  vitiates  Agrippa’s
ingenious  parable  and  the  joyful  humility  of
Dante’s  celestial  friends,  and  renders  both  equally
irrelevant  to  human  conditions.  Nature  may  ar¬
range  her  hierarchies  as  she  chooses  and  make
her  creatures  instrumental  to  one  another’s  life.
That  interrelation  is  no  injury  to  any  part  and
an  added  beauty  in  the  whole.  It  would  have  been
a  truly  admirable  arrangement  to  have  enabled
every  living  being,  in  attaining  its  own  end,  to
make  the  attainments  of  the  others’  ends  possible
to  them  also.  An  approach  to  such  an  equilibrium
has  actually  been  reached  in  some  respects  by  the


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


107


rough  sifting  of  miscellaneous  organisms  until
those  that  were  compatible  alone  remained.  But
Mutilation  by  nature,  in  her  haste  to  be  fertile,
crowding.  wants  to  produce  everything  at  once,

and  her  distracted  industry  has  brought  about
terrible  confusion  and  waste  and  terrible  injustice.
She  has  been  led  to  punish  her  ministers  for  the
services  they  render  and  her  favourites  for  the
honours  they  receive.  She  has  imposed  suffering
on  her  creatures  together  with  life;  she  has  de¬
feated  her  own  objects  and  vitiated  her  bounty
by  letting  every  good  do  harm  and  bring  evil  in
its  train  to  some  unsuspecting  creature.

This  oppression  is  the  moral  stain  that  attaches
to  aristocracy  and  makes  it  truly  unjust.  Every
privilege  that  imposes  suffering  involves  a  wrong.
Not  only  does  aristocracy  lay  on  the  world  a  tax
in  labour  and  privation  that  its  own  splendours,
intellectual  and  worldly,  may  arise,  but  by  so
doing  it  infects  intelligence  and  grandeur  with
inhumanity  and  renders  corrupt  and  odious  that
pre-eminence  which  should  have  been  divine.  The
lower  classes,  in  submitting  to  the  hardship  and
meanness  of  their  lives — which,  to  be  sure,  might
have  been  harder  and  meaner  had  no  aristocracy
existed — must  upbraid  their  fellow-men  for  profit¬
ing  by  their  ill  fortune  and  therefore  having  an
interest  in  perpetuating  it.  Instead  of  the  brutal
but  innocent  injustice  of  nature,  what  they  suffer
from  is  the  sly  injustice  of  men ;  and  though  the
suffering  be  less — for  the  worst  of  men  is  human


108


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


— the  injury  is  more  sensible.  The  inclemencies
and  dangers  men  must  endure  in  a  savage  state,
in  scourging  them,  would  not  have  profited  by
that  cruelty.  But  suffering  has  an  added  sting
when  it  enables  others  to  be  exempt  from  care  and
to  live  like  the  gods  in  irresponsible  ease;  the  in¬
equality  which  would  have  been  innocent  and  even
beautiful  in  a  happy  world  becomes,  in  a  painful
world,  a  bitter  wrong,  or  at  best  a  criminal  beauty.
a  hint  to  It  would  be  a  happy  relief  to  the

optimists.  aristocrats  conscience,  when  he  pos¬
sesses  one,  could  he  learn  from  some  yet  bolder
Descartes  that  common  people  were  nothing  but
letes-machines ,  and  that  only  a  groundless  preju¬
dice  had  hitherto  led  us  to  suppose  that  life  could
exist  where  evidently  nothing  good  could  be  at¬
tained  by  living.  If  all  unfortunate  people  could
be  proved  to  be  unconscious  automata,  what  a
brilliant  justification  that  would  be  for  the  ways
of  both  God  and  man !  Philosophy  would  not
lack  arguments  to  support  such  an  agreeable  con¬
clusion.  Beginning  with  the  axiom  that  whatever
is  is  right,  a  metaphysician  might  adduce  the
truth  that  consciousness  is  something  self-existent
and  indubitably  real ;  therefore,  he  would  contend,
it  must  be  self-justifying  and  indubitably  good.
And  he  might  continue  by  saying  that  a  slave’s
life  was  not  its  own  excuse  for  being,  nor  were
the  labours  of  a  million  drudges  otherwise  justi¬
fied  than  by  the  conveniences  which  they  supplied
their  masters  with.  Ergo,  those  servile  opera-


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


109


lions  could  come  to  consciousness  only  where  they
attained  their  end,  and  the  world  could  contain
nothing  but  perfect  and  universal  happiness.  A
divine  omniscience  and  joy,  shared  by  finite  minds
in  so  far  as  they  might  attain  perfection,  would
be  the  only  life  in  existence,  and  the  notion  that
such  a  thing  as  pain,  sorrow,  or  hatred  could  exist
at  all  would  forthwith  vanish  like  the  hideous  and
ridiculous  illusion  that  it  was.  This  argument
may  be  recommended  to  apologetic  writers  as  no
weaker  than  those  they  commonly  rely  on,  and
infinitely  more  consoling.

But  so  long  as  people  remain  on  what  such  an

How  aristocra-  Evaluable  optimist  might  call  the  low
des  might  do  level  of  sensuous  thought,  and  so  long
good’  as  we  imagine  that  we  exist  and  suffer,

an  aristocratic  regimen  can  only  be  justified  by
radiating  benefit  and  by  proving  that  were  less
given  to  those  above  less  would  be  attained  by
those  beneath  them.  Such  reversion  of  benefit
might  take  a  material  form,  as  when,  by  commer¬
cial  guidance  and  military  protection,  a  greater
net  product  is  secured  to  labour,  even  after  all
needful  taxes  have  been  levied  upon  it  to  support
greatness.  An  industrial  and  political  oligarchy
might  defend  itself  on  that  ground.  Or  the  re¬
turn  might  take  the  less  positive  form  of  oppor¬
tunity,  as  it  does  when  an  aristocratic  society  has
a  democratic  government.  Here  the  people  neither
accept  guidance  nor  require  protection;  but  the
existence  of  a  rich  and  irresponsible  class  offers


110


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


them  an  ideal,  such  as  it  is,  in  their  ambitious
struggles.  For  they  too  may  grow  rich,  exercise
financial  ascendancy,  educate  their  sons  like  gen¬
tlemen,  and  launch  their  daughters  into  fashion¬
able  society.  Finally,  if  the  only  aristocracy  rec¬
ognised  were  an  aristocracy  of  achievement,  and
if  public  rewards  followed  personal  merit,  the  re¬
version  to  the  people  might  take  the  form  of  par¬
ticipation  by  them  in  the  ideal  interests  of  eminent
men.  Holiness,  genius,  and  knowledge  can  rever¬
berate  through  all  society.  The  fruits  of  art  and
science  are  in  themselves  cheap  and  not  to  be
monopolised  or  consumed  in  enjoyment.  On  the
contrary,  their  wider  diffusion  stimulates  their
growth  and  makes  their  cultivation  more  intense
and  successful.  When  an  ideal  interest  is  general
the  share  which  falls  to  the  private  person  is  the
more  apt  to  be  efficacious.  The  saints  have  usu¬
ally  had  companions,  and  artists  and  philosophers
have  flourished  in  schools.

At  the  same  time  ideal  goods  cannot  be  assim¬
ilated  without  some  training  and  leisure.  Like
education  and  religion  they  are  degraded  by  popu¬
larity,  and  reduced  from  what  the  master  intended
to  what  the  people  are  able  and  willing  to  receive.
So  pleasing  an  idea,  then,  as  this  of  diffused  ideal
possessions  has  little  application  in  a  society  aris¬
tocratically  framed;  for  the  greater  eminence  the
few  attain  the  less  able  are  the  many  to  follow
them.  Great  thoughts  require  a  great  mind  and
pure  beauties  a  profound  sensibility.  To  attempt


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


111


to  give  such  things  a  wide  currency  is  to  be  wil¬
ling  to  denaturalise  them  in  order  to  boast  that
they  have  been  propagated.  Culture  is  on  the
horns  of  this  dilemma :  if  profound  and  noble
it  must  remain  rare,  if  common  it  must  become
mean.  These  alternatives  can  never  be  eluded
until  some  purified  and  high-bred  race  succeeds
the  promiscuous  bipeds  that  now  blacken  the
planet.

Aristocracy,  like  everything  else,  has  no  practi¬
cal  force  save  that  which  mechanical  causes  endow
it  with.  Its  privileges  are  fruits  of  inevitable
advantages.  Its  oppressions  are  simply  new  forms
and  vehicles  for  nature’s  primeval  cruelty,  while
the  benefits  it  may  also  confer  are  only  further
examples  of  her  nice  equilibrium  and  necessary
harmony.  For  it  lies  in  the  essence  of  a  mechani¬
cal  world,  where  the  interests  of  its  products  are
concerned,  to  be  fundamentally  kind,  since  it  has
formed  and  on  the  whole  maintains  those  prod¬
ucts,  and  yet  continually  cruel,  since  it  forms  and
maintains  them  blindly,  without  considering  diffi¬
culties  or  probable  failures.  Now  the  most  tyran¬
nical  government,  like  the  best,  is  a  natural  prod¬
uct  maintained  by  an  equilibrium  of  natural
forces.  It  is  simply  a  new  mode  of  mechanical
energy  to  which  the  philosopher  living  under  it
must  adjust  himself  as  he  would  to  the  weather.

Man  adds  But  w^en  the  vehicle  of  nature’s  in¬
wrong  to  na-  clemency  is  a  heartless  man,  even  if
ture  a  injury.  done  be  less,  it  puts  on  a


112


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


new  and  a  moral  aspect.  The  source  of  injury
is  then  not  only  natural  but  criminal  as  well,
and  the  result  is  a  sense  of  wrong  added  to  mis¬
fortune.  It  must  needs  be  that  offence  come,
but  woe  to  him  by  whom  the  offence  cometh.  He
justly  arouses  indignation  and  endures  remorse.

Now  civilisation  cannot  afford  to  entangle  its

Conditions  ideals  with  the  causes  of  remorse  and
of  a  just  in-  of  just  indignation.  In  the  first  place
equality.  nature  in  her  slow  and  ponderous  way
levels  her  processes  and  rubs  off  her  sharp  edges
by  perpetual  friction.  Where  there  is  maladjust¬
ment  there  is  no  permanent  physical  stability.
Therefore  the  ideal  of  society  can  never  involve
the  infliction  of  injury  on  anybody  for  any  pur¬
pose.  Such  an  ideal  would  propose  for  a  goal
something  out  of  equilibrium,  a  society  which
even  if  established  could  not  maintain  itself ;  but
an  ideal  life  must  not  tend  to  destroy  its  ideal
by  abolishing  its  own  existence.  In  the  second
place,  it  is  impossible  on  moral  grounds  that  injus¬
tice  should  subsist  in  the  ideal.  The  ideal  means
the  perfect,  and  a  supposed  ideal  in  which  wrong
still  subsisted  would  be  the  denial  of  perfection.
The  ideal  state  and  the  ideal  universe  should  be
a  family  where  all  are  not  equal,  but  where  all
are  happy.  So  that  an  aristocratic  or  theistic  sys¬
tem  in  order  to  deserve  respect  must  discard  its
sinister  apologies  for  evil  and  clearly  propose  such
an  order  of  existences,  one  superposed  upon  the
other,  as  should  involve  no  suffering  on  any  of  its


THE  ARISTOCRATIC  IDEAL


113


levels.  The  services  required  of  each  must  involve
no  injury  to  any;  to  perform  them  should  be  made
the  servant’s  spontaneous  and  specific  ideal.  The
privileges  the  system  bestows  on  some  must  in¬
volve  no  outrage  on  the  rest,  and  must  not  be
paid  for  by  mutilating  other  lives  or  thwarting
their  natural  potentialities.  For  the  humble  to
give  their  labour  would  then  be  blessed  in  reality,
and  not  merely  by  imputation,  while  for  the  great
to  receive  those  benefits  would  be  blessed  also,
not  in  fact  only  but  in  justice.


Vol.  IL— 8


CHAPTER  Y


DEMOCEACY


The  word  democracy  may  stand  for  a  natural

Democracy  as  social  equality  in  the  body  politic  or
an  end  and  as  for  a  constitutional  form  of  govern-
a  means.  ment  in  which  power  lies  more  or  less

directly  in  the  people’s  hands.  The  former  may
be  called  social  democracy  and  the  latter  demo¬
cratic  government.  The  two  differ  widely,  both
in  origin  and  in  moral  principle.  Genetically
considered,  social  democracy  is  something  primi¬
tive,  unintended,  proper  to  communities  where
there  is  general  competence  and  no  marked  per¬
sonal  eminence.  It  is  the  democracy  of  Arcadia,
Switzerland,  and  the  American  pioneers.  Such  a
community  might  be  said  to  have  also  a  demo¬
cratic  government,  for  everything  in  it  is  natu¬
rally  democratic.  There  will  be  no  aristocracy,  no
prestige;  but  instead  an  intelligent  readiness  to
lend  a  hand  and  to  do  in  unison  whatever  is  done,
not  so  much  under  leaders  as  by  a  kind  of  con¬
spiring  instinct  and  contagious  sympathy.  In
other  words,  there  will  be  that  most  democratic
of  governments — no  government  at  all.  But
when  pressure  of  circumstances,  danger,  or  in-

114


DEMOCRACY


115


ward  strife  makes  recognised  and  prolonged  guid¬
ance  necessary  to  a  social  democracy,  the  form

Natural  democ- its  government  takes  is  that  of  a  ru-
racy  leads  to  dimentary  monarchy,  established  by
monarchy.  election  or  general  consent.  A  natu¬
ral  leader  presents  himself  and  he  is  instinctively
obeyed.  He  may  indeed  be  freely  criticised  and
will  not  be  screened  by  any  pomp  or  traditional
mystery;  he  will  be  easy  to  replace  and  every
citizen  will  feel  himself  radically  his  equal.  Yet
such  a  state  is  at  the  beginnings  of  monarchy
and  aristocracy,  close  to  the  stage  depicted  in
Homer,  where  pre-eminences  are  still  obviously
natural,  although  already  over-emphasised  by  the
force  of  custom  and  wealth,  and  by  the  fission
of  society  into  divergent  classes.

Political  democracy,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  late
and  artificial  product.  It  arises  by

Artificial  n  i  .  «  .  ,  , .

democracy  is  a  gradual  extension  ot  aristocratic
an  extension  of  privileges,  through  rebellion  against
privilege.  abuses,  and  in  answer  to  restlessness

on  the  people’s  part.  Its  principle  is  not  the
absence  of  eminence,  but  the  discovery  that  exist¬
ing  eminence  is  no  longer  genuine  and  representa¬
tive.  It  is  compatible  with  a  very  complex  govern¬
ment,  great  empire,  and  an  aristocratic  society;
it  may  retain,  as  notably  in  England  and  in  all
ancient  republics,  many  vestiges  of  older  and  less
democratic  institutions.  For  under  democratic  \
governments  the  people  have  not  created  the
state;  they  merely  control  it.  Their  suspicions


116


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  jealousies  are  quieted  by  assigning  to  them  a
voice,  perhaps  only  a  veto,  in  the  administration ;
but  the  state  administered  is  a  prodigious  self-
created  historical  engine.  Popular  votes  never
established  the  family,  private  property,  religious
practices,  or  international  frontiers.  Institutions,
ideals,  and  administrators  may  all  be  such  as  the
popular  classes  could  never  have  produced;  but
these  products  of  natural  aristocracy  are  suffered
to  subsist  so  long  as  no  very  urgent  protest  is
raised  against  them.  The  people’s  liberty  con¬
sists  not  in  their  original  responsibility  for  what
exists — for  they  are  guiltless  of  it — but  merely  in
the  faculty  they  have  acquired  of  abolishing  any
detail  that  may  distress  or  wound  them,  and  of
imposing  any  new  measure,  which,  seen  against
the  background  of  existing  laws,  may  commend
itself  from  time  to  time  to  their  instinct  and
mind.

If  we  turn  from  origins  to  ideals,  the  contrast

ideals  and  between  social  and  political  democ-
expedients.  racy  js  no  \ess  marked.  Social  de¬
mocracy  is  a  general  ethical  ideal,  looking  to
human  equality  and  brotherhood,  and  inconsist¬
ent,  in  its  radical  form,  with  such  institutions  as
the  family  and  hereditary  property.  Democratic
government,  on  the  contrary,  is  merely  a  means
to  an  end,  an  expedient  for  the  better  and
smoother  government  of  certain  states  at  certain
junctures.  It  involves  no  special  ideals  of  life;
it  is  a  question  of  policy,  namely,  whether  the


DEMOCRACY


117


general  interest  will  be  better  served  by  granting
all  men  (and  perhaps  all  women)  an  equal  voice
in  elections.  For  political  democracy,  arising  in
great  and  complex  states,  must  necessarily  be  a
government  by  deputy,  and  the  questions  actually
submitted  to  the  people  can  be  only  very  large
rough  matters  of  general  policy  or  of  confidence
in  party  leaders.

We  may  now  add  a  few  reflections  about  each
kind  of  democracy,  regarding  democratic  govern¬
ment  chiefly  in  its  origin  and  phases  (for  its  func¬
tion  is  that  of  all  government)  and  social  democ¬
racy  chiefly  as  an  ideal,  since  its  origin  is  simply
that  of  society  itself.

The  possibility  of  intelligent  selfishness  and  the
prevalence  of  a  selfishness  far  from  intelligent
Well-founded  unite  to  make  men  wary  in  intrust-
distrust  of  jng  their  interests  to  one  another’s

rulers.  Yet  °

experts,  if  ra-  keeping.  If  passion  never  overcame
tionai,  would  pru(jence  an(j  jf  private  prudence  al-

interests.  ways  counselled  what  was  profitable
also  to  others,  no  objection  could  arise  to  an
aristocratic  policy.  For  if  we  assume  a  certain
variety  in  endowments  and  functions  among  men,
it  would  evidently  conduce  to  the  general  con¬
venience  that  each  man  should  exercise  his  pow¬
ers  uncontrolled  by  the  public  voice.  The  gov¬
ernment,  having  facilities  for  information  and
ready  resources,  might  be  left  to  determine  all
matters  of  policy;  for  its  members’  private  inter¬
ests  would  coincide  with  those  of  the  public,  and


118


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


even  if  prejudices  and  irrational  habits  prevented
them  from  pursuing  their  own  advantage,  they
would  surely  not  err  more  frequently  or  more
egregiously  in  that  respect  than  would  the  private
individual,  to  whose  ignorant  fancy  every  decision
would  otherwise  have  to  be  referred.

Thus  in  monarchy  every  expedient  is  seized  upon
to  render  the  king’s  and  the  country’s  interests
coincident ;  public  prosperity  fills  his  treasury,  the
arts  adorn  his  court,  justice  rendered  confirms
his  authority.  If  reason  were  efficacious  kings
might  well  be  left  to  govern  alone.  Theologians,
under  the  same  hypothesis,  might  be  trusted  to
draw  up  creeds  and  codes  of  morals ;  and,  in  fact,
everyone  with  a  gift  for  management  or  creation
might  be  authorised  to  execute  his  plans.  It  is
in  this  way,  perhaps,  that  some  social  animals
manage  their  affairs,  for  they  seem  to  co-operate
without  external  control.  That  their  instinctive
system  is  far  from  perfect  we  may  safely  take  for
granted;  but  government,  too,  is  not  always  ade¬
quate  or  wise.  What  spoils  such  a  spontaneous
harmony  is  that  people  neither  understand  their
own  interests  nor  have  the  constancy  to  pursue
them  systematically;  and  further,  that  their  per¬
sonal  or  animal  interests  may  actually  clash,  in
so  far  as  they  have  not  been  harmonised  by
reason.

To  rationalise  an  interest  is  simply  to  corre¬
late  it  with  every  other  interest  which  it  at  all


DEMOCKACY


119


affects.  In  proportion  as  rational  interests  pre¬
dominate  in  a  man  and  he  esteems  rational  satis¬
factions  above  all  others,  it  becomes  impossible
that  he  should  injure  another  by  his  action,  and
unnecessary  that  he  should  sacrifice  himself.  But
the  worse  and  more  brutal  his  nature  is,  and  the
less  satisfaction  he  finds  in  justice,  the  more  need
he  has  to  do  violence  to  himself,  lest  he  should  be
doing  it  to  others.  This  is  the  reason  why  preach¬
ing,  conscious  effort,  and  even  education  are  such
feeble  agencies  for  moral  reform:  only  selection
and  right  breeding  could  produce  that  genuine
virtue  which  would  not  need  to  find  goodness
unpalatable  nor  to  say,  in  expressing  its  own
perversities,  that  a  distaste  for  excellence  is  a
condition  of  being  good.  But  when  a  man  is
ill-begotten  and  foolish,  and  hates  the  means  to
his  own  happiness,  he  naturally  is  not  well  fitted
to  secure  that  of  other  people.  Those  who  suffer
by  his  folly  are  apt  to  think  him  malicious,  where¬
as  he  is  the  first  to  suffer  himself  and  knows  that
it  was  the  force  of  circumstances  and  a  certain
pathetic  helplessness  in  his  own  soul  that  led  him
into  his  errors.

These  errors,  when  they  are  committed  by  a
weak  and  passionate  ruler,  are  not  easily  forgiven.
People  jealous  His  subjects  attribute  to  him  an  intel-
of  eminence,  ligence  he  probably  lacks;  they  call

him  treacherous  or  cruel  when  he  is  very  likely
yielding  to  lazy  habits  and  to  insidious  traditions.


120


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


They  see  in  every  calamity  that  befalls  them  a
proof  that  his  interests  are  radically  hostile  to
theirs,  whereas  it  is  only  his  conduct  that  is  so.
Accordingly,  in  proportion  to  their  alertness  and
self-sufficiency,  they  clamour  for  the  right  to
govern  themselves,  and  usually  secure  it.  Demo¬
cratic  government  is  founded  on  the  decay  of
representative  eminence.  It  indicates  that  natu¬
ral  leaders  are  no  longer  trusted  merely  because
they  are  rich,  enterprising,  learned,  or  old.  Their
spontaneous  action  would  go  awry.  They  must
not  be  allowed  to  act  without  control.  Men  of
talent  may  be  needed  and  used  in  a  democratic
state;  they  may  be  occasionally  hired ;  but  they
will  be  closely  watched  and  directed  by  the  peo¬
ple,  who  fear  otherwise  to  suffer  the  penalty  of
foolishly  intrusting  their  affairs  to  other  men's
hands.

A  fool,  says  a  Spanish  proverb,  knows  more  at
home  than  a  wise  man  at  his  neighbour’s.  So
democratic  instinct  assumes  that,  unless  all  those
concerned  keep  a  vigilant  eye  on  the  course  of
public  business  and  frequently  pronounce  on  its
conduct,  they  will  before  long  awake  to  the  fact
that  they  have  been  ignored  and  enslaved.  The  im¬
plication  is  that  each  man  is  the  best  judge  of  his
own  interests  and  of  the  means  to  advance  them;
or  at  least  that  by  making  himself  his  own  guide
he  can  in  the  end  gain  the  requisite  insight  and
thus  not  only  attain  his  practical  aims,  but  also
some  political  and  intellectual  dignity.


DEMOCRACY


121


All  just  government  pursues  the  general  good;
the  choice  between  aristocratic  and  democratic
forms  touches  only  the  means  to  that  end.  One
arrangement  may  well  be  better  fitted  to  one  place
and  time,  and  another  to  another.  Everything
depends  on  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  avail¬
able  practical  eminence.  The  democratic  theory
it  is  repre-  is  clearly  wrong  if  it  imagines  that
sentative.  eminence  is  not  naturally  representa¬
tive.  Eminence  is  synthetic  and  represents
what  it  synthesises.  An  eminence  not  repre¬
sentative  would  not  constitute  excellence,  but
merely  extravagance  or  notoriety.  Excellence  in
anything,  whether  thought,  action,  or  feeling,  con¬
sists  in  nothing  but  representation,  in  standing
for  many  diffuse  constituents  reduced  to  har¬
mony,  so  that  the  wise  moment  is  filled  with  an
activity  in  which  the  upshot  of  the  experience
concerned  is  mirrored  and  regarded,  an  activity
just  to  all  extant  interests  and  speaking  in  their
total  behalf.  But  anything  approaching  such
true  excellence  is  as  rare  as  it  is  great,  and  a
democratic  society,  naturally  jealous  of  greatness,
may  be  excused  for  not  expecting  true  greatness
and  for  not  even  understanding  what  it  is.  A
government  is  not  made  representative  or  just  by
the  mechanical  expedient  of  electing  its  members
by  universal  suffrage.  It  becomes  representative
only  by  embodying  in  its  policy,  whether  by  in¬
stinct  or  high  intelligence,  the  people’s  conscious
and  unconscious  interests.


122


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Democratic  theory  seems  to  he  right,  however.
But  subject  about  the  actual  failure  of  theocracies,
to  decay.  monarchies,  and  oligarchies  to  remain
representative  and  to  secure  the  general  good.
The  true  eminence  which  natural  leaders  may
have  possessed  in  the  beginning  usually  declines
into  a  conventional  and  baseless  authority.  The
guiding  powers  which  came  to  save  and  express
humanity  fatten  in  office  and  end  by  reversing
their  function.  The  government  reverts  to  the
primeval  robber ;  the  church  stands  in  the  way  of
all  wisdom.  Under  such  circumstances  it  is  a
happy  thing  if  the  people  possess  enough  initi¬
ative  to  assert  themselves  and,  after  clearing  the
ground  in  a  more  or  less  summary  fashion,  allow
some  new  organisation,  more  representative  of
actual  interests,  to  replace  the  old  encumbrances
and  tyrannies.

Ancient  citi-  heroic  ages  of  Greece  and

zenship  a  pnv-  Rome  patriotism  was  stimulated  in

llege*  manifold  ways.  The  city  was  a  father-

land,  a  church,  an  army,  and  almost  a  family.  It
had  its  own  school  of  art,  its  own  dialect,  its  own
feasts,  its  own  fables.  Every  possible  social  in¬
terest  was  either  embodied  in  the  love  of  country
or,  like  friendship  and  fame,  closely  associated
with  it.  Patriotism  could  then  be  expected  to
sway  every  mind  at  all  capable  of  moral  en¬
thusiasm.  Furthermore,  only  the  flower  of  the
population  were  citizens.  In  rural  districts  the
farmer  might  be  a  freeman;  but  he  probably  had


DEMOCKACY


123


slaves  whose  work  he  merely  superintended.  The
meaner  and  more  debasing  offices,  mining,  sea¬
faring,  domestic  service,  and  the  more  laborious
part  of  all  industries,  were  relegated  to  slaves.
The  citizens  were  a  privileged  class.  Military
discipline  and  the  street  life  natural  in  Mediter¬
ranean  countries,  kept  public  events  and  public
men  always  under  everybody’s  eyes :  the  state  was
a  bodily  presence.  Democracy,  when  it  arose  in
such  communities,  was  still  aristocratic;  it  im¬
posed  few  new  duties  upon  the  common  citizens,

while  it  diffused  many  privileges  and  exemptions

/

among  them.

The  social  democracy  which  is  the  ideal  of

Modem  democ-  many  modern  times,  on  the  other
racyindus-  hand,  excludes  slavery,  unites  whole

i  •  «

nations  and  even  all  mankind  into  a
society  of  equals,  and  admits  no  local  or  racial
privileges  by  which  the  sense  of  fellowship  may  be
stimulated.  Public  spirit  could  not  be  sustained
in  such  a  community  by  exemptions,  rivalries,  or
ambitions.  No  one,  indeed,  would  be  a  slave,
everyone  would  have  an  elementary  education
and  a  chance  to  demonstrate  his  capacity;  but  he
would  be  probably  condemned  to  those  occupa¬
tions  which  in  ancient  republics  were  assigned  to
slaves.  At  least  at  the  opening  of  his  career  he
would  find  himself  on  the  lowest  subsisting  plane
of  humanity,  and  he  would  probably  remain  on  it
throughout  his  life.  In  other  words,  the  citizens
of  a  social  democracy  would  be  all  labourers;  for


124


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


even  those  who  rose  to  be  leaders  would,  in  a
genuine  democracy,  rise  from  the  ranks  and  be¬
long  in  education  and  habits  to  the  same  class  as
all  the  others.

Under  such  circumstances  the  first  virtue  which
a  democratic  society  would  have  to  possess  would
be  enthusiastic  diligence.  The  motives  for  work

Dangers  to  which  have  hitherto  prevailed  in  the
current  civiii-  world  have  been  want,  ambition,  and
sation.  love  OCCUpation :  in  a  social  democ¬

racy,  after  the  first  was  eliminated,  the  last  alone
would  remain  efficacious.  Love  of  occupation,  al¬
though  it  occasionally  accompanies  and  cheers
every  sort  of  labour,  could  never  induce  men  origi¬
nally  to  undertake  arduous  and  uninteresting  tasks,
nor  to  persevere  in  them  if  by  chance  or  way¬
wardness  such  tasks  had  been  once  undertaken.
Inclination  can  never  be  the  general  motive  for
the  work  now  imposed  on  the  masses.  Before
labour  can  be  its  own  reward  it  must  become  less
continuous,  more  varied,  more  responsive  to  in¬
dividual  temperament  and  capacity.  Otherwise
it  would  not  cease  to  repress  and  warp  human
faculties.

A  state  composed  exclusively  of  such  work¬
men  and  peasants  as  make  up  the  bulk  of  mod¬
ern  nations  would  be  an  utterly  barbarous  state.
Every  liberal  tradition  would  perish  in  it;  and
the  rational  and  historic  essence  of  patriotism  it¬
self  would  be  lost.  The  emotion  of  it,  no  doubt,
would  endure,  for  it  is  not  generosity  that  the


DEMOCRACY


125


people  lack.  They  possess  every  impulse;  it  is
experience  that  they  cannot  gather,  for  in  gath¬
ering  it  they  would  be  constituting  those  higher
organs  that  make  up  an  aristocratic  society.
Civilisation  has  hitherto  consisted  in  diffusion
and  dilution  of  habits  arising  in  privileged  cen¬
tres.  It  has  not  sprung  from  the  people;  it  has
arisen  in  their  midst  by  a  variation  from  them,
and  it  has  afterward  imposed  itself  on  them  from
above.  All  its  founders  in  antiquity  passed  for
demi-gods  or  were  at  least  inspired  by  an  oracle
or  a  nymph.  The  vital  genius  thus  bursting  forth
and  speaking  with  authority  gained  a  certain
ascendency  in  the  world;  it  mitigated  barbarism
without  removing  it.  This  is  one  fault,  among
others,  which  current  civilisation  has;  it  is  arti¬
ficial.  If  social  democracy  could  breed  a  new
civilisation  out  of  the  people,  this  new  civilisation
would  be  profounder  than  ours  and  more  per¬
vasive.  But  it  doubtless  cannot.  What  we  have
rests  on  conquest  and  conversion,  on  leadership
and  imitation,  on  mastership  and  service.  To
abolish  aristocracy,  in  the  sense  of  social  privi¬
lege  and  sanctified  authority,  would  be  to  cut  off
the  source  from  which  all  culture  has  hitherto
flowed.


Civilisation,  however,  although  we
are  wont  to  speak  the  word  with  a
certain  unction,  is  a  thing  whose  value
may  be  questioned.  One  way  of  defending  the
democratic  ideal  is  to  deny  that  civilisation  is  a


Is  current
civilisation  a
good?


126


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


good.  In  one  sense,  indeed,  social  democracy  is
essentially  a  reversion  to  a  more  simple  life,  more
Arcadian  and  idyllic  than  that  which  aristocracy
has  fostered.  Equality  is  more  easily  attained  in
a  patriarchal  age  than  in  an  age  of  concentrated
and  intense  activities.  Possessions,  ideal  and  ma¬
terial,  may  he  fewer  in  a  simple  community,  but
they  are  more  easily  shared  and  bind  men  together
in  moral  and  imaginative  bonds  instead  of  divid¬
ing  them,  as  do  all  highly  elaborate  ways  of  living
or  thinking.  The  necessaries  of  life  can  be  en¬
joyed  by  a  rural  people,  living  in  a  sparsely  set¬
tled  country,  and  among  these  necessaries  might
be  counted  not  only  bread  and  rags,  which  every¬
one  comes  by  in  some  fashion  even  in  our  society,
but  that  communal  religion,  poetry,  and  fellow¬
ship  which  the  civilised  poor  are  so  often  without.
If  social  democracy  should  triumph  and  take  this
direction  it  would  begin  by  greatly  diminishing
the  amount  of  labour  performed  in  the  world.
All  instruments  of  luxury,  many  instruments  of
vain  knowledge  and  art,  would  no  longer  be  pro¬
duced.  We  might  see  the  means  of  communi¬
cation,  lately  so  marvellously  developed,  again
disused;  the  hulks  of  great  steamers  rusting  in
harbours,  the  railway  bridges  collapsing  and  the
tunnels  choked;  while  a  rural  population,  with  a
few  necessary  and  perfected  manufactures,  would
spread  over  the  land  and  abandon  the  great  cities
to  ruin,  calling  them  seats  of  Babylonian  servi¬
tude  and  folly.


DEMOCRACY


127


Such  anticipations  may  seem  fantastic,  and  of
course  there  is  no  probability  that  a  reaction
against  material  progress  should  set  in  in  the  near
future,  since  as  yet  the  tide  of  commercialism  and
population  continues  everywhere  to  rise;  but  does
any  thoughtful  man  suppose  that  these  tendencies
will  be  eternal  and  that  the  present  experiment
in  civilisation  is  the  last  the  world  will  see?

If  social  democracy,  however,  refused  to  dimin¬
ish  labour  and  wealth  and  proposed  rather  to
accelerate  material  progress  and  keep  every  fur-

Horrors  of  uace  at  full  blast,  it  would  come  face
materialistic  to  face  with  a  serious  problem.  By
democracy.  whom  would  the  product  be  enjoyed?

By  those  who  created  it  ?  What  sort  of  pleasures,
arts,  and  sciences  would  those  grimy  workmen
have  time  and  energy  for  after  a  day  of  hot  and
unremitting  exertion  ?  What  sort  of  religion
would  fill  their  Sabbaths  and  their  dreams?  We
see  how  they  spend  their  leisure  to-day,  when
a  strong  aristocratic  tradition  and  the  presence
of  a  rich  class  still  profoundly  influence  popular
ideals.  Imagine  those  aristocratic  influences  re¬
moved,  and  would  any  head  be  lifted  above  a  dead
level  of  infinite  dulness  and  vulgarity?  Would
mankind  be  anything  but  a  trivial,  sensuous,
superstitious,  custom-ridden  herd?  There  is  no
tyranny  so  hateful  as  a  vulgar  and  anonymous
tyranny.  It  is  all-permeating,  all-thwarting;  it
blasts  every  budding  novelty  and  sprig  of  genius
with  its  omnipresent  and  fierce  stupidity.  Such


128


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


a  headless  people  has  the  mind  of  a  worm  and  the
claws  of  a  dragon.  Anyone  would  be  a  hero  who
should  quell  the  monster.  A  foreign  invader  or
domestic  despot  would  at  least  have  steps  to  his
throne,  possible  standing-places  for  art  and  intel¬
ligence;  his  supercilious  indifference  would  dis¬
countenance  the  popular  gods,  and  allow  some
courageous  hand  at  last  to  shatter  them.  Social
democracy  at  high  pressure  would  leave  no  room
for  liberty.  The  only  freeman  in  it  would  be
one  whose  whole  ideal  was  to  be  an  average  man.

Perhaps,  however,  social  democracy  might  take

Timocracy  or  a  m0re  liberal  form*  might  allow
socialistic  the  benefits  of  civilisation  to  be  inte-
anstocracy.  grated  in  eminent  men,  whose  influ¬
ence  in  turn  should  direct  and  temper  the  general
life.  This  would  be  timocracy — a  government  by
men  of  merit.  The  same  abilities  which  raised
these  men  to  eminence  would  enable  them  to
apprehend  ideal  things  and  to  employ  material
resources  for  the  common  advantage.  They  would
formulate  religion,  cultivate  the  arts  and  sciences,
provide  for  government  and  all  public  conven¬
iences,  and  inspire  patriotism  by  their  discourse
and  example.  At  the  same  time  a  new  motive
would  be  added  to  common  labour,  I  mean  ambi¬
tion.  For  there  would  be  not  only  a  possibility
of  greater  reward  but  a  possibility  of  greater  ser¬
vice.  The  competitive  motive  which  socialism  is
supposed  to  destroy  would  be  restored  in  timoc¬
racy,  and  an  incentive  offered  to  excellence  and


DEMOCRACY


129


industry.  The  country’s  resources  would  increase
for  the  very  reason  that  somebody  might  con¬
ceivably  profit  by  them ;  and  everyone  would  have
at  least  an  ideal  interest  in  ministering  to  that
complete  life  which  he  or  his  children,  or  whoever
was  most  capable  of  appreciation,  was  actually  to
enjoy.

Such  a  timocracy  (of  which  the  Roman  Church
is  a  good  example)  would  differ  from  the  social
aristocracy  that  now  exists  only  by  the  removal
of  hereditary  advantages.  People  would  be  born
equal,  but  they  would  grow  unequal,  and  the  only
equality  subsisting  would  be  equality  of  opportu¬
nity.  If  power  remained  in  the  people’s  hands,
the  government  would  be  democratic;  but  a  full
development  of  timocracy  would  allow  the  proved
leader  to  gain  great  ascendancy.  The  better  se¬
curity  the  law  offered  that  the  men  at  the  top
should  be  excellent,  the  less  restraint  would  it
need  to  put  upon  them  when  once  in  their  places.
Their  eminence  would  indeed  have  been  facti¬
tious  and  their  station  undeserved  if  they  were
not  able  to  see  and  do  what  was  requisite  better
than  the  community  at  large.  An  assembly  has
only  the  lights  common  to  the  majority  of  its
members,  far  less,  therefore,  than  its  members
have  when  added  together  and  less  even  than  the
wiser  part  of  them.

A  timocracy  would  therefore  seem  to  unite  the
advantages  of  all  forms  of  government  and  to
avoid  their  respective  abuses.  It  would  promote
vol.  n.-9


130


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


freedom  scientifically.  It  might  be  a  monarchy,
if  men  existed  fit  to  be  kings;  but  they  would
have  to  give  signs  of  their  fitness  and  their  hon¬
ours  would  probably  not  be  hereditary.  Like
aristocracy,  it  would  display  a  great  diversity  of
institutions  and  superposed  classes,  a  stimulating
variety  in  ways  of  living;  it  would  be  favourable
to  art  and  science  and  to  noble  idiosyncrasies.
Among  its  activities  the  culminating  and  most
conspicuous  ones  would  be  liberal.  Yet  there
would  be  no  isolation  of  the  aristocratic  body;  its
blood  would  be  drawn  from  the  people,  and  only
its  traditions  from  itself.  Like  social  democracy,
finally,  it  would  be  just  and  open  to  every  man,
but  it  would  not  depress  humanity  nor  wish  to
cast  everybody  in  a  common  mould.

There  are  immense  difficulties,  however,  in  the
way  of  such  a  Utopia,  some  physical  and  others
moral.  Timocracy  would  have  to  begin  by  uproot¬
ing  the  individual  from  his  present  natural  soil
and  transplanting  him  to  that  in  which  his  spirit
might  flourish  best.  This  proposed  transfer  is
what  makes  the  system  ideally  excellent,  since  na¬
ture  is  a  means  only;  but  it  makes  it  also  almost
impossible  to  establish,  since  nature  is  the  only
efficacious  power.  Timocracy  can  arise  only  in
the  few  fortunate  cases  where  material  and  social
forces  have  driven  men  to  that  situation  in  which
their  souls  can  profit  most,  and  where  they  find
no  influences  more  persuasive  than  those  which
are  most  liberating.  It  is  clear,  for  instance,  that


DEMOCRACY


131


timocracy  would  exclude  the  family  or  greatly
weaken  it.  Soul  and  body  would  be  wholly
transferred  to  that  medium  where
The  difficulty  lay  the  creature’s  spiritual  affinities;

all  Socialism.  hls  origins  would  be  disregarded  on

principle,  except  where  they  might
help  to  forecast  his  disposition.  Life  would  be¬
come  heartily  civic,  corporate,  conventual;  other¬
wise  opportunities  would  not  be  equal  in  the  be¬
ginning,  nor  culture  and  happiness  perfect  in
the  end,  and  identical.  We  have  seen,  however,
what  difficulties  and  dangers  surround  any  revolu¬
tion  in  that  ideal  direction.

Even  less  perfect  polities,  that  leave  more  to
chance,  would  require  a  moral  transformation  in
mankind  if  they  were  to  be  truly  successful.

A  motive  which  now  generates  political  democ¬
racy,  impatience  of  sacrifice,  must,  in  a  good
social  democracy,  be  turned  into  its  opposite.
Men  must  be  glad  to  labour  unselfishly  in  the
spirit  of  art  or  of  religious  service:  for  if  they
labour  selfishly,  the  higher  organs  of  the  state
would  perish,  since  only  a  few  can  profit  by  them
materially;  while  if  they  neglect  their  work,  civ¬
ilisation  loses  that  intensive  development  which
it  was  proposed  to  maintain.  Each  man  would
need  to  forget  himself  and  not  to  chafe  under
his  natural  limitations.  He  must  find  his  hap¬
piness  in  seeing  his  daily  task  grow  under  his
hands ;  and  when,  in  speculative  moments,  he
lifts  his  eyes  from  his  labour,  he  must  find  an


132


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ideal  satisfaction  in  patriotism,  in  love  for  that
complex  society  to  which  he  is  contributing  an
infinitesimal  service.  He  must  learn  to  be  happy
without  wealth,  fame,  or  power,  and  with  no
reward  save  his  modest  livelihood  and  an  ideal
participation  in  his  country’s  greatness.  It  is  a
spirit  hardly  to  be  maintained  without  a  close
organisation  and  much  training;  and  as  military
and  religious  timocracies  have  depended  on  disci¬
pline  and  a  minute  rule  of  life,  so  an  industrial
timocracy  would  have  to  depend  on  guilds  and
unions,  which  would  make  large  inroads  upon
personal  freedom.

The  question  here  suggests  itself
whether  such  a  citizen,  once  having
accepted  his  humble  lot,  would  be  in
a  different  position  from  the  plebeians
in  an  aristocracy.  The  same  subor¬
dination  would  be  imposed  upon  him,  only  the
ground  assigned  for  his  submission  would  be  no
longer  self-interest  and  necessity,  but  patriotic
duty.  This  patriotism  would  have  to  be  of  an
exalted  type.  Its  end  would  not  be,  as  in  indus¬
trial  society,  to  secure  the  private  interests  of
each  citizen ;  its  end  would  be  the  glory  and  per¬
fection  of  the  state  as  imagination  or  philosophy
might  conceive  them.  This  glory  and  perfection
would  not  be  a  benefit  to  anyone  who  was  not  in
some  degree  a  philosopher  and  a  poet.  They  would
seem,  then,  to  be  the  special  interests  of  an  aris¬
tocracy,  not  indeed  an  aristocracy  of  wealth  or


The  masses
would  have  to
be  plebeian  in
position  and
patrician  in
feeling.


DEMOCRACY


133


power,  but  an  aristocracy  of  noble  minds.  Those
whose  hearts  could  prize  the  state’s  ideal  perfec¬
tion  would  be  those  in  whom  its  benefits  would
be  integrated.  And  the  common  citizen  would
find  in  their  existence,  and  in  his  own  participa¬
tion  in  their  virtue,  the  sole  justification  for  his
loyalty.

Ideal  patriotism  is  not  secured  when  each
man,  although  without  natural  eminence,  pursues
his  private  interests.  What  renders  man  an  im¬
aginative  and  moral  being  is  that  in  society  he
gives  new  aims  to  his  life  which  could  not  have
existed  in  solitude:  the  aims  of  friendship,  relig¬
ion,  science,  and  art.  All  these  aims,  in  a  well-
knit  state,  are  covered  by  the  single  passion  of
patriotism;  and  then  a  conception  of  one’s  coun¬
try,  its  history  and  mission  becomes  the  touch¬
stone  of  every  ideal  impulse.  Timocracy  requires
this  kind  of  patriotism  in  everybody;  so  that  if
public  duty  is  not  to  become  a  sacrifice  imposed
on  the  many  for  the  sake  of  the  few,  as  in  aris¬
tocracy,  the  reason  can  only  be  that  the  many
covet,  appreciate,  and  appropriate  their  country’s
ideal  glories,  quite  as  much  as  the  favoured  class
ever  could  in  any  aristocracy.

Organisation  Is  this  possible?  What  might  hap-
for  ideal  ends  pen  ^e  human  race  WGre  im-

cism.  mensely  improved  and  exalted  there

is  as  yet  no  saying;  but  experience  has  given
no  example  of  efficacious  devotion  to  communal
ideals  except  in  small  cities,  held  together  by


134


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


close  military  and  religious  bonds  and  having
no  important  relations  to  anything  external.
Even  this  antique  virtue  was  short-lived  and
sadly  thwarted  by  private  and  party  passion.
Where  public  spirit  has  held  best,  as  at  Sparta  or
(to  take  a  very  different  type  of  communal  pas¬
sion)  among  the  Jesuits,  it  has  been  paid  for  by
a  notable  lack  of  spontaneity  and  wisdom;  such
inhuman  devotion  to  an  arbitrary  end  has  made
these  societies  odious.  We  may  say,  therefore,
that  a  zeal  sufficient  to  destroy  selfishness  is,  as
men  are  now  constituted,  worse  than  selfishness
itself.  In  pursuing  prizes  for  themselves  people
benefit  their  fellows  more  than  in  pursuing  such
narrow  and  irrational  ideals  as  alone  seem  to  be
powerful  in  the  world.  To  ambition,  to  the  love
of  wealth  and  honour,  to  love  of  a  liberty  which
meant  opportunity  for  experiment  and  adventure,
we  owe  whatever  benefits  we  have  derived  from
Greece  and  Rome,  from  Italy  and  England.  It
is  doubtful  whether  a  society  which  offered  no
personal  prizes  would  inspire  effort;  and  it  is  still
more  doubtful  whether  that  effort,  if  aetuallv
stimulated  by  education,  would  be  beneficent.
For  an  indoctrinated  and  collective  virtue  turns
easily  to  fanaticism;  it  imposes  irrational  sacri¬
fices  prompted  by  some  abstract  principle  or  habit
once,  perhaps,  useful;  but  that  convention  soon
becomes  superstitious  and  ceases  to  represent  gen¬
eral  human  excellence.


DEMOCRACY


135


Now  it  is  in  the  spirit  of  social  democracy  to

Public  spirit  °ffer  n0  prizes.  Office  in  it,  being  the
the  life  of  de-  reward  of  no  great  distinction,  brings
mocracy.  no  grea£  honour^  and  being  meanly

paid  it  brings  no  great  profit,  at  least  while  hon¬
estly  administered.  All  wealth  in  a  true  democ¬
racy  would  be  the  fruit  of  personal  exertion  and
would  come  too  late  to  be  nobly  enjoyed  or  to
teach  the  art  of  liberal  living.  It  would  be  either
accumulated  irrationally  or  given  away  outright.
And  if  fortunes  could  not  be  transmitted  or  used
to  found  a  great  family  they  would  lose  their
chief  imaginative  charm.  The  pleasures  a  demo¬
cratic  society  affords  are  vulgar  and  not  even  by
an  amiable  illusion  can  they  become  an  aim  in
life.  A  life  of  pleasure  requires  an  aristocratic
setting  to  make  it  interesting  or  really  conceiv¬
able.  Intellectual  and  artistic  greatness  does  not
need  prizes,  but  it  sorely  needs  sympathy  and
a  propitious  environment.  Genius,  like  goodness
(which  can  stand  alone),  would  arise  in  a  demo¬
cratic  society  as  frequently  as  elsewhere;  but  it
might  not  be  so  well  fed  or  so  well  assimilated.
There  would  at  least  be  no  artificial  and  simu¬
lated  merit;  everybody  would  take  his  ease  in  his
inn  and  sprawl  unbuttoned  without  respect  for
any  finer  judgment  or  performance  than  that
which  he  himself  was  inclined  to.  The  only
excellence  subsisting  would  be  spontaneous  ex¬
cellence,  inwardly  prompted,  sure  of  itself,  and


136


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


inwardly  rewarded.  For  such  excellence  to  grow
general  mankind  must  be  notably  transformed.
If  a  noble  and  civilised  democracy  is  to  subsist,
the  common  citizen  must  be  something  of  a  saint
and  something  of  a  hero.  We  see  therefore  how
justly  flattering  and  profound,  and  at  the  same
time  how  ominous,  was  Montesquieu’s  saying  that
the  principle  of  democracy  is  virtue.


CHAPTER  VI


FREE  SOCIETY


Primacy  of  Natural  society  unites  beings  in  time
nature  over  and  space;  it  fixes  affection  on  those
81,111  *  creatures  on  which  we  depend  and  to

which  our  action  must  be  adapted.  Natural  so¬
ciety  begins  at  home  and  radiates  over  the  world,
as  more  and  more  things  become  tributary  to  our
personal  being.  In  marriage  and  the  family,  in
industry,  government,  and  war,  attention  is  riv¬
eted  on  temporal  existences,  on  the  fortunes  of
particular  bodies,  natural  or  corporate.  There  is
then  a  primacy  of  nature  over  spirit  in  social  life ;
and  this  primacy,  in  a  certain  sense,  endures  to
the  end,  since  all  spirit  must  be  the  spirit  of  some¬
thing,  and  reason  could  not  exist  or  be  conceived
at  all  unless  a  material  organism,  personal  or  so¬
cial,  lay  beneath  to  give  thought  an  occasion  and
a  point  of  view,  and  to  give  preference  a  direction.
Things  could  not  be  near  or  far,  worse  or  better,
unless  a  definite  life  were  taken  as  a  standard,  a
life  lodged  somewhere  in  space  and  time.  Reason
is  a  principle  of  order  appearing  in  a  subject-
matter  which  in  its  subsistence  and  quantity  must

137


138


THE  LIFE  OF  SEASON


be  an  irrational  datum.  Reason  expresses  pur¬
pose,  purpose  expresses  impulse,  and  impulse  ex¬
presses  a  natural  body  with  self-equilibrating
powers.

At  the  same  time,  natural  growths  may  be  called
achievements  only  because,  when  formed,  they  sup¬
port  a  joyful  and  liberal  experience.  Nature's
works  first  acquire  a  meaning  in  the  commentaries
they  provoke;  mechanical  processes  have  interest¬
ing  climaxes  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
life  that  expresses  them,  in  which  their  ebb  and
flow  grows  impassioned  and  vehement.  Nature's
values  are  imputed  to  her  retroactively  by  spirit,
which  in  its  material  dependence  has  a  logical  and
moral  primacy  of  its  own.  In  themselves  events
are  perfectly  mechanical,  steady,  and  fluid,  not
stopping  where  we  see  a  goal  nor  avoiding  what
we  call  failures.  And  so  they  would  always  have
remained  in  crude  experience,  if  no  cumulative
reflection,  no  art,  and  no  science  had  come  to
dominate  and  foreshorten  that  equable  flow  of
substance,  arresting  it  ideally  in  behalf  of  some
rational  interest.

Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  rational  interests
have  a  certain  ascendancy  in  the  world,  as  well
as  an  absolute  authority  over  it;  for  they  arise
where  an  organic  equilibrium  has  naturally  es¬
tablished  itself.  Such  an  equilibrium  main¬
tains  itself  by  virtue  of  the  same  necessity  that
produced  it;  without  arresting  the  flux  or  in-


FREE  SOCIETY


139


troducing  any  miracle,  it  sustains  in  being  an  ideal
form.  This  form  is  what  consciousness  corre¬
sponds  to  and  raises  to  actual  existence;  so  that
significant  thoughts  are  something  which  nature
necessarily  lingers  upon  and  seems  to  serve.  The
being  to  whom  they  come  is  the  most  widely  based
and  synthetic  of  her  creatures.  The  mind  spreads
and  soars  in  proportion  as  the  body  feeds  on
the  surrounding  world.  Noble  ideas,  although
rare  and  difficult  to  attain,  are  not  naturally
fugitive.

Consciousness  is  not  ideal  merely  in  its  high-

All  experience  ”"5  Phases;  it  is  ideal  through  and
at  bottom  lib-  through.  On  one  level  as  much  as

eraL  on  another,  it  celebrates  an  attained

balance  in  nature,  or  grieves  at  its  collapse;  it
prophesies  and  remembers,  it  loves  and  dreams.
It  sees  even  nature  from  the  point  of  view  of  ideal
interests,  and  measures  the  flux  of  things  by  ideal
standards.  It  registers  its  own  movement,  like
that  of  its  objects,  entirely  in  ideal  terms,  looking
to  fixed  goals  of  its  own  imagining,  and  using
nothing  in  the  operation  but  concretions  in  dis¬
course.  Primary  mathematical  notions,  for  in¬
stance,  are  evidences  of  a  successful  reactive
method  attained  in  the  organism  and  translated
in  consciousness  into  a  stable  grammar  which  has
wide  applicability  and  great  persistence,  so  that  it
has  come  to  be  elaborated  ideally  into  prodigious
abstract  systems  of  thought.  Every  experience  of


140


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


victory,  eloquence,  or  beauty  is  a  momentary  suc¬
cess  of  the  same  kind,  and  if  repeated  and  sus-

Sociai  experi-  taine(l  becomes  a  spiritual  possession.
«nce  has  its  Society  also  breeds  its  ideal  harmonies,
ideality  too.  ^  affections  between

beings  naturally  conjoined  in  the  world;  later  it
grows  sensitive  to  free  and  spiritual  affinities,  to
oneness  of  mind  and  sympathetic  purposes.  These
ideal  affinities,  although  grounded  like  the  others
on  material  relations  (for  sympathy  presupposes
communication),  do  not  have  those  relations  for
their  theme  but  rest  on  them  merely  as  on  a  pedes¬
tal  from  which  they  look  away  to  their  own  realm,
as  music,  while  sustained  by  vibrating  instru¬
ments,  looks  away  from  them  to  its  own  universe
of  sound.

Ideal  society  is  a  drama  enacted  exclusively  in
the  imagination.  Its  personages  are  all  mythical,
The  seif  an  beginning  with  that  brave  protagonist
ideal.  who  calls  himself  I  and  speaks  all  the

soliloquies.  When  most  nearly  material  these  per¬
sonages  are  human  souls — the  ideal  life  of  particu¬
lar  bodies — or  floating  mortal  reputations — echoes
of  those  ideal  lives  in  one  another.  From  this
relative  substantiality  they  fade  into  notions  of
country,  posterity,  humanity,  and  the  gods.  These
figures  all  represent  some  circle  of  events  or  forces
in  the  real  world ;  but  such  representation,  besides
being  mythical,  is  usually  most  inadequate.  The
boundaries  of  that  province  which  each  spirit  pre¬
sides  over  are  vaguely  drawn,  the  spirit  itself  be-


FREE  SOCIETY


141


ing  correspondingly  indefinite.  This  ambiguity  is
most  conspicuous,  perhaps,  in  the  most  absorbing
of  the  personages  which  a  man  constructs  in  this
imaginative  fashion — his  idea  of  himself.  “  There
is  society  where  none  intrudes ;  ”  and  for  most  men
sympathy  with  their  imaginary  selves  is  a  powerful
and  dominant  emotion.  True  memory  offers  but
a  meagre  and  interrupted  vista  of  past  experience,
yet  even  that  picture  is  far  too  rich  a  term  for
mental  discourse  to  bandy  about;  a  name  with  a
few  physical  and  social  connotations  is  what  must
represent  the  man  to  his  own  thinkings.  Or  rather
it  is  no  memory,  however  eviscerated,  that  fulfils
that  office.  A  man’s  notion  of  himself  is  a  con¬
cretion  in  discourse  for  which  his  more  constant
somatic  feelings,  his  ruling  interests,  and  his  so¬
cial  relations  furnish  most  of  the  substance.

The  more  reflective  and  self-conscious  a  man  is
the  more  completely  will  his  experience  be  sub-
Romantic  sumed  and  absorbed  in  his  perennial
egotism.  “  I.”  If  philosophy  has  come  to  rein¬
force  this  reflective  egotism,  he  may  even  regard  all
nature  as  nothing  but  his  half-voluntary  dream
and  encourage  himself  thereby  to  give  even  to
the  physical  world  a  dramatic  and  sentimental
colour.  But  the  more  successful  he  is  in  stuff¬
ing  everything  into  his  self-consciousness,  the
more  desolate  will  the  void  become  which  sur¬
rounds  him.  For  self  is,  after  all,  but  one
term  in  a  primitive  dichotomy  and  would  lose  its
specific  and  intimate  character  were  it  no  longer


142


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


contrasted  with  anything  else.  The  egotist  must
therefore  people  the  desert  he  has  spread  about
him,  and  he  naturally  peoples  it  with  mythical
counterparts  of  himself.  Sometimes,  if  his  imag¬
ination  is  sensuous,  his  alter-egos  are  incarnate  in
the  landscape,  and  he  creates  a  poetic  mythology ;
sometimes,  when  the  inner  life  predominates,  they
are  projected  into  his  own  forgotten  past  or  in¬
finite  future.  He  will  then  say  that  all  experience
is  really  his  own  and  that  some  inexplicable  illu¬
sion  has  momentarily  raised  opaque  partitions  in
his  omniscient  mind.

Philosophers  less  pretentious  and  more  worldly
than  these  have  sometimes  felt,  in  their  way,  the  ab¬
sorbing  force  of  self-consciousness.  La

Vanitv

Kochefoucauld  could  describe  amour
propre  as  the  spring  of  all  human  sentiments.
Amour  propre  involves  preoccupation  not  merely
with  the  idea  of  6elf,  but  with  that  idea  repro¬
duced  in  other  men’s  minds;  the  soliloquy  has
become  a  dialogue,  or  rather  a  solo  with  an  echo¬
ing  chorus.  Interest  in  one’s  own  social  figure
is  to  some  extent  a  material  interest,  for  other
men’s  love  or  aversion  is  a  principle  read  into
their  acts;  and  a  social  animal  like  man  is  de¬
pendent  on  other  men’s  acts  for  his  happiness.  An
individual’s  concern  for  the  attitude  society  takes
toward  him  is  therefore  in  the  first  instance  con¬
cern  for  his  own  practical  welfare.  But  imagina¬
tion  here  refines  upon  worldly  interest.  What
others  think  of  us  would  be  of  little  moment  did


FREE  SOCIETY


143


it  not,  when  known,  so  deeply  tinge  what  we  think
of  ourselves.  Nothing  could  better  prove  the
mythical  character  of  self-consciousness  than  this
extreme  sensitiveness  to  alien  opinions;  for  if  a
man  really  knew  himself  he  would  utterly  despise
the  ignorant  notions  others  might  form  on  a  sub¬
ject  in  which  he  had  such  matchless  opportunities
for  observation.  Indeed,  those  opinions  would
hardly  seem  to  him  directed  upon  the  reality  at
all,  and  he  would  laugh  at  them  as  he  might  at
the  stock  fortune-telling  of  some  itinerant  gypsy.

As  it  is,  however,  the  least  breath  of  irresponsi¬
ble  and  anonymous  censure  lashes  our  self-esteem
and  sometimes  quite  transforms  our  plans  and
affections.  The  passions  grafted  on  wounded  pride
are  the  most  inveterate;  they  are  green  and  vigor¬
ous  in  old  age.  We  crave  support  in  vanity,  as  we
do  in  religion,  and  never  forgive  contradictions  in
that  sphere ;  for  however  persistent  and  passionate
such  prejudices  may  be,  we  know  too  well  that
they  are  woven  of  thin  air.  A  hostile  word,
by  starting  a  contrary  imaginative  current,  buffets
them  rudely  and  threatens  to  dissolve  their  being.

The  highest  form  of  vanity  is  love  of  fame.  It
Ambiguities  is  a  passion  easy  to  deride  but  hard
of  fame.  to  understand,  and  in  men  who  live

at  all  by  imagination  almost  impossible  to  eradi¬
cate.  The  good  opinion  of  posterity  can  have  no
possible  effect  on  our  fortunes,  and  the  practical
value  which  reputation  may  temporarily  have  is
quite  absent  in  posthumous  fame.  The  direct  ob-


144


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ject  of  this  passion — that  a  name  should  survive
in  men's  mouths  to  which  no  adequate  idea  of  its
original  can  be  attached — seems  a  thin  and  fan¬
tastic  satisfaction,  especially  when  we  consider
how  little  we  should  probably  sympathise  with  the
creatures  that  are  to  remember  us.  What  comfort
would  it  be  to  Virgil  that  boys  still  read  him  at
school,  or  to  Pindar  that  he  is  sometimes  men¬
tioned  in  a  world  from  which  everything  he  loved
has  departed?  Yet,  beneath  this  desire  for  nom¬
inal  longevity,  apparently  so  inane,  there  may  lurk
an  ideal  ambition  of  which  the  ancients  cannot
have  been  unconscious  when  they  set  so  high  a
value  on  fame.  They  often  identified  fame  with
immortality,  a  subject  on  which  they  had  far
more  rational  sentiments  than  have  since  pre¬
vailed.

Fame,  as  a  noble  mind  conceives  and  desires
it,  is  not  embodied  in  a  monument,  a  biography,
or  the  repetition  of  a  strange  name  by  strangers;
it  consists  in  the  immortality  of  a  man's  work,
his  spirit,  his  efficacy,  in  the  perpetual  rejuvena¬
tion  of  his  soul  in  the  world.  When  Horace —
no  model  of  magnanimity — wrote  his  exegi  monu-
mentum ,  he  was  not  thinking  that  the  pleasure
he  would  continue  to  give  would  remind  people
of  his  trivial  personality,  which  indeed  he  never
particularly  celebrated  and  which  had  much  better
lie  buried  with  his  bones.  He  was  thinking,  of
course,  of  that  pleasure  itself;  thinking  that  the
delight,  half  lyric,  half  sarcastic,  which  those  deli-


FBEE  SOCIETY


145


cate  cameos  had  given  him  to  carve  would  be  per¬
ennially  renewed  in  all  who  retraced  them.  Nay,
perhaps  we  may  not  go  too  far  in  saying  that
its  possible  even  that  impersonal  satisfaction  was
ideality.  not  ^he  deepest  he  felt;  the  deepest,

very  likely,  flowed  from  the  immortality,  not  of
his  monument,  but  of  the  subject  and  passion  it
commemorated ;  that  tenderness,  I  mean,  and  that
disillusion  with  mortal  life  which  rendered  his
verse  immortal.  He  had  expressed,  and  in  express¬
ing  appropriated,  some  recurring  human  moods,
some  mocking  renunciations;  and  he  knew  that
his  spirit  was  immortal,  being  linked  and  iden¬
tified  with  that  portion  of  the  truth.  He  had
become  a  little  spokesman  of  humanity,  uttering
what  all  experience  repeats  more  or  less  articu¬
lately;  and  even  if  he  should  cease  to  be  hon¬
oured  in  men’s  memories,  he  would  continue  to
be  unwittingly  honoured  and  justified  in  their
lives.

What  we  may  conceive  to  have  come  in  this  way
even  within  a  Horace’s  apprehension  is  undoubt¬
edly  what  has  attached  many  nobler  souls  to  fame.
With  an  inversion  of  moral  derivations  which  all
mythical  expression  involves  we  speak  of  fame  as
the  reward  of  genius,  whereas  in  truth  genius,  the
imaginative  dominion  of  experience,  is  its  own
reward  and  fame  is  but  a  foolish  image  by  which
its  worth  is  symbolised.  When  the  Virgin  in  the
Magnificat  says,  “  Behold,  from  henceforth  all
generations  shall  call  me  blessed,”  the  psalmist
Vol.  IL— 10


146


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


surely  means  to  express  a  spiritual  exaltation
exempt  from  vanity;  he  merely  translates  into  a
rhetorical  figure  the  fact  that  what  had  been  first
revealed  to  Mary  would  also  bless  all  generations.
That  the  Church  should  in  consequence  deem  and
pronounce  her  blessed  is  an  incident  describing,
but  not  creating,  the  unanimity  in  their  religious
joys.  Fame  is  thus  the  outward  sign  or  recog¬
nition  of  an  inward  representative  authority  re¬
siding  in  genius  or  good  fortune,  an  authority  in
which  lies  the  whole  worth  of  fame.  Those  will
substantially  remember  and  honour  us  who  keep
our  ideals,  and  we  shall  live  on  in  those  ages  whose
experience  we  have  anticipated.

Free  society  differs  from  that  which  is  natural
and  legal  precisely  in  this,  that  it  does  not  culti¬
vate  relations  which  in  the  last  analysis  are  experi¬
enced  and  material,  but  turns  exclusively  to  una¬
nimities  in  meanings,  to  collaborations  in  an  ideal
world.  The  basis  of  free  society  is  of  course  nat¬
ural,  as  we  said,  but  free  society  has  ideal  goals.
Spirits  cannot  touch  save  by  becoming  unanimous.
At  the  same  time  public  opinion,  reputation,  and
impersonal  sympathy  reinforce  only  very  general
feelings,  and  reinforce  them  vaguely;  and  as  the
inner  play  of  sentiment  becomes  precise,  it  craves
more  specific  points  of  support  or  comparison.  It
is  in  creatures  of  our  own  species  that  we  chiefly
scent  the  aroma  of  inward  sympathy,  because  it
is  they  that  are  visibly  moved  on  the  same  occa¬
sions  as  ourselves ;  and  it  is  to  those  among  our


FREE  SOCIETY


147


Comradeship.


fellow-men  who  share  our  special  haunts  and  hab¬
its  that  we  feel  more  precise  affinities.  Though
the  ground  for  such  feeling  is  animal  contact  and
contagion,  its  deliverance  does  not  revert  to  those
natural  accidents,  but  concerns  a  represented  sym¬
pathy  in  represented  souls.  Friendship,  springing
from  accidental  association,  terminates  in  a  con¬
sciousness  of  ideal  and  essential  agreement.

Comradeship  is  a  form  of  friend¬
ship  still  akin  to  general  sociability
and  gregariousness.  When  men  are  “  in  the
same  boat  together,”  when  a  common  anxiety,
occupation,  or  sport  unites  them,  they  feel  their
human  kinship  in  an  intensified  form  without
any  greater  personal  affinity  subsisting  between
them.  The  same  effect  is  produced  by  a  com¬
mon  estrangement  from  the  rest  of  society.  For
this  reason  comradeship  lasts  no  longer  than
the  circumstances  that  bring  it  about.  Its  con¬
stancy  is  proportionate  to  the  monotony  of  peo¬
ple’s  lives  and  minds.  There  is  a  lasting  bond
among  schoolfellows  because  no  one  can  become
a  boy  again  and  have  a  new  set  of  playmates.
There  is  a  persistent  comradeship  with  one’s
countrymen,  especially  abroad,  because  seldom  is
a  man  pliable  and  polyglot  enough  to  be  at  home
among  foreigners,  or  really  to  understand  them.
There  is  an  inevitable  comradeship  with  men  of
the  same  breeding  or  profession,  however  bad  these
may  be,  because  habits  soon  monopolise  the  man.
Nevertheless  a  greater  buoyancy,  a  longer  youth.


148


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


a  richer  experience,  would  break  down  all  these
limits  of  fellowship.  Such  clingings  to  the  famil¬
iar  are  three  parts  dread  of  the  unfamiliar  and
want  of  resource  in  its  presence,  for  one  part  in
them  of  genuine  loyalty.  Plasticity  loves  new
moulds  because  it  can  fill  them,  but  for  a  man
of  sluggish  mind  and  bad  manners  there  is  de¬
cidedly  no  place  like  home.

Though  comradeship  is  an  accidental  bond,  it

External  con-  *s  the  condition  of  ideal  friendship,
ditions  of  for  the  ideal,  in  all  spheres,  is  nothing
friendship.  ^  accidental  confirming  itself

and  generating  its  own  standard.  Men  must  meet
to  love,  and  many  other  accidents  besides  conjunc¬
tion  must  conspire  to  make  a  true  friendship  pos¬
sible.  In  order  that  friendship  may  fulfil  the  con¬
ditions  even  of  comradeship,  it  is  requisite  that
the  friends  have  the  same  social  status,  so  that
they  may  live  at  ease  together  and  have  congenial
tastes.  They  must  further  have  enough  commu¬
nity  of  occupation  and  gifts  to  give  each  an  appre¬
ciation  of  the  other’s  faculty;  for  qualities  are
not  complementary  unless  they  are  qualities  of  the
same  substance.  Nothing  must  be  actual  in  either
friend  that  is  not  potential  in  the  other.

Identity  in  sex  For  tllis  reason,  among  others,
required,  friends  are  generally  of  the  same  sex,

for  when  men  and  women  agree,  it  is  only  in  their
conclusions;  their  reasons  are  alwavs  different.
So  that  while  intellectual  harmony  between  men
and  women  is  easily  possible,  its  delightful  and


FREE  SOCIETY


149


magic  quality  lies  precisely  in  the  fact  that  it
does  not  arise  from  mutual  understanding,  but
is  a  conspiracy  of  alien  essences  and  a  kissing,
as  it  were,  in  the  dark.  As  man’s  body  dif¬
fers  from  woman’s  in  sex  and  strength,  so  his
mind  differs  from  hers  in  quality  and  function:
they  can  co-operate  but  can  never  fuse.  The
human  race,  in  its  intellectual  life,  is  organised
like  the  bees :  the  masculine  soul  is  a  worker,  sex¬
ually  atrophied,  and  essentially  dedicated  to  im¬
personal  and  universal  arts;  the  feminine  is  a
queen,  infinitely  fertile,  omnipresent  in  its  brood¬
ing  industry,  but  passive  and  abounding  in  intui¬
tions  without  method  and  passions  without  justice.
Friendship  with  a  woman  is  therefore  apt  to  be
more  or  less  than  friendship :  less,  because  there  is
no  intellectual  parity;  more,  because  (even  when
the  relation  remains  wholly  dispassionate,  as  in
respect  to  old  ladies)  there  is  something  mysteri¬
ous  and  oracular  about  a  woman’s  mind  which
inspires  a  certain  instinctive  deference  and  puts
it  out  of  the  question  to  judge  what  she  says  by
masculine  standards.  She  has  a  kind  of  sibylline
intuition  and  the  right  to  be  irrationally  a  apropos .
There  is  a  gallantry  of  the  mind  which  pervades
all  conversation  with  a  lady,  as  there  is  a  natu¬
ral  courtesy  toward  children  and  mystics;  but
such  a  habit  of  respectful  concession,  marking  as
it  does  an  intellectual  alienation  as  profound  as
that  which  separates  us  from  the  dumb  animals,
is  radically  incompatible  with  friendship.


150


THE  LIFE  OF  EEASON


Friends,  moreover,  should  have  been
and  .n  age.  young  together.  Much  difference  in  age

defeats  equality  and  forbids  frankness  on  many
a  fundamental  subject;  it  confronts  two  minds  of
unlike  focus:  one  near-sighted  and  without  per¬
spective,  the  other  seeng  only  the  background  of
present  things.  While  comparisons  in  these  re¬
spects  may  be  interesting  and  borrowings  some¬
times  possible,  lending  the  older  mind  life  and
the  younger  mind  wisdom,  such  intercourse  has
hardly  the  value  of  spontaneous  sympathy,  in
which  the  spark  of  mutual  intelligence  flies,  as  it
should,  almost  without  words.  Contagion  is  the
only  source  of  valid  mind-reading :  you  must  imi¬
tate  to  understand,  and  where  the  plasticity  of
two  minds  is  not  similar  their  mutual  interpreta¬
tions  are  necessarily  false.  They  idealise  in  their
friends  whatever  they  do  not  invent  or  ignore,
and  the  friendship  which  should  have  lived  on
energies  conspiring  spontaneously  together  dies
into  conscious  appreciation.

All  these  are  merely  permissive  conditions  for

Constituents  friendship;  its  positive  essence  is  yet
of  friendship,  to  find.  How,  we  may  ask,  does  the

vision  of  the  general  socius ,  humanity,  become  spe¬
cific  in  the  vision  of  a  particular  friend  without
losing  its  ideality  or  reverting  to  practical  values  ?
Of  course,  individuals  might  be  singled  out  for
the  special  benefits  they  may  have  conferred;  but
a  friend’s  only  gift  is  himself,  and  friendship  is
not  friendship,  it  is  not  a  form  of  free  or  liberal


FREE  SOCIETY


151


society,  if  it  does  not  terminate  in  an  ideal  pos¬
session,  in  an  object  loved  for  its  own  sake.  Such
objects  can  be  ideas  only,  not  forces,  for  forces  are
subterranean  and  instrumental  things,  having  only
such  value  as  they  borrow  from  their  ulterior
effects  and  manifestations.  To  praise  the  utility
of  friendship,  as  the  ancients  so  often  did,  and
to  regard  it  as  a  political  institution  justified,  like
victory  or  government,  by  its  material  results,  is
to  lose  one’s  moral  bearings.  The  value  of  victory
or  good  government  is  rather  to  be  found  in  the
fact  that,  among  other  things,  it  might  render
friendship  possible.  We  are  not  to  look  now  for
what  makes  friendship  useful,  but  for  whatever
may  be  found  in  friendship  that  may  lend  utility
to  life.

i

The  first  note  that  gives  sociability  a  personal
quality  and  raises  the  comrade  into  an  incipient
Personal  lik-  friend  is  doubtless  sensuous  affinity.
inz-  Whatever  reaction  we  may  eventually

make  on  an  impression,  after  it  has  had  time  to
soak  in  and  to  merge  in  some  practical  or  intel¬
lectual  habit,  its  first  assault  is  always  on  the
senses,  and  no  sense  is  an  indifferent  organ.  Each
has,  so  to  speak,  its  congenial  rate  of  vibration
and  gives  its  stimuli  a  varying  welcome.  Little
as  we  may  attend  to  these  instinctive  hospitalities
of  sense,  they  betray  themselves  in  unjustified  likes
and  dislikes  felt  for  casual  persons  and  things,
in  the  je  ne  sais  quoi  that  makes  instinctive  sym¬
pathy.  Voice,  manner,  aspect,  hints  of  congenial


152


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tastes  and  judgments,  a  jest  in  the  right  key,  a
gesture  marking  the  right  aversions,  all  these
trifles  leave  behind  a  pervasive  impression.  We
reject  a  vision  we  find  indigestible  and  without
congruity  to  our  inner  dream;  we  accept  and  in¬
corporate  another  into  our  private  pantheon,  where
it  becomes  a  legitimate  figure,  however  dumb  and
subsidiary  it  may  remain.

In  a  refined  nature  these  sensuous  premonitions
of  sympathy  are  seldom  misleading.  Liking  can¬
not,  of  course,  grow  into  friendship  over  night  as
it  might  into  love;  the  pleasing  impression,  even
if  retained,  will  lie  perfectly  passive  and  harm¬
less  in  the  mind,  until  new  and  different  impres¬
sions  follow  to  deepen  the  interest  at  first  evoked
and  to  remove  its  centre  of  gravity  altogether  from
the  senses.  In  love,  if  the  field  is  clear,  a  single
glimpse  may,  like  Tristan’s  potion,  produce  a  vio¬
lent  and  irresistible  passion;  but  in  friendship
the  result  remains  more  proportionate  to  the  in¬
cidental  causes,  discrimination  is  preserved,  jeal¬
ousy  and  exclusiveness  are  avoided.  That  vigilant,
besetting,  insatiable  affection,  so  full  of  doubts
and  torments,  with  which  the  lover  follows  his
object,  is  out  of  place  here;  for  the  friend  has  no
property  in  his  friend’s  body  or  leisure  or  residual
ties ;  he  accepts  what  is  offered  and  what  is  accept¬
able,  and  the  rest  he  leaves  in  peace.  He  is  dis¬
tinctly  not  his  brother’s  keeper,  for  the  society
of  friends  is  free.

Friendship  may  indeed  come  to  exist  without


FREE  SOCIETY


153


sensuous  liking  or  comradeship  to  pave  the  way;
_  ,  -  but  unless  intellectual  sympathy  and

human  medi-  moral  appreciation  are  powerful
tun  for  ideas,  enough  to  react  on  natural  instinct

and  to  produce  in  the  end  the  personal  affection
which  at  first  was  wanting,  friendship  does  not
arise.  Recognition  given  to  a  man’s  talent  or
virtue  is  not  properly  friendship.  Friends  must
desire  to  live  as  much  as  possible  together  and  to
share  their  work,  thoughts,  and  pleasures.  Good-
fellowship  and  sensuous  affinity  are  indispensable
to  give  spiritual  communion  a  personal  accent;
otherwise  men  would  be  indifferent  vehicles  for
such  thoughts  and  powers  as  emanated  from  them,
and  attention  would  not  he  in  any  way  arrested
or  refracted  by  the  human  medium  through  which
it  beheld  the  good.

.  „  •  .  j  No  natural  vehicle,  however,  is  in-
ontherefrac-  different;  no  natural  organ  is  or
tion*  should  be  transparent.  Transparency

is  a  virtue  only  in  artificial  instruments,  organs
in  which  no  blood  flows  and  whose  intrinsic  opera¬
tion  is  not  itself  a  portion  of  human  life.  In
looking  through  a  field-glass  I  do  not  wish  to  per¬
ceive  the  lenses  nor  to  see  rainbows  about  their
rim;  yet  I  should  not  wish  the  eye  itself  to  lose
its  pigments  and  add  no  dyes  to  the  bulks  it  dis¬
cerns.  The  sense  for  colour  is  a  vital  endowment
and  an  ingredient  in  human  happiness;  but  no
vitality  is  added  by  the  intervention  of  further
media  which  are  not  themselves  living  organs.


154


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


A  man  is  sometimes  a  coloured  and  some¬
times  a  clear  medium  for  the  energies  he  exerts.
When  a  thought  conveyed  or  a  work  done  enters
alone  into  the  observer’s  experience,  no  friendship
is  possible.  This  is  always  the  case  when  the  mas¬
ter  is  dead;  for  if  his  reconstructed  personality
retains  any  charm,  it  is  only  as  an  explanation  or
conceived  nexus  for  the  work  he  performed.  In  a
philosopher  or  artist,  too,  personality  is  merely
instrumental,  for,  although  in  a  sense  pervasive,
a  creative  personality  evaporates  into  its  expres¬
sion,  and  whatever  part  of  it  may  not  have  been
translated  into  ideas  is  completely  negligible  from
the  public  point  of  view.  That  portion  of  a  man’s
soul  which  he  has  not  alienated  and  objectified  is
open  only  to  those  who  know  him  otherwise  than
by  his  works  and  do  not  estimate  him  by  his  public
attributions.  Such  persons  are  his  friends.  Into
their  lives  he  has  entered  not  merely  through  an
idea  with  which  his  name  may  be  associated,  nor
through  the  fame  of  some  feat  he  may  have  per¬
formed,  but  by  awakening  an  inexpressible  animal
sympathy,  by  the  contagion  of  emotions  felt  be¬
fore  the  same  objects.  Estimation  has  been  partly
arrested  at  its  medium  and  personal  relations  have
added  their  homely  accent  to  universal  discourse.
Friendship  might  thus  be  called  ideal  sympathy
refracted  by  a  human  medium,  or  comradeship  and
sensuous  affinity  colouring  a  spiritual  light.

If  we  approach  friendship  from  above  and  com¬
pare  it  with  more  ideal  loyalties,  its  characteris-


FREE  SOCIETY


155


tic  is  its  animal  warmth  and  its  basis  in  chance

The  medium  conjunctions ;  if  we  approach  it  from
must  also  be  below  and  contrast  it  with  mere  com-
transparent.  radeship  or  liking,  its  essence  seems  to

be  the  presence  of  common  ideal  interests.  That
is  a  silly  and  effeminate  friendship  in  which  the
parties  are  always  thinking  of  the  friendship  itself
and  of  how  each  stands  in  the  other’s  eyes ;  a  sen¬
timental  fancy  of  that  sort,  in  which  nothing  tan¬
gible  or  ulterior  brings  people  together,  is  rather
a  feeble  form  of  love  than  properly  a  friendship.
In  extreme  youth  such  a  weakness  may  perhaps
indicate  capacity  for  friendship  of  a  nobler  type,
because  when  taste  and  knowledge  have  not  yet
taken  shape,  the  only  way,  often,  in  which  ideal
interests  can  herald  themselves  is  in  the  guise  of
some  imagined  union  from  which  it  is  vaguely
felt  they  might  be  developed,  just  as  in  love
sexual  and  social  instincts  mask  themselves  in  an
unreasoning  obsession,  or  as  for  mystic  devotion
every  ideal  masks  itself  in  God.  All  these  senti¬
mental  feelings  are  at  any  rate  mere  preludes,  but
preludes  in  fortunate  cases  to  more  discriminating
and  solid  interests,  which  such  a  tremulous  over¬
ture  may  possibly  pitch  on  a  higher  key.

The  necessity  of  backing  personal  attachment
^  .  with  ideal  interests  is  what  makes  true

terests  indis-  friendship  so  rare.  It  is  found  chiefly
pe :;s able-  in  y011th,  for  youth  best  unites  the  two

requisite  conditions — affectionate  comradeship  and
ardour  in  pursuing  such  liberal  aims  as  may  be


156


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


pursued  in  common.  Life  in  camp  or  college  is
favourable  to  friendship,  for  there  generous  activi¬
ties  are  carried  on  in  unison  and  yet  leave  leisure
for  playful  expansion  and  opportunity  for  a  choice
in  friends.  The  ancients,  so  long  as  they  were
free,  spent  their  whole  life  in  forum  and  palaestra,
camp,  theatre,  and  temple,  and  in  consequence
could  live  by  friendship  even  in  their  maturer
years ;  but  modern  life  is  unfavourable  to  its  con¬
tinuance.  What  with  business  cares,  with  political
bonds  remote  and  invisible,  with  the  prior  claims
of  family,  and  with  individualities  both  of  mind
and  habit  growing  daily  more  erratic,  early  friends
find  themselves  very  soon  parted  by  unbridgeable
chasms.  For  friendship  to  flourish  personal  life
would  have  to  become  more  public  and  social  life
more  simple  and  humane.

„  .  „ ,  .  ^  The  tie  that  in  contemporary  society

Friendship  be-  L  .  .  J

tween  man  most  nearly  resembles  the  ancient  ideal
and  wife.  0f  friendship  is  a  well-assorted  mar¬
riage.  In  spite  of  intellectual  disparity  and  of
divergence  in  occupation,  man  and  wife  are  bound
together  by  a  common  dwelling,  common  friends,
common  affection  for  children,  and,  what  is  of
great  importance,  common  financial  interests.
These  bonds  often  suffice  for  substantial  and  last¬
ing  unanimity,  even  when  no  ideal  passion  pre¬
ceded  ;  so  that  what  is  called  a  marriage  of  reason,
if  it  is  truly  reasonable,  may  give  a  fair  promise
of  happiness,  since  a  normal  married  life  can
produce  the  sympathies  it  requires.


FREE  SOCIETY


157


When  the  common  ideal  interests  needed  to  give
friendship  a  noble  strain  become  altogether  pre¬
dominant,  so  that  comradeship  and  personal  liking
may  be  dispensed  with,  friendship  passes  into
more  and  more  political  fellowships.  Discipleship
is  a  union  of  this  kind.  Without  claiming  any
_  share  in  the  master’s  private  life,  per-

ter  and  disci-  haps  without  having  ever  seen  him,  we
ple*  may  enjoy  communion  with  his  mind

and  feel  his  support  and  guidance  in  following
the  ideal  which  links  us  together.  Hero-worship
is  an  imaginative  passion  in  which  latent  ideals
assume  picturesque  shapes  and  take  actual  persons
for  their  symbols.  Such  companionship,  perhaps
wholly  imaginary,  is  a  very  clear  and  simple  ex¬
ample  of  ideal  society.  The  unconscious  hero,  to
be  sure,  happens  to  exist,  but  his  existence  is  irrele¬
vant  to  his  function,  provided  only  he  be  present
to  the  idealising  mind.  There  is  or  need  be  no
comradeship,  no  actual  force  or  influence  trans¬
mitted  from  him.  Certain  capacities  and  tenden¬
cies  in  the  worshipper  are  brought  to  a  focus  by
the  hero’s  image,  who  is  thereby  first  discovered
and  deputed  to  be  a  hero.  He  is  an  unmoved
mover,  like  Aristotle’s  God  and  like  every  ideal  to
which  thought  or  action  is  directed.

The  symbol,  however,  is  ambiguous  in  hero-
worship,  being  in  one  sense  ideal,  the  represen¬
tation  of  an  inner  demand,  and  in  another  sense
a  sensible  experience,  the  representative  of  an
external  reality.  Accordingly  the  symbol,  when


158


THE  LIFE  OF  BEASON


highly  prized  and  long  contemplated,  may  easily
become  an  idol;  that  in  it  which  is  not  ideal
nor  representative  of  the  worshipper’s  demand
may  be  imported  confusedly  into  the  total  adored,
and  may  thus  receive  a  senseless  worship.  The
devotion  which  was,  in  its  origin,  an  ideal  ten¬
dency  grown  conscious  and  expressed  in  fancy
may  thus  become  a  mechanical  force  vitiating  that
ideal.  For  this  reason  it  is  very  important  that
the  first  objects  to  fix  the  soul’s  admiration  should
be  really  admirable,  for  otherwise  their  accidental
blemishes  will  corrupt  the  mind  to  which  they
appear  sub  specie  boni.

Discipleship  and  hero-worship  are

tween  ideal  not  stable  relations.  Since  the  mean-
and  natural  ing  they  embody  is  ideal  and  radiates

flllCfifiDCCt  a  •ji*  i  i  *i  •

from  within  outward*  and  since  the
image  to  which  that  meaning  is  attributed  is  con¬
trolled  by  a  real  external  object,  meaning  and
image,  as  time  goes  on,  will  necessarily  fall  apart.
The  idol  will  be  discredited.  An  ideal,  ideally
conceived  and  known  to  be  an  ideal,  a  spirit  wor¬
shipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  will  take  the  place
of  the  pleasing  phenomenon;  and  in  regard  to
every  actual  being,  however  noble,  discipleship
will  yield  to  emulation,  and  worship  to  an  admi¬
ration  more  or  less  selective  and  critical.

A  disembodied  ideal,  however,  is  unmanageable
and  vague;  it  cannot  exercise  the  natural  and
material  suasion  proper  to  a  model  we  are  ex¬
pected  to  imitate.  The  more  fruitful  procedure


FREE  SOCIETY


159


is  accordingly  to  idealise  some  historical  figure
or  natural  force,  to  ignore  or  minimise  in  it  what
^  does  not  seem  acceptable,  and  to  re-
idealisation  of  tain  at  the  same  time  all  the  unob-
heroes.  jectionable  personal  colour  and  all  the

graphic  traits  that  can  help  to  give  that  model
a  persuasive  vitality.  This  poetic  process  is  all
the  more  successful  for  being  automatic.  It  is  in
this  way  that  heroes  and  gods  have  been  created.
A  legend  or  fable  lying  in  the  mind  and  con¬
tinually  repeated  gained  insensibly  at  each  recur¬
rence  some  new  eloquence,  some  fresh  congruity
with  the  emotion  it  had  already  awakened,  and
was  destined  to  awake  again.  To  measure  the  im¬
portance  of  this  truth  the  reader  need  only  con¬
ceive  the  distance  traversed  from  the  Achilles
that  may  have  existed  to  the  hero  in  Homer,  or
from  Jesus  as  he  might  have  been  in  real  life,  or
even  as  he  is  in  the  gospels,  to  Christ  in  the
Church.


CHAPTER  VII


PATRIOTISM


The  mythical  social  idea  most  po-

Xhe  creative

social  environ-  tent  over  practical  minds  is  perhaps
ment,  since  it  the  idea,  0f  country.  When  a  tribe,

must  be  repre-  enlarged  and  domiciled,  has  become  a
sented  sym-  state,  much  social  feeling  that  was  be-

bolically.  .

fore  evoked  by  things  visible  loses  its
sensuous  object.  Yet  each  man  remains  no  less
dependent  than  formerly  on  his  nation,  although
less  swayed  by  its  visible  presence  and  example;
he  is  no  less  concerned,  materially  and  ideally,
in  the  fortunes  of  the  community.  If  a  sense  for
social  relations  is  to  endure,  some  symbol  must
take  the  place  of  the  moving  crowd,  the  visible
stronghold,  and  the  outspread  fields  and  orchards
that  once  made  up  his  country ;  some  intellectual
figment  must  arise  to  focus  political  interests,
no  longer  confined  to  the  crops  and  the  priest’s
medicinal  auguries.  It  is  altogether  impossible
that  the  individual  should  have  a  discursive  and
adequate  knowledge  of  statecraft  and  economy.
Whatever  idea,  then,  he  frames  to  represent  his
undistinguished  political  relations  becomes  the
centre  of  his  patriotism.

160


PATRIOTISM


161


When  intelligence  is  not  keen  this  idea  may  re¬
main  sensuous.  The  visible  instruments  of  social
life — chieftains,  armies,  monuments,  the  dialect
and  dress  of  the  district,  with  all  customs  and
pleasures  traditional  there — these  are  what  a
sensuous  man  may  understand  by  his  country.
Bereft  of  these  sensations  he  would  feel  lost  and
incapable;  the  habits  formed  in  that  environment
would  be  galled  by  any  other.  This  fondness  for
home,  this  dread  of  change  and  exile,  is  all  the  love
of  country  he  knows.  If  by  chance,  without  too
much  added  thought,  he  could  rise  to  a  certain
poetic  sentiment,  he  might  feel  attachment  also
to  the  landscape,  to  the  memorable  spots  and  as¬
pects  of  his  native  land.  These  objects,  which
rhetoric  calls  sacred,  might  really  have  a  certain
sanctity  for  him;  a  wave  of  pious  emotion  might
run  over  him  at  the  sight  of  them,  a  pang  when
in  absence  they  were  recalled.  These  very  things,
however,  like  the  man  who  prizes  them,  are  de¬
pendent  on  a  much  larger  system;  and  if  patriot¬
ism  is  to  embrace  ideally  what  really  produces
human  well-being  it  should  extend  over  a  wider
field  and  to  less  picturable  objects.

Ambiguous  To  define  one’s  country  is  not  so
limits  of  a  simple  a  matter  as  it  may  seem.  The

ur^g^ogrlphi-  habitat  of  a  man’s  youth,  to  which
cai  and  moral,  actual  associations  may  bind  him,  is

hardly  his  country  until  he  has  conceived  the
political  and  historical  forces  that  include  that
habitat  in  their  sphere  of  influence  and  have  de-
Vol.  II.— n


162


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


termined  its  familiar  institutions.  Such  forces
are  numerous  and  their  spheres  include  one  an¬
other  like  concentric  rings.  France,  for  instance,
is  an  uncommonly  distinct  and  self-conscious  na¬
tion,  with  a  long  historic  identity  and  a  compact
territory.  Yet  what  is  the  France  a  Frenchman
is  to  think  of  and  love  ?  Paris  itself  has  various
quarters  and  moral  climates,  one  of  which  may
well  be  loved  while  another  is  detested.  The
provinces  have  customs,  temperaments,  political
ideals,  and  even  languages  of  their  own.  Is
Alsace-Lorraine  beyond  the  pale  of  French  patri¬
otism  ?  And  if  not,  why  utterly  exclude  French-
speaking  Switzerland,  the  Channel  Islands,  Bel¬
gium,  or  Quebec?  Or  is  a  Frenchman  rather  to
love  the  colonies  by  way  of  compensation?  Is
an  Algerian  Moor  or  a  native  of  Tonquin  his  true
fellow-citizen  ?  Is  Tahiti  a  part  of  his  “  coun¬
try”?  The  truth  is,  if  we  look  at  the  heart  of
the  matter,  a  Protestant  born  in  Paris  is  less  a
Frenchman  than  is  a  Catholic  born  in  Geneva.

If  we  pass  from  geography  to  institutions  the
same  vagueness  exists.  France  to  one  man  repre¬
sents  the  Revolution,  to  another  the  Empire,  to  a
third  the  Church,  and  the  vestiges  of  the  ancien
regime .  Furthermore,  how  far  into  the  past  is
patriotism  to  look?  Is  Charlemagne  one  of  the
glories  of  French  history?  Is  it  Julius  Caesar  or
Vercingetorix  that  is  to  warm  the  patriotic  heart?
Want  of  reflection  and  a  blind  subservience  to  the
colours  of  the  map  has  led  some  historians  to  call


PATRIOTISM


163


Roman  victories  defeats  suffered  by  their  country,
even  when  that  country  is  essentially  so  Roman,
for  instance,  as  Spain.  With  as  good  reason
might  a  Sicilian  or  a  Florentine  chafe  under  the
Latin  conquest,  or  an  American  blush  at  the  in¬
vasion  of  his  country  by  the  Pilgrim  Fathers.
Indeed,  even  geographically,  the  limits  and  the
very  heart  of  a  man’s  country  are  often  am¬
biguous.  Was  Alexanders  country  Macedon  or
Greece?  Was  General  Lee’s  the  United  States  or
Virginia?  The  ancients  defined  their  country
from  within  outward;  its  heart  was  the  city  and
its  limits  those  of  that  city’s  dominion  or  affini¬
ties.  Moderns  generally  define  their  country
rather  stupidly  by  its  administrative  frontiers;
and  yet  an  Austrian  would  have  some  difficulty
in  applying  even  this  conventional  criterion.

The  object  of  patriotism  is  in  truth  something
ideal,  a  moral  entity  definable  only  by  the  ties
which  a  man’s  imagination  and  reason  can  at  any
moment  recognise.  If  he  has  insight  and  depth
of  feeling  he  will  perceive  that  what  deserves  his
loyalty  is  the  entire  civilisation  to  which  he  owes
his  spiritual  life  and  into  which  that  life  will  pres¬
ently  flow  back,  with  whatever  new  elements  he
e  ^  A  t  may  have  added.  Patriotism  accord-

Sentimental  J

and  political  ingly  has  two  aspects :  it  is  partly  senti-
patriotism.  ment,  by  which  it  looks  back  upon  the

sources  of  culture,  and  partly  policy,  or  allegiance
to  those  ideals  which,  being  suggested  by  what  has
already  been  attained,  animate  the  better  organs


164


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


of  society  and  demand  further  embodiment.  To
love  one’s  country,  unless  that  love  is  quite  blind
and  lazy,  must  involve  a  distinction  between  the
country’s  actual  condition  and  its  inherent  ideal;
and  this  distinction  in  turn  involves  a  demand  for
changes  and  for  effort.  Party  allegiance  is  a  true
form  of  patriotism.  For  a  party,  at  least  in  its
intent,  is  an  association  of  persons  advocating  the
same  policy.  Every  thoughtful  man  must  advo¬
cate  some  policy,  and  unless  he  has  the  misfortune
to  stand  quite  alone  in  his  conception  of  public
welfare  he  will  seek  to  carry  out  that  policy  by
the  aid  of  such  other  persons  as  advocate  it  also.

The  earth  and  The  springs  of  culture,  which  retro-
the  race  the  spective  patriotism  regards,  go  back

rational  loy-  111  the  last  instance  to  cosmic  forces,
aity.  The  necessity  that  marshals  the  stars

makes  possible  the  world  men  live  in,  and  is  the
first  general  and  law-giver  to  every  nation.  The
earth’s  geography,  its  inexorable  climates  with
their  flora  and  fauna,  make  a  play-ground  for  the
human  will  which  should  be  well  surveyed  by  any
statesman  who  wishes  to  judge  and  act,  not  fan¬
tastically,  but  with  reference  to  the  real  situation.
Geography  is  a  most  enlightening  science.  In
describing  the  habitat  of  man  it  largely  explains
his  history.  Animal  battles  give  the  right  and
only  key  to  human  conflicts,  for  the  superadded
rational  element  in  man  is  not  partisan,  but  on
the  contrary  insinuates  into  his  economy  the  novel
principle  of  justice  and  peace.  As  this  leaven.


PATRIOTISM


165


however,  can  mingle  only  with  elements  predis¬
posed  to  receive  it,  the  basis  of  reason  itself,  in
so  far  as  it  attains  expression,  must  be  sought  in
the  natural  world.  The  fortunes  of  the  human
family  among  the  animals  thus  come  to  concern
reason  and  to  be  the  background  of  progress.

Within  humanity  the  next  sphere  of  interest
for  a  patriot  is  the  race  from  which  he  is  de¬
scended,  with  its  traditional  languages  and  re¬
ligions.  Blood  is  the  ground  of  character  and
intelligence.  The  fruits  of  civilisation  may,  in¬
deed,  be  transmitted  from  one  race  to  another  and
consequently  a  certain  artificial  homogeneity  may
be  secured  amongst  different  nations;  yet  unless
continual  intermarriage  takes  place  each  race  will
soon  recast  and  vitiate  the  common  inheritance.
The  fall  of  the  Boman  Empire  offered  such  a
spectacle,  when  various  types  of  barbarism,  with
a  more  or  less  classic  veneer,  re-established  them¬
selves  everywhere.  Perhaps  modern  cosmopoli¬
tanism,  if  not  maintained  by  commerce  or  by
permanent  conquest,  may  break  apart  in  the
same  way  and  yield  to  local  civilisations  no  less
diverse  than  Christendom  and  Islam.

Community  of  race  is  a  far  deeper
bond  than  community  of  language,
education,  or  government.  Where  one
political  system  dominates  various
races  it  forces  their  common  culture  to  be  external
merely.  This  is  perhaps  the  secret  of  that  strange
recrudescence  of  national  feeling,  apart  often


Race,  when
distinct,  the
greatest  of
distinctions.


166


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


from  political  divisions,  which  has  closely  fol¬
lowed  the  French  Revolution  and  the  industrial
era.  The  more  two  different  peoples  grow  alike
in  externals  the  more  conscious  and  jealous  they
become  of  diversity  in  their  souls ;  and  where  indi¬
viduals  are  too  insignificant  to  preserve  any  per¬
sonality  or  distinction  of  their  own,  they  flock
together  into  little  intentional  societies  and  fac¬
tious  groups,  in  the  hope  of  giving  their  imagi¬
nation,  in  its  extremity,  some  little  food  and
comfort.  Private  nationalities  and  private  relig¬
ions  are  luxuries  at  such  a  time  in  considerable
demand.  The  future  may  possibly  see  in  the  Oc¬
cident  that  divorce  between  administrative  and
ideal  groups  which  is  familiar  in  the  Orient;  so
that  under  no  matter  what  government  and  with
utter  cosmopolitanism  in  industry  and  science,
each  race  may  guard  its  own  poetry,  religion,  and
manners.  Such  traditions,  however,  would  always
be  survivals  or  revivals  rather  than  genuine  ex¬
pressions  of  life,  because  mind  must  either  repre¬
sent  nature  and  the  conditions  of  action  or  else
be  content  to  persist  precariously  and  without  a
function,  like  a  sort  of  ghost.

Some  races  are  obviously  superior  to  others.
A  more  thorough  adjustment  to  the  conditions  of
existence  has  given  their  spirit  victory,  scope,  and
a  relative  stability.  It  is  therefore  of  the  great¬
est  importance  not  to  obscure  this  superiority  by
intermarriage  with  inferior  stock,  and  thus  nullify
the  progress  made  by  a  painful  evolution  and  a


PATRIOTISM


167


prolonged  sifting  of  souls.  Eeason  protests  as
much  as  instinct  against  any  fusion,  for  instance,
of  white  and  black  peoples.  Mixture  is  in  itself
no  evil  if  the  two  nations,  being  approximately
equal,  but  having  complementary  gifts,  can  modify
them  without  ultimate  loss,  and  possibly  to  ad-
«Pure”  vantage.  Indeed  the  so-called  pure
races  may  be  races,  since  their  purity  has  gone  with
morally  sterile.  isoiation  and  inexperience,  have  borne

comparatively  little  spiritual  fruit.  Large  con¬
tact  and  concentrated  living  bring  out  native
genius,  but  mixture  with  an  inferior  stock  can
only  tend  to  obliterate  it.  The  J ews,  the  Greeks,
the  Romans,  the  English  were  never  so  great  as
when  they  confronted  other  nations,  reacting
against  them  and  at  the  same  time,  perhaps,
adopting  their  culture ;  but  this  greatness  fails  in¬
wardly  whenever  contact  leads  to  amalgamation.

There  is  something  unmistakably  illiberal,  al¬
most  superstitious,  in  standing  on  race  for  its
own  sake,  as  if  origins  and  not  results  were  of
moral  value.  It  matters  nothing  what  blood  a
man  has,  if  he  has  the  right  spirit;  and  if  there
is  some  ground  for  identifying  the  two  (since
monkeys,  however  educated,  are  monkeys  still)
it  is  only  when  blood  means  character  and  capac¬
ity,  and  is  tested  by  them,  that  it  becomes  im¬
portant.  Nor  is  it  unjust  to  level  the  individual,
in  his  political  and  moral  status,  with  the  race
to  which  he  belongs,  if  this  race  holds  an  approved
position.  Individual  gifts  and  good  intentions


168


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


have  little  efficacy  in  the  body  politic  if  they
neither  express  a  great  tradition  nor  can  avail  to
found  one;  and  this  tradition,  as  religion  shows,
will  falsify  individual  insights  so  soon  as  they
are  launched  into  the  public  medium.  The  com¬
mon  soul  will  destroy  a  noble  genius  in  absorbing
it,  and  therefore,  to  maintain  progress,  a  general
genius  has  to  be  invoked;  and  a  general  genius
means  an  exceptional  and  distinct  race.

Environment,  education,  fashion,  may  be  all
powerful  while  they  last  and  may  make  it  seem  a
prejudice  to  insist  on  race,  turning  its  assumed
efficacy  into  a  sheer  dogma,  with  fanatical  impulses
behind  it ;  yet  in  practice  the  question  will  soon  re-
.  ,  cur:  What  shall  sustain  that  omnipo-

True  national-  x

ity  direction  on  tent  fashion,  education,  or  environ-
a  definite  ideal.  men£  ?  Nothing  is  more  treacherous

than  tradition,  when  insight  and  force  are  lacking
to  keep  it  warm.  Under  Roman  dominion,  the  in¬
habitants  of  Sparta  still  submitted  to  the  laws  of
Lycurgus  and  their  life  continued  to  be  a  sort
of  ritualistic  shadow  of  the  past.  Those  enfran¬
chised  helots  thought  they  were  maintaining  a
heroic  state  when,  in  fact,  they  were  only  turn¬
ing  its  forms  into  a  retrospective  religion.  The
old  race  was  practically  extinct ;  ephors,  gymnasia,
and  common  meals  could  do  nothing  to  revive  it.
The  ways  of  the  Roman  world — a  kindred  pro¬
miscuous  population — prevailed  over  tha+  local
ritual  and  rendered  it  perfunctory,  because  there
were  no  longer  any  living  souls  to  understand  that


PATRIOTISM


169


a  man  might  place  his  happiness  in  his  country’s
life  and  care  nothing  for  Oriental  luxury  or  Ori¬
ental  superstition,  things  coming  to  flatter  his  per¬
sonal  lusts  and  make  him  useless  and  unhappy.

Institutions  without  men  are  as  futile  as  men
without  institutions.  Before  race  can  be  a  ra¬
tional  object  for  patriotism  there  must  exist  a
traditional  genius,  handed  down  by  inheritance
or  else  by  adoption,  when  the  persons  adopted  can
really  appreciate  the  mysteries  they  are  initiated
into.  Blood  could  be  disregarded,  if  only  the
political  ideal  remained  constant  and  progress
was  sustained,  the  laws  being  modified  only  to
preserve  their  spirit.  A  state  lives  in  any  case
by  exchanging  persons,  and  all  spiritual  life  is
maintained  by  exchanging  expressions.  Life  is  a
circulation ;  it  can  digest  whatever  materials  will
assume  a  form  already  determined  ideally  and
enable  that  form  to  come  forth  more  clearly  and
be  determined  in  more  particulars.  Stagnant  mat¬
ter  necessarily  decays  and  in  effect  is  false  to  the
spirit  no  less  than  a  spirit  that  changes  is  false
to  itself.

The  spirit  of  a  race  is  a  mythical  entity  ex¬
pressing  the  individual  soul  in  its  most

Country  well  ,  ,  ■,  »  j

represented  by  constant  and  profound  instincts  and

domestic  and  expanding  it  in  the  direction  in  which
civic  religion.  ,  ,  ...  ,

correct  representation  is  most  easily
possible,  in  the  direction  of  ancestors,  kinsmen,
and  descendants.  In  ancient  cities,  where  patri¬
otism  was  intense,  it  was  expressed  in  a  tribal


170


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  civic  religion.  The  lares,  the  local  gods,  the
deified  heroes  associated  with  them,  were  either
ancestors  idealised  or  ideals  of  manhood  taking
the  form  of  patrons  and  supernatural  protectors.
Jupiter  Capitolinus  and  the  Spirit  of  Borne  were
a  single  object.  To  worship  Jupiter  in  that  Capi¬
tol  was  to  dedicate  oneself  to  the  service  of  Eome.
A  foreigner  could  no  more  share  that  devotion
than  a  neighbour  could  share  the  religion  of  the
hearth  without  sharing  by  adoption  the  life  of
the  family.  Paganism  was  the  least  artificial  of
religions  and  the  most  poetical;  its  myths  were
comparatively  transparent  and  what  they  ex¬
pressed  was  comparatively  real.  In  that  religion
patriotism  and  family  duties  could  take  imagi¬
nable  forms,  and  those  forms,  apart  from  the  in¬
evitable  tinge  of  superstition  which  surrounded
them,  did  not  materially  vitiate  the  allegiance
due  to  the  actual  forces  on  which  human  happi¬
ness  depends.

What  has  driven  patriotism,  as  commonly  felt

Misleading  and  conceived,  so  far  from  rational
identification  courses  and  has  attached  it  to  vapid

^thgovem-  objects  has  been  the  initial  illegit-
ment.  imacy  of  all  governments.  Under  such

circumstances,  patriotism  is  merely  a  passion  for
ascendency.  Properly  it  animates  the  army,  the
government,  the  aristocracy;  from  those  circles  it

can  percolate,  not  perhaps  without  the

Sporting  or  r  y  r  r  .

belligerent  help  of  some  sophistry  and  mtimida-
patnotism.  tion,  into  the  mass  of  the  people,  who


PATRIOTISM


171


are  told  that  their  government's  fortunes  are  their
own.  Now  the  rabble  has  a  great  propensity  to
take  sides,  promptly  and  passionately,  in  any
spectacular  contest;  the  least  feeling  of  affinity,
the  slightest  emotional  consonance,  will  turn  the
balance  and  divert  in  one  direction  sympathetic
forces  which,  for  every  practical  purpose,  might
just  as  well  have  rushed  the  other  way.  Most
governments  are  in  truth  private  societies  pitted
against  one  another  in  the  international  arena
and  giving  meantime  at  home  exhibitions  of  elo¬
quence  and  more  rarely  of  enterprise;  but  the
people's  passions  are  easily  enlisted  in  such  a  game,
of  course  on  the  side  of  their  own  government,
just  as  each  college  or  region  backs  its  own  ath¬
letes,  even  to  the  extent  of  paying  their  bills.
Nations  give  the  same  kind  of  support  to  their
fighting  governments,  and  the  sporting  passions
and  illusions  concerned  are  what,  in  the  national
game,  is  called  patriotism.

Where  parties  and  governments  are  bad,  as  they
are  in  most  ages  and  countries,  it  makes  practi¬
cally  no  difference  to  a  community,  apart  from
local  ravages,  whether  its  own  army  or  the  enemy's
is  victorious  in  war,  nor  does  it  really  affect  any
man's  welfare  whether  the  party  he  happens  to
belong  to  is  in  office  or  not.  These  issues  con¬
cern,  in  such  cases,  only  the  army  itself,  whose
lives  and  fortunes  are  at  stake,  or  the  official
classes,  who  lose  their  places  when  their  leaders
fall  from  power.  The  private  citizen  in  any  event


172


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


continues  in  such  countries  to  pay  a  maximum  of
taxes  and  to  suffer,  in  all  his  private  interests,  a
maximum  of  vexation  and  neglect.  Nevertheless,
because  he  has  some  son  at  the  front,  some  cousin
in  the  government,  or  some  historical  sentiment
for  the  flag  and  the  nominal  essence  of  his  coun¬
try,  the  oppressed  subject  will  glow  like  the  rest
with  patriotic  ardour,  and  will  decry  as  dead  to
duty  and  honour  anyone  who  points  out  how  per¬
verse  is  this  helpless  allegiance  to  a  government
representing  no  public  interest.

Exclusive  pa-  In  proportion  as  governments  be-
triotism  ra-  come  good  and  begin  to  operate  for

when  the1  gov-  the  general  welfare,  patriotism  itself
eminent  sup-  becomes  representative  and  an  expres-

ported  is  •  n  i  i  •  i  •  1 1

universally  S10n  °t  reason;  but  just  m  the  same

beneficent.  measure  does  hostility  to  that  govern¬
ment  on  the  part  of  foreigners  become  groundless
and  perverse.  A  competitive  patriotism  involves
ill-will  toward  all  other  states  and  a  secret  and
constant  desire  to  see  them  thrashed  and  subordi¬
nated.  It  follows  that  a  good  government,  while
it  justifies  this  governmental  patriotism  in  its  sub¬
jects,  disallows  it  in  all  other  men.  For  a  good
government  is  an  international  benefit,  and  the
prosperity  and  true  greatness  of  any  country  is  a
boon  sooner  or  later  to  the  whole  world;  it  may
eclipse  alien  governments  and  draw  away  local
populations  or  industries,  but  it  necessarily  bene¬
fits  alien  individuals  in  so  far  as  it  is  allowed  to
affect  them  at  all.


PATRIOTISM


173


Animosity  against  a  well-governed  country  is
therefore  madness.  A  rational  patriotism  would
rather  take  the  form  of  imitating  and  supporting
that  so-called  foreign  country,  and  even,  if  practi¬
cable,  of  fusing  with  it.  The  invidious  and  aggres¬
sive  form  of  patriotism,  though  inspired  generally
only  by  local  conceit,  would  nevertheless  be  really
justified  if  such  conceit  happened  to  be  well
grounded.  A  dream  of  universal  predominance
visiting  a  truly  virtuous  and  intelligent  people
would  be  an  aspiration  toward  universal  benefi¬
cence.  For  every  man  who  is  governed  at  all
must  be  governed  by  others ;  the  point  is,  that  the
others,  in  ruling  him,  shall  help  him  to  be  him¬
self  and  give  scope  to  his  congenial  activities.
When  coerced  in  that  direction  he  obeys  a  force
which,  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word,  represents
him,  and  consequently  he  is  truly  free;  nor  could
he  be  ruled  by  a  more  native  and  rightful  author¬
ity  than  by  one  that  divines  and  satisfies  his  true
necessities.

A  man’s  nature  is  not,  however,  a  quantity  or

quality  fixed  unalterably  and  a  priori.

Accidents  of  i  i  -i.  i  •

birth  and  As  breeding  and  selection  improve  a
training  affect  race,  so  every  experience  modifies  the

the  ideal.  •  -i  •  •  -i  ■«  -i  n*  i  *i  i  •

individual  and  offers  a  changed  basis
for  future  experience.  The  language,  religion,
education,  and  prejudices  acquired  in  youth  bias
character  and  predetermine  the  directions  in  which
development  may  go  on.  A  child  might  possibly
change  his  country;  a  man  can  only  wish  that  he


174


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


might  change  it.  Therefore,  among  the  true
interests  which  a  government  should  represent,
nationality  itself  must  be  included.

Mechanical  forces,  we  must  not  weary  of  repeat¬
ing,  do  not  come  merely  to  vitiate  the  ideal;  they
come  to  create  it.  The  historical  background  of
life  is  a  part  of  its  substance  and  the  ideal  can
never  grow  independently  of  its  spreading  roots.
A  sanctity  hangs  about  the  sources  of  our  being,
whether  physical,  social,  or  imaginative.  The  an¬
cients  who  kissed  the  earth  on  returning  to  their
native  country  expressed  nobly  and  passionately
what  every  man  feels  for  those  regions  and  those
traditions  whence  the  sap  of  his  own  life  has  been
sucked  in.  There  is  a  profound  friendliness  in
whatever  revives  primordial  habits,  however  they
may  have  been  overlaid  with  later  sophistications.
For  this  reason  the  homelier  words  of  a  mother
tongue,  the  more  familiar  assurances  of  an  ances¬
tral  religion,  and  the  very  savour  of  childhood’s
dishes,  remain  always  a  potent  means  to  awaken
emotion.  Such  ingrained  influences,  in  their
vague  totality,  make  a  man’s  true  nationality.  A

government,  in  order  to  represent  the

ditions  and  general  interests  of  its  subjects,  must

may  contribute  move  in  sympathy  with  their  habits
something.  ,  ...  .  .  ,  • ,

and  memories;  it  must  respect  their
idiosyncrasy  for  the  same  reason  that  it  protects
their  lives.  If  parting  from  a  single  object  of
love  be,  as  it  is,  true  dying,  how  much  more
would  a  shifting  of  all  the  affections  be  death
to  the  soul.


PATRIOTISM


175


Tenderness  to  such  creative  influences  is  a  mark
of  profundity ;  it  has  the  same  relation  to  political
life  that  transcendentalism  has  to  science  and
morals;  it  shrinks  back  into  radical  facts,  into
centres  of  vital  radiation,  and  quickens  the  sense
for  inner  origins.  Nationality  is  a  natural  force
and  a  constituent  in  character  which  should  be
reckoned  with  and  by  no  means  be  allowed  to  miss
They  are  not  those  fruits  which  it  alone  might  bear ;
ends.  bnt^  like  the  things  it  venerates,  it  is

only  a  starting-point  for  liberal  life.  Just  as  to
be  always  talking  about  transcendental  points  of
reference,  primordial  reality,  and  the  self  to  which
everything  appears,  though  at  first  it  might  pass
for  spiritual  insight,  is  in  the  end  nothing  but
pedantry  and  impotence,  so  to  be  always  harping
on  nationality  is  to  convert  what  should  be  a  rec¬
ognition  of  natural  conditions  into  a  ridiculous
pride  in  one’s  own  oddities.  Nature  has  hidden
the  roots  of  things,  and  though  botany  must  now
and  then  dig  them  up  for  the  sake  of  compre¬
hension,  their  place  is  still  under  ground,  if  flow¬
ers  and  fruits  are  to  be  expected.  The  private
loyalties  which  a  man  must  have  toward  his  own
people,  grounding  as  they  alone  can  his  morality
and  genius,  need  nevertheless  to  be  seldom  paraded.
Attention,  when  well  directed,  turns  rather  to
making  immanent  racial  forces  blossom  out  in
the  common  medium  and  express  themselves  in
ways  consonant  with  practical  reason  and  uni¬
versal  progress.  A  man’s  feet  must  be  planted


176  the  life  of  eeason


in  his  country,  but  his  eyes  should  survey  the
world.

I

What  a  statesman  might  well  aim  at  would  be
to  give  the  special  sentiments  and  gifts  of  his
countrymen  such  a  turn  that,  while  continuing  all
vital  traditions,  they  might  find  less  and  less  of
what  is  human  alien  to  their  genius.  Differences
in  nationality,  founded  on  race  and  habitat,  must
always  subsist ;  but  what  has  been  superadded  arti¬
ficially  by  ignorance  and  bigotry  may  be  gradually
abolished  in  view  of  universal  relations  better  un¬
derstood.  There  is  a  certain  plane  on  which  all
races,  if  they  reach  it  at  all,  must  live  in  common,
the  plane  of  morals  and  science;  which  is  not  to
say  that  even  in  those  activities  the  mind  betrays
no  racial  accent.  What  is  excluded  from  science
and  morals  is  not  variety,  but  contradiction.  Any
community  which  had  begun  to  cultivate  the  Life
of  Eeason  in  those  highest  fields  would  tend  to
live  rationally  on  all  subordinate  levels  also;  for
with  science  and  morality  rationally  applied  the
best  possible  use  would  be  made  of  every  local  and
historical  accident.  Where  traditions  had  some
virtue  or  necessity  about  them  they  would  be  pre¬
served;  where  they  were  remediable  prejudices
they  would  be  superseded.


The  symbol  At  the  birth  of  society  instincts  ex-
for  country  isted,  needful  to  the  animal  and  hav-

and  may  be-  mg  a  certain  glorious  impetuosity
come  an  idol,  about  them,  which  prompted  common
action  and  speech,  and  a  public  morality,  and


PATRIOTISM


177


men  were  led  to  construct  myths  that  might  seem
to  justify  this  co-operation.  Paternal  authority
could  easily  suggest  one  symbol  for  social  loyalty :
the  chief,  probably  a  venerable  and  imperious  per¬
sonage,  could  be  called  a  father  and  obeyed  as  a
natural  master.  His  command  might  by  conven¬
tion  be  regarded  as  an  expression  of  the  common
voice,  just  as  the  father’s  will  is  by  nature  the  rep¬
resentative  of  his  children’s  interests.  Again,  the
members  of  each  community  were  distinguished
from  their  enemies  by  many  a  sign  and  custom;
these  signs  and  customs  might  also  become  a
graphic  symbol  for  the  common  life.

Both  these  cases  suggest  how  easily  a  symbol
takes  the  place  of  its  object  and  becomes  an  idol.
If  the  symbol  happens  to  be  a  man  there  are
natural  human  sentiments  awakened  by  him;  and
whatever  respect  his  character  or  gifts  may  in¬
spire,  whatever  charm  there  may  be  in  his  person,
whatever  graciousness  he  may  add  to  his  official
favours  or  commands,  increase  immensely  his
personal  ascendency.  A  king  has  a  great  oppor¬
tunity  to  make  himself  loved.  This  scope  given
to  private  inclination  is  what,  to  ordinary  fancy,
makes  royalty  enviable;  few  envy  its  impersonal
power  and  historic  weight.  Yet  if  a  king  were
nothing  but  a  man  surrounded  by  flatterers,  who
was  cheered  when  he  drove  abroad,  there  would  be
little  stability  in  monarchy.  A  king  is  really  the
state’s  hinge  and  centre  of  gravity,  the  point  where
all  private  and  party  ambitions  meet  and,  in  a
Vol.  H— 12


178


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sense,  are  neutralised.  It  is  not  easy  for  factions
to  overturn  him,  for  every  other  force  in  the  state
will  instinctively  support  him  against  faction.  His
elevation  above  everyone,  the  identity  of  his  sober
interests  with  those  of  the  state  at  large,  is  cal¬
culated  to  make  him  the  people’s  natural  repre¬
sentative;  his  word  has  therefore  a  genuine  au¬
thority,  and  his  ascendency,  not  being  invidious,
is  able  to  secure  internal  peace,  even  when  not  en¬
lightened  enough  to  insure  prosperity  or  to  avoid
foreign  wars.  Accordingly,  whenever  a  monarchy
is  at  all  representative  time  has  an  irresistible
tendency  to  increase  its  prestige;  the  king  is  felt
to  be  the  guardian  as  well  as  the  symbol  of  all
public  greatness.

Meantime  a  double  dislocation  is  possible  here:
patriotism  may  be  wholly  identified  with  personal
loyalty  to  the  sovereign,  while  the  sovereign  him¬
self,  instead  of  making  public  interests  his  own,
may  direct  his  policy  so  as  to  satisfy  his  private
passions.  The  first  confusion  leads  to  a  conflict
between  tradition  and  reason;  the  second  to  the
ruin  of  either  the  state  or  the  monarchy.  In  a
word,  a  symbol  needs  to  remain  transparent  and
to  become  adequate;  failing  in  either  respect,  it
misses  its  function.

The  feudal  system  offers  perhaps

s^i^atio^sen-  the  best  illustration  of  a  patriotism
sitive  but  par-  wholly  submerged  in  loyalty.  The

sense  of  mutual  obligation  and  service
was  very  clear  in  this  case ;  the  vassal  in  swearing


PATRIOTISM


179


fealty  knew  perfectly  well  what  sort  of  a  bargain
he  was  striking.  A  feudal  government,  while  it
lasted,  was  accordingly  highly  responsive  and  re¬
sponsible.  If  false  to  its  calling,  it  could  be  read¬
ily  disowned,  for  it  is  easy  to  break  an  oath  and
to  make  new  military  associations,  especially  where
territorial  units  are  small  and  their  links  acci¬
dental.  But  this  personal,  conscious,  and  jealous
subordination  of  man  to  man  constituted  a  govern¬
ment  of  insignificant  scope.  Military  functions
were  alone  considered  and  the  rest  was  allowed  to
shift  for  itself.  Feudalism  could  have  been  possi¬
ble  only  in  a  barbarous  age  when  the  arts  existed
on  sufferance  and  lived  on  by  little  tentative  res¬
urrections.  The  feudal  lord  was  a  genuine  repre¬
sentative  of  a  very  small  part  of  his  vassal's  in¬
terests.  This  slight  bond  sufficed,  however,  to  give
him  a  great  prestige  and  to  stimulate  in  him  all
the  habits  and  virtues  of  a  responsible  master;  so
that  in  England,  where  vestiges  of  feudalism
abound  to  this  day,  there  is  an  aristocracy  not
merely  titular.


Monarchical  A  highly  concentrated  monarchy
representation  presents  the  exactly  opposite  phenom-

comprehensive  -n-  ,  .  . .  .  ,

buttreacher-  enon.  Here  subordination  is  mvolun-
ous-  tary  and  mutual  responsibility  largely

unconscious.  On  the  other  hand,  the  scope  of
representation  is  very  wide  and  the  monarch  may
well  embody  the  whole  life  of  the  nation.  A  great
court,  with  officers  of  state  and  a  standing  army,
is  sensitive  to  nothing  so  much  as  to  general  ap-


180


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


pearances  and  general  results.  The  invisible  forces
of  industry,  morality,  and  personal  ambition  that
really  sustain  the  state  are  not  studied  or  foment¬
ed  by  such  a  government;  so  that  when  these  re¬
sources  begin  to  fail,  the  ensuing  catastrophes  are
a  mystery  to  everybody.  The  king  and  his  min¬
isters  never  cease  wondering  how  they  can  be  so
constantly  unfortunate.

So  long,  however,  as  the  nation’s  vital  force  is
unspent  and  taxes  and  soldiers  are  available  in
plenty,  a  great  monarchy  tends  to  turn  those  re¬
sources  to  notable  results.  The  arts  and  sciences
are  encouraged  by  the  patronage  of  men  of  breed¬
ing  and  affairs ;  they  are  disciplined  into  a  certain
firmness  and  amplitude  which  artists  and  scholars,
if  left  to  themselves,  are  commonly  incapable  of.
Life  is  refined;  religion  itself,  unless  fanaticism
be  too  hopelessly  in  the  ascendant,  is  co-ordinated
with  other  public  interests  and  compelled  to  serve
mankind ;  a  liberal  life  is  made  possible ;  the
imagination  is  stimulated  and  set  free  by  that
same  brilliant  concentration  of  all  human  energies
which  defeats  practical  liberty.  At  the  same  time
luxury  and  all  manner  of  conceits  are  part  and
parcel  of  such  a  courtly  civilisation,  and  its  best
products  are  the  first  to  be  lost ;  so  that  very  likely
the  dumb  forces  of  society — hunger,  conscience,
and  malice — will  not  do  any  great  harm  when  they
destroy  those  treacherous  institutions  which,  after
giving  the  spirit  a  momentary  expression,  had  be¬
come  an  offence  to  both  spirit  and  flesh.  Observ-


PATRIOTISM


181


ers  at  the  time  may  lament  the  collapse  of  so
much  elegance  and  greatness;  but  nature  has  no
memory  and  brushes  away  without  a  qualm  her
card-castle  of  yesterday,  if  a  new  constructive  im¬
pulse  possesses  her  to-day.

_  ,  Where  no  suitable  persons  are  found

Impersonal  r

symbols  no  to  embody  the  state’s  unity,  other  sym-
ad vantage.  bois  kave  ^  choseili  Besides  the

gods  and  their  temples,  there  are  the  laws  which
may,  as  among  the  Jews  and  Mohammedans,  be¬
come  as  much  a  fetich  as  any  monarch,  and  one
more  long-lived;  or  else  some  traditional  policy
of  revenge  or  conquest,  or  even  the  country’s  name
or  flag,  may  serve  this  symbolic  purpose.  A  trivial
emblem,  which  no  thinking  man  can  substitute
for  the  thing  signified,  is  not  so  great  an  advan¬
tage  as  at  first  sight  it  might  seem;  for  in  the
first  place  men  are  often  thoughtless  and  adcrre
words  and  svmbols  with  a  terrible  earnestness;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  an  abstract  token,  be¬
cause  of  its  natural  insipidity,  can  be  made  to
stand  for  anything;  so  that  patriotism,  when  it
uses  pompous  words  alone  for  its  stimulus,  is  very
apt  to  be  a  cloak  for  private  interests,  which  the
speaker  may  sincerely  conceive  to  be  the  only
interests  in  question.

The  essence  of  patriotism  is  thus  annulled,  for
patriotism  does  not  consist  in  considering  the
private  and  sordid  interests  of  others  as  well  as
one’s  own,  by  a  kind  of  sympathy  which  is
merely  vicarious  or  epidemic  selfishness;  patriot-


182


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ism  consists  rather  in  being  sensitive  to  a  set
of  interests  which  no  one  could  have  had  if  he
had  lived  in  isolation,  but  which  accrue  to  men
conscious  of  living  in  society,  and  in  a  society
having  the  scope  and  history  of  a  nation.  It  was
^  .  .  the  vice  of  liberalism  to  believe  that

Patriotism  not

self-interest,  common  interests  covered  nothing  but
save  to  the  so-  sum  0f  those  objects  which  each

cial  man

whose  aims  individual  might  pursue  alone ;  where-
are  ideal.  ^ y  science,  religion,  art,  language,  and

nationality  itself  would  cease  to  be  matters  of
public  concern  and  would  appeal  to  the  individual
merely  as  instruments.  The  welfare  of  a  flock  of
sheep  is  secured  if  each  is  well  fed  and  watered,
but  the  welfare  of  a  human  society  involves  the
partial  withdrawal  of  every  member  from  such
pursuits  to  attend  instead  to  memory  and  to  ideal
possessions ;  these  involve  a  certain  conscious  con¬
tinuity  and  organisation  in  the  state  not  necessary
for  animal  existence.  It  is  not  for  man’s  interest
to  live  unless  he  can  live  in  the  spirit,  because
his  spiritual  capacity,  when  unused,  will  lacerate
and  derange  even  his  physical  life.  The  brutal
individualist  falls  into  the  same  error  into  which
despots  fall  when  they  declare  war  out  of  personal
pique  or  tax  the  people  to  build  themselves  a  pyra¬
mid,  not  discerning  their  country’s  interests,  which
they  might  have  appropriated,  from  interests  of
their  own  which  no  one  else  can  share.

Democracies,  too,  are  full  of  patriots  of  this
lordly  stripe,  men  whose  patriotism  consists  in  joy


PATRIOTISM


183


at  their  personal  possessions  and  in  desire  to  in¬
crease  them.  The  resultant  of  general  selfislmess
might  conceivably  be  a  general  order;  but  though
intelligent  selfishness,  if  universal,  might  suffice
for  good  government,  it  could  not  suffice  for  na¬
tionality.  Patriotism  is  an  imaginative  passion,
and  imagination  is  ingenuous.  The  value  of  pa¬
triotism  is  not  utilitarian,  but  ideal.  It  belongs
to  the  free  forms  of  society  and  ennobles  a  man  not
so  much  because  it  nerves  him  to  work  or  to  die,
which  the  basest  passions  may  also  do,  but  be¬
cause  it  associates  him,  in  working  or  dying,  with
an  immortal  and  friendly  companion,  the  spirit
of  his  race.  This  he  received  from  his  ancestors
tempered  by  their  achievements,  and  may  transmit
to  posterity  qualified  by  his  own.


CHAPTER  VIII


IDEAL  SOCIETY


To  many  beings — to  almost  all  that  people  the
The  grega-  earth  and  sky — each  soul  is  not  at-
rious  instinct  tached  by  any  practical  interest.  Some

all  social  in-  .  .  ,  .  ,  ,  .  ,  . ,

stincts  in  sus-  are  f°°  distant  to  be  perceived ;  the
pense.  proximity  of  others  passes  unnoticed.

It  is  far  from  requisite,  in  pursuing  safety,  that
every  strange  animal  be  regarded  as  either  a  friend
or  an  enemy.  Wanton  hostilities  would  waste
ammunition  and  idle  attachments  would  waste
time.  Yet  it  often  happens  that  some  of  these
beings,  having  something  in  common  with  creat¬
ures  we  are  wont  to  notice,  since  we  stand  to  them
in  sexual,  parental,  or  hostile  relations,  cannot
well  go  unobserved.  Their  presence  fills  us  with
a  vague  general  emotion,  the  arrested  possibility
at  once  of  sexual,  of  parental,  and  of  hostile  ac¬
tions.  This  emotion  is  gregarious  or  imperson¬
ally  social.  The  flock  it  commonly  regards  may
be  described  as  an  aggregate  in  which  parents  and
children  have  been  submerged,  in  which  mates  are
not  yet  selected,  and  enemies  not  yet  descried.

Gregarious  sentiment  is  passive,  watchful,  ex¬
pectant,  at  once  powerful  and  indistinct,  troubled

184


IDEAL  SOCIETY


185


and  fascinated  by  things  merely  possible.  It  ren¬
ders  solitude  terrible  without  making  society  par¬
ticularly  delightful.  A  dull  feeling  of  familiarity
and  comfort  is  all  we  can  reasonably  attribute  to
uninterrupted  trooping  together.  Yet  banishment
from  an  accustomed  society  is  often  unbearable.
A  creature  separated  from  his  group  finds  all  his
social  instincts  bereft  of  objects  and  of  possible
exercise;  the  sexual,  if  by  chance  the  sexual  be  at
the  time  active;  the  parental,  with  all  its  exten¬
sions;  and  the  combative,  with  all  its  supports.
He  is  helpless  and  idle,  deprived  of  all  resource
and  employment.  Yet  when  restored  to  his  tribe,
he  merely  resumes  a  normal  existence.  All  par¬
ticular  feats  and  opportunities  are  still  to  seek.
Company  is  not  occupation.  Society  is  like  the
air,  necessary  to  breathe  but  insufficient  to
live  on.

Similar  beings  herding  together  in  the  same
places  are  naturally  subject  to  simultaneous  reac¬
tions,  and  the  sense  of  this  common  reaction  makes
possible  the  conception  of  many  minds  having  a
common  experience.  The  elements  of  this  experi¬
ence  they  express  to  one  another  by  signs.  For
when  spontaneous  reactions  occur  together  in
many  animals,  each,  knowing  well  his  own  emo¬
tion,  will  inevitably  take  the  perceived  attitude
and  gesture  of  his  fellows  for  its  expression — for
his  own  attitude  and  gesture  he  knows  nothing  of ;
and  he  will  thus  possess,  without  further  instruc¬
tion,  the  outward  sign  for  his  inner  experience.


186


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


it  gives  rise  to  It  is  easy  to  see  how  a  moral  world
conscience  or  can  grow  out  of  t*hese  primary  intui-

the  public  tions.  Knowing,  tor  instance,  the  ex¬
voice.  pression  of  anger,  a  man  may  come

to  find  anger  directed  against  himself;  together
with  physical  fear  in  the  presence  of  attack,  he
will  feel  the  contagion  of  his  enemy’s  passion,
especially  if  his  enemy  be  the  whole  group  whose
reactions  he  is  wont  to  share,  and  something  in
him  will  strive  to  be  angry  together  with  the  rest
of  the  world.  He  will  perfectly  understand  that
indignation  against  himself  which  in  fact  he  in¬
stinctively  shares.  This  self-condemning  emotion
will  be  his  sense  of  shame  and  his  conscience.
Words  soon  come  to  give  definition  to  such  a
feeling,  which  without  expression  in  language
would  have  but  little  stability.  For  when  a  man
is  attracted  to  an  act,  even  if  it  be  condemned
by  others,  he  views  it  as  delightful  and  eligible
in  itself;  but  when  he  is  forced,  by  the  conven¬
tional  use  of  words,  to  attach  to  that  act  an  oppro¬
brious  epithet,  an  epithet  which  he  himself  has
always  applied  with  scorn,  he  finds  himself  unable
to  suppress  the  emotion  connoted  by  the  word ;  he
cannot  defend  his  rebellious  intuition  against  the
tyranny  of  language ;  he  is  inwardly  confused  and
divided  against  himself,  and  out  of  his  own  mouth
convicted  of  wickedness.

A  proof  of  the  notable  influence  that  language
has  on  these  emotions  may  be  found  in  their  trans¬
formations.  The  connivance  of  a  very  few  persons


IDEAL  SOCIETY


187


is  sufficient  to  establish  among  them  a  new  appli¬
cation  of  eulogistic  terms;  it  will  suffice  to  sup¬
press  all  qualms  in  the  pursuance  of  their  common
impulse  and  to  consecrate  a  new  ideal  of  character.
It  is  accordingly  no  paradox  that  there  should  be
honour  among  thieves,  kindness  among  harlots,
and  probity  among  fanatics.  They  have  not  lost
their  conscience;  they  have  merely  introduced  a
flattering  heresy  into  the  conventional  code,  to
make  room  for  the  particular  passion  indulged  in
their  little  world.

Guises  of  pub-  Sympathy  with  the  general  mind
lie  opinion.  may  als0  take  other  forms.  Public

opinion,  in  a  vivacious  and  clear-headed  commu¬
nity,  may  be  felt  to  be  the  casual  and  irresponsible
thing  which  in  truth  it  is.  Homer,  for  instance,
has  no  more  solemn  vehicle  for  it  than  the  indefi¬
nite  and  unaccentable  w.  “So,”  he  tells  us,
“  somebody  or  anybody  said.”  In  the  Greek  trage¬
dians  this  unauthoritative  entity  was  replaced  by
the  chorus,  an  assemblage  of  conventional  persons,
incapable  of  any  original  perception,  but  possess¬
ing  a  fund  of  traditional  lore,  a  just  if  somewhat
encumbered  conscience,  and  the  gift  of  song.  This
chorus  was  therefore  much  like  the  Christian
Church  and  like  that  celestial  choir  of  which  the
church  wishes  to  be  the  earthly  echo.  Like  the
church,  the  tragic  chorus  had  authority,  because
it  represented  a  wide,  if  ill-digested,  experience;
and  it  had  solemnity,  because  it  spoke  in  archaic
tropes,  emotional  and  obscure  symbols  of  prehis-


188


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


toric  conflicts.  These  sacramental  forms  retained
their  power  to  move  in  spite  of  their  little  perti¬
nence  to  living  issues,  partly  on  account  of  the
mystery  which  enshrouded  their  forgotten  passion
and  partly  on  account  of  the  fantastic  interpreta-
tions  which  that  pregnant  obscurity  allowed.

Far  more  powerful,  however,  are  those  embodi¬
ments  of  the  general  conscience  which  religion

Oracles  and  furnishes  in  its  first  and  spontaneous
revelations.  phase,  as  when  the  Hebrew  prophets

dared  to  cry,  “  So  saith  the  Lord.”  Such  faith  in
one’s  own  inspiration  is  a  more  pliable  oracle  than
tradition  or  a  tragic  chorus,  and  more  responsive
to  the  needs  and  changes  of  the  hour.  Occidental
philosophers,  in  their  less  simple  and  less  eloquent
manner,  have  often  repeated  that  arrogant  Hebraic
cry :  they  have  told  us  in  their  systems  what  God
thinks  about  the  world.  Such  pretensions  would
be  surprising  did  we  not  remind  ourselves  of  the
obvious  truth  that  what  men  attribute  to  God  is
nothing  but  the  ideal  they  value  and  grope  for  in
themselves,  and  that  the  commandments,  myth¬
ically  said  to  come  from  the  Most  High,  flow  in
fact  from  common  reason  and  local  experience.

If  history  did  not  enable  us  to  trace  this  deriva¬
tion,  the  ever-present  practical  standard  for  faith
would  sufficiently  indicate  it;  for  no  one  would
accept  as  divine  a  revelation  which  he  felt  to  be
immoral  or  found  to  be  pernicious.  And  yet  such
a  deviation  into  the  maleficent  is  always  possible
when  a  code  is  uprooted  from  its  rational  soil  and


IDEAL  SOCIETY


189


transplanted  into  a  realm  of  imagination*  where
it  is  subject  to  all  sorts  of  arbitrary  distortions.
If  the  sexual  instinct  should  attach  us  (as  in  its
extensions  and  dislocations  it  sometimes  does)  to
beings  incapable  of  satisfying  it  or  of  uniting  with
us  in  propagating  the  race,  we  should,  of  course,
study  to  correct  that  aberration  so  that  our  joys
and  desires  might  march  in  step  with  the  possible
progress  of  the  world.  In  the  same  way,  if  the
gregarious  instinct  should  bring  us  into  the  im¬
agined  presence  of  companions  that  really  did  not
exist,  or  on  whose  attitude  and  co-operation  our
successes  in  no  way  depended,  we  should  try  to  lead
back  our  sense  of  fellowship  to  its  natural  founda¬
tions  and  possible  sanctions.

Society  exists  so  far  as  does  analogous  existence
and  community  of  ends.  We  may,  in  refining  the
social  instinct,  find  some  fellowship  in  the  clouds
and  in  the  stars,  for  these,  though  remote,  are
companions  of  our  career.  By  poetic  analogy  we
may  include  in  the  social  world  whatever  helps  or
thwarts  our  development,  and  is  auxiliary  to  the
energies  of  the  soul,  even  if  that  object  be  inani¬
mate.  Whatever  spirit  in  the  past  or  future,  or
in  the  remotest  regions  of  the  sky,  shares  our  love
and  pursuit,  say  of  mathematics  or  of  music,  or
of  any  ideal  object,  becomes,  if  we  can  somehow
divine  his  existence,  a  partner  in  our  joys  and  sor¬
rows,  and  a  welcome  friend.

Those  ideal  objects,  however,  for  whose  sake  all
revolutions  in  space  and  time  may  be  followed


190


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


with  interest,  are  not  themselves  members  of  onr
society.  The  ideal  to  which  all  forces  should

The  ideal  a  minister  is  itself  no  force  or  factor  in
measure  for  ail  its  own  realisation.  Such  a  possible

no  existence  disposition  of  things  is  a  mere  idea,
itself.  eternal  and  inert,  a  form  life  might

possibly  take  on  and  the  one  our  endeavours,  if
they  were  consistent,  would  wish  to  impose  on  it.
This  ideal  itself,  however,  has  often  been  ex¬
pressed  in  some  mythical  figure  or  Utopia.  So
to  express  it  is  simply  to  indulge  an  innocent
instinct  for  prophecy  and  metaphor;  but  unfort¬
unately  the  very  innocence  of  fancy  may  engage
it  all  the  more  hopelessly  in  a  tangle  of  bad
dreams.  If  we  once  identify  our  Utopia  or  other
ideal  with  the  real  forces  that  surround  us,  or
with  any  one  of  them,  we  have  fallen  into  an  illu¬
sion  from  which  we  shall  emerge  only  after  bitter
disappointments;  and  even  when  we  have  come
out  again  into  the  open,  we  shall  long  carry  with
us  the  desolating  sense  of  wasted  opportunities
and  vitiated  characters.  For  to  have  taken  our
purposes  for  our  helpers  is  to  have  defeated  the
first  and  ignored  the  second ;  it  is  to  have  neglected
rational  labour  and  at  the  same  time  debauched
social  sense.

The  religious  extensions  of  society  should  there¬
fore  be  carefully  watched ;  for  while  sometimes,  as
with  the  Hebrew  prophets,  religion  gives  dramatic
expression  to  actual  social  forces  and  helps  to  in¬
tensify  moral  feeling,  it  often,  as  in  mystics  of  all


IDEAL  SOCIETY


191


creeds  and  ages,  deadens  the  consciousness  of  real
ties  by  feigning  ties  which  are  purely  imaginary.
This  self-deception  is  the  more  frequent  because
there  float  before  men  who  live  in  the  spirit  ideals
which  they  look  to  with  the  respect  naturally  ren¬
dered  to  whatever  is  true,  beautiful,  or  good;  and
the  symbolic  rendering  of  these  ideals,  which  is
the  rational  function  of  religion,  may  be  confused
with  its  superstitious  or  utilitarian  part — with
exploiting  occult  forces  to  aid  us  in  the  work  of
life.

Occult  forces  may  indeed  exist,  and  they  may
even  be  so  disposed  that  the  ideal  is  served  by  their
agency;  but  the  most  notable  embodiment  of  a
principle  is  not  itself  a  principle,  being  only  an
instance,  and  the  most  exact  fulfilment  of  a  law
is  not  a  law,  being  simply  an  event.  To  discover
a  law  may  meantime  be  the  most  interesting  of
events,  and  the  image  or  formula  that  expresses
a  principle  may  be  the  most  welcome  of  intellect¬
ual  presences.  These  symbols,  weighted  with  their
wide  significance,  may  hold  the  mind  and  attract
its  energies  into  their  vortex;  and  human  genius
is  certainly  not  at  its  worst  when  employed  in
framing  a  good  myth  or  a  good  argument.  The
lover  of  representation,  be  he  thinker  or  dramatist,
moves  by  preference  in  an  ideal  society.  His  com¬
munion  with  the  world  is  half  a  soliloquy,  for
the  personages  in  his  dialogue  are  private  sym¬
bols,  and  being  symbols  they  stand  for  what  is  not
themselves;  the  language  he  imputes  to  them  is


192


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


his  own,  though  it  is  their  ways  that  prompt  him
to  impute  that  language  to  them.  Plastic  images
of  his  own  making  and  shifting  are  his  sole  means
of  envisaging  eternal  principles  and  ultimate  sub¬
stances,  things  ideal  and  potential,  which  can  never
become  phenomenal  in  their  own  persons.

It  is  an  inspiring  thought,  and  a

Contrast  be*  *  •  <  »  •  *  •  «

tween  natural  true  one>  that  in  proportion  as  a  man  8
and  intellectual  interests  become  humane  and  his  ef¬
forts  rational,  he  appropriates  and  ex¬
pands  a  common  life,  which  reappears  in  all  indi¬
viduals  who  reach  the  same  impersonal  level  of
ideas — a  level  which  his  own  influence  may  help
them  to  maintain.  Patriotism  envisages  this  ideal
life  in  so  far  as  it  is  locally  coloured  and  grounded
in  certain  racial  aptitudes  and  traditions ;  but  the
community  recognised  in  patriotism  is  imbedded
in  a  larger  one  embracing  all  living  creatures.
While  in  some  respects  we  find  sympathy  more
complete  the  nearer  home  we  remain,  in  another
sense  there  is  no  true  companionship  except  with
the  universe.  Instinctive  society,  with  its  compul¬
sory  affections,  is  of  course  deeper  and  more  ele¬
mentary  than  any  free  or  intellectual  union.  Love
is  at  once  more  animal  than  friendship  and  more
divine ;  and  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of  family
affection  when  compared  with  patriotism.  What
lies  nearer  the  roots  of  our  being  must  needs  en¬
joy  a  wider  prevalence  and  engage  the  soul  more
completely,  being  able  to  touch  its  depths  and  hush
its  primordial  murmurs.


IDEAL  SOCIETY


193


On  the  other  hand,  the  free  spirit,  the  political
and  speculative  genius  in  man,  chafes  under  those
blind  involutions  and  material  bonds.  Natural,
beneficent,  sacred,  as  in  a  sense  they  may  be,  they
somehow  oppress  the  intellect  and,  like  a  brood¬
ing  mother,  half  stifle  what  they  feed.  Something
drives  the  youth  afield,  into  solitude,  into  alien
friendships;  only  in  the  face  of  nature  and  an
indifferent  world  can  he  become  himself.  Such  a
flight  from  home  and  all  its  pieties  grows  more
urgent  when  there  is  some  real  conflict  of  temper
or  conscience  between  the  young  man  and  what  is
established  in  his  family;  and  this  happens  often
because,  after  all,  the  most  beneficent  conventions
are  but  mechanisms  which  must  ignore  the  nicer
sensibilities  and  divergences  of  living  souls.

Common  men  accept  these  spiritual  tyrannies,

weak  men  repine  at  them,  and  great

man^^God,  men  break  them  down.  But  to  defy
from  real  to  the  world  is  a  serious  business,  and

ideal  society.  .

requires  the  greatest  courage,  even  if
the  defiance  touch  in  the  first  place  only  the
world’s  ideals.  Most  men’s  conscience,  habits,
and  opinions  are  borrowed  from  convention  and
gather  continual  comforting  assurances  from  the
same  social  consensus  that  originally  suggested
them.  To  reverse  this  process,  to  consult  one’s
own  experience  and  elicit  one’s  own  judgment,
challenging  those  in  vogue,  seems  too  often  au¬
dacious  and  futile ;  but  there  are  impetuous
minds  bom  to  disregard  the  chances  against

Vol.  IL— 13


194


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


them,  even  to  the  extent  of  denying  that  they
are  taking  chances  at  all.  For  in  the  first  in¬
stance  it  never  occurs  to  the  inventor  that  he
is  the  source  of  his  new  insight ;  he  thinks  he  has
merely  opened  his  eyes  and  seen  what,  by  an  in¬
conceivable  folly,  the  whole  world  had  grown  blind
to.  Wise  men  in  antiquity,  he  imagines,  saw
the  facts  as  he  sees  them,  as  the  gods  see  them
now,  and  as  all  sane  men  shall  see  them  hence¬
forward.

Thus,  if  the  innovator  be  a  religious  soul,  grown
conscious  of  some  new  spiritual  principle,  he  will
try  to  find  support  for  his  inspiration  in  some  lost
book  of  the  law  or  in  some  early  divine  revelation
corrupted,  as  he  will  assert,  by  wicked  men,  or  even
in  some  direct  voice  from  heaven ;  no  delusion  will
be  too  obvious,  no  re-interpretation  too  forced,  if
it  can  help  him  to  find  external  support  somewhere
for  his  spontaneous  conviction.  To  denounce  one
authority  he  needs  to  invoke  another,  and  if  no
other  be  found,  he  will  invent  or,  as  they  say,  he
will  postulate  one.  His  courage  in  facing  the
actual  world  is  thus  supported  by  his  ability  to
expand  the  world  in  imagination.  In  separating
himself  from  his  fellow-men  he  has  made  a  new
companion  out  of  his  ideal.  An  impetuous  spirit
when  betrayed  by  the  world  will  cry,  “  I  know  that
my  redeemer  liveth  ” ;  and  the  antiphonal  response
will  come  more  wistfully  after  reflection :

“  It  fortifies  my  soul  to  know
That  though  I  wander,  Truth  is  so.”*


IDEAL  SOCIETY


195


The  deceptions  which  nature  practises  on  men

are  not  always  cruel.  There  are  also

symbols  revert  kindly  deceptions  which  prompt  him
to  the  con-  to  pursue  or  expect  his  own  good  when,

crcte

though  not  destined  to  come  in  the
form  he  looks  for,  this  good  is  really  destined  to
come  in  some  shape  or  other.  Such,  for  instance,
are  the  illusions  of  romantic  love,  which  may
really  terminate  in  a  family  life  practically  better
than  the  absolute  and  chimerical  unions  which
that  love  had  dreamed  of.  Such,  again,  are  those
illusions  of  conscience  which  attach  unspeakable
vague  penalties  and  repugnances  to  acts  which
commonly  have  bad  results,  though  these  are  im¬
possible  to  forecast  with  precision.  When  disil¬
lusion  comes,  while  it  may  bring  a  momentary
shock,  it  ends  by  producing  a  settled  satisfaction
unknown  before,  a  satisfaction  which  the  coveted
prize,  could  it  have  been  attained,  would  hardly
have  secured.  When  on  the  day  of  judgment,  or
earlier,  a  man  perceives  that  what  he  thought  he
was  doing  for  the  Lord’s  sake  he  was  really  doing
for  the  benefit  of  the  least,  perhaps,  of  the  Lord’s
creatures,  his  satisfaction,  after  a  moment’s  sur¬
prise,  will  certainly  be  very  genuine.

Such  kindly  illusions  are  involved  in  the  sym¬
bolic  method  by  which  general  relations  and  the

Nature  a  sym-  inconceivably  diffuse  reality  of  things
b°i  for  destiny.  have  to  be  apprehended.  The  stars  are

in  human  thought  a  symbol  for  the  silent  forces
of  destiny,  really  embodied  in  forms  beyond  our


196


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


apprehension ;  for  who  shall  say  what  actual  being
may  or  may  not  correspond  to  that  potentiality
of  life  or  sensation  which  is  all  that  the  external
world  can  be  to  our  science?  When  astrology  in¬
vented  the  horoscope  it  made  an  absurdly  pre¬
mature  translation  of  celestial  hieroglyphics  into
that  language  of  universal  destiny  which  in  the  end
they  may  be  made  to  speak.  The  perfect  astrono¬
mer,  when  he  understood  at  last  exactly  what
pragmatic  value  the  universe  has,  and  what  fort¬
unes  the  stars  actually  forebode,  would  be  pleas¬
antly  surprised  to  discover  that  he  was  nothing
but  an  astrologer  grown  competent  and  honest.

Ideal  society  belongs  entirely  to  this  realm  of
kindly  illusion,  for  it  is  the  society  of  symbols.
Whenever  religion,  art,  or  science  presents  us  with
an  image  or  a  formula,  involving  no  matter  how
momentous  a  truth,  there  is  something  delusive
in  the  representation.  It  needs  translation  into
the  detailed  experience  which  it  sums  up  in  our
own  past  or  prophecies  elsewhere.  This  eventual
change  in  form,  far  from  nullifying  our  knowl¬
edge,  can  alone  legitimise  it.  A  conception  not
reducible  to  the  small  change  of  daily  experience
is  like  a  currency  not  exchangeable  for  articles  of
consumption;  it  is  not  a  symbol,  but  a  fraud.

And  yet  there  is  another  aspect  to  the

notions  have  matter.  Symbols  are  presences,  and
also  inherent  they  are  those  particularly  congenial

vhIh  PS

presences  which  we  have  inwardly
evoked  and  cast  in  a  form  intelligible  and  familiar


IDEAL  SOCIETY


197


to  human  thinking.  Their  function  is  to  give  flat
experience  a  rational  perspective,  translating  the
general  flux  into  stable  objects  and  making  it  rep¬
resentable  in  human  discourse.  They  are  there¬
fore  precious,  not  only  for  their  representative  or
practical  value,  implying  useful  adjustments  to
the  environing  world,  but  even  more,  sometimes,
for  their  immediate  or  aesthetic  power,  for  their
kinship  to  the  spirit  they  enlighten  and  exercise.

This  is  prevailingly  true  in  the  fine  arts  which
seem  to  express  man  even  more  than  they  express
nature ;  although  in  art  also  the  symbol  would  lose
all  its  significance  and  much  of  its  inward  articu¬
lation  if  natural  objects  and  eventual  experience
could  be  disregarded  in  constructing  it.  In  music,
indeed,  this  ulterior  significance  is  reduced  to  a
minimum;  yet  it  persists,  since  music  brings  an
ideal  object  before  the  mind  which  needs,  to  some
extent,  translation  into  terms  no  longer  musical
— terms,  for  instance,  of  skill,  dramatic  passion,
or  moral  sentiment.  But  in  music  pre-eminently,
and  very  largely  in  all  the  arts,  external  propriety
is  adventitious;  so  much  can  the  mere  presence
and  weight  of  a  symbol  fill  the  mind  and  consti¬
tute  an  absolute  possession.

In  religion  and  science  the  overt  purpose  of
Religion  and  symbols  is  to  represent  external  truths,
science  indi-  The  inventors  of  these  symbols  think

live  and  direct-  they  are  merely  uncovering  a  self-
iy  ideal.  existent  reality,  having  in  itself  the

very  form  seen  in  their  idea.  They  do  not  per-


198


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ceive  that  the  society  of  God  or  Nature  is  an  ideal
society,  nor  that  these  phantoms,  looming  in  their
imagination,  are  but  significant  figments  whose
existent  basis  is  a  minute  and  indefinite  series
of  ordinary  perceptions.  They  consequently  at¬
tribute  whatever  value  their  genial  syntheses  may
have  to  the  object  as  they  picture  it.  The  gods
have,  they  fancy,  the  aspect  and  passions,  the  his¬
tory  and  influence  which  their  myth  unfolds ;  na¬
ture  in  its  turn  contains  hypostatically  just  those
laws  and  forces  which  are  described  by  theory.
Consequently  the  presence  of  God  or  Nature  seems
to  the  mythologist  not  an  ideal,  but  a  real  and
mutual  society,  as  if  collateral  beings,  endowed
with  the  conceived  characters,  actually  existed  as
men  exist.  But  this  opinion  is  antenable.  As
Hobbes  said,  in  a  phrase  which  ought  to  be  in¬
scribed  in  golden  letters  over  the  head  of  every
talking  philosopher:  No  discourse  whatsoever  caw
end  in  absolute  knowledge  of  fact.  Absolute
knowledge  of  fact  is  immediate,  it  is  experiential.
We  should  have  to  become  God  or  Nature  in  order
to  know  for  a  fact  that  they  existed.  Intellectual
knowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  where  it  relates
to  existence,  is  faith  only,  a  faith  which  in  these
matters  means  trust.  For  the  forces  of  Nature
or  the  gods,  if  they  had  crude  existence,  so  that
we  might  conceivably  become  what  they  are,  would
lose  that  causal  and  that  religious  function  which
are  their  essence  respectively.  They  would  be
merely  collateral  existences,  loaded  with  all  sorts


IDEAL  SOCIETY


199


of  irrelevant  properties,  parts  of  the  universal
flux,  members  of  a  natural  society;  and  while  as
such  they  would  have  their  relative  importance,
they  would  be  embraced  in  turn  within  an  intelli¬
gible  system  of  relations,  while  their  rights  and
dignities  would  need  to  be  determined  by  some
supervening  ideal.  A  nature  existing  in  act  would
require  metaphysics — the  account  of  a  deeper
nature — to  express  its  relation  to  the  mind  that
knew  and  judged  it.  Any  actual  god  would  need
to  possess  a  religion  of  his  own,  in  order  to  fix  his
ideal  of  conduct  and  his  rights  in  respect  to  his
creatures  or  rather,  as  we  should  then  be,  to  his
neighbours.  This  situation  may  have  no  terrors
for  the  thoughtless;  but  it  evidently  introduces
something  deeper  than  Nature  and.  something
higher  than  God,  depriving  these  words  of  the
best  sense  in  which  a  philosopher  might  care  to
use  them.


Their

opposite

outlook.


The  divine  and  the  material  are
contrasted  points  of  reference  required
by  the  actual.  Reason,  working  on  the
immediate  flux  of  appearances,  reaches  these  ideal
realms  and,  resting  in  them,  perforce  calls  them
realities.  One — the  realm  of  causes — supplies  ap¬
pearances  with  a  basis  and  calculable  order;  the
other — the  realm  of  truth  and  felicity — supplies
them  with  a  standard  and  justification.  Natural
society  may  accordingly  be  contrasted  with  ideal
society,  not  because  Nature  is  not,  logically  speak¬
ing,  ideal  too,  but  because  in  natural  society  we


200


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ally  ourselves  consciously  with  our  origins  and
surroundings,  in  ideal  society  with  our  purposes.
There  is  an  immense  difference  in  spirituality,  in
ideality  of  the  moral  sort,  between  gathering  or
conciliating  forces  for  action  and  fixing  the  ends
which  action  should  pursue.  Both  fields  are  ideal
in  the  sense  that  intelligence  alone  could  discover
or  exploit  them;  yet  to  call  nature  ideal  is  un¬
doubtedly  equivocal,  since  its  ideal  function  is  pre¬
cisely  to  be  the  substance  and  cause  of  the  given
flux,  a  ground-work  for  experience  which,  while
merely  inferred  and  potential,  is  none  the  less
mechanical  and  material.  The  ideality  of  nature
is  indeed  of  such  a  sort  as  to  be  forfeited  if  the
trusty  instrument  and  true  antecedent  of  human
life  were  not  found  there.  We  should  be  frivolous
and  inconstant,  taking  our  philosophy  for  a  game
and  not  for  method  in  living,  if  having  set  out  to
look  for  the  causes  and  practical  order  of  things,
and  having  found  them,  we  should  declare  that
they^  were  not  really  causal  or  efficient,  on  the
strange  ground  that  our  discovery  of  them  had
been  a  feat  of  intelligence  and  had  proved  a  price¬
less  boon.  The  absurdity  could  not  be  greater  if
in  moral  science,  after  the  goal  of  all  effort  had
been  determined  and  happiness  defined,  we  de¬
clared  that  this  was  not  really  the  good.

Those  who  are  shocked  at  the  assertion  that  God
and  Nature  are  ideal,  and  that  their  contrasted
prerogatives  depend  on  that  fact,  may,  of  course,
use  the  same  words  in  a  different  way,  making


IDEAL  SOCIETY


201


them  synonymous,  and  may  readily  “  prove  ”  that
God  or  Nature  exists  materially  and  has  absolute
being.  We  need  but  agree  to  designate  by  those
terms  the  sum  of  existences,  whatever  they  (or  it)
may  he  to  their  own  feeling.  Then  the  ontologi¬
cal  proof  asserts  its  rights  unmistakably.  Science
and  religion,  however,  are  superfluous  if  what  we
wish  to  learn  is  that  there  is  Something,  and  that
All-there-is  must  assuredly  be  All-there-is.  Ecsta¬
sies  may  doubtless  ensue  upon  considering  that
Being  is  and  Non-Being  is  not,  as  they  are  said  to
ensue  upon  long  enough  considering  one’s  navel;
but  the  Life  of  Reason  is  made  of  more  variegated
stuff.  Science,  when  it  is  not  dialectical,  describes
an  ideal  order  of  existences  in  space  and  time,
such  that  all  incidental  facts,  as  they  oome,  may
fill  it  in  and  lend  it  body.  Religion,  when  pure,
contemplates  some  pertinent  ideal  of  intelligence
and  goodness.  Both  religion  and  science  live  in
imaginative  discourse,  one  being  an  aspiration  and
the  other  a  hypothesis.  Both  introduce  into  the
mind  an  ideal  society.

The  Life  of  Reason  is  no  fair  reproduction  of
the  universe,  but  the  expression  of  man  alone.  A
theory  of  nature  is  nothing  but  a  mass  of  observa¬
tions,  made  with  a  hunter’s  and  an  artist’s  eye.
A  mortal  has  no  time  for  sympathy  with  his  victim
or  his  model;  and,  beyond  a  certain  range,  he  has
no  capacity  for  such  sympathy.  As  in  order  to  live
he  must  devour  one-half  the  world  and  disregard
the  other,  so  in  order  to  think  and  practically  to


202


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


know  he  must  deal  summarily  and  selfishly  with
his  materials;  otherwise  his  intellect  would  melt
again  into  endless  and  irrevocable  dreams.  The
law  of  gravity,  because  it  so  notably  unifies  the
motions  of  matter,  is  something  which  these
motions  themselves  know  nothing  of ;  it  is  a
description  of  them  in  terms  of  human  discourse.
Such  discourse  can  never  assure  us  absolutely  that
the  motions  it  forecasts  will  occur;  the  sensible
proof  must  ensue  spontaneously  in  its  own  good
time.  In  the  interval  our  theory  remains  pure
presumption  and  hypothesis.  Reliable  as  it  may
be  in  that  capacity,  it  is  no  replica  of  anything
on  its  own  level  existing  beyond.  It  creates,
like  all  intelligence,  a  secondary  and  merely  sym¬
bolic  world.


In  translating
existence  into
human  terms
they  give  hu¬
man  nature  its
highest  exer¬
cise.


When  this  diversity  between  the
truest  theory  and  the  simplest  fact,
between  potential  generalities  and  act¬
ual  particulars,  has  been  thoroughly
appreciated,  it  becomes  clear  that
much  of  what  is  valued  in  science


and  religion  is  not  lodged  in  the  miscellany  under¬
lying  these  creations  of  reason,  but  is  lodged
rather  in  the  rational  activity  itself,  and  in  the
intrinsic  beauty  of  all  symbols  bred  in  a  genial
mind.  Of  course,  if  these  symbols  had  no  real
points  of  reference,  if  they  were  symbols  of  noth¬
ing,  they  could  have  no  great  claim  to  considera¬
tion  and  no  rational  character ;  at  most  they  would
be  agreeable  sensations.  They  are,  however,  at


IDEAL  SOCIETY


203


their  best  good  symbols  for  a  diffused  experience
having  a  certain  order  and  tendency;  they  render
that  reality  with  a  difference,  reducing  it  to  a
formula  or  a  myth,  in  which  its  tortuous  length
and  trivial  detail  can  be  surveyed  to  advantage
without  undue  waste  or  fatigue.  Symbols  may
thus  become  eloquent,  vivid,  important,  being  en¬
dowed  with  both  poetic  grandeur  and  practical
truth.

The  facts  from  which  this  truth  is  borrowed,
if  they  were  rehearsed  unimaginatively,  in  their
own  flat  infinity,  would  be  far  from  arousing  the
same  emotions.  The  human  eye  sees  in  perspec¬
tive;  its  glory  would  vanish  were  it  reduced  to
a  crawling,  exploring  antenna.  Not  that  it  loves
to  falsify  anything.  That  to  the  worm  the  land¬
scape  might  possess  no  light  and  shade,  that  the
mountain’s  atomic  structure  should  be  unpictur-
able,  cannot  distress  the  landscape  gardener  nor
the  poet;  what  concerns  them  is  the  effect  such
things  may  produce  in  the  human  fancy,  so  that
the  soul  may  live  in  a  congenial  world.

Naturalist  and  prophet  are  landscape  painters
on  canvases  of  their  own;  each  is  interested  in
his  own  perception  and  perspective,  which,  if  he
takes  the  trouble  to  reflect,  need  not  deceive  him
about  what  the  world  would  be  if  not  foreshort¬
ened  in  that  particular  manner.  This  special  in¬
terpretation  is  nevertheless  precious  and  shows  up
the  world  in  that  light  in  which  it  interests  natu¬
ralists  or  prophets  to  see  it.  Their  figments  make


204


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


their  chosen  world,  as  the  painter’s  apperceptions
are  the  breath  of  his  nostrils.

While  the  symbol’s  applicability  is  essential  to  its
worth — since  otherwise  science  would  be  useless

Science  should  and  religion  demoralising— its  power
be  mathemati-  and  fascination  lie  in  its  acquiring  a

ion  anthropo-  more  and  more  profound  affinity  to
morphic.  the  human  mind,  so  long  as  it  can  do

so  without  surrendering  its  relevance  to  practice.
Thus  natural  science  is  at  its  best  when  it  is  most
thoroughly  mathematical,  since  what  can  be  ex¬
pressed  mathematically  can  speak  a  human  lan¬
guage.  In  such  science  only  the  ultimate  material
elements  remain  surds;  all  their  further  move¬
ment  and  complication  can  be  represented  in  that
kind  of  thought  which  is  most  intimately  satis¬
factory  and  perspicuous.  And  in  like  manner,
religion  is  at  its  best  when  it  is  most  anthropo¬
morphic;  indeed,  the  two  most  spiritual  religions,
Buddhism  and  Christianity,  have  actually  raised
a  man,  overflowing  with  utterly  human  tenderness
and  pathos,  to  the  place  usually  occupied  only  by
cosmic  and  thundering  deities.  The  human  heart
is  lifted  above  misfortune  and  encouraged  to  pur¬
sue  unswervingly  its  inmost  ideal  when  no  com¬
promise  is  any  longer  attempted  with  what  is  not
moral  or  human,  and  Prometheus  is  honestly  pro¬
claimed  to  be  holier  than  Zeus.  At  that  moment
religion  ceases  to  be  superstitious  and  becomes  a
rational  discipline,  an  effort  to  perfect  the  spirit
rather  than  to  intimidate  it.


IDEAL  SOCIETY


205


Summary  of  We  have  seen  that  society  has  three
this  book.  stages — the  natural,  the  free,  and  the

ideal.  In  the  natural  stage  its  function  is  to  pro¬
duce  the  individual  and  equip  him  with  the  pre¬
requisites  of  moral  freedom.  When  this  end  is
attained  society  can  rise  to  friendship,  to  unanim¬
ity  and  disinterested  sympathy,  where  the  ground
of  association  is  some  ideal  interest,  while  this
association  constitutes  at  the  same  time  a  per¬
sonal  and  emotional  bond.  Ideal  society,  on  the
contrary,  transcends  accidental  conjunctions  alto¬
gether.  Here  the  ideal  interests  themselves  take
possession  of  the  mind;  its  companions  are  the
symbols  it  breeds  and  possesses  for  excellence,
beauty,  and  truth.  Beligion,  art,  and  science  are
the  chief  spheres  in  which  ideal  companionship  is
found.  It  remains  for  us  to  traverse  these  prov¬
inces  in  turn  and  see  to  what  extent  the  Life  of
Beason  may  flourish  there.


.


r-7/

■  :r^o!w


•-  mv  v-MB


I

*


V


•  •


.

'
