The Realm of Matter: Book Second of Realms of Being (George Santayana, 1930)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/realmofmatterboo0000geor). Second book of Realms of Being: Santayana's materialist ontology of substance and change.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

—


THE REALM OF MATTER _


en


Thou hast ordered all things in number


and measure and weight.
—Wisdom of Solomon.


Nil natum est in corpore ut uti
Possemus, sed quod natum est, id procreat
usum.


Nothing has arisen in the body in order
that we may use it, but when anything has
arisen it creates its use.—LUCRETIUS.

Kal yap ei atti % puxh TH BAN eyévvnce
madovca, Kal el éxowdvyncey airy Kal éyévero
kak, ) ty aitla mapotoa: od yap ay éyévero
els althy wh TH Wapovola a’rhs Thy yéveouw
haBodca.—For if the (heavenly) soul, having
become subservient to matter, passed into
process, and if by communion with matter
she was corrupted, extant matter by its
presence was the cause thereof; for the
(heavenly) soul would not pass into matter,
if matter was not at hand to lend her a
changeful existence.—PLOTINUS.


REALM OF MATTER


BOOK SECOND
OF


REALMS OF BEING


BY


GEORGE SANTAYANA


BD
Seg!
S33
1730 2


NEW YORK
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
1930


264285


PREFACE


THERE is a prejudice in some quarters against the word
Matter, even where the thing and all its uses are most
honoured. Matter seems an evil to the sour moralist
because it is often untoward, and an occasion of im-
perfection or conflict in things. But if he took a wider
view matter would seem a good to him, because it is
the principle of existence: it is all things in their
potentiality, and therefore the condition of all their
excellence or possible perfection. In metaphysics,
however, the objection to matter is not that matter is
evil, but that it is superfluous, unknowable, or even
non-existent; and I might easily have avoided certain
antagonisms by giving to matter a more fashionable
name and speaking instead of the realm of events or of
space-time or of evolution. I might even have taken
refuge in that half-poetical language to which I am
not disinclined, and might have called the realm of
matter simply nature. But nature, events, space-
time, and even evolution (when this means simply
metamorphosis) are indicative terms, containing no
ontological analysis: my problem is precisely to distin-
guish in this vast flood of existence the planes and
qualities of reality which it contains or presupposes.
I wish to note the differences and the relations between
Vv


vi THE REALM OF MATTER


the animate and the inanimate, the physical and the
moral, the psychological and the logical, the temporal
and the eternal. It is very true that one and the same
flux of events exemplifies now one and now another
of these realms of being, or variously impinges upon
them; but this amphibious character of existence is far
from being a reason for not distinguishing those realms.
On the contrary, besides the inherent differences in
them which nothing can ever obliterate, there is an
added reason why the naturalist should discriminate
them. He is not merely living, like the animals, but
professing to describe the world; and the sense of
existence would remain a merely emotional burden,
and life a blind career, unless he began by discriminat-
ing the essences which it discloses, in their hetero-
geneity, hierarchy, and succession.

If, then, in turning to the study of existence I had
avoided the word matter, there would have been a
sort of treason in that subterfuge. I do not mean
treason so much to matter itself, because the intrinsic
essence of matter being unknown, it may be figured
almost indifferently by any image of sense or thought,
as by “‘ the gods” or “ the devil’, provided that ex-
pectation and action are not misled by that symbol.
I mean rather treason to spirit, to truth, to essence, to
those trembling immaterial lights and that infinite
immutable background which, unless sharply con-
trasted with the matter which they surround, may be
transposed in confused apprehension to the plane of
matter, and saddled with material functions, Have
not both truth and spirit, not to speak of essence, been
represented in our day as things physical, temporal,
instrumental, and practical? Ontologically, this attitude


PREFACE Vii


is absurd, and a mere failure in discernment; but
taken apostolically—for it is zealously espoused—it
expresses a genuine and perfectly legitimate allegiance:
that respect for matter only, which characterises the
psyche when absorbed in action and in circumstances.
Life marks a mechanical complication, maintained in a
world where it did not always exist; and the psyche,
in her fundamental impulse, is perfectly content that
all her ardent labour should end in a vain redistribu-
tion of matter, or should never end. It would seem
idle from her point of view, and rather mad, that any
spirit should ever disengage itself from that process and
should come to find in it some satisfying essence, so
that in discerning and possessing this essence it might
transcend that remorseless flux and might look away
from it to an eternal world. In the reversion of
philosophy (which in spite of itself is a form of spirit)
to exclusive sympathy with the flux of matter, there is
accordingly a too domestic virtue or exaggerated piety,
like that of a fair daughter devoting her whole existence
to nursing her old mother. Free spirit lets the dead
bury their dead, and takes no thought for the morrow;
and it redeems the labouring world by bringing joy
into it.

Theoretical scruples about the reality of matter are
of two sorts: they may be sceptical and empirical,
based on the fact that matter is no immediate datum
of intuition; or they may be scientific and logical,
based on the suspicion that some particular idea of
matter may be unfit or inadequate to express its true
nature. These two kinds of objection are mutually
contradictory; for the one condemns matter for not
being a human sensation, and the other condemns


Vill THE REALM OF MATTER


matter for being only a human idea. The first objec-
tion involves a retreat to the subjective sphere; and
however legitimate such a retreat may be in romantic
soliloquy, it is in principle destructive of all science or
even belief. The postulate of substance—the assump-
tion that there are things and events prior to the
discovery of them and independent of this discovery—
underlies all natural knowledge. The refinements
which may supervene on this conviction ought never
to shake it, and do not do so when they are fruitful.
Therefore the first sort of objection against matter—
that it is a thing-in-itself antecedent to human experi-
ence—may be dismissed at once as vain and sophistical;
for it rescinds that animal faith, or that common sense,
which is the beginning of art and of science and. their
perpetual presupposition.

There remains the second difficulty: the suspicion,
or the clear perception, that some special description
of matter—say that of Democritus or that of Descartes
—is inadequate or mistaken. But of course all human
notions of matter, even if not positively fabulous, must
be wholly inadequate; otherwise the natural philosopher
would be claiming a plenitude of miraculous illumina-
tion such as no prophet ever thought to possess.
Human ideas of matter are initially as various as human
contacts with it, and as human sensations in its presence.
These ideas are sensuous and pictorial from the
beginning. ‘They are then variously sifted and refined
according to people’s progress in the arts of com-
parison and calculation. In popular speech the word
matter continues to suggest the popular aspects of
natural things; in scientific speech, at each stage of it,
the word comes to denote such aspects of those same


PREFACE 1x


things as have become calculable at that stage. Thus to
a stone-cutter extension and impenetrability may well
seem the essence of matter; the builder, intent on the
strains and dangers of position, will add degrees of
cohesion and weight to his definition. At this stage
metaphysicians and moralists will look down on matter
as something gross and dead, and will imagine that
motion and organisation must be imposed on matter
from without: not seeing that this external force, if it
governed and moved matter, would be the soul of
matter, and much nearer to its proper essence than
the zsthetic aspects which its aggregates may wear to
the human eye. Yet what could be more obviously
material than thunder and lightning, sunshine and rain,
from which the father of the gods borrowed his poetic
substance? Weight and figure are not more character-
istic of matter than are explosiveness, swiftness, fertility,
and radiation. Planters and breeders of animals, or
poets watching the passing generations of mankind,
will feel that the heart and mystery of matter lie in
the seeds of things, semina rerum, and in the customary
cycles of their transformation. It is by its motion and
energy, by its fidelity to measure and law, that matter
has become the substance of our world, and the
principle of life and of death init. ‘The earliest sages,
no less than the latest moderns, identified matter with
fire, «ther, or fluids, rather than with stocks and
stones; the latter are but temporary concretions, and
always in the act of growing or crumbling. Even those
who, partly for dialectical reasons, reduced matter to
impenetrable atoms, attributed all its fertility to the
play of collisions which swept perpetually through the
void and drove those dead atoms into constellations


< THE REALM OF MATTER


and vortices and organisms. ‘This endless propulsion
and these fated complications were no less material, and
far more terrible, than any monumental heap into which
matter might sometimes be gathered, and which to a
gaping mind might seem more substantial. If any
poet ever felt the life of nature in its truth, irrepressible,
many-sided, here flaming up savagely, there helplessly
dying down, that poet was Lucretius, whose material-
ism was unqualified.

Finally, in our own times, when physics speculates
chiefly on bodies so remote or minute as to be known
only through variations in light, matter seems to eva-
porate into these visible variations, as if light had no
source, or as if man had no contact with nature except
through the eye. But the seat of these perceptions is
not the heavens or the ether, but the human organism;
and even if the human organism were composed of
these or of other such perceptions, the conditions for
the existence of these elements and their relation to
the heavens, the zther, and one another, would con-
stitute a material world. A psychological nature might
thus be ascribed to matter, in its unapproachable
internal essence; but that hypothesis, or rather myth,
would materialise a late human idea, removed by the
whole diameter of evolution and mundane time from
the primeval matter which was its object; an object
which cannot be found in the landscape of intuition,
but must be posited in action, from the outside, in its
dynamic and truly material capacity. Criticism, I
think, would induce us to stop with this functional
definition of matter, which represents our actual
approach to it. We should then attach the landscape
of intuition to matter only at the summit of evolution,


PREFACE x1


when the psyche becomes a poet, and learns to tran-
scribe her material passions and experiences into terms
of essence.

All these partialities in the conception of matter are
honest and inevitable. Each view, in stretching its
special language as far as possible, may serve to disclose
some side of the true order of nature. But this order
is that of actual generation and existential flux, some-
thing that happens and is not conceived; so that no
sensuous or graphic or mathematical transcript of it
should be so pressed as to be substituted for it. Nor is
it reasonable for those familiar with one side of nature
to deride those who, seeing some different side, un-
suspectingly identify it with the substance before them.
They are wrong; but the critic would be wrong also if
he did not tolerate their error, and even prize it for
its measure of subjective truth.

The realm of matter, then, from the point of view
of our discovery of it, is the field of action: it is essen-
tially dynamic and not pictorial. Moreover, our action
is interpolated in a world already in existence. Our
existence and purposes are things of yesterday; they
were evidently drawn from that very world on which
they react. From the point of view of origins, there-
fore, the realm of matter is the matrix and the source
of everything: it is nature, the sphere of genesis, the
universal mother. The truth cannot dictate to us the
esteem in which we shall hold it: that is not a question
of fact but of preference. Yet natural philosophy may
disclose the source of our preferences and their implica-
tions, so that it may lead us to reconsider them, or to
express them differently. So if, with this conception
of the realm of matter before us, we turn back to the


xi THE REALM OF MATTER


moral prejudices against matter, we shall be amazed at
their levity. A spiritual mind might well look over the
head of nature to a First Cause, and beyond the
vicissitudes of life to a supreme good: therein there
would be a genuine aversion from the realm of matter,
and absorption in essences which, at best, existence can
illustrate or suggest for a moment to the mind, as it
does beauty or the laws of number. But, though not
prized for itself, the realm of matter would remain
standing; otherwise those divine essences would never
have been illustrated or suggested at all. If in clinging
to the immaterial we denied the material, it would not
be merely ashes or dust that we should be despising,
but all natural existence in its abysmal past and in its
indefinite fertility; and it would be, not some philo-
sopher’s sorry notion of matter that we should be
denying, but the reality of our animal being, the fact
that we are creatures of time, rooted in a moving
universe in which our days are numbered. And
rather than blaspheme in this way against our own
nature and origin, we might well say with the Irish
poet. >


Who is that goddess to whom men should pray,
But her from whom their hearts have turned away,
Out of whose virgin being they were born,

Whose mother-nature they have named with scorn,
Calling her holy substance common clay. . . .


Ah, when I think this earth on which I tread
Hath borne these blossoms of the lovely dead,
And makes the living heart I love to beat,

I look with sudden awe beneath my feet—


1 “A, E.” (George Russell) in “'The Virgin Mother”.


PREFACE Xili
and here the poet adds the questionable line:


As you with erring reverence overhead.


If I look overhead, I see the cosmic spaces, the sun
or the stars: all this is as much a part of nature, and a
source of life, as the nether earth. Or if by “‘ over-
head ” we understand the spiritual sphere, why should
it not be looked upon with as much respect as that
realm of matter which, for a free spirit, can be only a
means and an instrument? But I think I understand
what the poet means, and the justness of his sentiment.
Reverence is something due to antiquity, to power, to
the roots and the moral supports of existence; it is
therefore due really to the realm of matter only, and
there is a profound error and self-deception in attribut-
ing those genetic functions, or directing that piety, to
ideal objects. ‘Towards these the appropriate feeling
is not reverence so much as love, enthusiasm, con-
templative rapture, mystic union: feelings which it
would be as silly to address to matter as to address a
dutiful reverence to essences or to attribute power to
them. In reality, the realm of matter contains more
than half of that which from the dawn of life has been
the object of human religion: it contains “ the gods ”’,
or the veritable influences represented by their names
and conciliated by the worship of them. Hell and
heaven, for any honest and serious religion, are parts
of nature; if ever they cease to be so regarded, they are
immediately replaced, as among liberal Protestants, by
the goods and evils of this world. The residue of
human religion is something private, generous, and
not obligatory: it rises from the earth in incense and
music, never to return; it forms a spiritual life, akin


xiv THE REALM OF MATTER


to poetic love, to happiness, to philosophy. In contrast
with it, the tremendous sanctions and fixed duties of
established religion, being instinct with prudence and
great hopes, belong to the sober economy of life; and
they all regard, if people’s eyes were only unsealed,
this despised realm of matter.


CHAP.


Iil.


CONTENTS


PREFACE * .


THE SCOPE OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY .


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES OF SUBSTANCE


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES OF SUBSTANCE .


PICTORIAL SPACE AND SENTIMENTAL TIME


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE
TROPES . ;

TELEOLOGY ‘ .
THE PSYCHE . °
PSYCHOLOGISM . .


THE LATENT MATERIALISM


OF IDEALISTS


PAGE


Ior


190


CHAPTER I
THE SCOPE OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY


THE measure of confidence with which I have spoken
of essence forsakes me when I approach existence.
Logic, grammar, and poetry are free; nO Contrast

alien fact, no vociferation, can prevent intui- Bee

tion from beholding what it actually beholds. jatural

The public censor has indeed some rights over science.

the persons in whom intuition arises, and may condemn
their habit of mind if he thinks that it comports idleness
or the disruption of happy national conventions; but,
in this instance, fortune having relegated me, like the
gods of Epicurus, to the interstices of the worlds, I
may escape that censure or disregard it. Who knows?
Perhaps some kindred spirit may tell me that I have
chosen the better part. In any case, I deny nothing
and prejudge nothing concerning the intuitions of
others; if I cultivate my own with a certain ardour,
it is only as any man cultivates his language and tastes,
if his mind is at all liberal; and I am confident no god
or man will be justly angry with me for browsing so
innocently in my own pasture. But when the active
impulse of curiosity and dogmatism asserts itself in its
turn, as it must in the most contemplative mind, and
I ask myself what dark objects or forces have created
or are threatening my contemplation, then indeed I
am at a loss: and as in positing such natural agencies


at all I assume that they are objects obligatory to every
I B


2 THE REALM OF MATTER


other mind with which I can communicate, I bind
myself to make my opinions conformable with their
reports, and my reports agreeable to their experience.
Of course the belief that I can communicate with other
minds, and that the reports reaching me signify an
experience of theirs over and above my own, is a part
of this extraordinary compulsory assumption which I
make in living; the assumption that I am surrounded
by a natural world, peopled by creatures in whom
intuition is as rife as in myself: and as all my concern
in perception and action turns on what those external
things may do, so half my interest in my own thoughts
turns on what other people may be thinking.

It is not the task of natural philosophy to justify
this assumption, which indeed can never be justified.
Assumption LtS task, after making that assumption, is to

ption :

of an exist- Carry it out consistently and honestly, so as
ing world. to arrive, if possible, at a conception of nature
by which the faith involved in action may be en-
lightened and guided. Such a description of nature,
if it were ever completed in outline, would come round
full circle, and in its account of animals it would report
how they came to have intuitions (among them this
natural philosophy) and to use them in the description
of the world which actually surrounded them. The
whole field of action and of facts would then be em-
braced in a single view, summary and symbolic, but
comprehensive.

The dream of the natural philosopher would be to
describe the world from its beginning (if it had a be-
Inevitable ginning), tracing all its transformations; and
attempt to he would like to do this analytically, not pic-
describe it. torjally—that is, not inthesensuous language of
some local observer composing a private perspective, but
in terms of the ultimate elements (if there are ultimate
elements) concerned in the actual evolution of things.
Out of those elements he would conceive each observer


SCOPE OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY 3


and his perspective arising, and of course varying from
moment to moment. Even if the natural philosopher
were an idealist, and admitted only observing spirits
and their perspectives, he would endeavour to trace the
evolution of these intuitions, which would be his atoms,
in their universal order and march, by no means con-
tenting himself with one intuition and one perspective;
for, if he did so, his idealism (like that of some philo-
sophies of history) would not be a system of physics or
of logic, but a literary entertainment, the lyrical echo
of many verbal reports in a romantic imagination.
This echo might be interesting in itself: but it would
remain only an incident in that natural world which
indeed it presupposed, but which it deliberately ignored.
So that when the idealist became a man again in the
world of action, and began to live (as he must) by
animal faith, his philosophy would entirely forsake him;
yet it is in the service of this animal faith that philosophy
exists, when it is science and wisdom. Indeed, a
theoretical refusal to trust natural philosophy cannot
absolve the most sceptical of us from framing one,
and from living by it. I must conceive a surrounding
world, even if in reflection I say to myself at every step:
Illusion, Illusion. It then becomes almost as interesting
to know what sort of illusions must accompany me
through life, as it would be to imagine what sort of
world I really live in. Indeed, if all spurious substitutes
for natural philosophy were discarded (spurious because
irrelevant to the animal faith which alone posits exist-
ence) those two positions might coincide, since the
picture of the natural world framed by common sense
and science, while framed with the greatest care, would
be admittedly only a picture; and belief in the exist-
ence of that world, though assumed without wobbling,
would be admittedly but an article of inevitable faith.
Non-scientific beliefs about existence, whether in-
spired by religious feeling, reasoning, or fancy, are


4 THE REALM OF MATTER


alternatives to the current natural philosophy, or ex-
tensions of it. Nobody would believe in his ideas if
Pe ena’: had not an initial propensity to believe in
religions things, as if his ideas described them. Dog-
involve matic religions are assertions about the nature
cosmologies. é E

of the universe; what is called supernatural
is only ultra-mundane, an extension of this world on
its own plane, and a recognition of forces ruling over
it not reckoned with in vulgar commerce. The
assertions made by such religious faith, if not super-
stitious errors, are ultimate truths of natural philosophy,
which intuition or revelation has supplied in advance
of experiment: but if the assertions are true at all,
experiment might one day confirm them. Thus
Christian orthodoxy maintains that men will carry
their memories and their bodies with them into hell
or heaven. Theology is the natural philosophy of
that larger world which religion posits as truly exist-
ing: it therefore has precise implications in politics
and science. ‘The absence of such implications and
commitments, far from showing that religion has
become spiritual, proves it a sham; it is no longer a
manly hypothesis, honestly made about the world
confronted in action. No doubt there is an inner
fountain of religious feeling which a person accepting
his theology on hearsay might wholly lack; but it
was religious instinct of some kind that originally
prompted those hypotheses about the hidden nature
of things, and if this instinct is lacking those hypotheses
will soon be discarded. On the other hand, religious
feeling may not always require ultra-mundane ex-
tensions of the natural world; it may find a sufficient
object and sanction in the course of earthly history
and domestic life, as was the case, at bottom, with
Jewish and Protestant righteousness: the politics
and science dictated by religious faith will then coin-
cide with those recommended by worldly wisdom.


SCOPE OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY 5


Religious feeling may take still other forms; for
instance, it may smile mystically at action and belief
altogether, retreating into the invisible sanctuary of
the spirit, or floating incredulously amid mere music
and dreams. But mysticism, whether austere or
voluptuous, since it regards the absolute, ceases to
regard existence which, by definition, is relative, since
it consists in having external relations. Positive and
virile minds may find indulgence in such mysticism
irreligious, because their earnestness is directed upon
alleged facts, in this world or in another: facts essenti-
ally relevant to action and policy, and open to natural
philosophy.

Much restraint, and some disillusion, may enable
a man to entertain ideas without believing them to
describe any matter of fact: such ideas will ,,

: olatrous
be avowedly mere terms of grammar, logic, or character
fancy, to be discarded, or at least discounted, of meta-
on broaching a serious natural philosophy. °°”
They may still be indispensable as a medium, as some
language is indispensable to science; but they will
be optional and interchangeable, as the scientific part
of a book of science (which is never the whole of it)
is perfectly translatable from one language into another.
This is not to say that the medium of intuition, even
in natural philosophy, is indifferent in itself; nothing
is dearer to a man or a nation than congenial modes
of expression; I would rather be silent than use some
people’s language; I would rather die than think as
some people think. But it is the quality of life that
is concerned here, not the truth of ideas. ‘To attempt
to impose such modes of intuition or expression, as
if they were obligatory tenets, is metaphysics: a projec-
tion of the constraints or the creations of thought into
the realm of matter. The authority of intuition would
be entire if it kept to the definition of essences, and
of their essential relations; but when zeal intervenes,


6 | THE REALM OF MATTER


and we profess to find our favourite dialectic in
things, we are betrayed into disrespect for nature,
and are inflating our egotism into cosmic proportions.
At best the metaphysician has given a useful hint to
the naturalist: he has supplied categories which may
be convenient or even indispensable for expressing
the ways of nature in human discourse. ‘The palmary
instance of this is mathematics, which, long after having
ceased to be empirical and become dialectical, still
continues to serve for construction and even for
prophecy in the material sphere: yet the symbols
employed grow more abstruse and tenuous as they
grow more exact, so that people are little tempted to
substitute the notation for the thing denoted; and
they thus escape metaphysics.

When the experience interpreted is spiritual or
passionate, the categories used are, as in religion and
poetry, clearly mythological: yet they are not without
a real, though indirect, object in the realm of matter.
This object is the psyche, with all those profound
currents in her life which create the passions, and
create the spirit which expresses the passions, yet
which in expressing them is so entangled that it often
comes to regard them as its enemies. ‘Those psychic
currents, being dynamic, are material; but they are
hidden from the eye of spirit, which alone is spiritual,
by layer upon layer of vague sensation, rhetoric, and
imagery.

Belief, in its very soul, is belief about nature; it
is animal faith. To entangle belief in anything non-
Natureis Natural, or avowedly tangential to action,
the nexus would be to cheat at the game. Honest
substances Speculative belief is always speculative physics.
and forces. But its terms are inevitably the essences
present to intuition; and the very faith which, in the
presence of these essences, posits existing things, drags
something of the given apparition into the presumed


SCOPE OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY 7


substance of the thing revealed: the theophany human-
ises the god. In correcting this illusion, and in dis-
carding one mythical or metaphysical image after
another, science must still retain some symbol for the
overpowering reality of the world. This reality is not
that symbol itself, nor a collection of such symbols: if
we cling to these we shall never quit the realm of essence.
Nor am I sure that the most learned symbols are the
least deceptive; if any human ideas must be idolized,
I should almost prefer those of the senses and of the
poets. Yet it would be ignominious for a philosopher
voluntarily to succumb to illusion at all, when the
artificiality and relativity of all human views, especially
of learned and beautiful systems, is so patent to re-
flection. Yet views we must have, none the worse,
surely, if they are beautiful and learned; so that the
natural philosopher is driven to a deeper question, to
which I mean to devote this book: How much, when
cleared as far as possible of idolatry, can sense or science
reveal concerning the dark engine of nature? In what
measure do they truly enlighten animal faith?

In broaching this question I am not concerned with
repeating, correcting, or forecasting the description
which men of science may give of the world. 44... a. i
I accept gladly any picture of nature honestly science
drawn by them, as I accept gladly any picture °w'*dse?
drawn by my own senses. Different circumstances or
different faculties would certainly have produced differ-
ent pictures. From Genesis to Thales, to Ptolemy,
to Copernicus, to Newton, and to Einstein the land-
scape has pleasantly varied; and it may yet open other
vistas. These variations and prospects show the
plasticity of human thought, for it is not the facts that
have much varied, nor the material station of man, nor
his senses and destiny. ‘The incubus of existence
remains exactly the same. Is it merely imagination that
has become more laboured but no less fantastic? Or


8 THE REALM OF MATTER


has the path of destiny been really cleared and the forces
that control destiny been better understood? Within
what limits does any description of nature, picturesque
or scientific, retain its relevance to animal faith and
its validity as knowledge of fact, and at what point
does it become pure speculation and metaphor? That
is the only question which I shall endeavour to answer.

My survey of the realm of matter will accordingly
be merely transcendental, and made from the point of
view of a sceptic and a moralist criticising the claims
of experience and science to be true knowledge.

By transcendental reflection I understand reversion,
in the presence of any object or affirmation, to the
‘The tran. immediate experience which discloses_that
scendental Object or prompts that afhrmation. ‘T'ran-
ated +. scendental reflection is a challenge to all
animal dogmatism, a demand for radical evidence.
faith: It therefore tends to disallow substance and,
when it is thorough, even to disallow existence. Nothing
is ultimately left except the passing appearance or the
appearance of something passing. How, then, if tran-
scendental reflection disallows substance, can it lead
me to distinguish the properties of substance?

In Scepticism and Animal Faith 1 have considered
the transcendental motives which oblige me to believe in
substance. The belief must always remain an assump-
tion, but one without which an active and intelligent
creature cannot honestly act or think. ‘'Transcendent-
alism has two phases or movements—the sceptical one
retreating to the immediate, and the assertive one by
which objects of belief are defined and marshalled, of
such a character and in such an order as intelligent
action demands. The enterprise of life is precarious,
and to the sceptic it must seem an adventure in the
dark, without origins or environment or results. Yet
this flying life, by its forward energy, breeds from
within certain postulates of sanity, certain conceptions


SCOPE OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY 9


of the conditions which might surround it and lend it
a meaning, so that its own continuance and fortunes
may be conceived systematically and affirmed with
confidence. Thus the faith that posits and describes
a world is just as transcendental as the criticism which
reduces that world to an appearance or a fiction. If so
many transcendental philosophers stop at the negative
pole, this arrest is not a sign of profundity in them,
but of weakness. It is by boldly believing what tran-
scendental necessity prompts any hunting animal to
believe, that I separate myself from that arrested
idealism, and proceed to inquire what existences, what
substances, and what motions are involved in the chase.

In the chase, for those who follow it, the intensity
of experience is not like the intensity (limitless if you
will) of contemplating pure Being—immutable, __

Action

equable, and complete. The hunter and the posits a
hunted believe in something ambushed and field ex-
: é 5 : isting sub-
imminent: present images are little to them gtantially
but signs for coming events. ‘Things are for science
getting thick, agents are coming together, °°"
or disappearing: they are killing and dying. The
assurance of this sort of being is assurance of existence,
and the belief in this sort of agent is belief in substance.
If this belief and assurance are not illusions (which
the acting animal cannot admit them to be), several
properties must belong to substances and to the world
they compose. These properties I may distinguish in
reflection and call by philosophical names, somewhat
as follows.


CHAPTER II
INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES OF SUBSTANCE


1. SINCE substance is posited, and not given in in-
tuition, as essences may be given, substance is external
to the thought which posits it.

2. Since it is posited in action, or in readiness for
action, the substance posited is external not merely
Aworld ~ to the positing thought (as a different thought
inwhich would be) but is external to the physical
tooeur agent which is the organ of that action, as
mustbe well as of that thought. In other words,
eis Substance has parts and constitutes a physical
temporal, space. Conversely, the substantial agent in
variety and action and thought is external to the sur-
auty: rounding portions of substance with which
it can interact. All the parts of substance are external
to one another.

3. Since substance is engaged in action, and action
involves change, substance is in flux and constitutes
a physical time. Changes are perpetually occurring
in the relations of its parts, if not also in their intrinsic
characters.

4. Since the agents in action and reaction are
distinct in position and variable in character, and
since they induce changes in one another, substance
is unequally distributed. It diversifies the field of
action, or physical time and space.

5. Since there is no occasion for positing any

Io


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES Il


substance save as an agent in the field of action, all
recognisable substance must lie in the sarne field in
which the organism of the observer occupies a relative
centre. Therefore, wherever it works and solicits
recognition, substance composes a relative cosmos.

A mutual externality, or Auseinandersein—an alter-
nation of centres such as moment and moment, thing
and thing, place and place, person and person
—is characteristic of existence. Each centre Bheteie
is equally actual and equally central, yet each externality
is dependent on its neighbours for its position Roos
and on its predecessors for its genesis. The toall
existential interval from one centre to an- 7°"
other is bridged naturally by generation or motion—
by a transition actually taking place from one moment,
place, or character to another, in such a manner that
the former moment, place, or character is abandoned
and lost. The same interval may still be bridged
cognitively by faith or intent, cognition being a sub-
stitute for a transition which cannot be executed
materially, because the remote term of it is past or not
next in the order of genesis or transformation. But
this interval can never be bridged by synthesis in
intuition. Synthesis in intuition destroys the exist-
ential status of the terms which it unites, since it
excludes any alternation or derivation between them.
It unites at best the essences of some natural things
into an ideal picture. On the other hand the con-
junction of existences in nature must always remain
successive, external, and unsynthesised. Nature shows
no absolute limits and no privileged partitions; whereas
the richest intuition, the most divine omniscience, is
imprisoned in the essence which it beholds. It cannot
break through into existence unless it loses itself and
submits to transition; and the foretaste or aftertaste
of such transition, present in feeling, must posit some-
thing eventual, something absent from intuition, if


12 THE REALM OF MATTER


even the sense or idea of existence is to arise at all.
Then the mind engaged in action may begin to live
by faith in the outlying conditions of life, and by an
instinctive tension towards obscure events.

It might seem that memory eludes this necessity,
and actually encloses some parts of the past in the
Memory, Present, and brings the movement of events
when | bodily within the circle of intuition. But
eign this is an illusion founded on the fact that
between memory contains both imagery and know-
separate ; é
natural ledge: the imagery is all present, but that
facts. of which it gives knowledge, when memory
is true, is past and gone. Even if, by a rare
favour, the original aspect of the past experience
should be reproduced exactly, it will not be the
past event, nor even the present one, that will be
given in intuition, but the dateless essence common
to both.

The cognitive value of this apparition will hang
on the ulterior fact that such an apparition, or the
event which it reports, occurred before, at a point of
time which was its own centre, and not a marginal
feature in the present perspective. Memory, then,
in so far as it is, or even claims to be, knowledge, is
faith in the absent, and bridges external relations by
intent only, not by synthesis in intuition.

A mutual externality is also requisite among the
instances of spirit, that is, among thoughts that are to

af be regarded as existences and events. This
Existing : :
thoughts at first sight might seem contrary to the
are separate apparent self-existence and self-evidence of
events D .
lodged each CONSCious being, and to the transcendental
in its place status of spirit, which, because it is a logical
in nature. .

counterpart to any datum, might be alleged

to be an omnipresent fact, existing absolutely. But
this, although it may pass for criticism, is the sophistry
of reflection, which can readily take its verbal terms


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 13


for existences or substances, and ignore the natural
springs of feeling and of reflection itself. An instance
of spirit, a pure feeling or intuition, if it had no date
or place in nature, would not be an event or existence
at all, but only another name, and a mythical name,
for the essence conceived to be present there. The
life of thought, in its conscious intensity, lies in the
syntheses which it is perpetually making among its
. changing materials. These acts of synthesis, these
glances and insights, are historical facts; they arise
and are distinguishable on the level of experience from
their material conditions; but they are not substances.
Their substance is their organ in its movement and
in its changing tensions: it is the psyche. The case is
like that of a collision between two vehicles, or check-
mate in a game of chess. The collision is a new fact,
on the plane of human affairs, as is the checkmate
which ends the game; so, too, are the chagrin or the
severe pain which these events may occasion. But
the pain or the chagrin could no more arise, or come
into existence, without the living persons who endure
them—persons moving in the realm of matter—than
the checkmate could occur without the match, or the
collision without the vehicles. If a feeling or thought
is to be actual, and not a metaphorical name for some
eternal essence, it must therefore arise out of material
events, and in the midst of them: it must stand in
external relations.

Thus the first indispensable condition for the being
of substance is indispensable also to any form of
existence, mental or historical as well as physical.
Existence, like substance, is essentially diffuse and
many-centred. One fact can be reached cognitively
from another fact only by faith, and materially only by
transition; and the cognitive or the initial fact itself
can exist only by virtue of its position or action in a
natural system extending beyond it.


14 THE REALM OF MATTER


It follows that substance is in flux, virtual, if not
actual. External relations are such as are due to the
Existence Position, not to the inherent character, of the
being con- terms. ‘They are, therefore, always variable,
tingent is ° °
essentially and existence, although it may endure by
unstable. accident for any length of time, is inherently
mortal and transitory, being adventitious to the essences
which figure in it. When Hamlet says, To be or not to
be, he is pondering the alternative between existence
and non-existence, and feeling the contingency of both.
The question is not whether he shall be or not be
Hamlet: death might cause him to forget his essence,
but could not abolish it or transform it into another
essence. In the realm of essence all these essences are
eternally present and no alternative arises: which is
perhaps the ultimate truth conveyed by the doctrine of
eternal salvation or punishment. But the accidents of
death, or dreams, or oblivion continually confront this
life, and existence is an optional form of being. Shall
this beloved or detested essence presently lose it? And
on what other essence shall it fall next? To this
pressing question the realm of essence supplies no
answer, and the contemplative mind is hopelessly
puzzled by it. Solvitur ambulando: the event, the pro-
pulsive currents of substance merging and rushing into
new forms, will precipitate a solution without ever
considering alternatives; and it is perhaps because they
never stop to think before they act, that they are able
to act at all.

Something not essence, then, actualises and limits
Lae the manifestation of every essence that figures
ike in nature or appears before the mind. To
which de- this dark principle of existence we give the
events is | name of substance; so that substance, by defini-
Seton tion, is the soil, the medium, and the creative

' force which secretly determines any option
like that of Hamlet. Every such option is momentary


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 15


and local; for although substance is external to essence
and to thought, and its parts are external to one
another, yet substance is internal to the things which it
forms by occupying those contrasted places and assum-
ing these various qualities. It is their substance, the
principle of their existence, the ground of all the spon-
taneous changes which they undergo. It is indefinitely,
perhaps infinitely, deep and inhuman; but whatever
else its intrinsic essence may be, it is certainly complex,
local, and temporal. Its secret flux involves at least
as many contrasts and variations as the course of
nature shows on the surface. Otherwise the ultimate
core of existence would not exist, and the causes of
variation would not vary. But how shall that which
puts on this specious essence here and not there, be in
the same inner condition in both places? Or how shall
that which explodes now, have been equally active
before? Substance, if it is to fulfil the function in
virtue of which it is recognised and posited, must
accordingly be for ever changing its own inner con-
dition. It must be in flux.

Undoubtedly the word substance suggests perma-
nence rather than change, because the substances best
known to man (like the milk and the wet sand,
of the young architect) evidently pass from need not be
place to place and from form to form while #tttbuted
retaining their continuity and quantity. Such stance _
permanence is not contrary to flux, but a con- otherwise
dition of flux. The degree of permanence implied in
which substance may have in any particular a
process, and the name which should be given to this per-
manent factor, are questions for scientific discussion.
They may not, and need not, receive any ultimate answer.
But that some permanence, not the casual persistence
of this or that image, is interwoven with the flux of
things, follows from the reality of this flux itself. If
change were total at any point, there transformation


16 THE REALM OF MATTER


and existence would come to an end. The next, com-
pletely new, fact would not be next; it would be the
centre, or the beginning, of a separate world. In other
words, events, if they are to be successive or contiguous,
must be pervaded by a common medium, in which they
may assume relations external to their respective
essences; for the internal or logical relations between
these essences will never establish any succession or
continuity among them, nor transport them at all into
the sphere of existence. The critics of empiricism who
have insisted that a series of sensations is not the
sensation of a series, might well have added that the
sensation of a series is no more than an isolated term
on its own account, unless there is a background
common to those terms and to this synthetic idea—a
background in relation to which they may respectively
take such places as shall render them contiguous or
successive, although there is nothing within any of
them to indicate such a position. This background,
for human perception, is the field of vision symbolising
the field of action; in this specious field the position of
objects is distinguished before the objects are clearly
specified or posited; but this unity of perspective,
relative to the momentary station and thought of the
observer, cannot embrace the existential flux itself, in
which the events reported and the observer, with his
thought, are incidental features. For the continuity
and successiveness of this existing series, synthesis in
apprehension is useless: it merely creates one more
item—a living thought—to be ranged among its neigh-
bours in the flux of existence. ‘That which is requisite
is the natural derivation of one phase in this flux from
another, or a natural tension between them, determining
their respective characters and positions. Such deri-
vation and such tension, essential to action, involve a
substance within or between events. There may be
very much more in substance than that; but this is


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 17


enough to disclose the existence of a substance, and to
begin the human description of it by its functions.

Permanence, therefore, need not be set down separ-
ately among the radical properties attributed to sub-
stance: it is sufficiently expressed in the possibility of
change, of continuity, of succession, and of the in-
clusion of actual events in a natural series, which shall
not be a mere perspective in imagination.

Action and animal faith look in some specific direc-
tion; the butt of action, which is what I call substance,
must be particular, local, and circumscribed. ives
It must be capable of varying its position or ou.
its condition; for otherwise I could neither greeter:
affect it by my action, nor await and observe "
its operation. In battle, in the chase, or in labour, at-
tention is turned to a particular quarter, to something
substantial there: it would defeat all action and art
if all quarters were alike, and if I couldn’t face a fact
without turning my back on exactly the same fact in
the rear; and the price of bread would be indifferent,
if one substance being everywhere present I could find
the same substance in the air. Action evidently would
be objectless in an infinite vacuum or a homogeneous
plenum; and even the notion or possibility of action
would vanish if I, the agent, had not distinguishable
parts, so that at least I might swim forward rather than
backward in that dense vacuity.

A field of action must, then, be diversified substan-
tially, not pictorially only; that which is at tie eat
work in it here must not be equally at work in gtance of
it there; the opportunities which it opens to things is
me now must not be the same which it opened fieta-
and will open always. Any conception of Physical
substance which represents it as undivided js onlya
and homogeneous is accordingly not a con- stmmatr
ception of nature or of existence: and if ;
such an object is ever called substance, it must be in

Cc


18 THE REALM OF MATTER


a metaphysical sense which I do not attach to the word.
One test of such evasions into the realm of essence is
ability, or ambition, to give a precise definition of what
substance is. Materia prima may be defined—Plotinus
has an admirable exposition of it, like the Athanasian
creed—because it is avowedly something incapable of
existence, and at best one of those ideal terms which
serve to translate nature into the language of thought.
Materia prima is a grammatical essence, comparable
to the transcendental ego, the “I think’, which ac-
cording to Kant must accompany all experience. The
discrimination of such essences distinguishes one logic
from another, and leaves everything in nature, except
human language, just as it was. The existing substance
of things, on the contrary, is that which renders them
dynamic; it is wherever dynamic things are, not where
they are not; it determines their aspects and powers;
and we may learn, since it exists in us also, to play with
it and to let it play on us, in specific ways. But it
would be frivolous to attempt to define it, as if a set
of words, or of blinking ideas, could penetrate to the
heart of existence and determine how, from all eternity,
it must have been put together. What we may discover
of it is not its essence but its place, its motion, its
aspects, its effects. Were it an essence given in intui-
tion, a visionary presence to sense or to language, it
would forfeit those very functions which compel us to
posit it, and which attest its formidable reality. Chief
of these functions is a perpetual and determinate revolu-
tion in the heavens, and fertility and decay upon earth.
In this flux there is a relative permanence and con-
tinuity; but substance is not for that reason less agi-
tated than the familiar face of nature, or nearer to the
impassibility of an eternal essence. Far otherwise.
Investigation rather shows that this substance (which
may be traced experimentally in many of its shifts) is
in a continual silent ferment, by which gross visible


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 19


objects are always being undermined and transformed:
so much so that science often loses its way amid those
subtle currents of the elements, and stops breathless at
some too human image.

There are certain celebrated doctrines which, in
their forms of expression, are excluded at once from
natural philosophy by these considerations. ty physics
I may not say, for instance, with Parmenides Parmenides
that Being is and Not-Being is not, if what Way to
I am seeking to describe is the substance of Democritus.
nature. If for dialectical reasons, which are not directly
relevant to physics, I wished to regard pure Being as
the essence of matter, I should be compelled to distri-
bute this pure Being unequally in a void: a result which
would contradict my premise that Not-Being is not,
since this void would not only exist but would be the
only true theatre of existence, because it would be the
only seat of change. The pure Being or matter distri-
buted in it, by hypothesis, is impassible and everywhere
identical. Nature and life would therefore be due to
the redistribution in the bosom of Not-Being of a pure
Being in itself immutable. We should thus be led to
the system of Democritus: a possible and even a model
system of physics, although, in its expression, too
Eleatic, and borrowing from that dialectical school a
false air of necessity.

Similarly, at the threshold of natural philosophy,
the Vedanta system must yield to the Samkhya: and
this the Indians seem to have admitted by .,. y,.
regarding the two systems as orthodox and danta must
compatible. It might be well if in the West 2&6 Way
we could take a hint from this comprehensive- Samkhya
ness. The unity and simplicity of pure Being **°™
is not incompatible with the infinite variety of essences .
implied in it; and many things are true in the realm
of essence which, if taken to describe existence, would
be unmeaning or contrary to fact. It would suffice to


20 THE REALM OF MATTER


distinguish the two spheres more carefully, for the
legitimacy of systems, verbally most unlike, to become
equal: although certainly those which were drawn from
insight into essence would be more profound and un-
shakable than those drawn from observation of nature,
since nature might as well have offered quite a different
spectacle. On the other hand, it is the order and ground
of this spectacle that interests the natural philosopher;
and to him that more inward and more sublime
intuition of essential Being is a waste of time, or a
rhetorical danger.

One more illustration: the language of Spinoza
about substance ought to yield, in physics, to that of
ao Aristotle, in spite of the fact that a follower
Spinoza of Descartes could not help being more
must give . ° .
ae to enlightened in mechanical matters than a
Anstotle. follower of Socrates. Nevertheless it was
Aristotle who gave the name of substance to compound
natural things actually existing, and Spinoza who
bestowed it on an ambiguous metaphysical object,
now pure Being, now the universe in its infinity—in
either case an ideal unity and an essence incapable of
realisation all at once, if at all, in any natural locus.
No discrimination of infinite Being into infinitely
numerous attributes would ever generate existence,
since all would remain eternal; and no enumeration
of the possible modes of each attribute would turn
them into particular things or into living minds, since
each mode would imply all the others, and all would
be equally rooted everywhere. In Aristotle, on the
contrary, the name of substance is given where the
office of substance is performed, and where one fact
here asserts itself against another fact there; so that
substance is the principle of individuation and ex-
clusion, the condition of existence, succession, and
rivalry amongst natural things. Even if these things,
as conceived by Aristotle, have too much of an animate


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 21


unity, and are mysteriously fixed in their genera and
species, and redolent of moral suggestions, all this is
but the initial dramatic rendering of their human uses,
and the poetry of good prose. It does not prevent a
more disinterested analysis, a microscopic and tele-
scopic science, from disclosing in time the deeper
mechanisms and analogies of nature, and its finer
substance: just as the static zoology and the political
psychology of Aristotle do not prevent us from peeping
into the seething elementary passions beneath those
classical masks. Things have not ceased to wear the
sensuous and moral forms which interested the Greeks;
but we may discover how those shells were generated,
and what currents of universal substance have cast
them up.

Finally, the practical intellect, in positing substance,
imposes on it a certain relevance to the agent, who is
to be in dynamic relations with it. The the fela
objects which art and sanity compel me to of action

: : must have
recognise as substantial, must affect me to- a dynamic
gether, even if in very different ways. They uty.
must all impinge, directly or indirectly, on my action
now; and it is by this test that I distinguish fact
from fiction and true memory from fancy. Facts are
dynamically connected with that which I now posit
as substantial, and objects of fancy are not so connected.
The field of animal faith spreads out from a living
centre; observation cannot abandon its base, but from
this vital station it may extend its perspectives over
everything to which it can assign existence. Among
these accredited things there may be other centres of
observation, actual or eventual; but if the original
organ and station, and these other stations and organs
accredited by it, were not parts of one and the same
substantial world, no means would remain of identifying
the objects observed from one centre with those ob-
served from another. I can acknowledge the existence


22 THE REALM OF MATTER


of other moral centres in the world which I posit, but
only if these centres are agencies, earthly or celestial,
at work in my field of action, and dynamically con-
nected with my own existence. All credible animation,
of ascertainable character, must animate substances
found in the same world with myself, and collateral
with my own substance.

Perhaps this argument has some analogy to Spinoza’s
proof of the unity of substance. He tells us that sub-
nae stance is one, because if there were two or
system is more substances they could bear no relation
pee 5 to one another. In other words, there can
not cover be but one universe, since anything outside,
all reality. by being outside, would be related to it and
collateral, and so after all would form a part of it. Yet
if one universe, or one substance, can exist absolutely,
and out of all relation to anything else, why should
not any number of them exist, each centred in itself?
The necessity of lying in external relations in order
to exist, far from proving that only one system of facts
is possible, proves that any closed circle of facts, in
interplay with one another and with nothing else, will
form a complete universe. Each part of this system
will exist by virtue of its active position there, and
may be discovered by any members of it who are
sufficiently intelligent and adventurous; but from no
part of that universe will anything beyond that universe
be discoverable. Does this fact preclude the being
of a different system, a separate universe, possessing
the same sort of inward life and reality? I cannot
think so. Transcendental necessities are relative to
particular centres of experience; they have no juris-
diction beyond. ‘Those other universes, to us, would
be undiscoverable; but ours, too, would be undis-
coverable to them; and yet we exist here without their
leave. Might they not exist without ours?

What logic enables us to assert, therefore, is not


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 23


that there is only one universe, but that each universe
must be one, by virtue of a domestic economy determin-


ing the relative position and character of the
events which compose it. Anything beyond
this dynamic field is beyond the field of posited
existence and possible knowledge. If there
are other centres and active substances moving
in other spheres, the relation of these dis-
connected spheres is not a physical relation:
no journey and no transformation can bridge
it: it lies in the realm of truth. Each of
these worlds will exemplify its chosen essence;


If there
are many
worlds
their
mutual
relations
are not
physical,
but are
the eternal
relations
of their
essences in
the realm
of truth.


and the internal and unchangeable relations
between these essences will be the only relations be-
tween those worlds. One will not exist before the other,
nor will they be simultaneous; nor will either lie in
any direction from the other, or at any distance. No
force or influence will pass between them of any trace-
able physical or historical kind. If omniscience should
see any harmony, contrast, or mutual fulfilment be-
tween their natures, that spiritual bond would be of
the sort which links essences together by a logical
necessity, and which a contemplative spirit may stop
to disentangle and admire if it can and will.

Indeed, we may go further and say even of a single
universe taken as a whole that its status is that of a
truth rather than of an existence. Each part of it will
exist, and if animate may truly feel its internal tension
and life, and may truly assert the existence of the other
parts also; yet the whole system—perhaps endless in
its time and space—never exists at once or in any
assignable quarter. Its existence is only posited from
within its limits: externally its only status is that of
atruth. Its essence was not condemned to be a closet-
tragedy; living actors have been found to play it and
a shifting stage to exhibit for a moment those convin-
cing scenes. This essence has therefore the eternal


24 THE REALM OF MATTER


dignity of a truth: it is the complete description of
an event. Yet this event, taken as a whole, being
unapproachable from outside, dateless, and nowhere,
is in a sense a supernatural event. ‘Those scenes are
undiscoverable, save to those who play them, and that
tumult is an ancient secret in the bosom of truth.
Indeed, good sense might suffice to convince anyone
that no arguments or definitions can prevent things
The frst from being as numerous and as separate as
object of they may chance to be. ‘There is an infinite
anima’ _ diversity of essences: what shall dissuade
natureas the fatality of existence, which must be
awhole- groundless, from composing such changeful
systems as it likes, on planes of being utterly incom-
mensurable and incommunicable? The most a man
can say for himself, or for any other element from
which exploration may start, is that whatever is to
enter his field of action must belong to the same dynamic
system with himself. In experience and art, as in the
nebular hypothesis, this dynamic oneness of the world
is primitive. It is not put together by conjoining
elements found existing separately, but is the locus
in which they are found; for if they were not found
there, they would be essences only and not facts. In
mature human perception the essences given are doubt-
less distinct and the objects which they suggest are
clearly discriminated: here is the dog, there the sun,
the past nowhere, and the night coming. But beneath
all this definition of images and attitudes of expectancy,
there is always a voluminous feeble sensibility in the
vegetative soul. Even this sensibility posits existence;
the contemplation of pure Being might supervene
only after all alarms, gropings, and beliefs had been
suspended—something it takes all the discipline of
Indian sages to begin to do. The vegetative soul
enjoys an easier and more Christian blessedness: it
sees not, yet it believes. But believes in what? In


INDISPENSABLE PROPERTIES 25


whatever it may be that envelopes it; in what we, in
our human language, call space, earth, sunlight, and
motion; in the throbbing possibility of putting forth
something which we call leaves, for which that patient
soul has no name and no image. The unknown total
environment is what every intellect posits at birth;
whatever may be attempted in action or discovered
in nature will be a fresh feature in that field. Every-
thing relevant to mortal anxiety lies within that im-
mensity, be it an object of earthly fear or pursuit or
of religious hope. Animal faith and material destiny
move in a relative cosmos.


CHAPTER III
PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES OF SUBSTANCE


THE properties which, willy-nilly, we assign to sub-

stance by trusting it and by presuming to act upon it,
are relative and functional properties. Has substance
no other properties, positive and native to it, which
we may discover by observation or experience?

That substance has many native and positive char-
acters is certain: in its diffusion it lends existence to
Besides its Certain eternal essences, and enables them
necessary to figure in a flux of events. At each point,
functions, then, substance must exemplify some essence,
manifests of which, then and there, it creates an in-
positive stance; but it does so by setting that essence
properties. in a frame of external relations; so that
substance is always more and other than the essence
which it exemplifies at any point. It is also more than
the set of external relations, or the natural medium,
into which these exchangeable essences fall; for this
framework, apart from the exchange of alternative
essences which diversify it and individuate its parts,
would itself be a mere essence, like geometrical space
or time, eternal and unsubstantial. This is not to
say that, besides the essences which it exemplifies at
each point, and the manner in which it connects and
exchanges them, substance need have any other essence
of its own. Its residual being, or not-being, is anti-
thetical to essence altogether, and irrational. We may

26


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 27


enjoy it, we may enact it, but we cannot conceive it;
not because our intellect by accident is inadequate, but
because existence, which substance makes continuous,
is intrinsically a surd, a flux, and a contradiction.

The question for the natural philosopher is there-
fore reduced to this: which, if any, of the essences
revealed in human experience or observation may we
assign to substance and regard as belonging to its
essence?

This question might be answered easily and rather
gloriously in a single word, All! Every character, every
relation, every event which occurs anywhere
qualifies substance and is a property of it. an
We should thus come at once upon a perfectly essences
correct, if perfectly useless, definition of sub- tespect
stance: the essence of substance would be that qualities of

: substance.
of the universe, or so much of the realm of
essence as is ever exemplified in existence, when, where,
and in the manner in which it is exemplified. This
definition, I say, would be correct, because the essences
which substance takes on in detail are certainly forms
of substance at those points; while those essences which
it takes on in its larger sweeps (or, as I shall call them,
its tropes) are forms of substance on that scale and in
those cycles. In this way a man is a substance, because
his human and his personal essence have become forms
of substance in him; and the universe is the sum of all
substance, the form of which is called the truth. Even
those instances of essence which are not forms of
substance in this passive manner, are manifestations of
substance by way of active expression or epigenesis;
though not embodied in substance they are evoked
from it and compose the realm of spirit, which is a
natural manifestation of substance in man, but not a
true description of it. The freest intuition is free only
outwards, in that, like music, it need not look towards
substance or towards truth; but, like music, the freest


28 THE REALM OF MATTER


intuition is closely bound to substance by its genesis,
and rooted there altogether; so that all the essences
appearing in contemplation belong to the essence of
substance, as all the subtlest developments of music or
dialectic belong to the essence of man.

Nevertheless the proposed definition of substance
would be useless: it would merely say that all that
tases exists exists, without indicating what is its
‘sasub. tenure of existence or the mode of its attach-
stance in ment to substance; and this is the question
itself. ; ; : : : A

which arises in action and which gives the
category of substance its meaning. Indeed, if from
the truth that all phenomena are manifestations of
substance, in some direction and at some remove, we
passed to the idea that all phenomena are equally sub-
stantial, we should have fallen into a positive error;
and the word substance itself would have become
superfluous; which is the reason why modern philo-
sophers have dropped it. Not that in dropping the
word they have abandoned the category: something
somewhere must exist in itself and be substantial; but
this self-existence would be made to migrate from the
heart of things to their surface, or to the total picture
which they make in the mind’s eye, or to this mind’s
eye itself, assumed though perhaps not mentioned.
Any of these dislocations of substance would render it
irrelevant to action. Action cannot accept phenomena
simply as phenomena, but must trace the substantial
thread on which they are strung together; for it is quite
false that any phenomenon taken in itself is substantial;
it is a mere essence, save for its backing in nature,
which, although it always exists, is often very recondite,
and definable by essences very different from that which
it wears on the surface.

The dog in the fable, who dropped the substance
for the shadow, might have found substance even in
that shadow, namely, water and light reflected from the


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 29


water; and if he had been a natural philosopher, he
might have traced that ray back to the very bone which
he had held in his mouth, and had let slip for =, 4,
the sake of its deceptive image. This com- andthe
plication in the manifestations of substance >?"
misled his action, because he was not interested in
manifestations at all, but only in a substance which he
might assimilate blindly and turn into the hidden sub-
stance of himself: and this substance was not to be
found where he sought it. There is a natural hierarchy
in the manifestations of substance; and while no
appearance is a mere appearance, but all are in some
way appearances of substance, yet some of the essences
exhibited to human intuition fit the dynamic movement
of nature tightly and consecutively, and can be true
guides to action, whereas others are poised delicately
there, like a mood or a dream, not long to be traced or
trusted; for the flux of substance has other forms be-
neath to which it proves more faithful. While we halt
and disport ourselves at the human level, substance
slips on in its merely material career, and that poem is
ended. The study of substance is the pursuit of these
deepest and most pervasive of its properties, and of the
manner in which the rarer properties and the super-
vening unities are generated in that context. It is the
study of physics.

In dreams substance mocks the pursuer; he wastes
the emotions of action in a direction in which substance
is absent, and action therefore impossible; Pharaoh’s
but in another direction, namely, in himself, 4ea™.
substance is always at hand, and he may ironically trace
his dream back to it on waking. Pharaoh’s dream was
all about substance, yet much interpretation was needed
before his fat and lean kine could disclose their relevance
to the world of action. They had such relevance
initially in his royal preoccupation with animals and
with the fat of the land; but this backward reference


30 THE REALM OF MATTER


of ideas to their seat and their origin is seldom conveyed
by the deliverance of the ideas themselves; when it is,
they become reflection or memory. In the forward
impulse of perception or policy, ideas have, or are
taken to have, a forward reference to substance as well:
appetition turns them into prophecies. Fortunately
Pharaoh had at his elbow a prophetic materialist, to
whom ideas were signs, and who readily conceived what
genuine substances might be signified by them; and
the event having justified his prudent guess, the states-
man needed to go no further in his interpretation of
ideas: the people’s stomach and the king’s treasury
were ultimate substances for_him. Had Joseph been a
more curious philosopher, even a treasury or a stomach
might have seemed to him but covering ideas, standing
‘for undeciphered operations of nature; and he might
have begun to speculate about earth and water, the sun
and the miracle of seeds; but even if his science had
advanced as far as the science of to-day, it would not
have reached anything but some more abstract term,
or more refined covering idea. He had found substance,
as substance may be found, in the thick of action, in
those harvests and granaries; there he had touched the
hand of the Lord.

There is another fable which renders the matter
more subtly, and dwells more on its ideal side. Nar-
cissus was not deceived like the dog; he knew
that the fair image was but a reflection of
himself; but in his love of form he was seized with a
sort of desperate enthusiasm, and coveted that celestial
object with an earthly passion; so that his fate was
~ worse than the dog’s, and in plunging after the shadow
he lost not only that fancied substance, but his true
substance and life as well. Not that self-love need
always be suicidal. Had Narcissus been content to
enjoy his own substance blindly, in its coursing life
through his members, he might have possessed himself


Narcissus.


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 31


mightily and long, being all action, all ignorance, all
irresponsibility; he might have reverted from the
Narcissus of fable to the Narcissus of Freud. But the
poets have made him a symbol for a higher fate, for
the great deviation of attention from substance to
essence. This deviation, as we see in him, has two
stages, one confused and mad, at which he stopped,
and another sublime and musical, to which he might
have proceeded. For Narcissus is the forerunner of
Apollo, or Apollo in embryo; he explains the mystery
of Apollo having been born so free and so deeply in-
spired; for high things must have deep and hidden
foundations. ‘The foundation of intuition, and of all
the free arts, lies in the substance of the self, with its
long vegetable and animal evolution; until one day, in
the person of Narcissus, attention is arrested on the
form which the self lends to all nature, or wears in its
own eyes. If at first this intuition is not pure, and
Narcissus wildly pursues essence as if it were substance,
he becomes Dionysus, inspired but drunk: if on the
contrary his intuition liberates the form of substance
from its flux, and sees it in its wholeness and in its
unsubstantiality, then Narcissus becomes Apollo, in-
spired but sane.

These parables have a common moral. Ideas, or
the forms which things wear in human experience,
are unsubstantial in themselves, cheating every poyever
action or hope that may be directed upon unpre-
them in their literal immediate being, or given codented
essence; but they may all be traced, either by all things
interpretation outwards or by reversion in- ibisbae
wards to their origin in the self, until they their sub-
lead us to substance; that is, to something *“"%*
that can be the butt of action, and in which the effects
of action may be fertile and prolonged. Experience and
the arts of life thus seem to justify the presumption that
all things are natural, even the most ideal, and that


oz THE REALM OF MATTER


nothing, even in a dream, appears by chance, but that
all is symptomatic, significant, and grounded in sub-
stance.

And as all things unsubstantial may be traced to
substance, so all the movements of substance may be
Which on traced to one another. It is sheer ignorance
itsown to stare at anything as if it were inexplicable
pantinuous and self-created, a mere intruder in the world.
process. - "The universe itself no doubt is groundless and
a perpetual miracle; but it is a tame wonder, and ter-
ribly self-imitative; and everything in it bears its hall-
mark and stamp of origin, if we only are clever enough
to turn it inside out, and inspect its fabric. The habits
of nature are marvellous, but they are habits; and the
flux of substance fills quite innocently and automatic-
ally the intervals which its own lapse may create. ‘This
assumption is not justifiable by induction, because no
experience covers any great part of nature, nor that
part thoroughly; but it is nevertheless the anchor of
rational life. All prudence, all art, all calculation rely
upon it, and prosper—in so far as they prosper—by
that confidence.

The simplest sort of continuity is persistence, or
sustained identity: and this is often found or assumed
ae, in the field of action. Leaving my hat and
things are umbrella in the cloak room, I expect, on my
praceable departure, to find the same objects. I con-
roughly ceive them to have endured unchanged in the
persistent. interval. And when I take fresh possession
of them, and carry them into quite another place, I
conceive that, save for a little wear and tear, they still
remain identical. And I assume a similar battered
identity in my own person. If things lapsed in nature
as they lapse in immediate experience, objects that
disappeared at any point would be annihilated, and
some new thing, perhaps like them but not the same,
would presently be created somewhere else. This


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 33


magical world may be acceptable to a laughing child,
or a desperate sceptic, but it will never do for a sports-
man. Ifthe scent is lost for a moment, he must assume
that the fox is still in existence, or he could not pursue
the chase. To wait and wonder whether another fox
might not be created anywhere else at any other time
would not be hunting; nor would it be labour, nor art,
nor science; it would be treating objects not as sub-
stances but as apparitions. That which appears, if it
is posited as a thing to be chased, must exist continu-
ously even when it does not appear. The object at each
instant must occupy some particular position in the
field of action, a place determinable by exploration;
and belief and action may be directed upon it when
invisible with entire confidence that its path is traceable
and calculable.

That substances persist through motion is a veri-
table postulate of practical reason: not a mock postu-
late known to be false (as Kant’s postulates 5. tence
were apparently meant to be) but one believed in sub-
to be true, and constantly revived by events. Stance need
If it were not true, action, and even the thought lasting or
of action, would be farcical, and would in fact “ves!
never have arisen. Yet this postulate, as action implies
and verifies it, does not extend further than action itself.
The huntsman need not assume that his fox will live
for ever. Possibly its haunting image, surviving the
chase, may of old have suggested to him his totems and
animal gods; but in the chase itself only a brief per-
sistence, limited to this particular fox, is posited or
proved. Soon this substance is expected to disappear;
true, it may feed the hunter or his dogs; yet no theory
of a total and absolute indestructibility of substance,
through all its transformations, need be broached in
practice. The persistence which the human mind
tends to attribute to things, especially when they are
loved or feared, is less that of their substance than of

D


34 THE REALM OF MATTER


their ghosts. It is a confused intermixture of essences
with facts, of casual circumstances with profound rever-
berations in memory. Experience, even in those of us
who think ourselves enlightened, is full of increments
and losses which seem to us absolute, as if they were
souls, strengths, or illuminations coming from other
spheres. The field of action remains to that extent an
animated chaos in which at best certain magic rhymes
may be detected, which superstition raises into laws,
Were it not for sane instinct, custom, and the steadying
machinery of the arts, we should all be little better than
poets. It is but a thin thread of calculable continuity
that runs through immediate experience: the postulate
of permanence is applicable and reasonable only in the
field of action posited outside, and only in so far as
exact arts and sciences may be able to dominate it.
Might not substance, then, be as intermittent and
spasmodic as experience itself? Might it not be a
It might fire whose very nature was to lapse: not
ee oe merely to lapse inwardly and devour its own
separate flames, but occasionally to lapse from exist-
moments. ence altogether, like the setting sun of
Heraclitus? A different sun, he observed, was created
in the morning; and perhaps not all the intervals or
pauses between existences would be so regular, nor
the existences so much alike. Some sun might be
the last; it would not follow that it had not existed.
So all existence might be occasional, and destined
some day to fail altogether. A playful philosopher,
now that science has again become playful, might
conceive that all things are totally destroyed at each
instant, and fresh things created—I was going to say
“in their place”, but I should rather say in fresh
places, since times and spaces in such a system would:
also have no unity and no continuity. Yet these
momentary worlds would still be substantial, in the
transcendental sense; they would not be merely


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 35


phenomenal, if they were independent, while they
lasted, of the notice taken of them by any mind. Per-
haps a moralist or a poet might call them unsubstantial,
because transitory; but in that sense existence itself
would be unsubstantial, and all our categories would
become confused. Let us reconcile ourselves once
for all to transitive existence: the eternal is ours if
we truly honour it, but in another sphere; and mean-
time let us inquire what forms of iteration and of
persistence appear in the flux of existence, which is
substantial because it flows, and at each moment
assaults and betrays our charmed conceptions.

It was well known to the ancients, and is confirmed
daily, that when things die they leave heirs: the flies
that seem to vanish every winter return every But in fact
summer. And this pertinacity in substance saeres
is not always intermittent; a phase of latency, heritance,
silent but deeply real, often connects the potenti- |

. 2 y, an
phases of activity. Sleep and night are not latent
nothing: in them substance most certainly Phases.
endures, and even gathers strength, or unfolds its
hidden coils. Then the spirit, in withdrawing into
slumber, seems to return into the womb, into a security
and naturalness much deeper than its distracted life.
It knows that while it sleeps all things wait, last, and
ripen; they all breathe inwardly with that same peace
which returns to it only in the night. ‘Those heavenly
bodies, which when gaped at seemed but twinkling
specks, are in reality sleeping giants; they roll with
an enormous momentum at prodigious distances, and
keep the world in equilibrium. ‘The rocks are rooted
in their buried foundations, the bed of the sea stretches
beneath it, and holds it; the earth broods over its
ominous substance, like a fiery orange with a rind of
stone. It is this universal pause and readiness in
things, guarding us unwatched, that chiefly supports
our sanity and courage. This constancy gives us


36 THE REALM OF MATTER


security; the eyes may close in peace, while the child’s
dreaming hand, half closing, prepares to grasp a sword.
The ancients also observed how regularly some ob-
jects may be transformed into others, as water into ice
Substance OF Vapour; and that there is a certain equiva-
isquantita. lence through these phases in their quantity
tiveand or energy. ‘The seasons return, their fruits
its changes ° : s
proportion- Varying with the weather; the generations
ate and 1, repeat themselves, but mixing their breed;
‘and there is always a potentiality of reversion
to a former constellation of properties, prevented only
by cross-currents of change. Even where evolution
is not cyclical, but creates new forms, it is propor-
tionate and still conservative; anything does not
succeed anywhere to anything else. Nothing new
arises except out of seeds differently watered, measur-
ably, locally, conditionally. A limited potentiality,
an inherited substance, links all the transformations
of things together. They pass their matter on to one
another; their matter is the principle of their equiva-
lence and continuity. When objects are mutually
convertible, they are substantial: were they disem-
bodied essences it would be neither necessary nor
intelligible that one should yield to the other in any
order, or with any proportion in quantity or quality.
But when substantial things perish, we know very
well that their elements are simply dispersed, and go
to swell the substance of other parts of nature. A long
and victorious husbandry has enabled us to trace these
migrations of substance; so much so that it has become
a plausible hypothesis, countenanced by many an art
and many an experiment, that substance is constant
in quantity, and never created or destroyed. Only
a certain number of loaves can be baked from a barrel
of flour; and it would be a miracle if twelve loaves
could satisfy the hunger of five thousand people.
Famine and war, commerce and prosperity are evident


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES au


phases in this natural economy: friction and crowding
of substance here, scarcity there, and everywhere a
limited, special, temporary opportunity for existence.
It is to be observed, however, that this quantitative
limitation in things is, for human experience and
science, rather a matter of averages and Of substance
proportion between desultory facts than any need not
traceable persistence in particular substances; °peu" .
genesis is roughly subject to calculation and manner of
5 3 A feelings or
responsive to custom, but its inner texture images in
eludes observation. Nor is this to be sense.
wondered at, or set down as an argument against
substance altogether: because, if we remember how
and why substance is posited in the beginning, we
shall not expect it to exhibit the sort of permanence
which belongs to specious objects. Specious objects
are mere essences; in themselves they are eternal and
always recoverable in their absolute identity, except
for physical difficulties in reproducing the same
attitude in the psyche. Substance, on the contrary,
is internally in flux. So that the presumption of
identity with which we revert to an essence, or to a
term in discourse, is likely to be ill-grounded if we
transfer it to a thing, the substance of which is always
changing its form. Moreover, the very notion of
persistence, like all notions, is a specious essence:
it is cumulative and emotional and given in that dumb
feeling of duration of which a certain specious philo-
sophy has made so much. It is not to be expected
that substance should realise internally this specious
quality, which may express in human intuition one
aspect of its movement. The feeling of blank duration
itself covers a slumbering life in the psyche, roughly
sustained and rhythmical, like breathing, but by no
means changeless or simple. Obvious persistence is a
comment made superficially on a physical flux not
clearly discerned; whereas the persistence of substance


38 THE REALM OF MATTER


is something integral to that flux itself, rendering its
changes changes, and its phases successive or contiguous.

If the elements of substance resembled persistent
images in sense, or were indestructible cubes, spheres,
Pictorial OF pyramids, these Egyptian solids would
character hardly possess the sort of permanence im-
Ole pressing the traveller who stops to admire
atoms. the Pyramid of Cheops. This pyramid was
once built, yet it defies time paradoxically. ‘The stars
have the same sublimity, for they ought to burn out or
fall from heaven and yet (in our limited experience)
they do not: so that an existence seems to us to have
put on the eternity of an essence, and by this marvel
our own steps and breath and vapid thoughts are
rebuked and arrested. But atoms having immutable
geometrical forms and no inner substance save pure
Being, would be eternal by definition, and not suitable
elements of existence at all. They would have no
scale for time within them, no sensitiveness to motion
or change of relations. Their inner nature would be
irrelevant to that flux of existence which it was designed
to render intelligible. It would be only their changing
arrangement in the void that would determine the field
of action. And since the void has pure Being in it no
less than an atom (both having geometrical extension
for their essence) it is not easy to see how the limits or
the position of an atom could themselves be determined.
A crumbling pyramid is more substantial than an
eternal one.

Indeed if those Egyptian solids were existing bodies
Tf eub- and not merely geometrical essences, their
stance takes indestructibility, supposing them indestruct-
geometrical . ‘
forms, it ible, would be a contingent and merely
an sup-, historical fact. It is evident that a spherical,
survives Cubical, or pyramidal body might at any time
nen fall to pieces; it is an atom provisionally, by
courtesy, by virtue of its function in a given mechanism;


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 39


in its existence and substance, which are centred
equally in every part, it is thoroughly divisible. Yet,
in admitting this undeniable possibility, or rather
this natural presumption, that Egyptian atoms should
some day crumble, we still posit and imply persistence
in the world; for the principle of existence in those
fragments would be the same as in the atoms when they
were whole, and the same medium of space and time,
or whatever else it may be, and the same fatality of
motion and of order would permeate that dust and
govern its destinies. It was evidently these deeper
properties of substance that kept those atoms whole, if
perhaps during some cycle of natural existence they
remained indestructible; and among those deeper
properties we must count the void in which those atoms
could move and the mysterious cohesion and fertility
of some of their aggregates, by which nature is diversi-
fied and made alive.

The atomic theory is, nevertheless, in one sense,
inherent in physics, and alone possible; because the
very nature of existence is to be dispersed in ye sup.
centres, dislocated, corpuscular, granular; the stance is

° atomic in
parts must be particulars externally related. 3. much as
Any demand for a unity not a unity of ar- existence is
rangement, derivation, or conjunction turns and all ’
its back on existence. Indeed these very enveloping
unities of arrangement, when substance realises only truths
them, are not contained in the substance at 2bout it.
any point, or at any moment; they are not seated, for
instance, in any intuition which may define them or in
any perception which may posit them in the world.
They belong, if they are realised, to the realm of truth.
It is simply true that the parts of substance have assumed
that arrangement; and this truth is not proved by the
mere intuition of such a unity, which might be specious
only, but must be made the goal of a laborious investi-
gation and a practical faith. The seen unities are not


40 THE REALM OF MATTER


false; they are manifestations of substance like the in-
tuitions which we have when we read poetry; but they
express our reaction to a manifold object and our gross
relation to it, rather than the diffuse substance of that
object itself. The unities and arrangements embodied
in substance are not separable from it or from its flux;
and like substance and its flux these can be known only
functionally.

For this reason an atomism which professes to define
its atoms trespasses against the modesty of our genuine
Illusion of COMtacts with things. The atomism of De-
scientific  mocritus, with the Cartesian notion of sub-
gnosticism- stance and the Newtonian notion of space,
time, and matter, are all too graphic and mathematical;
they betray their Eleatic and Pythagorean origin; they
share a poetic or mythological gnosticism which thinks
to decipher the heart of nature in terms of human
intuition. ‘These terms may be admirably chosen and
the best possible; but their value is not exhaustive and
must always remain symbolical. The persistence of
substance can hardly be intrinsically similar to the
stubbornness of some ghostly image that will not down.

Great philosophers, having been men of universal
mind, have instinctively set the same standard of
Intuitive accuracy and truth for all their investigations.
knowledge As there is a possibility of literal or intuitive
or divina- : .
tion is knowledge in some fields, they have desired
Boe such knowledge everywhere; but in physics,
moral and in regard to the intrinsic properties of
subjects. — substance, such knowledge is impossible. In-
tuition lies at the opposite end of the gamut of nature;
its simplest object covers an immense complexity, a
voluminous heritage, in the animal soul. Where
literal knowledge is possible—apart from contempla-

tion of essence, which is complex feeling rather than
knowledge—is in literary psychology. Here we often
conceive our object exactly as it was or may be: be-


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 41


cause it is no more improbable that two brothers should
feel and think alike than that two similar leaves should
sprout on the same tree. Therefore poetry is, in one
sense, truer than science, and more satisfactory to a
seasoned and exacting mind. Poetry reveals one sort
of truth completely, because reality in that quarter
is no more defined or tangible than poetry itself; and
it clarifies human experience of other things also,
earthly and divine, without falsifying these things more
than experience falsifies them already. Science, on
the contrary, the deeper it goes, gets thinner and
thinner and cheats us altogether, unless we discount its
symbols.

We may leave it then for literary psychologists
and intuitive metaphysicians to record their experience
in ways appealing to men of their own mind; and we
may leave it for mathematicians to construct possible
worlds. ‘The practical naturalist is concerned only
with such properties of substance as are implied,
measured, and elicited in his arts and in his explora-
tions. ‘The study of nature is the most picturesque
of studies, and full of joy for the innocent mind; but
in natural science all is familiarity and nothing com-
prehension, save as there is a humorous or devout
comprehension in foresight and trust.

I may now add to the indispensable properties of
substance others which substance seems to possess,
and which, since they too are assumed in practice,
may be assumed in natural philosophy.

6. Substance, in diversifying the field of nature, some-
times takes the form of animals in whom there are feelings,
images, and thoughts. These mental facts are immaterial.
They offer no butt for action and exercise no physical
influence on one another.

7. The same mental facts are manifestations of sub-
stance; in their occurrence they are parts of a total
natural event which, on its substantial side, belongs


42 THE REALM OF MATTER


to the plane of action. They are therefore signifi-
cant and relevant to action as signs, being


Action,

when created and controlled by the flux of substance
rational, b e

presupposes eneath. . ;

that the 8. Beneath the intermittence of pheno-
transforma-


tions of | mena, the phases or modes through which sub-
substance substance flows are continuous. ;

ous, g. As far as action and calculation can
dvely con. eXtend, the quantity of substance remains equiva-
stant, and lent throughout.

eeu a 10. Each phase or mode of substance, al-
and that though not contained in its antecedents, is pre-
the spirit, determined by them in its place and quality,
beinga and proportionate to them in extent and intensity.
part of [>t An event will be repeated if ever the con-


scenan stellation of events which: bred it should
the con-gs recur. This regularity in the genesis of modes
proper to or phases of substance is constantly verified
one of the . . oy tie
eens in action on a small scale. To expect it in
there. substance is the soul of science and art; but
to expect it in phenomena is superstition.

When, then, in perception, action, memory, or hope
experience is treated as significant, a substance is posited
which must be external to thought, with its
parts external to one another and each a focus
of existence; a substance which passes through various
phases is unequally distributed in the field of action,
and forms a relative cosmos surrounding each agent.
Action on these assumptions makes it further appear
that this substance is the source of phenomena un-
substantial in themselves but significant of the phases
of substance which produce them; that these phases
are continuous and measurable; and that each trans-
formation, though spontaneous in itself, is repeated
whenever the same conditions recur. Now a sub-
stance possessing these functions and these char-
acteristics has a familiar name: it is called matter.


Summary.


PRESUMABLE PROPERTIES 43


Matter is the medium of calculable art. But I have
found from the beginning that the impulse to act and
the confidence that the opposite partner in action has
specific and measurable resources, are the primary
expressions of animal faith; also that animal faith is
the only principle by which belief in existence of any
kind can be justified or suggested to the spirit. It
follows that the only object posited by animal faith is
matter; and that all those images which in human
experience may be names or signs for objects of belief
are, in their ultimate signification, so many names or
signs for matter. Their perpetual variety indicates
the phases through which the flux of matter is passing
in the self, or those which the self is positing in the
field of action to which it is responsive. Apart from
this material signification, those feelings and percep-
tions are simply intuitions of essences, essences to
which no existence in nature can be assigned. The
field of action is accordingly the realm of matter; and
I will henceforth call it by that name.


CHAPTER IV
PICTORIAL SPACE AND SENTIMENTAL TIME


THE wise men of Ionia perceived long ago that water,
air, or fire, by metamorphosis, might make up the whole
life of nature. This is now being rediscovered;
pete but with two interesting differences. Explora-
physics of tion and mathematics have changed the scale
hee eciets of our science: we are acquainted with dis-
extended tance, outwards and inwards. On the other
by mathe- caw Be
matics and hand, religion and romanticism have estab-
dislocated lished the troubled reign of subjectivity, and
y idealism. A : E ‘
have endowed immediate experience with a
kind of authority which the maritime Greeks, keen-eyed
but practical and argumentative, had never dreamt of.
They looked in order to understand and to possess;
whereas our philosophy, if not our instinct, reverts with
relief from understanding and possession to esthetic
life, as to a surer foundation. Our cosmology has
spirited away that living substance which, like Zeus,
had many names, but under all of them was felt to be
fatally revolving, plastic, and mighty. Air has been
attenuated to space, the fluid to motion, fire to light—
ambiguous essences which are thought of as existing
in nature, and forming its elements, yet are also names
for feelings or ghostly concepts floating before the
mind; and to these last the modern philosopher, when
pressed, is inclined to reduce them.
Why shouldn’t some astronomer with one foot in


44


PICTORIAL SPACE 45


idealism tell us that the universe is nothing but light?
If we forget that we eat, work, and die, if we forget
that we are animals, may we not plausibly think Wc
that nothing exists save a certain coloured ambiguity
brightness playing in vacuo? And what is con- of the word
sciousness, which in the nineteenth century ~ a
passed for the only reality, but an active and burning
light? May not formal science, too, be invoked to
prove that light is the only revealer and measurer of
the material universe? And yet this light, which should
be the source of clearness, is itself the most obscure of
things, and its name the most ambiguous of names.
For in physics light is understood to be a mysterious
agency coursing through space, material in that it has
a measurable velocity and does material work, and is
a form of vibration or radiation emitted by bodies when
ignited, and intercepted and reflected by them even
when opaque. It traverses space unceasingly in a
thousand directions, leaving it perfectly black and cold.
This light is invisible: only gross matter shedding it
or catching it can become bright. Plants and blind
animals—and even the human eye is blind to some of
its rays—may bask in it with profit, being deeply pene-
trated by its electric warmth, as by the healing shafts
of Apollo.

To call this cosmic agency light is a poetic metaphor,
as if we called it Phoebus; which indeed we might do
without absurdity, since Apollo besides his golden
locks had his invisible arrows; and these were the dread
reality of the god. Only the obvious essence of bright-
ness shining in intuition is light proper. This is no
insidious power, but an open gift, vouchsafed from
moment to moment like daily bread to the spirit; an
essence appearing and vanishing as we open or shut
the eyes; an intensive quality, esthetic and emotional,
proper to images of colour or visual patterns. It has
no velocity or direction or substance or pertinacity;


46 THE REALM OF MATTER


it is incapable of warming anything or doing any work;
it is obvious but cannot be caught, proportionate but
not to be measured; remote in its spiritual presence
from all the functions of that cosmic fire which,
according to Heraclitus, shaped, animated, and devoured
everything. Yet this visionary light, which can burn
only in the hearth of the soul, lends its name to that
mathematical measure of astronomical distances. In
one sense, light is the messenger of matter, and carries
the eye through time and space almost to infinity, and
if we trust its reports dehumanises the universe; but in
another sense it tinctures this same universe with a
surreptitious humanity, for it seems to reduce every-
thing to immediate experience, to the focus of intuition
at any moment in any man; so that both its substance
and its measure seem to become esthetic. ‘Thus the
dominance of light, in its two acceptations, marks the
two developments, and the fundamental confusion,
by which modern cosmology differs from that of the
ancients.

That the realm of matter, in its own way, is spatial
and temporal follows from the conception of this realm
Physical a8 the field of action. In action one state of
space and things must pass into another, something must
time are ee : :
intrinsicto be precipitated, and each direction and each
substance degree of change must be distinguished from
and cannot : . .
be defined all others, which are its alternatives. Sub-
apriort. —_ stance, if it is to flow and to have parts, must
be distributed in centres, each a focus of external and
transitional relations with the rest. Interaction and
genesis involve this sort of space and time, or create
them. But what this physical space or time may
properly be, we could know perfectly only by knowing
perfectly the intimate movement and ultimate ranges
of matter—not a human task. We know matter, as it
behoves us to know it, in the measure in which our
highly selective action and mental chronicle of action


PICTORIAL SPACE 47


penetrate into its meshes: and presently I shall say
something concerning our share in this general flux of
existence, and our ways of noting it. Physical space and
time are integral elements in this realm of matter: they
are physical, which is as much as to say that they are
contingent, to be explored by experiment rather than
by reasoning, to be shared by us rather than contem-
plated. They may change their form if they choose,
like any existence, and may manifest a different essence
in their new instances.

It is therefore a problem never to be solved except
provisionally and locally, how far a human sensation of
sentimental time or of pictorial space, or how far any
geometrical model of a pure space or time, may fitly
express the temporal and spatial dimensions of nature,
or be a true measure for them. Over the field of
action, in which we exist, logic, which is but our way
of thinking, can have no prior control. Substance did
not drop into a world with a previous constitution; it
was not obliged to squeeze itself into atoms or to spread
itself through infinities, so as to verify the precipitate
fancies of future philosophers. ‘To ask whether sub-
stance must be discrete or continuous, finite or infinite,
many or one, is like asking whether the Almighty must
think in French or in English. Having no competence
in that sphere, why should we have any preferences?
Let physical time and space be infinite or finite, discrete
or continuous, unreturning or circular, multiplex or
single: these would be curious and impressive truths,
if they were discoverable, and too great for ignorant
opinion.

Meantime the practical arts retain a great advantage
over the speculation which seeks to elucidate them:
they deal directly with matter, whereas a graphic or
dialectical analysis can be immediately concerned only
with images which are symbols, or with symbols which
are words. When the act of measuring is an actual


48 THE REALM OF MATTER


transition, like a journey, both the metre and the thing
measured are material and equally internal to the flux
Phyl «Of :«<substance. The measure is then ‘cone
ysica
spaceand gruous and literal; and the disadvantage of
gree oe be Serhaps leaving no precise image in intuition—
only by the for what, to intuition, is a pace or a mile?—is
See ee counterbalanced by the advantage of bridging
that tra- _ truly external relations, and catching nature
verse them- in her own net. A graphic calculus or a map
may afterwards be constructed to give definition and
a common denominator to the parts of this past or
possible performance, and to display it as a whole to
intuition—but now in another realm of being from that
in which it might actually occur: for it would occur in
the realm of matter, and it is surveyed as an essence.
This is not a defect in the survey, but the condition of
inspection or retrospect, which is the translation of an
event into an idea, and not a repetition of the same
event. As literature is but childish exclamation modu-
lated and transcribed, so scientific imagination is but
sensation steadied and defined. Instead of the flying
miscellany of natural images—vivid but treacherous
tokens of what nature is doing—science sets up an idol,
simpler and more dignified, but still only an idea.
Mathematical space and time are sublimated essences
of this sort. ‘They cannot appear in sense as they are
Arte defined to be—infinite, equable, and pure;
matical yet they remain specious or ideal in their
space and ‘nature, purified extensions or generalisations
scientific of the imagery of sense. It is contact with
figments. matter, patient empirical art, that guides
this idealisation, so that the Egyptian blocks may be
fit and four-square, and the planets may not belie the
prophet; and this advance in the validity and pre-
cision of the symbols used, in spite of their greater
tenuity, causes them to be mistaken, as the crude
images of sense were at first, for the very essence of


PICTORIAL SPACE 49


matter. Having erected and polished our mathe-
matical idol, we suppose ourselves to behold intuitively
what space and time are physically; we even feel
confident that it is impossible for them not to exist,
or to exist otherwise. The clearness and necessity
native to essence when kept in its own realm are thus
attributed to the realm of matter, where all is profound
fertility and darkness; and having discarded one or
two optical illusions, and straightened out one or two
perspectives in religious legend, we feel all the freer
to endow the residue of our imaginative baggage with
a perfect substantiality.

We might have done better, perhaps, like the
animals or the saints, if we had continued to trust
instinctively in the secret harmonies of the realm of
matter, or of the kingdom of God; we might have
lived on, imaginatively, in the world of poetry, which
is often pragmatic and hygienic enough. But there
are natural stages and shifts in human ideation: every
age has its peculiar insights and new illusions. The
terms of science, like those of sense, are essences de-
scribing in human discourse the objects encountered
in action. ‘This relative function removes them, and
ought to remove them, from any passive or complete
iteration of the realm of matter in its intrinsic essence.
When the mathematician applies his calculus to nature,
he does so tentatively, after having taken a hint from
nature herself, by selecting for his unit some simple
image which action and comparison of cases have
shown to have prophetic value; and in his most wonder-
ful successes, if he is wise, he keeps his distance and his
sense of abstraction. Here lies the legitimate magic
of poetic intuitions, such as are these intuitions of time
and space; that, being incarnations of spirit on some
animal occasion, they have a double affinity, here to
spirit and there to matter, and that with the authority
proper to their intended object they associate the form

E


50 THE REALM OF MATTER


and accent of the free symbol which names it. What
was only interaction becomes also perception, and
what was a process becomes also a drama; and these
moral overtones, on their new emotional plane, are
the first ideas, the beginnings of knowledge, of their
natural occasions.

If we ask how it happens that quite fresh essences,
spontaneously evoked in intuition, like sounds or words
Simple Or mathematical fictions, can nevertheless
pean why apply to nature, the answer is not far to seek.

ction ° cd

applies to Ideas apply to their occasions because they
fact. arise out of them, mark them, and are a part
of the total natural event which controls their develop-
ment. Mind is a great symptom of health; it appears
at victorious moments, changes with them, and recalls
them. Even its confusions and agonies are but con-
flicts in its domination; it would not be there to die,
if harmony had not given it birth. The zsthetic origin-
ality of sensations and ideas is therefore an innocent
privilege, if their practical connections are knit to-
gether harmoniously with the environing flux of events.
And, on some plane, they must be so knit, because
sensations and ideas arise only when living beings are
actively adjusting, or secretly readjusting, their powers.
If the adjustment to the moving environment were
perfect, the essences evoked in thought, whatever notes
they might freely strike zsthetically, would apply or
work perfectly in practice; for it is not the ideas that
work there, but the men in whom the ideas have arisen.
Wind se Moreover, in applying any idea a man
bred in the must start from a material centre, his own
material body, and must use a material scale, since


movements x ‘
to which it neither centre nor scale can be furnished by
iscon. logic. Numbering is an action: the essence
Ealjed by of a number in intuition preserves the cumu-

lative sense of a repeated touching and dis-


crimination of particular things. Measuring is the act


PICTORIAL SPACE 51


of superposing one material thing on another What
wonder that the notions arising from such operations
apply to their source, and enable the prophet to cry,
as if inspired, that the Lord has ordered all things
in measure and number and weight? These are the
material categories bred in the mind by mechanical
art, and whatever may be later their ideal elaboration,
their validity in the field of action, which is the only
existing world, remains conventional and pragmatic.
An eye sensitive to physical light would have been
useless to the organism, and incidentally would never
have endowed the spirit with the vision of brightness,
were not light mechanically reflected and diversified
by the earthly bodies on which it falls. Signals coming
to the eye would not otherwise be prophetic of rougher
contacts. Nor would pictorial space otherwise have
become what it is for human intelligence, an accurate
and detailed map, drawn according to a private pro-
jection, and covering the field of action, or the home-
world of mankind. In consequence, when the sun
rises, it not merely warms the backs of mankind, as
if they were lizards, but it clears away from the spirit
half the terrors of a precarious life. It suddenly extends
the field of grovelling search and opportunity to the
horizon. The gift of specious light, great as it is
zsthetically, would have seemed trivial to the heart,
but for this quicker adjustment to matter and this new
safety expressed init. Since physical light is an instru-
ment of reaction at long range, specious light, its moral
echo, has become almost a synonym for intelligence.
A chief characteristic of pictorial space, pictorial
which betrays its animal origin, is that it has space al-
a centre. This centre is transcendental; that >t...
is to say, it is not determined by any distinc- scendental
tion in the parts of space itself, as conceived, some animal
all of which are equally central. The dignity spirit.
of being a centre comes to any point of space from


52 THE REALM OF MATTER


the spirit, which some fatality has lodged there, to the
exclusion, at least in its own view, of all other places.
These other places appear in that view as removed,
and ranged in concentric spheres at greater and greater
distances. The cosmos of Ptolemy is the perfect model
or systematisation of pictorial space. The choice of
the earth for a centre, although arbitrary geometrically,
was not arbitrary historically, because Ptolemy and all
other human beings found themselves on the earth,
and were natives of it. So the fatality which always
lodges spirit at some one point in nature, and makes
this its centre, is not arbitrary biologically: for wherever
there is a living organism it becomes a centre for
dramatic action and reaction, and thereby calls down
spirit to assume that station, and make it a moving
vehicle for one phase of its earthly fortunes. Pictorial
space therefore reappears, wherever an animal rises to
intuition of his environment, and in each case it has
its moral or transcendental centre in that animal; a
centre which, being transcendental or moral, moves
wherever the animal moves, and is repeated without
physical contradiction or rivalry in as many places as
are ever inhabited by a watchful animal soul.

The name of this relative centre is here. Nature,
if it has limits and is all measurable by a single measure
(which may be doubted), may have a centre, but not in
the same sense as pictorial space; for here, in pictorial
space, is a centre of occupied position and actual refer-
ence, the determinant of far and near, forward and back,
up and down, right and left: animal categories imposed
on the field of action by action itself, and impossible
except in a perspective created by living intently in
the act of looking, moving, or reaching out from an
occupied centre in a particular direction. This direc-
tion could not be chosen, or even conceived, except in
sympathy with some organic impulse; in pictorial space
all structures and lines of cleavage crystallise about the


PICTORIAL SPACE 53


axis of attention. The centre of the cosmos, on the
contrary, if it exists, would be determined by reciprocal
material relations between its parts; and the choice of
a starting-point in surveying it never would shift that
centre, but only lead to it, as if to Rome, by a particular
road.

When an image of one’s own body is included in
pictorial space, as happens almost always in action,
this image will roughly correspond with the Hla
centre of that action in physical space: vision jective or
will be centred in the moving hero, and will practical

: A ; -¢ here travels
follow him in his adventures. For even if with the
nature as a whole has no centre, every or- sensitive

A : = . rganism,
ganism is a focus for its external and changing
relations to the rest of the world, and is the centre of a
dynamic cosmos relative to itself. ‘Thus pictorial space,
spreading round its transcendental point of origin in
the attentive spirit, affords a suitable index to that
field of action which is its professed object, since the
segment of nature implicated in that action actually
surrounds and recedes from that. action very much as
pictorial objects surround the image of the body, and
seem to recede from it. In perception, as in painting,
distortion is often the secret of significance. Pictorial
space achieves something which might have seemed a
miracle to a spirit acquainted with matter from the
outside, but ignorant of the animal mind, which is the
self-consciousness of matter; for pictorial space infuses
into its object, physical space, an intrinsic reference
to the station, the impulses, and the organs of the
creatures ranging within it. This symbolic virtue hangs
together with the transcendental status and graphic
unity of pictorial space, by virtue of which it forms no
part of physical space, but is a new whole symbol for
it as a whole. The two belong to different realms of
being, like Lucifer and the morning star, that yet
bear the same name; and they are connected, not by


54 THE REALM OF MATTER


interfering with or patching one another, but by a spon-
taneous concomitance and mutual implication, so that
to find the one, under certain conditions, is to announce
the other. Matter, or physical space, at certain nodes
in its organisation, grounds and justifies the biassed
sensitiveness of animals to their environment; and this
biassed sensitiveness, raised to intuition, forms an
ocular-muscular perception of that very space; for the
intuitions of animals, at least in action, are not pure or
contemplative, but by force of the intent involved in
action, signify to the spirit the conditions of its exist-
ence—in this case the movement and filling of physical
space in that neighbourhood.
Sometimes, as in deep thought, no image of one’s

own body figures at all in intuition. Here then means

whatever point in imagined space is the centre
The ob-
jectiveor Of attention. Here may be the word on the
contempla- page which I have reached in reading; or if
tive here :
travels with My attention has passed from the words to the
the object images awakened by them in my fancy, here
of attention. ) : a :

may be Dante’s Purgatorio, rising solitary out
of a glassy sea and lifting its clear-cut terraces in perfect
circles, up to the fragrant wood at the summit, whence
souls grown too pure for a mild happiness pass into
the flame of heaven. Here is then at the antipodes of
Jerusalem and Calvary; half-way up from the centre of
the Earth, which is the Inferno, to the lowest of those
concentric celestial spheres, each broader and more
luminous, which, as Plotinus would say, are There.
For, in my contemplative mood, I should be regarding
myself as directed away from the earth, and from the
Hell in it, and in my pictorial space the Eternal would
seem to be the Beyond. But now, perhaps, someone
knocks at my door and disturbs my reverie. Here is
now, if still a purgatory, a purgatory of a very different
sort; it is this room in this town where my body finds
itself. I look out of the window, and now here is Paris;


PICTORIAL SPACE 55


I notice on my table Baedeker’s guide-books and the
Indicateur des chemins de fer, and 1 consider how easily
here may be transferred to quite another geographical
place. As to the here of a moment ago, it is not only
not here, but it is nowhere. It belongs to Dante’s
imaginary world. It is a theme from the symphony of
essence.

_ The bond between pictorial space and physical space
lies in the organ of intuition, which is a part of the
agent in action. As this organ extends its .,..W.
instrumental uses, adjusting the organism at aedohe
long range to its environment in physical Jectve


é 3 centres of
space, so and in the same measure this same pictorial


organ exercises its expressive or spiritual eS the

function, and creates a pictorial space for the scope of its
spirit of that animal. This intuition is an [28cfon on
important element in the total consciousness other parts
which that spirit can have of its destiny; it *™"*

sets the stage in which the image of its body is found
always occupying the centre, and marks the vital dis-
tinctions of forward and back, up and down, far and
near. Such relations, though obviously relative to an
animal life, are not intransitive, as if they were the
baseless invention of some impenetrable atom coming
to life; they express a movement. Indeed, it is hardly
conceivable that a point or an arrested structure should
feel or think. The organ of intuition is rather so much
of nature as is engaged in that movement, and contri-
butes to the choice of the essence which that intuition
evokes. It might even be said that the whole universe
is the ultimate organ of every intuition, as it is the ulti-
mate object of every belief: but the measure in which
this is true is most unequal. All intuitions, and especi-
ally that of space, take the point of view of some par-
ticular creature at some particular juncture; and if we
wish to discover the special organ of an intuition, we
may do so by internal evidence, noting the moral centre


56 THE REALM OF MATTER


of the given scene, and its pictorial circumference, as
we might those of a novel. The novel (unless it is an
intentional travesty) will describe the country and age
in which it was written; so the intuition will normally
describe, and will always betray, that centre of vital
relations which is its seat and its author. Thus the
degree in which the intuition transcends or ignores that
centre, becoming possibly an intuition of pure truth,
will mark the degree in which its organ, though par-
ticular, is sensitive to the rest of nature.

Besides a specious centre, here, pictorial space has
a specious scale: it contains a direct emotional sense
the of the large and small, the far and near. Size
emotional and distance are indeed so emotional that they
infinite. are more than spatial, and touch the sphere
of sentimental time: the “ far” is redolent of the pro-
longed and dubious adventure of reaching it, and the
“large” taxes the synthetic power of the eye, or the
clasp of the extended arms. Pictorial space itself,
especially when empty and considered absolutely, is
the very model of vastness; it opens in all directions
(something baffling to a hunting animal) and recedes
to immeasurable distances. In its presence the breast
expands, which is glorious, but the will halts, which is
annihilating, and brings tears to the eyes. Therefore
the oppressed souls of heroes sighed in Homer, looking
into the broad heaven. The notion of the romantic
infinite is a sublimation of this helplessness in apply-
ing a homely measure to unhomely things; from the
practically inexhaustible we pass to the ideally im-
measurable or infinite, and find it at once alluring
and maddening, inevitable and dubious. Romanticism
could not gloat on a more congenial abyss.

The mystery of this mock infinite comes of importing
into an essence, mathematically quite definite, the emo-
tions of an explorer. The innumerable would present
no difficulty if nobody was condemned to enumerate it;


PICTORIAL SPACE 57


and nobody is. If nature is in some sense infinite,
there will be substance found to occupy all its parts,
and establish their real relations: but the geo- 4. ssathe-
metrical model of an infinite empty space is matical
only a phantasm visiting the imagination, pic- mfnite is
torial space washed clean. Having no scale, essence,
no separable parts, and none but internal Which
necessary relations, it is an essence without suggests to
existence. Taken in this capacity it is a per- Somme.
fectly clear and coherent object: a fact which but not _
confirms its specious character and derivation S?s*""*"
from a sensuous image; because if it were the essence of
matter, as Descartes deputed it to be, it would hardly
be clear or distinct to human apprehension. For
matter, with all existence supported by matter, is unin-
telligible, if for no other reason, because it changes.
The light of spirit which shines in the darkness cannot
see the primeval darkness which begat it and which
it dispels; but in so far as its strength avails it consumes
that darkness, as it were, for fuel, and sees that which
was dark before by the light which it spreads over it.
In this way first pictorial space and then geometrical
space are cast like a search-light or a net over the field
of action, to map and to measure it; but the principle
of action, matter in its native unison and flux, escapes
intuition, and may be mapped and measured only ex-
ternally, even if quite correctly and safely. This is
possible because the darkness of matter is not chaotic
or malicious; it does not circumvent the light which
plays upon it, but only ignores it, and lets it play on.
That light is its own child, its own effluence. The
harmony between the depths and the surface, the seed
and the flower, is as natural as their diversity.
Pictorial spaces are pictorial in various degrees: they
range from the simplest essence of extensity, through
all images of motion, collapse, swiftness, or scenic con-
fusion; or they may culminate in a reposeful landscape,


58 THE REALM OF MATTER


and in that essence of empty volume or immensity
which, save for the absence of analysis, would fuse with
the notion of geometrical space. Perfectly
Neglected : 3
original, ObDVious, but not at all geometrical, is the
spaces of space revealed by internal sensations, when in
sie ar one’s insides something is felt moving, it
would be hard to say what, where, or in how many
dimensions. In dizziness and dreams there are lapsing
pictorial spaces; in semi-consciousness there are un-
mapped unrelated spaces waxing and vanishing. It is
not only the latitude and longitude of visionary places
that are unassignable, but their spatial quality that is
unearthly: the talk about flat-land and four dimensions
is but a thin scientific parody of the uncertainty of
animal sense. Even in rational human experience, the
living intuition of space is endlessly qualified. There
is the scene-painter’s space, divided into a few distinct
planes in the direction of vision, but vague beyond and
non-existent behind the observer’s back. At the theatre
the house is not in the same space as the play-scene, nor
in the same time—unless you break the dramatic spell,
and substitute the material stage and the paid actors
for the poetic world in which you ought to have been
living. Even in real life, space for most men stops at
the horizon; not sharply, for that would suggest a
beyond, but by fancy merely dying out, so that a beyond
is not needed, and in fact does not exist in that space.
It was in this way that the ancients conceived a round
heaven divided into concentric layers, without thinking
of the infinity beyond; for the empyrean, when that
was invented, was rather an ocean of light than an
abyss of nothingness. The views of storks about space
—and they must be valid pragmatically—would doubt-
less baffle us altogether, and the logic of them might
seem to us absurd when translated into our language.
Our own topographical knowledge is the fruit of accu-
mulation and synthesis, and doubtless truer of nature


PICTORIAL SPACE 59


as a whole, though perhaps less penetrating in some
dimensions; and its precision renders us intolerant or
forgetful of immediate experience even in ourselves.
Only in tales or superstitions do we recover at times the
elasticity of ignorance, and plunge innocently into as
many pictorial spaces as may open out spontaneously
before the mind. Even an intelligent man of action
will sometimes stop to notice these unauthorised vistas
with a humorous affection, as he might play with a
child. Yet they may be, in their sporadic way, short
cuts to things remote or future, incoherently but vividly
reported, like Africa and Norway to the stork; and in
any case they are collateral with the elements of our
scientific conceptions. Pictures are to knowledge as
sound is to language. Some true indication is contained
in any sensation, since something must have happened
materially to produce it; but knowledge, synthesis,
choice of a centre, and range in apprehension are all
adventitious to the existing object: they transfer it from
physical to pictorial space, and transpose the parts of
it perceived at all into terms of essence.

Pictorial space is one of the dearest possessions of
the human spirit: it would be thankless of us to be
impatient because it is subjective, as if it pictorial
ought not to have been so. It might no space Ji
doubt have had a different sensuous texture, and perhaps
and might have conveyed much the same tensitory.
practical information in that other guise; but it could
hardly have been more beautiful than, to the human
eye, are the colours of the spectrum, the forms of
motion, and the spheres of shadow and of light. If
our senses had dogged more faithfully the steps of
mutation in matter, we may doubt whether they would
have rendered so well the results and scope of those
mutations, on the scale of the human body. In science,
as in religion, little would be gained by an exchange
of idols. Criticism would not be enlightening if it


60 THE REALM OF MATTER


disgusted us with vision, or led us to quarrel with ideas
because they are not things. Ideas are better than
things; and one of the happiest fruits of existing in
physical space is that pictorial spaces may be based
upon it. The wise man is content with his native
language: he would not be a better poet or a sharper
judge in any other. Pictorial conventions would not
have established themselves in the eye or brain if they
could not be innocently and harmoniously associated
with the business of life; they are to be smilingly
welcomed, like strangers coming in the name of the
Lord. But the Lord may presently send other mes-
sengers: pictorial conventions may vary from age to
age and in different races, even if the universe at large
is not much changed. Yet this deeper possibility,
too, should be remembered by a spirit that would
not put all its eggs in one basket: the measure of de-
scriptive truth now possessed by pictorial space need
not always belong to it. Its beauty is its own; but
if the world fell back into chaos and reconstituted itself
differently, our pictorial space would have become
obsolete. Other conventions would flourish and other
peacocks would spread their tails: all to the greater
glory of intuition, so long as intuition survived.

I speak here impulsively of the future; but if the
return to chaos were complete, if substance, which is
In nature the principle of continuity, were itself de-
Ses stroyed, then there would be no sense in
pendent on Saying that time in the second cosmos was
derivation future from the point of view of the first.
mediated  Lhis firstness and secondness would be re-
by matter. versible, and imputed only because I, from
the outside, happened to think of one world before
the other. It would be substance in me that alone
would actually have passed from the thought of one
to the thought of the other, and only my intuition
would have connected their essences in a specious


SENTIMENTAL TIME 61


time. As the space of neither world would lie in the
space of the other, so the histories of the two worlds
would run irrelevant courses, and be neither before
nor after each other, nor simultaneous. For by
physical time I understand an order of derivation in-
tegral to the flux of matter; so that if two worlds had
no material connection, and neither was in any of its
parts derived from the other, they could not possibly
have positions in the same physical time. The same
essence of succession might be exhibited in both; the
same kind of temporal vistas might perplex the senti-
mental inhabitants of each of them; but no date in
one would coincide with a date in the other, nor would
their respective temporal scales and rates of precipita-
tion have any common measure.

The notion that there is and can be but one time,
and that half of it is always intrinsically past and the
other half always intrinsically future, belongs .
to the normal pathology of an animal mind: he. with
it marks the egotistical outlook of an active its moral
being endowed with imagination. Such a between
being will project the moral contrast pro- past and
duced by his momentary absorption in action a vista in
upon the conditions and history of that the animal
action, and upon the universe at large. A
perspective of hope and one of reminiscence con-
tinually divide for him a specious eternity; and for
him the dramatic centre of existence, though always
at a different point in physical time, will always be
precisely in himself.

Presentness is the coming, lasting, or passing away
of an essence, either in matter or in intuition. This
presentness is a character intrinsic to all Ryistence
existence, since an essence would not be andchange
exemplified in any particular instance unless trinsically
it came into, or went out of, a medium alien Present.
to it. Such coming and going, with the interval (if


62 THE REALM OF MATTER


any) between, constitute the exemplification of that
essence, either in the realm of matter or in that of spirit.
Thus presentness, taken absolutely, is another name
for the actuality which every event possesses in its
own day, and which gives it its place for ever in the
realm of truth. But taken relatively, as it is more
natural to take it, presentness is rather a name for the
middle position which every moment of existence
occupies between its sources and its results. This
presentness is pervasive; a moment does not fail to
be eternally present because it never was and never
can be present at any other moment. This is the
ubiquity of actuality, or if you will, of selfishness:
because that very leap and cry which brings each
moment to birth cuts it off from everything else; the
rest becomes, and must for ever remain, external to it.
And this division is as requisite as this actuality: the
moment does not, as if by some sin or delusion, cut
itself off from some placid unitary continuum in which
it ought to have remained embedded; it is not a frag-
ment torn from eternity. On the contrary, its place
in eternity is established by that severance. It is one
wave in a sea that is nothing but waves. That from
which it cuts itself off cuts itself off from it in turn, by
the same necessity of its being; and every part of that
remainder,.with the very same leap and cry, cuts itself
off from every other part.

Now life is a rich and complex instance of this
precipitation and self-assertion, and of this pervasive
Intuition Presentness. Intuition, when it arises, arises
shares this Within a physical moment, and expresses a
peysic’ passing condition of the psyche. Feelings and
ness, but thoughts are parts of natural events; they
ceive tem- Delong to the self which generates them in one
poral per- of its physical phases. Intuition creates a syn-
Specuves thesis in present sensibility; it is an act of atten-
tion occurring here and now. It has not, intrinsically,


SENTIMENTAL TIME 63


any miraculous transcendence, as if it spontaneously
revealed distant things as they are or were or shall be.
Yet in expressing the moment intuition evokes essences;
and these essences, coming as they come in the heat
of action, and attributed as they are to the objects
of physical pursuit or physical attention, may bring
tidings of facts at any distance. Within the life of the
organism this distance is primarily a distance in physical
time—a distance which intuition synthesises in the
feeling of duration. For the animal psyche is retent-
ive and wound up to go on; she is full of survivals
and preparations. This gathered experience and this
potentiality work within her automatically: but some-
times she becomes aware of them in part, in so far as
she learns to project given essences and to develop
spatial and temporal perspectives within the specious
field of the moment.

This feat is made easy by the frequent complexity
of the specious field, in which one feature may be seen
to vanish or to appear whilst others persist. The
essence of change includes a direction in the felt sub-
stitution of term for term; it therefore includes the
notion of the earlier absence of something now given,
and of the earlier presence of something now absent.
This is the very sense of existence and of time, and
the key to all intelligence and dominion over reality.
It contains the principle of transitive knowledge, since
the present is aware of the past, and I in this condition
think of myself in another condition; and it supplies
an instance of transitive cognition which is knowledge
in the sense of being true; because the essence of
transition given in intuition is elicited directly by
actual partial transitions in the state of the psyche,
and this psyche is a congruent part of nature; so that
when the essence of transition given now is projected
over all physical time, it is plausibly projected and has
every chance of being true.


64 THE REALM OF MATTER


Thus sentimental time is a genuine, if poetical,
version of the march of existence, even as pictorial
a dictate Space is a genuine, if poetical, version of its
viowat distribution. The views taken are short,
time is especially towards the future, but being ex-
natural and :
proper to. tensible they suggest well enough the un-
eee fathomable depths of physical time in both

directions; and if the views, being views,
must be taken from some arbitrary point, they may
be exchanged for one another, thus annulling the bias
of each, in so far as the others contradict it. I am far
from wishing to assert that the remainder or resultant
will be the essence of physical time; but for human
purposes a just view enough is obtained if we remember
that each now and here is called so only by one voice,
and that all other voices call it a then and a there. It
is inevitable, and yet outrageous, that every day and
year, every opinion and interest, should think itself
alone truly alive and alone basking in the noon of
reality. ‘The present is indeed a true focus, an actual
consummation, in so far as spirit is awake in it; and
it could not have a universal scope if it had not a par-
ticular foundation. ‘To uproot intuition from its soil
in animal life would be to kill it, or if somehow it were
alleged to survive, to render it homeless in the realm
of matter. ‘The body is not a prison only, but a watch-
tower; and the spirit would live in darkness or die of
inanition if it could not open the trap-door of action,
downwards towards its foundations and food in matter;
or if it could not open the two windows of time, east-
ward and westward, towards rising or sinking con-
stellations. It is no cruel fate, but its own nature,
that imprisons life in the moment, and prevents it from
taking just cognisance of any other time save by a great
effort of intelligence.

If the present could see the past and the future
truly, it would not feel its own pre-eminence; it would


SENTIMENTAL TIME 65


substitute their intrinsic essences for the essences
of their effects within its own compass, or for its
anticipations of them. It would thereby cease {ts error
to be this waking moment in this animal is due to
life, and would rise into a preternatural eee
impartiality and ubiquity. For the double tivity is
aerial perspective in which a living moment toits
sees the future and the past is a false per- «xistence.
spective; it paints in evanescent colours what is in
fact a steady procession of realities, all equally vivid
and complete; it renders the past faded and dead,
and the future uncertain and non-existent. But this is
egregious egotism and animal blindness. The past
is not faded, except in the eye of the present, and the
future is not ambiguous, except to ignorant conjecture.
Yet it is only by conjecture or confused reminiscence
that the present is able to conceive them. The present
had to choose between misrepresentation and blindness:
for if it had not seen the past and future in a selfish
perspective, it could not have been aware of them at
all. In the romantic guise of what is not yet or what
is no longer, the fleeting moment is able to recognise
outlying existences, and to indicate to its own spirit
the direction in which they lie. Flux, by its very
essence, cannot be synthesised; it must be undergone.
The animal egotism which gives it a centre now and
not then, contrary to fact, yet enables the passage
from then to now, and from now onwards to another
now, to be given in a dramatic synthesis—a syn-
thesis which actual succession excludes. But without
synthesis there is no intuition, no feeling: so that the
sentimental perspectives of time are the only avail-
able forms in which a physical flux could be reported
to the spirit.

The least sentimental term in sentimental time is
the term mow, because it marks the junction of fancy
with action. Now is often a word of command; it

F


66 THE REALM OF MATTER


leans towards the future, and seems to be the voice of
the present summoning the next moment to arise,
The joyous and pouncing upon it when it does so. For
now. now has in it emotionally all the cheeriness
of material change: it comes out of the past as if im-
patient at not having come sooner, and it passes into
the future with alacrity, as if confident of losing nothing
by moving on. For it is evident that actual succession
can contain nothing but mows, so that now in a certain
way is immortal. But this immortality is only a con-
tinual reiteration, a series of moments each without
self-possession and without assurance of any other
moment; so that if ever the now loses its indicative
practical force and becomes introspective, it becomes
acutely sentimental, a perpetual hope unrealised and a
perpetual dying.

Various other modes of felt time cluster round this
travelling now. Just now, for instance, is already re-
us trospective, and marks a condition of things

e fore- ‘ -
ground of no longer quite in hand, already an object
green of intent and of questionable knowledge,

yet still so near, that any mistake about it
would be more like an illusion of sense than like a false
assertion. Just now is like a spoken word lingering in
the ear, so distinctly that what it was may still be
observed, and described by inspection; and yet the
description arising is distinguishable from it, and the
two may be compared within the field of intuition.
For though the voice is silent, I am still able to hear
it inwardly; and its increasing uncertainty, its evanes-
cence, is a notable part of what I perceive. At last
the reverberation becomes inaudible, and I have only
an image formed at intervals by silently repeating
the word. If I am able to repeat it, it is not be-
cause I can mentally remember it, but I remember it
mentally because I am able to repeat it physically.
This muted repetition is thereafter my physical


SENTIMENTAL TIME 67


memory of what that sound was at its loudest; it
suggests the glorious then, contrasted with this silent
and empty now.

The psyche is full of potential experience—pictures
which she is ready to paint and would wish to hang—
but the question is where, in those vast vague fts middle
galleries of fancied time, she shall hang them. distance.
When the picture is composed and, so to speak, in her
hand, but she can find no hook for it in the direction
of action, she says mot yet; and unless she drops and
forgets it, she may go on to say soon, or some day; or
if, diabolically, the place it was about to occupy appears
otherwise filled, she may cry, too late. ‘There are
corresponding removes and vacillations in the direction
of the past, where active impulses are not engaged.
A risen image looks for points of attachment in the
realm of truth; the sentimental mind would hardly
_ entertain it, unless it could pass for somebody’s ghost.

A place can be found for almost anything in the fog
of distance, and the most miraculous tale begins with
once upon a time. ‘There is hardly more definiteness,
with added melancholy, in saying long ago. ‘The
event has sunk, for sentiment, below the horizon, into
the night where everything sleeps which, though theo-
retically credited, is not relevant to present action.

All, however, is not flaccidity and weakness in
sentimental time; it has its noble notes in the sublime
always and the tragic mever. ‘These terms, Jmaginary
when true, describe facts in physical time, tsic
and their force comes from that backing, but aon ae
not their sentimental colour; for there is «ntirety.
nothing tragic in the mere absence of anything from
the universe, and nothing sublime in the presence
there of such elements as may happen to be pervasive,
like matter and change. The sublimity or tragedy
comes from projecting sentimental time, with its
human centre, upon the canvas of nature. Never then


68 THE REALM OF MATTER


proclaims an ultimate despair or relief. It professes to
banish from the whole past or future some essence
now vividly present to the mind, tempting or horrible;
and the living roots of that possibility here in the soul
render the denial of it in nature violent and marvellous.
That something arresting to thought should be absent
from the field of action causes a cruel division in the
animal spirit; for this spirit can live only by grace of
material circumstances, yet, being a spirit, it can live
only by distinguishing eternal essences. Its joy lies
in being perpetually promoted to intuition and con-
firmed in it; but it 1s distracted if its intuitions are
thwarted, and expel or contradict one another. There-
fore, whenever the spirit finds some steadfast feature
in the world, it breathes, even in the midst of action
and discovery, its native air. ‘That which exists always,
even if only a type or a law, seems almost raised above
existence: always assimilates time to eternity. Imagina-
tion then flatters itself that it dominates the universe,
as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be.
In fact, imagination can never synthesise anything
but its own vistas, in a specious, not a physical time;
but, if the vista had happened to be true, and if physical
time had repeated endlessly the feature now singly
conceived, thought would have marvellously domes-
ticated that crawling monster, prescribing, or seem-
ing to prescribe, how and how far it should uncoil
itself. In respect to the whole flux of existence such
a boast is gratuitous; but it may be justified in respect
to that field of action on which the spirit immediately
depends.

Spirit, however scattered its occasions and instances
may be, is always synthetic in its intellectual energy
he or actuality: it gives the form of totality to
specious its world. The frontiers may be vague and
present. the features confused, but they could not be
confused or vague if they were not features and frontiers


SENTIMENTAL TIME 69


of a single scene. Synthesis is a prerequisite to the
sensation of change. An image of motion or a feeling
of lapse is a single feeling and a single image. That
exciting experience in which now, now, keeps ringing
like a bell would not be a strained experience of the
mind, nor more than so many fresh experiences, if the
iteration were not synthesised, each stroke being re-
ceived by a sensorium already alive, and as it were
elastic, so that the dying strokes and others imminent
formed with the fresh stroke a single temporal landscape,
a wide indefinite now open to intuition, which psycho-
logists call the specious present. This intuition no doubt
has its basis in the datable physical moment, in a
definite phase of the organism; but the temporal land-
scape given in it is ideal, and has no date and no clear
limits; indeed, it is a miniature of all time, as imagina-
tion might survey and picture it. A few more details
on the same canvas, a closer attention to the remoter
vistas, and this specious present might contain all
knowledge. All that the most learned historian or
the deepest theologian has ever actually conceived must
have come to him in the specious present. Unless
action concentrates the attention on the forward edge
of this prospect, on the budding now, the whole leans
rather towards the past, and grows more and more
extended. It becomes full of things vain for our
present purpose. Even when action or scientific
observation rescue the specious present from this
sentimentality, they leave it ideal, and its field a purely
sensuous unit.

Action and scientific observation, though framed
within the specious present in perception, ignore it in
practice; but arts like music and eloquence js possible
are directed (without knowing it) to enriching richness,
this specious present and rendering it, in and
some climax, so overwhelmingly pregnant =sthetic.
and brilliant, that scientific observation and action


70 THE REALM OF MATTER


become impossible; as if the flux of things had cul-
minated, collected all its treasures, and wished, at least
for a moment, to stop and possess them. Under such
tension, when the spirit takes flight towards its proper
objects, essence and truth, the body, which cannot
follow, bursts into irrelevant action, such as tears or
applause or laughter or contortions. Synthesis, which
must be material before it can be spiritual, has then
brought to a head more currents than can flow into
any useful channel, and some random outlet must be
found for that physical fullness and that physical im-
potence. Meantime intuition shines in all its glory.
On lesser occasions, when attention lights up some
particular path in the field of action, spirit, being all
eagerness and appetition, almost seems to be a form of
energy or source of motion in matter. But the fact
that it is always wholly contemplative becomes evident
in its richer moments; for then the specious present
extends far beyond the urgent occasion for action, and
may even drop its conscious relevance to the person
or the hour; and at the same time its vistas will cease
to be sentimental, because the survey of them will have
become intellectual and impartially receptive.

The specious present is dateless, but it is temporal;1
it is the vaguely limited foreground of sentimental
Plus, time. In it the precipitation proper to ex-
yacsised istence, the ticking of the great clock is
specious Clearly audible: the bodily feeling of the
present, moment is complicated in it by after-images
perception Of instants receding, and strained by antici-
of flux. pation of instants to come. As the psyche
can synthesise in memory the fading impressions
that reverberate within her, so she can prefigure and
rehearse the acts for which she is making ready. A
pleasant rumble and a large assurance thus pervade


1 For the exact force of these terms, see Scepticism and Animal Faith,
p. 270.


SENTIMENTAL TIME 71


animal consciousness in its calmer moments. There
is no knife-edge here of present time, nor any exact
frontiers, but a virtual possession of the past and even
of the future; because the psyche is magnificently
confident not only that a future will be forthcoming,
but that its paces will be familiar, and easy to deal with;
in fact she is quietly putting irons in the fire, and means
to have a hand in shaping it. The general character
of the future is felt to be as sure as the ebb and flow of
the tide, or as the rest of a sentence half spoken; and
this assurance, which might seem groundless, is not
so, because the psyche is not a detached spirit, examin-
ing the world by the light of some absolute logic. She
is herself a material engine, a part of that substantial
flux which exists only by bridging its intervals, and is
defined as much by what it becomes as by what it may
have been. ‘That future which is in part her product
is, in that measure, her substance transformed, or by
its action transforming the surrounding substance.

At bottom, then, the future is no new event, but
the rest of this transformation. In an organism like
the psyche, it is the present pregnancy of 4...
matter that determines the further develop- volution of
ment of its forms. Of course this develop- eo‘ eyche
ment may be cut short at any point by hee
contacts with other organisms, or with the (eoncn-
inorganic; and then, if the psyche survives, ory ire
she will be diverted in some new direction, P*°?"”
at first violent and unpredictable. But if she could
understand fully all the substance of which she is a
portion, she would dominate in the specious present
the remotest future of her universe, as well as its deepest
past; for physical time is nothing but the deployment
of substance, and the essence of this substance is the
form which, if free, it would realise in its deployment.
The psyche, then, is not radically deceived in her som-
nolent confidence in the future, nor in her conviction


_


9) THE REALM OF MATTER


that she helps to determine it. The future may be
largely foreseen, or brought about as intended, even
as the past may be largely remembered; the psyche
has materials within the moment for both those
temporal vistas. It is her egotism here that is in error
rather than her faith; for the vivacity of her wishes or
momentary fancies may obscure her sense for things
at a distance; and beyond the chance limits of the
specious present, she may think the future indeter-
minate and unreal, and the past dead.

The dead past? Certainly all years prior to A.D.
1920 are past at the time when I write these words,

and all later years-are future, and to me
Cross- :
lights of | Uncertain; yet the reader knows that one of
pastnessand the years perhaps long subsequent to 1920
uturity. . ee %
is as living and sure as 1920 is to me now.

My problematic future will be his living present, and
both presently a third man’s irrevocable past. ‘There
is no moment in the whole course of nature (unless
there be a first and a last moment) which is not both
future and past for an infinity of other moments. In
itself, by virtue of its emergence in a world of change,
each moment is unstably present, or in the act of elaps-
ing; and by virtue of its position in the order of genera-
tion, both pastness and futurity pervade it eternally.
Such double abysmal absence is the price which
existence pays for its momentary emphasis. Futurity
and pastness, the reproach of being not yet and being
no longer, fall upon it from different quarters, like
lights of different colours; and these same colours,
like the red light and the green light of a ship, it itself
carries and spreads in opposite directions. And these
shafts cross one another with a sort of correspondence
in contradiction: the moments which any moment
calls past call it future, and those which it calls future
call it past.

Contradictory epithets of this sort are compatible


SENTIMENTAL TIME 73


when they are seen to be relative; but it must be under-
stood that they are the relative aspects of something
which has an absolute nature of its own, to aK cok
be the foundation of those relations. And be truly
the absolute nature of moments is to be Bic only
present: a moment which was not present in relatively,


itself could not be truly past or future in 75.35
relation to other moments. What I call the trinsically
past and what I call the future are truly past "°°
or future from here; but if they were only past or only
future, it would be an egregious error on my part to
believe that they were past or future at all, for they
would exist only in my present memory or expectation.
In their pastness and futurity they would be merely
specious, and they would be nothing but parts of a
present image. If I pretended that they recalled or
forecast anything, I should be deceived; for nothing
of that kind, either in the past or in the future, would
ever rejoice in presentness and exist on its own account.
Thus only false memory and false expectation end in
events intrinsically past or intrinsically future—that is
to say, intrinsically sentimental. False legends and
false hopes indeed have their being only in perspective;
their only substance is the thought of them now, and
it is only as absent that they are ever present.
Romantic idealism, which saturates modern specu-
lation even when not avowed, if it were not halting
and ambiguous, would reduce all time to the o_o nental
picture of time, and establish the solipsism time is the
of the present moment. And the present ees
moment indeed includes and absorbs all senti- by modern
mental time: apart from its vistas, neither i4°!™-
the past nor the future would be at all romantic or
unreal. Common sense admits this in respect to the
past. The equal reality of the past with the present,
and its fixity of essence, so that ideas of it may be false
or true, are not seriously questioned. But in respect


74, THE REALM OF MATTER


to the future, imagination is less respectful of fact, and
flounders in an abyss to which it attributes its own
vagueness. The prevision which the psyche often
has of its future actions, as in planning or calculation,
ought to give steadiness to thoughts of the future, in
as much as here the causes of future events are already
found at work; and the ancients, who were not senti-
mental, cultivated policy and prophecy, endeavouring
to define the future through its signs and causes, as
we define the past through its memorials. But modern
anticipations are based rather on supposed “ laws ”’,
or on intuition of divine purposes; that is, on forms
found in the perspective of events, as synthesised in
imagination: whereby physical time is asked to march
to the music which sentimental time may pipe for it.
In reality, nature moves in a time of her own, every-
where equally present, of which sentimental time is
‘a momentary echo; for sometimes a single
But the :
healthy pulse of substance may become conscious of
mind tran- its motion, and may fantastically endeavour
scends it,
both in to embrace the true past and the true future,
living and necessarily external to it, in a single view.
in thinking. : ’

This sentimental agony fancy then transfers
from its own flutterings to the brisk precipitation and
the large somnolence of the general flux, which is
neither regretful nor perturbed, and not intent on
prolonging one of its phases rather than another.
Animal life itself shares this conformity with the flux
of things, whenever animal life is perfect; and even
perfect intuition shares it, by entirely transmuting
motion into light: so that both in rude health and in
pure contemplation it either forgets the past and the
future altogether, or ceases to be sentimental about
them, and learns to feel their direct and native reality,
as they feel it themselves.


CHAPTER -V
THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE


SINCE all moments of physical time are intrinsically
present, it might seem that real existence was not
changeful at all but only, perhaps, asymmet- Hypothesis
rical, like a frieze of sculptured arrows all of static
sects . world in
pointing one way, or a file of halted soldiers which the
lifting one foot for ever, as if they had meant sense of
to march. The illusion of successive events would be
would be produced by the eye glancing along 2” tlusion.
the frieze or the reviewing officer passing down the
line. This ancient persuasion is founded on much
moral reflexion and is appropriate to the intellect
composing and recomposing its views of the truth.
The realm of truth is indeed eternal and static, and
the exploring spirit may traverse it by one or another
narrow path in a thousand directions without adding,
removing, or changing a single feature of that inde-
structible labyrinth. But in regard to the realm of
existence this suggestion is inapplicable and radically
perverse. Indeed, even on this hypothesis, flux would
not be abolished but only transferred from the panorama
of facts to the living spirit which, in gradually dis-
covering them, would be really passing through a
succession of different states. All the questions con-
cerning change, time, and existence would recur in
respect to this experience and its temporal order; and
the dignity of that eternal truth, arrogating to itself


75


76 THE REALM OF MATTER


the name of reality, would not help at all to explain
our passing illusions, and in comparison with their
insistence might itself seem rather shadowy and
unimportant.

Moreover, whence should reviewing officers or
travelling eyes fetch their mobility, save from that
Theillusion Very world which this hypothesis declares
would still to be static? The gift of progressive obser-


Mr ve ees Brite
change, and Vation is no homeless miracle, no illusion


thisin' , Without a ground; it is a faculty native and
to material appropriate to animals. It is quite true that
ogi often a movement of attention produces an


experience of change before an object, like an in-
scription, which is materially static; but then it is not
a disembodied spirit that freely surveys that monument
and notes its parts seriatim; an instinctive or trained
movement of the eye imposes a temporal order on the
words read. Only haste and lack of circumspection
in conceiving what spirit is and how it moves could
assign to it the origin of change. On the contrary,
while spirit is extraordinarily mobile in its existence,
it borrows this mobility from the hair-trigger organisa-
tion and unstable equilibrium of its organs, and of
the stimulations which excite them incessantly. In its
own nature, spirit arrests the flux of things, as best it
may, in its intuitions, and turns it into a store of syn-
thetic pictures and symbols, sensuous and intellectual.
We may therefore say with more reason that the world
imposes movement on a spirit which by its own genius
would rather be addressed to the eternal, than say that
reality seems successive only to a flighty spirit, turning
distractedly the leaves of a book written in eternity.
Matter, not spirit, is the seat and principle of the flux.
Spirit, being an emanation of this flux, seems indeed a
pilgrim wandering and almost lost in the wilderness
of essence and in the dark treasure-house of truth;
but in respect to the realm of matter, spirit is like a


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE v5


child asking questions and making pause, and often
brutally run over and crushed by a rush of changes
which it cannot understand.

So true is this that even the vistas of sentimental
time, although the spirit creates them in its effort to
dominate and synthesise the flux of things, , ..

. . . Tr: pirit

yet trouble it a little and seem disquieting. endures
To intense contemplation, memory and pro- change but,
phecy come forward and become present, and possible,
the present itself recedes into a wonderful synthesises

° : it into the
unreality and becomes truth. Everything truth ~
stands together, like a thing accomplished. 't*
Prophets do not predict but see, and cry out, even if
the vision be of the last day of creation: Behold, the
trump blew, and the heavens fell. Such pictorial pro-
phecy, like pictorial memory, is a state of trance: it
takes us out of changing time altogether, as it is the
function of spirit to take us, either into the realm of
truth, if the memories or prophecies are clairvoyant, or
else into the realm of essence, if they are false fancies.
Meantime historical events, since they are conventional
stretches containing variations, continually lose and
continually gain existence, never being complete and
comprehensive, as is the truth about them. They
cannot be gathered up or understood, even by those
who enact them, without being sublimated and con-
gealed into their historical essences and forfeiting their
natural flux. The dramatic direction which they may
retain in visionary memory, like the visible lack of
symmetry in the file of halted soldiers or in the sculp-
tured arrows, suggests a movement to the observer only
because it induces him to perform one in his survey;
but the direction of this survey is reversible, like a film
for the cinema. The asymmetrical forms themselves
contain no precipitation; they do not destroy and
traverse themselves, or take one another’s places. ‘They
are only a synthetic model or fossil of change.


78 THE REALM OF MATTER


Modern philosophers, being contemptuous of
essences and without a clear conception of them, usually
Hypothesis assume the reality of change and succession
of an without much scrutiny; they do not stop to
absolute . : : ae
timein. inquire where and by what juxtaposition the
which loose quality abandoned yieldsto the quality acquired.
thar If we venture to imagine what is probably in
places. their minds, I think we shall come upon some-
thing like this: that the flux is composed of states of
existence, mental, material, or simply qualitative, each
of which is a unit and contains no variation; yet they
succeed and replace one another because they arise in
an underlying pervasive medium, absolute time, which
itself lapses inherently and inevitably at a uniform rate,
so that all its moments are already dated, and at a
precise remove from one another. When states of mind
or matter or neutral phenomena arise, they must there-
fore arise at one or another of these dated instants.
Although each fact is an absolute reality in itself, and
with no intrinsic relevance to any other fact, yet any
of them may be successive or simultaneous, if they
occur at identical or successive moments in that ever-
flowing irreversible time.

This conception of a pure yet physical time, in
which events of any sort may arise and take their
places, needs only to be described and in-
spected for it to dissolve into puzzles. Each
of its moments would be exactly like every other: far
from measuring a scale of duration, they would collapse
into identity. I have already indicated the sensuous
origin and specious character of this ghost: it is an
after-image of the sensation of time. But let me now
admit the hypothesis of such an intuitive phantom
being substantial, and the prior locus of all existence.
Events will now be rendered successive simply by their
position in pure time, apart from any inner continuity
or derivation of one from another; and the absolute


Its futility.


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 79


date of each will be the sole character in it by virtue
of which it may be pronounced the source or the result
of any other. But absolute dates are intrinsically in-
discernible and different only in that one is earlier and
another later; so that concrete events will be arranged
in sequence only by virtue of a character in them which
is absolutely indistinguishable.

Here a subtler suggestion might be made by idealists.
Succession, they might say, is a relation between the
characters of events. As existences, all states i
of spirit—and for the idealist no other exist- [Hypothesis
ences are possible—are self-created and, in cession is
status, eternal; they are fragments of the one {pondence
universal mind; but each may be temporal in of per-
its deliverance or in the picture it unfolds. aaah
If we could compare these scattered spiritual dateless
acts—as the idealist is always doing, although
on his principles it would be impossible—we should see
correspondences, developments, and contradictions in
their objects. A feature central in one view might be
recognised as the same as a feature quite marginal and
faint in another view: the pictured future there might
be the living present here, and the pictured past here,
in some measure, the present there. Comparing and,
as it were, matching these pictures by their rims, we
might compose a tolerably continuous landscape; and by
identifying the original states of spirit, actually existing
each for itself, with those ideal elements which they
supplied to this panorama—another illegitimate habit of
idealists—we might attribute to those existing 1; explains
states the dates of their objects, as these re- away suc-

7 é cession an
appear in our own synthesis. ‘Thus we think to abolishes
cast specious time, like a butterfly-net, over “heehee
spirits freely fluttering and dateless in themselves, which
altogether escape it: they are not rendered successive by
the fact that some of them may repeat the beginning and
some the end of what, in our survey, seems a single story.


80 THE REALM OF MATTER


It is imperative, then, if we wish to understand
existence and the succession of its moments, to dis-
regard any synthesis created in imagination

he real
flux can. between the essences of these moments, or
notbe between what are supposed to have been their
synthetised. = 3 A 5
essences. Actual succession is a substitution,
not a perspective. Now, when this transcendental syn-
thetic glance is discounted, are there other elements
left in the experience of change which might serve to
describe fitly the nature of a flux actual and physical?

Certainly there are such intuitions, else even the
most tentative and modest approach to an understanding
are of nature would be denied us. The feeling
expressed of persistence or sheer duration is such an
in the . ore : : :
feeling of intuition. This feeling is more complex than
duration. the insight into the eternity of a given essence,
in which there is no drag. It is rather a sense of
iteration or failure to lapse in something properly tran-
sitory: astrange and questionable arrest where movement
is latent or imminent. Such a sense of persistence may
become tedious, sublime, or excruciating; it includes
an acute tension or sense of existence. It is therefore
an admirable expression of the life of nature, emphasis-
ing the continuity not without implying the variation.
It marks the fact that the flux of existence, although it
really never stops, often sustains certain recognisable
forms, such as the psyche herself, in a precarious being.

The counterpart of continuity, interruption, has the
same implication. ‘Total catastrophes in nature might
Pirie 8 OCCUS) but a wholly new world would not
pressed in remember or Suspect its previous non-ex-
galt modi-._astence. The great advance in understanding

"comes when intuition reveals change in some
single respect within a constant object. Doubtless, in
strictness, when the world changes in any particular
its total essence is renewed, since its balance becomes
another; yet the new total essence is—and must be, if


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 81


the world is to be consecutive—largely similar to the
old one; and this not by a groundless accident or magic
law, but because the matter of the earlier phase is
inherited by the later. This matter, which alone
renders either phase a fact and not a mere essence,
carries with it its quantity, its energy, and a progressive
redistribution of its parts; so that the very principle
of genesis, in lending to each moment of the flux its
physical existence, determines the essence which it
shall exemplify, and determines it in virtue of the
continuity and heredity which must bind moments
together materially if they are to be successive chrono-
logically. ‘The same material heritage also determines
in what measure or in what detail each successive
moment shall differ from the previous one, or how far
it shall merely repeat it; and it renders the world,
throughout its moments, somewhat amenable to ad-
dition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.

If it is true that we cannot bathe twice in the same
river, because the water has flowed on, it is true also
that the same water which was formerly here ,, ._,

7 i ysica
is now farther down; so that we might bathe continuity,
in it again if only we ran down the bank Whichis


with greater celerity than the water. But our aber
second plunge, though into the same water, ees
would be at another point in the stream: and and _

it is this combination of continuity with in- ra og
stability that we indicate when we speak-of a_ includes
river-or a flux. The dialectic of continuity— “™"™™”
whether it may be analysed into an infinite number of
discrete points or into an indefinite number of intervals
—was probably not considered by nature before she
began to exist: there is therefore no need to consider
it in describing existence. Continuity, forthe naturalist,
is merely a name for the fact that existence is a trans-
mitted burden, something that goes on and is kept up.
In the midst of death we are in life; destruction and

G


82 THE REALM OF MATTER


change are never so complete at any moment as not to
continue the previous reality. If each moment made
a wholly fresh beginning it would not be a moment in
a flux, but simply one member in an original multitude
of beings. >:

Now, this hereditary nature of existence—each
moment being genitum non factum—is rudely repre-
Moving sented in intuition by any phenomenon which
sensible partly changes and partly seems to remain the
units bear ° ee
mires same. Common sense hypostatises this in-
to these tuition, when it traces and recognises persons
ereditary s 5 3 é
modes of and things, supposed to remain identical in a
flux, maze of changing relations; and science only
carries this inevitable hypostasis a step further when it
conceives permanent atoms, or permanent laws, sus-
taining the flux of things and keeping it continuous
and intelligible. Such science is conscientious fiction:
there are presumably no atoms and no laws separable
from the concrete strains and movements of the flux,
by which its substance is intimately modified; but this
substance being hereditary, each of its moments
assumes a form derived from the previous posture of
things, and offering to observation innumerable repeti-
tions, calculable changes, and familiar habits: otherwise
neither life nor observation could ever have arisen in
the midst of chaos to take note of its existence.

Substance, with its intrinsic deployment and
heredity, would certainly remain mysterious to us even
Evolution 2 we could inspect it at close quarters, because
and laware it involves an unintelligible alloy added to
siews of | Whatever essences we might assign to it. As
material things stand, however, the mystery is darkened
coven by the great difference in scale between the
texture of matter and that of human ideas; and when,
in mathematics, we pursue and almost seem to attain
that inhuman reality, we find ourselves in possession
of a perfect method of notation from which everything


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 83


to be noted has disappeared; and the only truth of our
most accurate science turns out to be practical and
utterly blind. We must revert, in order to recover our
sanity and the subject-matter of our natural science,
to crude experience and to the common arts; and here
everything is on the human scale. Sunset and sunrise,
the obvious repetitions in the generations of men and
animals, and in their stock passions, hide movements
which in nature are probably knit unbrokenly together,
and never quite alike, or obedient to any disembodied
law. Seen on the human scale, repetitions are perfectly
inexplicable: they suggest to the gaping mind a magical
control of events by a monotonous destiny: they sug-
gest superstition. But beneath these trite measures,
which human wit casts over things, like a net of pro-
verbs, the natural flux goes its own pace, uncontrolled
by any magic or logic. It is natural: it passes every-
where from what it was at that point, as the conjunction
of elements there prompts it to do, never asking whether
that conjunction is new or habitual. It knows no desire
for novelty, no obsession by rule; it is as willing to
run into repetitions as into catastrophes, and it is as
likely to suggest to gross observation a law in one place
as a purpose in another. Its order in one place may
produce a mind to which its general order seems a
chaos.

Physical time is another name for this native in-
stability of matter, which, since it has distinct stations
or phases, may be observed by spirit, and he ux
since it falls into recurring rhythms may be bh saat

a . rst lends
measured by its own stride. These stages existence
and rhythms are essences; and it is in terms ea
of essence that any possible physics is con- as may
demned to describe nature; but the descrip- efine it.
tion becomes true in so far as these or equivalent
essences are actually embodied in the field of action.
It is only by such embodiment in matter that essences


84 THE REALM OF MATTER


can be loosened, as it were, from their essential setting
and turned into the characters of facts; or rather—
since their essential setting is eternal and holds them
even while embodiments of them are passing through
existence—it is only by being distributed in the field
of action that essences can add for a moment external
and variable relations to those which their proper nature
involves.

This descent or incarnation of essences cannot be
their own doing, since all essences are inert and non-
existent. Even in a dream the objects that impose
themselves successively on the spirit, being purely
imaginary, have no power to maintain themselves or to
generate one another, any more than one word or note
in the air has the power, in the absence of a vocal
instrument, to breed the next word or the next note.
It is the slumbering material psyche that generates those
feelings and images out of her disquiet, as when awake
she generates those words or notes out of her material
exuberance; were it not for her stored troubles no
insane anxieties or absurd vicissitudes would disturb
her sleep. Even the thinnest creations of spirit, there-
fore, are products of the realm of matter, and possible
only within it. Incarnation is no voluntary emanation
from above; it is a dire event, a budding torment, here
below. A world of accidents, arbitrary and treacherous,
first lends to the eternal a temporal existence and a place
in the flux.

Particularity and transition are inherent in this
nether form of being. Everything that arises is liable
The flux to lapse; everything that exists exists by con-
flows | junction with other things on its own plane;
no prior it belongs somewhere and to a certain time
medium. by virtue of the external relations which pin
it there. From this an important consequence follows:
Existence can have no general or stable medium deeper
than itself, such as an absolute space or time through


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 85


which it should flow and which in some respects would
control its formation. The flux is itself absolute and
the seat of existence: the substance which flows through
things cannot exist between them. It bestows on them
their hereditary qualities and quantities, and their place
in nature. Without substance each phenomenon would
be an insulated essence, lacking all force or movement,
either internal or transcendent, and incapable of existing
in itself or of imposing itself at any particular moment
on any particular mind. But the counterpart is no less
true: without those exchangeable forms, without run-
ning through those distinct states and positions, sub-
stance in turn would fade into an essence. Far from
being the natural parent of all scattered particular facts,
it would be the impotent possibility of their forms only.
It would not be that pregnant and labouring matter
which fills the world, but the essence at the opposite
end of the ontological scale, pure Being, in which all
essences are indeed contained, as it were, in solution,
but in which none is suffered to come forward with an
irrational emphasis, and impudently to exist. In order
to exist substance itself must be something in particular,
exclusive at each point of what it is at all others.
Having no prior conditions, existence at each node
or centre is what it happens to be, showing such a form,
energy, intensity, or consciousness as it happens y, yay
to show. We must consider and inspect each take any
part separately, by transporting ourselves into Course and
it at least ideally, before we can say what that any events
part is intrinsically, or how many parts there “"*“°°V
are, or what is their order. Relations the facts must
indeed have, if they are many: first, the relations eter-
nally contrasting their several essences; and secondly,
those accidental and variable relations which render
these facts existing instances of their essences, and parts
of one fluid world. All the axioms of philosophers de-
claring the world to be necessarily infinite or everlasting


86 THE REALM OF MATTER


or rational or conscious must be received as applying
only to their respective systems: the world meantime
is just what it is, has been what it has been, and will be
what it will be.

Yet, while the character of each fact is self-declared,
its place among other facts (such as our belief in it)
depends on contacts and transitions between


Yet in being * ; shes

ohm it and the rest of its world. Did it not come
Bice aah SrOm something different and did it not empty
eats itself into something else, it would not contain
natural within itself that stress, that incompleteness,
relations. that pervasive mortality, which precisely mark
it as actual and living, and both more and less than a
pure essence.

If each moment of existence is a centre, and self-
assertive, it is so by being a focus of rays gathered into
it from external sources and discharged again into
eventual effects. By virtue of these connections and
transmissions its place is fixed in the flux, and it vin-
dicates its right to be called existent, since it is dis-
coverable, measurable, and dated. All that it possesses
besides—its intrinsic essence, its originality, its feeling,
if it has feeling—is hidden from the world, escapes
physics altogether, and merely marks its degree of in-
spiration: I mean, how much of the eternal it has
managed, in passing, to draw down into itself, to illus-
trate, or to discover.

How express in human language (all the terms of

which, unless they are proper names, designate
Though all : ° :
existing | essences) this mixture of self- assertion and
pain Dee instability proper to any moment of existence?
condemned I'he classic expedient is to analyse existence
ee ae into matter and form, the matter being trans-
from one missible and serving to connect moment
form to with moment and to render the later the off-
another. 5 5 :

spring of the earlier, while the form serves to


characterise each moment and give it individuality


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 87


and limits. This is a correct and—as might be seen by
reviewing the alternatives—an inevitable way of ex-
pressing the nature of change in rhetorical terms. To
the senses, to the passions, to the defining intellect the
flux of existence is indeed a flight of eternal essences
across a permanent screen, in which alone they have
their momentary existence—a screen which sometimes
seems to be the vague universe and sometimes one’s
own soul. Yet these categories, being logical or poetical,
are not important to the naturalist. No doubt the
naturalist too may speak of forms and of matter; but
his forms are aggregates, themselves arising and break-
ing up; and his matter is something existent, the matter
actually transmitted and transmuted by nutrition,
generation, or labour. This matter everywhere has a
particular quality, structure, and potency; and it not
only possesses form, as a geometrical solid possesses it,
but it is informed with the peculiar essence of existence
also, which includes inner instability. For it is by its
place, size, energy, and growth by material composition
—qualities all involving external and variable relations
—that a geometrical body existing differs from a
geometrical solid defined. Aristotle himself derived the
existence of any particular thing or substance not from
its metaphysical components but from prior complete
natural beings; and he even assigned to this ancestral
matter what seems to us too fixed a form, since he did
not admit any evolution of species. Even if by chance
he had been right in respect to the natural history of
earthly animals, the same matter in other cycles or in
other worlds might evidently have displayed a different
morphology. The matter which by taking a particular
form becomes a particular thing need never have worn
that form before and may never wear it again. Its career
is open towards the infinite. Though at each moment
it must be something specific, yet, if we consider its
unknown plastic stress and the incalculable accidents


88 THE REALM OF MATTER


to which it may be subject, we shall hardly be able to
hold it down to any other enduring characters than those
involved in its distinctive function: which is to lend
existence to certain essences in a certain order, and
enable them to succeed and to confront one another in
a competitive world.

How penetrate into the inner flow of this existence?
Sensuous, dialectical, or moral views of it, however legiti-
This flux mate, are necessarily summary, superficial,
not tobe and poetical, being created by a psyche biassed
understood es : :
in graphic and synthetic in her reactions. Mathematical
terms. views are more impartial, but wretchedly
abstract. Thus, for instance, number is a just category
to apply to the field of action, since its elements move
as units, but it is a miserable essence to substitute for
them. Accurate science has this defect, that it seems
to describe the distribution of units of nothing, and to
record averages in movements that elude sense, and
yet are conceived and posited only in reference to
pictorial objects. Meantime existence is no spectacle,
though spectacles and calculations may amuse or de-
scribe it. In ourselves, and in the objects on our own
plane encountered in action, existence is a strain and
an incubus, particular, self-centred, substantial. It is
in terms of such existence, unstable but burdened and
concrete, that an unsophisticated natural philosophy
might conceive the realm of matter.

If there is to be lapse, the flux at each point must
possess an essence from which it lapses. These points,
Idea ofa Which are the terms of any possible change,
natura [ will call natural moments. By natural
moment. moments, I do not mean instants or cross-
sections of the whole flux, where everything is supposed
simultaneous; I mean rather any concrete but ultimate
elements in the web of existence, within which there
is no change or variation of essence, yet which are not
merely their essences, but events exemplifying those


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 89


essences, facts generated and dated in a general flux
that outruns them on every side. Within each natural
moment there can be no temporal divisions or scale;
if a duration is assigned to it at all distinguishable from
its intrinsic being, it must be assigned by virtue of
some external measure or scale, drawn from an alien
medium or perspectivein which the moment is supposed
to be embedded. In its own person, a natural moment
may be called lasting or instantaneous with equal
propriety; for its quality is unchangeable, and any
variation would simply divide it into several natural
moments; it contains no temporal diversity by which
it could be collated with different points in a dated
scale of time. On the other hand, this undivided
moment has material continuity with other moments
which generate it and which it generates, so that its
life is but one incident, an indivisible beat between
states of existence which are not itself yet are its
closest kin.

In what does this kinship consist? Not merely in
similarity, though some similarity—perhaps only quan-
titative—is doubtless involved in derivation. ,,,

A natural moment may be followed by a cata- transitive
strophe and by chaos. Nor is derivation mere “°°”
juxtaposition, since we have seen that there is no prior
medium in which this juxtaposition could occur. ‘There
must, then, be something in the inner nature of one
natural moment that renders it the derivative from
another natural moment, therefore called its source, and
productive of a third natural moment which we there-
fore call its effect. Every natural moment is both tradi-
tional and propulsive. It has a beginning and an end,
a head and a tail—the head turned towards the end,
and the tail towards the beginning. ‘These need not be
distinct members within its body; they may be distin-
guished, like up and down, only by virtue of contrary
contacts and tensions; for a natural moment bears quite


go THE REALM OF MATTER


opposite relations to its source and food on the one side,
and to its effects or relics on the other. Many rays, as
it were, are focussed in each explosion; and the spark
dies by diffusion or excretion of the substance which
lent it spasmodic being. Its essence is like that of a
valve: it contains a reference to the direction in which
matter may flow through it. The moment exists only
in act, when the valve is a valve in function; and at
that crisis it yields to pressure coming from one side
only, while it opens out and empties itself only towards
the other side. Or we might liken it to a hyphen or
to the sign + ; essentially transitional, as it is existen-
tially transitory. By essence, it overlooks its neighbours
on either hand without trespassing on their ground.
That a thing by its internal being should have refer-
ence to something external—a fact which in the case
of knowledge gives so much trouble to logicians—is ©
so far from being an anomaly or an exception that it
is the indispensable condition of existing at all: because,
apart from that transcendent tension or inherent in-
stability, a natural moment would be simply its essence,
and not the act of reaching and dropping that essence,
as it must be if it exists or takes place in nature.

I do not think that analytically transition can be
otherwise expressed than as a transformation of one
Transition thing into another, involving two natural
though un- moments, and leaving the bond between
intelligible, 5 : :
may be | them obscure. But it is not analytically
symbolised that transition may be understood; it is lost

ramatic- . Sas Nae

Bit os when its terms are divided; and yet it is no
prc synthesis of these terms, but a generation—
comportsa Whatever that may be—of one term out of the
forward ~~ other. Within each term, however, we may
within the expect to find a synthetic symbol and counter-
moment. part of transition. Let me call it the forward
tension of the natural moment. This name is not


meant to attribute to the elements of the flux any


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE gI


conscious effort or expectancy; they are restless with-
out the feeling of unrest; yet the analogy implied in
the metaphor must be a real analogy, since effort and
expectancy are creatures and expressions of this very
tension in the flux of matter, when it takes the form of
a psyche. Forward tension, then, will designate fairly
enough whatsoever corresponds, within a natural
moment, to the external fact that it occurs between
two others, one of which an observer would call its
antecedent and the other its consequent. Such a syn-
thetic burden, native to existence in its every node or
concretion, may well be represented in physics by a
quantum of potential energy, determined by some
formula or equation; and we know that the ignorant
psyche creates many a poetic index to this same burden
in herself, when she conceives sentimental time, and
all the dramatic perspectives that people the imagina-
tion; for it is only by virtue of the tensions concen-
trated within her own organism—her memory, will, and
intelligence—that the psyche is able to paint a world,
which she thinks real, on the canvas of intuition.

That the natural moment has a forward tension
becomes the more plausible, or even certain, when we
consider that we are describing elements of

: : ; : The nature
existence (not mathematical or dialectical pat- ¢¢ jatural
terns, which analysis might discover there) and emis
that the field of existence is simply the field funa®
of action: for there is no doubt that in action written
a forward tension is inherent. Nor is it the the conven-
agent only that has this movement; we have tonal or
found that his partner in action, the brother- moments
world on which he acts, must have it too, if es icone
they are to play the same game, and contribute
to the same sequel. We may therefore confidently
attribute the forward tension proper to our life to all
the rest of nature, down to its primary elements,
without attributing to those elements, or to that total,


92 THE REALM OF MATTER


any specifically human quality. On the contrary, that
forward tension in us is precisely what we share with
all matter, and what renders matter our great com-
panion; for the realms of essence and of truth, to which
the spirit looks when it suspends action, are not so
much our companions or enemies in this world as our
celestial monitors: their perpetual presence does not
beset us here but, if we notice it, transports us there. We
may therefore appeal to our experience of action on the
human scale to suggest to us the nature of action even in
the heart of matter, which a mere diminution of mathe-
matical scale or use of the microscope may never reach.

Now, on the human scale, the most obvious units
in action are men, and their forward tension is dramatic-
ally .called their will. A man’s body, if we study it
analytically, is enormously complex, and his will highly
conditioned and insecure, so that he thinks it free; but
if we take him and his will in the flush of action, as
factors in the moral world, they count as units. Each
personage in history, each passion or interest in a
man’s life, may be called a conventional moment.
Considered dramatically, each is a single phase of
existence internally constant, through which existence
is precipitated into its next phase. How these con-
ventional moments begin, how they end, how matter
flows through them, and what determines their inner
character while they last are all matters of common
knowledge: we call them birth, death, food, and
influence. It is on this analogy that natural moments
should be conceived, if we wish to avoid the extra-
vagances of pure theory usurping the place of fact.

A man, with the forward tension of all his instincts
Birth and and passions, notoriously springs from a seed;
death are and he develops from the heart of that seed,
properto . * :
all natural Internally, as it transforms and organises the
moments. food which comes to it and which it selects.
Seed and food: these are the conditions a parte priori


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 93


of a man’s existence; a seed, to transmit the centre of
organisation and impose its specific hereditary form;
and food to supply suitable matter to pass through that
form and sustain it in existence.. So this conventional
moment, this individual life, begins and is established:
and how does it end? By dissolution, when that
hereditary formative energy is exhausted, or crushed
by accident, and the matter which it had organised
about its centre is dispersed. This matter will take
other forms, some of them living; it may breed worms,
as the Christian imagination was fond of repeating;
but a corpse is not a seed; it is not from there that the
next generation is derived; their seed must be plucked
from the secret heart of the man in his maturity,
essentially uncontrolled and uncontaminated by his
personal fortunes. There is a vast difference in
character between the beginning and the end: the
source is single, concentrated, specific, loaded with
precise potentialities; the effects and consequences are
diffused, peripheral, miscellaneous, unending. Except
the seed of his children, all that a man sheds during
his life and at his death is, from the vital point of
view, corruption; all that he draws in, in so far as it
feeds his flame, is purity and life. He is a pulsation
or diastole of his hereditary nature, a bubble waxing
till it bursts.

Existence, then, is a passage from potentiality to
act, the order of its moments being determined by the
direction of realisation within each of them. actualisa-
Before and after are not relations in a pure tion hasa
° ° . ° irection
time, but organic, like up and down or right even with-
and left. They presuppose a centre, a focus inthe
into which matter flows and from which it is due to the
dispersed; and this concretion, like a spark Siar
or a blow, is irreversible, and separates its through
occasion and materials on the one hand, in ‘4 form.
which it was potential, from its effects and remains on


94 THE REALM OF MATTER


the other, in which its potentiality is that of other things.
Thus existence is not simply a series of essences solidi-
fied, nor a juxtaposition of phenomena; it is the career
of a hereditary substance, it is the Life of Matter. And
this in both senses of the word life: for it is the history
of the fortunes of that plastic enduring being, and it
is also the forward tension intrinsic to each moment
of that career: an inner tension which is sometimes
raised to consciousness and turns to spiritual light, but
which animates matter everywhere and renders it
transitional. Matter, as if ashamed at the irrationality
of having one form rather than another, hastens to
exchange it, whatever it may be, for some other form,
and this haste is its whole reality; for it can add nothing
to the essences which it successively exemplifies except
just this: that they are enabled to be exemplified in
succession, to be picked up and“abandoned. Matter
is the invisible wind which, sweeping for no reason
over the field of essences, raises some of them into a
cloud of dust: and that whirlwind we call existence.
Potentiality seems a vain word, and deceptive; yet
it indicates a fact in the realm of truth, since seeds are
Potentiality C4Pable of development into certain organisms
aretro- | Only, and these cannot spring from any other
afr source. Yet what this potentiality may be
material actually is usually unknown to us; we merely
eruty- assume that it must be something actual, since
the state of the seed at any one time must exemplify
some individual essence, however complex it may be.
Not that this actual state of the potential would pass
into the further state, potential in it, if the potential
were merely an essence, or a pure phenomenon; an
essence or pure phenomenon has no fertility, no im-
plications; it will remain for ever just what it is. It
is matter, impatient of form, that fills form with a
forward tension, and realises one essence after another;
and this tension in matter is ultimately expressed and


a wie Fi ad


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 95


rendered conscious in spirit; so that spirit is normally
filled with craving, fear, curiosity, and jealousy, clasping
to its bosom something precious and unintelligible, only
too apt to slip away.

The relation between a man and his father and that
between his son and himself, considered in its essence,
is identical in the two instances, and always tostances
bilateral: there cannot be a child without a of parent
parent nor a parent without a child. Yet the 44.
flux runs only one way, and from the point of view
of each person the felt tensions in the two instances
are unilateral, different, and opposite. Even if by
miracle grandfather and grandson were identical in
essence—as in Greece they often bore the same name—
they would be separated and posited as distinct persons
by their opposite unilateral relation to the man between,
who was son only to the one, and father only to the
other. By these contrasting offices and sentiments
each generation synthesises the flux of life in its own
feeling and action at every moment; and we may
reasonably regard this double tension as representing,
on the human scale, the irreversible polarity within
every natural moment, which indicates and transmits
the irreversible direction of genesis.

Nor is this universal flux composed of a single
strand, like a thin autobiographical melody, sounding
only one note at a time. It 1s many-voiced, {ora
like the sea of Homer. We may indeed divide tensions
it ideally into instants, each of which cuts involved.
through the whole stream and shows its complex
visceral face at that juncture; but such a cross-section
is not a natural moment. A natural moment is a
realised essence of any sort, so long as its realisation
continues; and there may be many collateral natural
moments. Moments will be collateral if, when traced
backwards or forwards according to their inward
tensions, they terminate in identical ulterior moments;


96 THE REALM OF MATTER


and this without being strictly simultaneous through-
out the interval, nor divisible on the same scale. So
streams that flow from the same lake and empty into
the same estuary need not be identical or equal or
parallel but must be collateral. Scientific speculation
now seems to authorise this view, even for the purposes
of calculation, which I should not have expected; but
a sceptic will readily admit that the more the sciences
deepen their view and discount their assumptions the
more they will familiarise us with differences of pace
in nature, and incommensurable meanderings. Yet
not meanderings beyond the field of action, into a
metaphysical region: for unless all these scales and
dimensions impinge upon facts posited and acted upon
by animal faith, their interesting variety will belong
only to the realm of essence, and will not describe this
world. ‘This world is not easily probed or understood.
Existence is nothing if not complex, elastic, funda-
mentally chaotic. Perception, description, and dogma
over-simplify and over-regulate everything.

All lateral tensions might be typified, for a living
being, in the horrid simultaneity of eating and being
Living eaten. Microbes devour no less efficaciously
beings must than wild beasts; and this perpetual inner
laterally if Waste, met by the need of replenishment, is
they are the clearest of demonstrations that matter
to persist . . . . °
recognis- iS the principle of existence. Matter is
pply: essentially food, an object of competition
and a substance fit for assimilation. It is for ever
withdrawing itself from one form and assuming
another, or being redigested. Food is substance in
circulation, shuffling its unities like figures in a dance;
and the same generative transition that originally
establishes a particular moment of existence is required
to maintain and renew it; otherwise that essence is
lost. Every living thing must feed, feed perpetually,
or it dissolves.


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 97


If, then, we may transfer these fundamental char-
acters of conventional moments to natural moments,
we may say that a natural noment arises and { ateral
exists only by virtue of external supports; tensions
first a parent moment to launch it and deter- ¢Pnqiton_
mine its initial character, and then collateral tion and
moments to control that heritage and deter- $f forward
mine what, and how long, it shall be in act. tension in
If ever existence is sustained at all in what ticular,
we call the same object, or person, or thought, ™o™«nt-
this happens by an external equilibrium which keeps
that thing in a state of suspense or of continual self-
recovery: each of its external relations tending to
transform it, yet all of them together, for the nonce,
keeping it as it was.

A seed, if it could be thoroughly inspected by a
clairvoyant spirit, would reveal the essence which
contains or prepares its pregnancy, according to the
method of development prevalent in nature, or in that
species. But the actual essence of the seed, or of its
ultimate fruit, is nothing to the naturalist; for he knows
that no seed will mature except under certain fostering
external conditions; and to these conditions, not to
the unknown essence of the seed, he will trace and
attribute the issue. The seed itself could never have
been formed or, as it were, expelled from the parent
moment, without the food and warmth of a fostering
world; and in the act of birth or existence—for these
are one in a natural moment—the sequel will be de-
termined and sustained by the lateral tensions which
beset it, allowing that sequel and forbidding any other.
Everything, then, seems to be a mechanism of circum-
stances, of which the essences realised at distinct
moments are, for the naturalist, only idle signs.

What seems to follow? That the forward tension
which I have been attributing to natural moments may
be simply the act of escaping in the direction of least

H


98 THE REALM OF MATTER


resistance, as matter always will. The mysterious
potentiality packed in the seed would then not be
a: internal to it, or due to a specially wonderful
fora” essence therein embodied. It would be the
universal concentration there of many external relations
mechanism. 4+ work together, a resultant of all the cosmic
tensions to which that point was subject. In itself
the seed or the moment would not then need to possess
any specific character: it might have only a simple
or neutral essence, such perhaps as the pure Being
which filled the atoms of Democritus; yet, without
manifesting any particular bias, it might be ready, as
far as its quantity availed, to run and nourish any
vortex then evolving, or any self-asserting form. ‘This
it would do or not do, according to circumstances;
so that all the tensions and heritages of animal life
would be but incidents in a universal mechanism.

A diviner like Democritus, or like a modern mathe-
matician hypostatising his notation into the substance
ie of the world, may be willing to prophesy that
doctrine such is the actual constitution of the universe.
that all Such it may be indeed, at some inhuman
similar and depth; and I am willing to admit any such
all laws hypothesis on the authority of the learned,
isamere because that seems to me to be the direction in
speculation. \ hich the truth must lie, even if I distrust the
means by which those wise men think they have dis-
covered it. Yet however perfectly such a system might
transcribe the flux of existence, it would not be that
flux in person, or in its lapsing life; and science cannot
well be truer of it, though true at a deeper level, than
are all the vulgar essences which visibly give it character.
Somehow the flux has actually gathered and distilled
itself into many-coloured natural moments, as into
drops; and these are the first and fundamental measures
by which we may measure it, and the centres from
which we must survey it.


THE FLUX OF EXISTENCE 99


Perhaps in a chaos the only forward tension might
be that of the universe as a whole, distended and
convulsed by all its lateral tensions indiscriminately.
Chaos, however, though doubtless fundamental, is not
now complete. If it were, it would not be observable
for lack of observers; and we, so long as we behold a
world, however chaotic, have the assurance that the
flux, for the time being, has been somewhat canalised
in our parts of the universe, and that lateral tensions
are partly held in check, and turned to sustenance, for
the benefit of some persisting organisms; and the for-
ward tensions of these, with their variations and fulfil-
ments, form the drama of natural history.

Moreover, if we may say that in the world at large
lateral tensions determine the existence and the forward
tension of every part, we may also say, vice :
versa, that the forward tensions of the parts, the flux is _
taken together and meeting, compose the spontaneous

i ° + in the part
lateral tensions at work at that time; and this no less than
way of speaking has some advantages. It in the
recognises that material existence, though
everywhere conditioned externally, is everywhere spon-
taneous. Neither its being nor its singular forward
tension are in the least questionable or unwelcome to
any innocent moment. It takes itself for granted and
leaps, if it can, to the full expansion of its inner powers.
That act, or that attempt, is its very existence. Once
existing, the moment unhesitatingly exercises its native
force in its innate direction, and acts no less freely and
efficaciously than it is acted upon. In a contingent
world necessity is a conspiracy of accidents.

This precipitation of accidents is the work of matter,
shifting its equilibrium and modifying its , .,
strains. A flux could neither change nor separable
continue if it were immaterial. Its successive ‘om

. ° matter.
forms, since it takes them up and drops them,
are not essences without substance nor facts without


100 THE REALM OF MATTER


derivation. A natural moment marks the existential
emergence of a new form—that particular form which
circumstances then impose on the matter at hand, as
previously disposed; and this moment ends when the
balance of tensions which brought it about yields to a
fresh equilibrium. ‘This limit of any moment is and is
called an end, as that other limit is and is called a begin-
ning; for here there is concretion and there release.
The forms are eternal, the matter is old; yet the inter-
play of the two is full of novelty, and at each point takes
a somewhat unprecedented direction. For it is not the
old form that creates the new; the old form, if it could
do anything, would simply preserve itself; but it is
indomitable matter, from the beginning in unstable
equilibrium, that fell once into that old form as it falls
now into the new, spontaneously and without vows
of fidelity. Its potentiality, though unborn, is always
specific, since it is involved in the distribution and
tensions of the actual matter already in play; its realisa-
tion is the flux of existence, creating succession and
telling the beads of time.

The dominance of matter in every existing being,
even when that being is spiritual, is the great axiom of
materialism, to which this whole book is only a corollary.
But this axiom would not be consonant with the life of
nature if it did not involve a complementary truth which
takes away all its partisan bias and half its inhuman
sting: I mean the complementary truth that matter
is no model devised by the human imagination, like
Egyptian atoms or the laws of physics, but is a primeval
plastic substance of unknown potentiality, perpetually
taking on new forms; the gist of materialism being that
these forms are all passive and precarious, while the
plastic stress of matter is alone creative and, as far as we
can surmise, indestructible.


CHAPTER VI
TROPES


EveNTs have a form as much as things have: even the
Greeks, those lovers of statues, were far from insensible
to the essence of tragedy or of a happy life. Notion of
Now the form of an event is not that event 2 trope.
itself. An event, as I take the word, means a portion
of the flux of existence; it is a conventional moment,
like the birth of Christ or the battle of Waterloo, com-
posed of natural moments generating one another in a
certain order, and embedded in a particular context of
other events: so that each event is a particular and can
occur only once. Only the type of such a sequence,
composed of such moments, is the form of the event,
and this form is a universal. It need never have
occurred; if I had said the resurrection of Christ,
instead of his birth, the reader might have his doubts
about it. The fact that such an essence was ex-
emplified somewhere in an event would be a historical
truth; in order to substantiate it, the flux of matter
must assume that form; without this material and
incidental illustration that type of sequence would
remain in the air, in the realm of fiction or of theory.
It is especially important at this point to dispel that
confusion between essences and facts which makes a
quicksand of all philosophy. I will therefore give
_a separate name to the essence of any event, as
IoI


102 THE REALM OF MATTER


distinguished from that event itself, and call it a
trope.

In what precisely does an event differ from the
trope which it exemplifies? I reply (for I must be
Atrope _ brief): in being enacted. Any substance differs
isnotan from the essence of that substance, and any
py event from the essence of that event, in that
it can arise and perish, and this in two ways: externally,
by intruding into a field of irrelevant entities, or quit-
ting that field; and then again internally, by changing
the order of its parts, each of which, in a thing or an
event, has an individuality internal to it, and is a con-
crete component, not merely a fragment or aspect of
the whole. Things and events are contingent and they
are compound, even if monotonous or continuously
similar: whereas their essences are eternal, and even
when complex are not compound but absolutely in-
dissoluble.

Now, in a flux, the total essence realised in the form
of its flow during any particular period obviously
cannot be realised in any one of its moments, when
only this moment exists: it can be realised only
progressively, by the order in which those moments
arise and vanish. This order is the trope; it is the
essence of that sequence seen under the form of
eternity; and since existence, in this event, has realised
that essence, that essence has descriptive value in
respect to this world. It belongs to the realm of
truth.

For this reason, a trope is not on the same plane
of being as a perspective, because it is not relative to
Atrope any point of view or native to any psyche: a
nota per- perspective is only specious, whilst a trope is
spective. formal. The flux, of its own initiative and
in its own person, falls into that order composed of
those elements, whether anyone observes it or not;
the trope is a historical truth, the perspective is a


TROPES 103


historical impression. But these relative impressions
or perspectives could never arise if substance and the
flux of substance had no essence of their own to begin
with: that would be tantamount to saying that sub-
stance was nothing, that there were no moments and
no centres, and that there was no difference between
a flux and what was not a flux. The nature of existence
is to possess whatsoever nature it possesses with a
treacherous emphasis, dragging that essence, by a sort
of rape, from its essential context into contingent
relations; those relations, being contingent, are vari-
able; and the flux is merely the realisation of this
intrinsic variability involved in existence. The flux
is accordingly always tracing some path through the
realm of essence, and at every point assumes an assign-
able posture: that is to say, while each natural moment
enriches the flux with its intrinsic quality, the exist-
ence of that moment comes by a transformation of
the substance which flows through it and unites it
in a determinate trope with its antecedents and its
consequents.

Thus, in order to describe an event we need to look
forward and back along the path of change, and to note
what each included moment which we are ji describes
able to distinguish had for its origin and for its some
results. Observation then discovers a trope, embedded
but unless this trope spans all existence, and imexistence.
extends endlessly or to some absolute end of time,
the total event which it defines will be like the natural
moments composing it, a mere episode; and this
episode, observed because we happen to belong to the
same epoch, will be caught on the wing, leaving a
margin before, behind, and around it of unexplored con-
tingency. The embosoming reality, by virtue of which
this whole episode takes its place in nature, will remain
unknown. The mind cannot pursue the roots of things
into the darkness; it cannot discover why they exist;


104 THE REALM OF MATTER


it must be satisfied with noting their passing aspect,
which is but an essence; and it must follow the chase,
carried by its own galloping substance, to see what
aspect they may wear next. The flux, or the path of
existence, will elude us if we are content to express it
lyrically, by eliciting the intrinsic essences of its single
moments; but it may be partly described dramatically,
in epic tropes, in terms which are formule or types of
sequence.

Tropes are not necessarily exhaustive even of that
part of the flux in which they may be discovered:
Tropes are Many heterogeneous tropes may run on to-
ofmany gether, or may appear once only, like a lost
sorts, inter- . :
woven and thought. When a man is speaking, there are
superposed. tropes in his language; every word uttered
being a trope, as well as all inflections and forms of
syntax. But these cannot live detached, in a realm of
grammar; they can live only when grafted on the
wholly different tropes of the nervous system, heart-
beats, and circulation of the blood; and these bio-
logical tropes are again embedded in others of longer
span, belonging to natural and political history. All
these measures are more or less on the human scale,
familiar but treacherous; because they in turn can
only live if supported and filled out by minute incessant
vibrations, molecular and ethereal, or by whatever else
may mark the primary pulse of nature. In this complex
of changes, perhaps endless tropes might be dis-
tinguished by a tireless and ingenious observer. Each
animal and each philosopher picks out those which fall
in with the rhythms and oppositions of his own habits
and thoughts: a mile means a thousand paces, and we
measure all things by our own stride. These measures
are not false on that account; on the contrary, they
are true, since the tropes of human existence are
natural tropes, belonging to the same flux as all the
others, and capable of being their measure. But they


TROPES Santos


are not exclusive, nor exhaustive, nor pre-eminent: and
superstition consists in thinking them so.

A sceptic, fearing to fall into such superstition, might
even complain that all tropes were merely impression-
istic units; that, in fact, they were nothing but perspec-
tives, and that in supposing them to be more, I and
all other men (including himself when not sceptical)
were dupes of our human interests and habits. But
the oversight and self-contradiction inherent in scepti-
cism recurs here unabashed. In obeying our habits and
interests we are masters, not dupes; our habits and
interests are themselves tropes that must have been
established victoriously in the flux, if living creatures
defined by those tropes are able to lift their heads
out of it and to survey it, no matter how relatively and
how partially. Everything cannot be merely imputed.
Imputation itself must exist actively, in centres
and on occasions which are not imputed but actual.
If for instance space, time, and matter were not
characterised by definite properties and modes of
being, separating them from non-entity and distin-
guishing them from one another, they would be simply
nothing. If in the region indicated by these names—
for we use them indicatively in, perception and by
animal faith—there is anything at all, it must possess
the essence which it possesses, of which these names
are partial suggestions; although, of course, the true
essence of that substance need not at all resemble the
images which, in using those names, may occupy any
man’s fancy.

Scepticism, then, need not be turned into a dogma,
into absolute relativism, solipsism, or idealism, nor into
a denial of substance and of truth. On the contrary,
a scepticism sceptical of itself may become a method of
discovery, and in challenging superficial tropes it may
reveal deeper ones. And here, in the words “ interest ”
and ‘“‘ habit” I think we have a hint of a principle


106 THE REALM OF MATTER


applicable to the criticism of tropes. No trope is exclu-
sive, as if it could prevent the parallel, higher, lower,
or intertwined development of other tropes;
peer bs d; they are habitual
repeated ut some tropes are repeated; they
are the most modes of action or measures constantly main-
eg tained; and this circumstance distinguishes
them from local harmonies, often the most important
zesthetically, which arise only once, by an unprecedented
union of circumstances. The advent of Christianity, of
the Renaissance, and of the Reformation are important
tropes never, we may presume, to be repeated; but
birth and death are perpetual in nature, and the habits
and passions of each creature, while it lives, are prin-
ciples of reiteration; they involve repetitions in action,
and they find and use repetitions in nature, answering to
their own precision of form. Organisms are instruments
of repetition; and they rely, for their existence and
prosperity, on the repetition of opportunities for the
repetition of their acts. Were this reliance not justi-
fied, or this mechanism unstable, there could be
no life, experience, or art in the world. ‘The more
exactly and the more pervasively a trope repeats itself
the more it introduces us, if we discover it, into the
heart of the flux, and the better it supplies us with
an instrument and a background for tracing such
rarer tropes as may be discernible occasionally, or
such as may arise only once. Moreover, repetition
of itself marks the beginning and the end of a trope
and rescues it from the arbitrary scope of human
apperception.

Tropes realised only once—like the whole history
of the world, if there be such a total—are resultant
Galva harmonies, which only emotion could regard
pervasive as reasons for their own existence. Tropes
be funda- realised occasionally leave open the question
mental. of their incidence: why do they appear at
certain junctures and not at others? If no reason can


TROPES 107


be given, the flux to that extent is found to be chaotic.
If on the contrary their initiation is regular, they are
parts of a universal trope, which requires them at
those junctures, and connects their occasions by a
mechanism deeper than they. This universal trope will
be realised everywhere, and contained, not interrupted,
in the realisation of all supervening occasional tropes.
The flux can be truly and surely measured only by
tropes which repeat themselves uninterruptedly on
their own plane.

Such a trope is called mechanical: so that to say
that the world is fundamentally mechanical is the
evident alternative to saying that it is funda- ., |.

: Le echanism
mentally chaotic. Nor is it merely by a play ig the
on words, or a sort of divination, that we are alternative
5 . : . : to chaos.
justified in saying so: the thing follows from
our original trust in the possibility of action, which is
the criterion of existence, and the test of substantiality.
The agent and his world must both be compacted of
matter moving in constant and recurring tropes, if the
one is not to be mad and the other treacherous. Men
of the world, and women even with more assurance,
are quick to foresee or to divine what must be going on.
Naturally they express this insight in loose human
terms; but the trust in repetition and in mechanism is
there, else all penetration and all policy would be pre-
cluded. To turn this imaginative insight into science
is merely a matter of attentive observation, measurement,
and transcription of current metaphors into technical
terms. The behaviour of animals would then appear
to be scanned by tropes continuous with those which
scan the behaviour of matter everywhere, if not iden-
tical with them. Madness and wild originality, like
volcanoes and tornadoes, will be of the greatest help
in hastening this assimilation; because the level of
mechanism is so deep and its scale so far from the
human that it is better revealed in cataclysms, miracles,


108 THE REALM OF MATTER


and diseases than in the placid course of superficial

experience. Rarer, +e |
All this, however, is said in general and from a
transcendental point of view: it prejudges nothing
Thefunda. 28 to the particular mechanism which may
mental actually be fundamental. In any case, in

trope :
calling tropes mechanical, because by hypo-


arbitrary, :
vital, not thesis constantly repeated, we must not


Sarena assume that they are mathematically neces-
simple. sary, or not vital, or simple, or exclusive.
On the contrary, they are contingent and arbitrary,
since they are forms of existence, which might just as
easily have possessed any other character. ‘They are
spanned by all sorts of other tropes, including those
native to the human senses and to human logic. They
are radically “ vital’, if this word means spontaneous
and irreducible to any alien principle. As to their
simplicity, that is perhaps only a relation to human
alacrity or bewilderment in their presence, and no
property of their substance or essence. Forms of flux
can never be quite simple, since they must contain
several terms; in existence they are hardly separable
from the tensions which realise them, which probably
extend to infinity; so that to speak of simplicity is
rather a sign of it in us, than a serious postulate of
science.

There is a reason why comparatively simple tropes,
called laws, are discoverable in those parts of nature,
like the heavens, which we observe from a

Laws: how : : :
discerned great distance, and also in those parts, like
and in what the depths of matter, which we cannot observe
’ at all, but may imagine in terms relative to
their gross aspects and motions. Distance and theory
act like a sieve: they eliminate all the detail and leave
only average results or total impressions, conveyed
by special and highly selective media, such as light
and mathematical calculation. The picture thus pro-


TROPES 109g


duced, if there be a picture at all, is a pure fiction, a
visual or phonetic symbol perfectly subjective and
human; but the law enunciated may be true; that is,
the flux may actually pass through the series of abstract
positions selected, and in its moving equilibrium may
satisfy the equations expressed in the law.

When tropes are called laws, there is danger of
idolatry: for although scientific philosophers often
warn us that a law is merely a formula or an
average, or an equation probably approxi- een
matively realised in a certain plane of events, Physical

° <4° . idol.

yet this probability lets loose our action and
expectation; and the force of expectation projects its
confidence into a myth; it erects Law into a meta-
physical power compelling events to obey it. This
is the great idol, I will not say of science, but of the
passions which science subserves. Images are as
indispensable in science as they are in worship; a
thorough iconoclast, who should banish all images,
poetical and mathematical no less than sensuous, would
simply make a desert of the mind, and destroy all
science, like all religion; but these necessary images
are vehicles, not ultimate objects of regard. The
quick mind passes through them, here to the instant
fact, there to the supreme essence.

I think that the reality of law can be briefly ex-
pressed in two maxims: one, that whatsoever happens
anywhere, happens there spontaneously, as Natural
if it had never occurred before and would causation

- spontane-
never occur again; the other, that whatso- ous, but
ever spontaneously happens once will have habitual.
spontaneously happened before and will spontane-
ously happen again, wherever similar elements are in
the same relations. The first of these maxims pro-
claims the contingency, substantiality, originality of
fact everywhere: it is the axiom of empiricism, when
experience is understood practically and not psycho-


18 Ke) THE REALM OF MATTER


logically. The second maxim proclaims the postulate
of action and of reason called the uniformity of nature.
It is only a postulate, which contingent, substantial,
and original facts may at any point disallow; but in
so far as they do so, they revert to chaos and render
life and art difficult, if not impossible.

“The reign of law” is accordingly only a modern
and bombastic equivalent for the ancient naturalness
of nature. In so far as the law is more rigid than a
habit, it is a human artifice of notation. In so far as
it indicates a co-operative march of events mutually
generated and destroyed, it is another name for the
ways of nature or of God, for the forms which exist-
ence can show to spirit. But nature, though highly
favourable to spirit, since she has bred it, is not governed
by her child; and even in our familiar world the wide
margin of incalculable properties by which the calcul-
able part of nature is surrounded—what we sometimes
call her secondary and tertiary qualities—proves this
most curiously; for in the world of action, as spirit
conceives it, spirit itself seems superfluous. And
perhaps even in that calculable skeleton of primary
qualities, selected because they can be measured and
predicted in mathematical tropes, there may be a
margin of error; for a law is an essence, eternally
identical, and nature is in flux, and probably never
the same. Very likely all the movements of matter
are more or less elastic or organic: I mean responsive
afresh to a total environment never exactly repeated,
so that no single law would perfectly define all con-
secutive changes even in the plane of matter, and every
response would be that of a new-born organism to
an unprecedented world. There would be nothing
magical in this: it would merely distribute the radical
contingency of existence throughout its successive
phases, without concentrating it in a single initial
fact and initial law. But on the human scale, and for


TROPES III


fashioning perishable human works, such fundamental
instability in nature would remain negligible. Even
in a land of earthquakes we live in houses.

Belief in law when hasty is called superstition or,
when more cautious, empiricism: but the principle in
both cases is the same. Both take expecta- The hazard
tion for probability; and what probability in empiri-
can there be that an expectation, arising at Peoer.
one point, should define a law for the whole tition.
universe? Expectation is an animal attitude resting
not at all on induction or probability, but on the fact
that animals are wound up to do certain things and
vaguely but confidently posit a world in which their
readiness may become action. In superstition, as in
empiricism, we yield to the vital temptation to ignore
reason, and we trust to courage and to whatever idea
is uppermost in the mind. Yet in a roundabout way,
on the scale and in the period of that animal life, this
blind courage is normally justified by the event. For
how should the psyche be ready and eager for a par-
ticular employment, if in her long evolution she had
not been moulded to just that employment by a world
which allowed and rewarded it? How should potential-
ities and propensities be more deeply rooted in her
than in the world of which she is an integral part?
Certainly, her ideas are specious and her passions
precipitate; yet for all their delusions and disarray,
they have brought her forward, and she survives; so
that things expected, hoped for, and worked for by
any prospering animal, are, on the whole and with a
difference, likely to happen.

There is then no necessity in the relation between
cause and effect, and no assurance that law is sais,
constant. Nevertheless, causation is prevalent: status of
were it not prevalent in fact, the expecta- ‘ope
tion of it could never have arisen. But the :
validity of a prevalent law lies simply in its function as


112 THE REALM OF MATTER


a measure of events; it is no adequate description of
them, much less a power bringing them about. Ob-
viously the complete and actual march of events cannot
be reduced to anything else than its full and precise
self: and even its complete form, being an essence,
would be, if considered apart, in another realm from
its manifestation. There is no constraint to exist
native to these tropes, but it may be true that the flux,
which must exhibit some form or other, does for a time
and in a certain dimension exhibit this particular trope,
or, as we say, obeys this law. A mathematical or
pictorial skeleton is thus traced by the economy of
thought within the body of nature, leaving all the other
dimensions and all the other tropes to hang like gar-
lands about those calculated supports. The skeleton
exists, in the sense that by hypothesis this law prevails
- now in this region; but it is no skeleton in its operative
function, like that of an animal; it is no rigid substance
within the soft substance of events; it is only a trope,
which the thrifty mind selects from the tangle of
relations which hold those facts in the mesh of existence.
The selection is not made arbitrarily, but in sympathy
with the scale and character of the action which that
thrifty mind follows in its fortunes and prophesies in
its thoughts.

Many a divergence among philosophers may be
understood and dispelled by this consideration: that
Necessary the fundamental tropes in nature, far from ex-
inadequacy Cluding other tropes, inevitably produce them.
of tropes When things are in motion, new relations
the full © arise among them by a necessary magic, and
reality. eae > :

they lend themselves to description in various
logics or anatomies without interrupting their habitual
flux. It is never a just objection to the reality of any
trope that it may not be the exclusive trope in the
movement of existence, or that there are events which
it cannot properly measure. Mathematical tropes may


TROPES 113


pervade the realm of matter, supporting occasional
moral and esthetic tropes which supervene on the
mathematical tropes without interrupting them.
Tropes, mathematical or vital, mechanical or his-
torical, all belong to the region of Platonic Ideas; they
are unitary patterns distinguishable in the at
movement of things; they are no part of the ecsences,
moving substance executing those patterns Seuee
and overflowing them. Yet, if any mind is put cannot
to perceive that flux, or to distinguish any of control,
its phases, it cannot do so otherwise than by ~~
discerning some essence exemplified there, which limits
one phase or one moment and divides it from another.
Of itself existence has no wholeness: it would not be
existence if it were not scattered into moments, each
its own centre, reaching out towards one another in
the dark, forgetting what they were in what they
become, and learning what they will be only by
becoming it. It is the very function of flux and of
volume in the flux, it is the singular virtue of physical
time and space, to make it possible that incompatible
things should be equally actual, and irrelevant things
closely conjoined. For when anything is actual, the
existence of any ulterior thing becomes, to that living
moment, eventual, and unnecessary: whether that
ulterior thing arises or fails to arise, whether some-
where else it once existed or did not exist, makes no
difference here. No difference, I mean, in the instant
fact: for that by subterranean processes or substantial
derivation, this moment has followed upon others, and
will issue in others again, is, if true, an additional
circumstance, curious but, in principle, subsidiary: for
each of those other moments, and every physical bond
between them, would still have to realise and posit
itself on its own account, as this moment posits and
realises itself here. The brute fact might be enlarged,
but it would necessarily remain insulated and absolute
I


114 THE REALM OF MATTER


in its contingency. No moment, no event, and no
world can insure the existence or the character of
anything beyond it.

How, then, impose on all existence some trope
exhibited by it here and now, and trust that trope to
ea be universal? Why should the flux submit to
prevalence reproducing this particular pattern, instead of
is condi- bringing others to light? The contingency
tional. : : : :

of existence is pervasive, and the stress of it
may be everywhere much the same, but the forms of
existence are likely to be always, as we recede from
any fact, increasingly different. The repetitions are as
contingent as the novelties; each field of repetition, if
we extend the range of observation beyond its limits,
proves itself a novelty, as does every species of animal,
every art, and every idea. Even if, in fact, some trope
is perpetually recurrent, or if one little unchanging
world is suspended for ever in the midst of a vacuum
destined never to be peopled by other worlds, still
this final truth is an accident and almost a paradox:
for why should this universe have come to be so trim,
when the infinity of essence was tempting it to be
otherwise?

It follows that whenever a trope of any sort has been
distinguished and found to prevail in nature, as far as
our knowledge extends, it need by no means prevail
beyond the limit of this domesticated region, nor above
or below the level of our human sensibility. It need
not even exclude anomalies and outbreaks of chaos in
the interstices of the prevalent tropes. In viewing any
part of nature as a unit, as we do in the act of discovering
a trope, we have necessarily substituted an essence for
it. For this reason essences only can be data: the fact
which has aroused this intuition and which we posit in
these sensuous or grammatical terms, necessarily tran-
scends these terms, and every ideal synthesis of them.
It exists on its own moving plane, by tension towards


TROPES 115


ulterior facts and by relation to them. Our intuition is
a snapshot: the image it creates yields a word, a law,
a Jogos in another realm of being from the flux which
confronts it. The tropes which we call the laws of
nature cannot therefore exclude other and contrary
_ manifestations of what nature secretly contains. Egotism
and credulity may protect most of us from troubling
about those foreign possibilities; if there comes any
startling failure in our presumptions—any miracle or
paradox—we are inclined to believe that the marvel
responds to our private interests even more directly and
surely than does the familiar routine of the world; and
the more remote and eccentric the comet that intrudes
into our skies, the clearer proof we read in it of our home
faith. Everything is indeed a support for the religious
spirit, when that spirit is addressed to the truth; but
when it is addressed to imposing on the universe its
own animal habits and animal prosperity, the farther it
ranges the more it is likely to find itself out in the cold.

For fear of this unhomeliness of the infinite, some
philosophers in all ages have adopted a heroic way of
asserting the absolute domination of their y ton of
acquired science: they have supposed that the recurrent
history of the world is self-repeating and comes °“'**-
round for ever in a circle. Infinity and familiarity are
thus reconciled; and the limited evidences of human
knowledge do not prevent it from claiming unlimited
authority. The horrid sense of something alien and
undiscoverable beyond receives its quietus. There is,
the inspired philosopher asserts, always something
beyond the known, but it is always a repetition of what
he has discovered: it is this again and again. And so
without further exploration, and without the super-
human labour of changing his habitual categories, the
philosopher realises his dream of finding the trope,
vast or minute, which nature shall be condemned to
exhibit for ever.


116 THE REALM OF MATTER


- 'To assume such inertia in things, when existence
is essentially inventive and spirit the most sublimated
Moral and volatile form of it, might seem to be itself
justification g curious instance of inertia: and of inertia
of the :
demand for in the wrong place, because thought at least
ENE might be lively. But the motive and the true
sphere for such a love of finality lie in the moral life;
there it is indeed imperative to find a master trope, and
to stick to it. The psyche (as we shall see presently) is
herself a trope, not a substance: but a trope so imbedded
in substance as to execute itself energetically, when it
has a chance, and not merely to be exhibited passively,
by a concourse of other tropes. The psyche is a definite
potentiality rooted in a seed, and exhibited unswervingly
in the development of that seed, if suitably nourished
and allowed to mature. Such an innate but merely
potential trope, which an animal strives to realise by
his growth and action, has the aspect of a will; it may
become conscious: not at first or normally conscious
of its own ultimate form, but rather of incidental con-
trasts between pleasure and pain, success and failure,
involved in the realisation of its destiny. In hunger
and the chase, in wounds and constraint, an animal
gradually learns to distinguish such objects and actions
as are good, in that they further the discharge of his
innate powers, from such as thwart this discharge and
are evil. All experience and wisdom will do nothing
but define for him the trope in which his life moves or
ought to move; hence the profound marriage of animal
life with reason, with definition, with selection. Hence,
too, the abusive projection in human philosophy of
rules of art upon the flux of existence. The realm of
matter, for the moralised spirit, seems to exist only to
be mastered, to be reformed, to be painted. Such is
indeed its moral function in man, in so far as he profits
by its economy. Profit, or the hope of it, rules the
thrifty mind, not only in religion, where the edifying


TROPES 117


aspect of things is deputed to be their essence, but also
in science, where the most august philosophers, in order
to judge between true and false theories, often employ
the childish criterion of simplicity. The flux, however,
is not subject to these subjections; and only a specu-
lative spirit, after much discipline, can learn to rejoice
with it in its freedom.


CHAPTER VII
TELEOLOGY


WE have already seen that explanation by habit or law
is a reduction of events to their rhythms or repetitions;
oF we gain no insight into why or how a thing
ike : :
explanation happens by saying that it has often happened
bylaw, before. Did we really wish to understand,
explanation ° ° fi é
by purpose We Should inquire into the inner elements
is verbal of such a mutation in any one of its instances:
only. 5 :
because a thing must happen each time by a
concourse of motions there, and not because the same
thing happens also in other places; although naturally
it will happen again if the conditions which produced
it here are repeated. Now a different form of mock
explanation appears in what is called teleology, when
the ground of things is sought in their excellence, in
their harmony with their surroundings, or in the
adaptation of organs to their functions and of actions
to their intentions.
Such correspondences exist: teleology, if it be only
a name for them, is a patent and prevalent fact in nature.
Nature  Lndeed the adaptation of things to one another
awebof is involved in their co-existence: a thing can
adaptations. arise only by finding and taking its place
where other things make room for it. Everything
in the moving equilibrium of nature is necessarily co-
operative. But the question becomes interesting (and
unanswerable) when we ask why, at any point, this
118


TELEOLOGY 11g


so singular thing should have found such a singular
set of conditions as to permit or compel it to exist there.
A wider view, exploring antecedents and consequents,
and discovering analogies, may enlarge the prospect,
and, as happens in the books of naturalists, may so
pleasantly occupy the mind with pictures and stories,
that we may stop asking for reasons. And to invoke
adaptation itself, as if this were a cause of adaptation,
would be to halt at a word, adding perhaps to it, as an
element of power, the bated breath with which we
pronounce it.

Yet this human scale and these human emotions,
which we impose so fatuously on the universe, bear
witness, on the plane of thought, to the existence of
organisms and of life on the plane of matter; for we
should have no emotions and no scale to impose on
other things if our own being were not definite, animate,
and self-assertive.

In human society teleology takes a special and
conscious form: it becomes art. Not only do tropes—
which here we call methods—everywhere yyight art
dominate the scene, but very often the method be the key
is explicitly adopted or modified, and the *™™
action planned; foresight and intention occupy the
first moment of it, and execution of that prevision
occupies the second moment. Here the preformation
of events and the pre-adaptation of instruments to
their uses is a simple fact of history. Knowing how
our passions and purposes watchfully realise their
avowed ends, may we not reasonably assimilate obscure
events to these deliberate actions, the causes of which
seem clear to us and intimately confessed? As we do
things when we wish, must not all nature, or God
working through nature, wish everything when they
do it? Must not some idea, seen under the form of
the good, guide and attract every movement in nature?

Yes: that is the normal way of speaking, the


120 THE REALM OF MATTER


rhetorical or poetical way of describing nature in human
terms from the human point of view. But moral
ears. sentiment, poetry, and theology are forms of
only in literature, not of science; they are not wrong
the realm jn their own sphere, and their rightness
of art. ° ate : °

becomes intelligible, and takes its place in
natural history, when we see its relativity to human
experience, and its psychic seat. ‘There, in literature,
a sceptic should be the last to quarrel with the use of
moral analogies in describing nature: poetry does not
contradict science, because in daring to be poetry, it
avows a complete ignorance and disdain of the prose
of things. Poetry is poetry, and opens up a legitimate
vista within its own world, but only to a poetic spirit;
in its material existence it is a flood of verbiage inci-
dental to human passions and their rhetorical auto-
matisms. In its biological capacity poetry can be
described only in prose; and all its insights reappear
as incidents and as subjective creations bred in the
realm of matter.

Before indicating, in the tentative way which alone
is possible, the material basis of teleology, it may be
* well to examine the logic of it in the imagina-

oral :
beinghas tion; for the contrast between poetry and
physical + prose is by no means absolute, and any
roots and :
works only SCrupulous study of moral philosophy com-
through pels us to restore that subject, and ourselves
who pursue it, to our place in nature. The
clearness of moral life after all is only a verbal clear-
ness; a sort of facility and acceleration by which our
acts and feelings come to a climax and fulfil their
natural tropes. We are left in the dark concerning
the manner of this fulfilment. We are even more in
the dark as to the ground of the ideas and wishes which,
as we say, guide our conduct; when all goes well, we
need not stop to question them, but presently when
they clash with one another and fail of fulfilment, the


TELEOLOGY 121


easy miracle of their power begins to seem dubious,
and subterranean bonds between them and the world
of action become visible in a new, a biological, direction.

Consider first the existential presence of human
wishes and ideas. Is it conceivably an original fact
and unconditioned? Why should any wish an wishes
or idea arise at all here and now? Is the peieees
mid-void peopled with them, as with little physical
winged heads of cherubs, without bodies and °c<asions,
without support? Surely if anything ever had a cause
and was evidently secondary, it is human will and fancy;
to take them for absolute beings, or original powers,
would be to allow theoretical sophistries to blind us
to the plainest facts. If I want water, it is because
my throat is parched; if I dream of love, it is because
sex is ripening within me. Nature has fixed the char-
acter, and circumstances have fixed the occasion, for
this ferment of desire and conception. Conscious will
is a symptom, not a cause; its roots as well as its con-
sequences are invisible to it, material, and often in-
congruous and astonishing.

But suppose that the mind, like some morose tyrant,
determines to shut all doors and windows against the
outer world, and to see only by the lamp of ,.,
self-consciousness. What will be the stuff physical
of its meditations? Nothing but animal °%**-
wishes and barn-yard ideas; demands for food, air,
liberty of motion; dreams of wild things to be chased,
eaten, played with, or hidden; or perhaps of fame to be
won, empires conquered, friendship and love and praise.
How comes absolute free-will or a groundless moral
energy to choose these singular objects? Could it
not have employed its inviolable leisure and its infinite
invention in conceiving something better than such
a very humble, cruel, and nasty animal world? And
could not its sentiment have been less sentimental,
less unctuous and constrained, less tainted by terror


122 THE REALM OF MATTER


and desperate delusion? Why are human love and
religion so tormented, if they are masters of the world?
If they command miraculously and matter obeys, is
it not because matter had first created them and dic-
tated the commands which they were to issue?

Evidence of this, if it were needed, might also
be found in the loose character of ideas and wishes
They are compared with their fulfilments, even when
Sones they are materially fulfilled. These ideas and
accompany- Wishes are personal, confused, and incom-
ing action. plete. When a law-giver designs a constitu-
tion or an architect an edifice, a thousand contrary
principles and suggestions assault his mind. Unless
he is very precipitate, or an absolute slave of habit, the
plan will take shape in his mind to his own surprise;
it will be a sudden concretion of subtle currents and
accidents within him, the harmony and relevance of
which, if any, we call his genius or his ability. Even
when these are greatest, and most seasoned by ex-
perience, their prophetic virtue will be only abstract
and partial; the event will be a new surprise, as was the
idea. For it is hardly possible that the edifice when
complete, or the constitution when in actual operation,
should produce the same impression on the mind as
the plan conceived there originally. The plan arose
by a synthesis of acquired impulses within one body:
the work arises by a concourse of actions which, even
if still those of the same person only, and obedient to
the same vital impulses as the idea (as happens in
singing, speaking, or making a gesture) yet occur now
in the outer world, in a comparatively foreign material,
and with a greater admixture of accidental concomitants.
Therefore a man’s actions and works seem to him less
a part of himself than his intentions, but to others seem
more so: because to others he is a personage and to
himself he is a mind.

Ideas and wishes, then, are mental echoes of move-


TELEOLOGY 123


ments proper to bodily life; were they not, they could
have no application and no relevance to the world.
The more accurately they prefigure events ___.

“T° Scientific
and seem to control them by prescribing psychology
their tropes, the better they prove their own ‘self isa
fidelity to the ruling impulses of matter. te neiioie:
Clear ideas are evidences of clean arts; a firm ‘¢. of
and victorious will bears witness to a strong”
and opportune economy in the organism. Indeed,
for a scientific psychology behaviour is the only con-
ceivable seat of mind, and intelligence simply a certain
plasticity in organisms which enables them to execute
tropes in subtle harmony with their material oppor-
tunities. ‘True, mind and intelligence are something
more in fact. ‘This we perceive when, in reflection, we
gather up sensuous images, memories, lyric effusions,
and dramatic myths into a literary psychology, which
may be remarkably convincing but remains purely
literary; for it cannot follow the flux of its subject-
matter by observation and measurement, but must re-
create it in imagination, and leave it at that. Similarly,
the history which interweaves intentions with events
and ideas with motions may give a capital description
of moral perspectives, but it is simply literature.

Total events in nature are never wholly mental, and
it is on their material side, through their substance
and physical tensions, that they are derived yy.ta1
from previous events and help to shape the events,
events which follow. But this doctrine is #cs),
based on far-reaching considerations which _ be teleo-
may often be ignored; and when only the '°%"
mental side of an event is discovered, the material and
substantial side of it may be denied, and states of mind,
in their purity, may be regarded as total natural events.
It will then seem plausible to regard them as links in
the chain of natural causes, for are they not moments
in experience, as memory or dramatic reconstruction


124 THE REALM OF MATTER


may survey it? But this amphibious psycho-physics,
even if we admitted it, would not be teleological. Each
mental event would transmit existence and energy to
its successor in proportion to its own intensity and
quality, just as if it were a form of matter. It would
not thereby exercise any magical moral control over its
consequences. Thus intense thought might make the
head ache, fear might cause paralysis, amusement
laughter, or love a want of appetite and early death.
The teleological virtue of wishes and ideas is accordingly
something quite distinct from their alleged physical
influence; indeed it is only when we disregard this
incongruous mechanical efficacy attributed to them
that we begin to understand what their teleological
virtue would mean: it would mean a miraculous pre-
established harmony between the commands or wishes
of the spirit and events in the world. It would mean
the exercise of divine power, which a well-advised
human being could never attribute to himself, but
only to the grace of God, perhaps passing through
him.

Teleology then retreats into a theology, or into a
cosmological idealism, fraught with curious alternatives:
The will for a divine mind, if conscious and omniscient
invoked, as high theology would make it, would not be
if cosmic, :
would be an event; it would be a decree, a command-
mythical. ment, or an eternal glory relative to all events,
but on a different plane from any of them. If, on the
contrary, the divine will was immanent in the world
and intermingled with all natural events, it would
evidently not be separate or self-conscious; indeed, it
would be only a poetic synonym for the actual fertility
of matter, and for the tropes exhibited in its evolution.
In either case, after making our bow to this divine
will, out of deference to antiquity and to human
rhetoric, we should be reduced to studying as far as
possible the crawling processes of nature. These will


TELEOLOGY 125


be the seat of such teleology as surely exists, aa as
a critical philosophy may record without falling into
rhetorical ambiguities. Organic life is a circular trope
which at each repetition touches or approaches a point
which we regard as its culmination, and call maturity.
In man, maturity involves feelings, intentions, and
spiritual light: but it is idle to regard the whole trope
as governed by these top moments in it, which are
more highly conditioned, volatile, and immaterial than
are their organs, their occasions, or their fruits.

Nature is full of coiled springs and predestined
rhythms; of mechanisms so wound up that, as soon as
circumstances permit, they unroll themselves 4...
through a definite series of phases. A seed, isan
if suitable sown and watered, will grow into eer
one particular sort of plant, and into no other. i organic
At the inception of such a trope the pre- ™
destined movement is said to be “potential”; there is
a “* predisposition ” in matter at that point to execute
the whole movement. What is this predisposition?
Examination of a seed would probably never disclose
in it a perfect model of the future flower, any more
than examination of a young man’s passions, or of his
body, would disclose there the poems which these
passions might ultimately inspire. Potentiality seems
to be an imputed burden, a nominal virtue attributed
to the first term of a trope because of the character of
the rest of it. Yet, sometimes, as in a seed, the imputed
burden is genuine, and potentiality is pregnancy. A
true beginning and sufficient cause of what ensues is
really found there; but this initial reality need not at
all resemble that which it will become. Its nature is
internal, hidden, perhaps inexpressible in the terms of
human observation at all; so far is it from being an
image cast into that well from the outside, or a reflex
name given to it in view of the future. The tropes
which mark the obvious metres of nature tell nothing


126 THE REALM OF MATTER


of the inspiration, the secret labour, or the mechanism
which brings them forth.

Heredity is an obvious case of repetition; but its
temporal scale is so large in respect to an observer of
Heredity his own species that individualities may seem
isatrope to him more striking and self-grounded than
theme uniformities. Yet from a little distance, or
rateand in an alien species, heredity recedes into a
perilous monotonous succession of waves and a multi-
of its tudinous repetition of objects. Both impres-
instances: sions are just, and nature, here seen at close
quarters, reveals the complexity of her endless pulsa-
tions. There is a curious involution of the organism
in the seed. The seed is not merely the first state of
the organism in the offspring but was also a part of a
similar organism in the parent. This notable trope is
apt to blind us to the mechanism requisite for its
repetition. We are solicited by the magic rhyme of it
to rest content with explaining the beginning of life by
the end, the part by the whole, the actual by the ideal,
the existent by the non-existent. Abandoning physics
altogether as incapable of solving the mystery, we may
wonderingly record the reappearance, by the will of
God, of new generations of every species, each after its
‘kind. But as in the Christian sacraments, so here in
natural reproduction, the grace of God does not operate
without physical continuity in its channels; and it would
be by tracing that continuity, and the accidents which
often cause it to deviate from its course, that reproduc-
tion might be seen in its natural setting. The multitude
of successes would not then blind us to the far greater
number of failures. To arise in this world and to
become something specific is in each instance a fresh
and doubtful undertaking.

Prodigious complexity is something to which nature
is not averse, like a human artist, but on the contrary
is positively prone; and in animals the attainment of


TELEOLOGY 127


such prodigious complexity is made possible by the
fact that a special environment is at hand, in the body
of the parent, enabling the young organism to run
through its earlier and fundamental phases safely, surely,
and quickly. So unerring is this development that the
animal is often born complete; yet there is enough
wavering, with false starts in directions once taken by
the species and since abandoned, to show that the core
of the seed need contain no prefigurement of the whole
result, but that this result is reached tentatively in
reproduction, as it was originally in evolution; only that
the ovum is a far better locus for a perfect development
of the psyche than was the bleak outer world.

Nevertheless the manner of this quick and spon-
taneous growth is little understood, and only the total
trope remains to furnish our imagination. Seeing its
dramatic unity, we feel that the first term must be
pregnant with the ultimate issue, as the first act of a
good play—assuming human nature and the ways of the
world—is pregnant with the last. We forget that poetic
genius itself must have natural sources and reason ex-
ternal guides; and we attribute the perpetual attainment
of some natural perfection to the miraculous power of the
trope realised in it, or to the divine will contemplating
that trope and, as if fascinated by its magic beauty,
commanding matter to reproduce it for ever and ever.

Final causes certainly exist in the conduct of human
beings, yet they are always inadequate to describe the
events in which they are manifested, since |.
such events always presuppose a natural occa- seat bugis
sion and a mechanical impulse; and these 2te moral

F ‘ perspectives

cannot flow from the purpose or choice which superposed
they make possible and pertinent. The whole on natural
operation of final causes therefore requires,
beneath and within it, a deeper flow of natural forces
which we may darkly assign to fate or matter or chance
or the unfathomable will of God. Yet, since without


128 THE REALM OF MATTER


this irrational occasion or afflatus those purposes and
choices could never have taken shape, it ought to suffice
for our reasonable satisfaction if, in some measure, the
natural perfections of things are manifested in them,
and if there is some degree of harmony between the
world and the spirit. Moral tropes have their proper
status and dignity if they are actually found in the
human aspect of events; they are not rendered false or
nugatory merely because the material existence pre-
supposed in them has a different method of progression.
Medicine and psychology are now disclosing a truth
which men of experience have perceived in all ages,
that virtues and vices are equally phases of a controllable
physical life: a fact which takes nothing away from their
beauty or horror. They are the moral qualities of a
natural being.

Mechanical tropes in their turn are incompetent to
describe or measure spiritual realities, such as excellence
or happiness or spirit itself; nor is it reasonable to
require them to do so. They will be amply authenti-
cated if they can serve to trace the whole material back-
ing and occasions of those moral harmonies or spiritual
lights. ‘These, in order to arise do not require a different
mechanism of their own, or a different occasion; the
material mechanism and the material occasion fully
suffice to introduce and to justify them. The physical
terror of murder has made murder criminal; the animal
warmth and transport of love have made love tender
and deep. Of course, a deepening of apprehension is
required, founded itself on a changed habit, a finer
involution of responses in the organism; so that the
same things which were done and regarded brutally
may be done and regarded with a far-reaching sense of
all that they involve. This new sense sees light and
glow in the fire, of which the blinder senses could feel
only the heat. Hence if either the naturalist or the
moralist is a man of a single sense he must be left to


TELEOLOGY 129


grope in his professional half-light. Nature in his
children will probably redress the balance.

The fact that natural organisms are far more closely
purposeful than works of art, may itself serve to reveal
the true superposition of art upon nature. ;
Art is a human, marginal, not indispensable ae
extension of natural teleology. The essential imperfect

: , form of
organic tropes, passions, and powers of man natural
must have been first firmly rooted in the race, ons2nisa-
before anyone could conceive a project, or be “<
able to execute it as conceived. Even highly civilised
humanity forms its plans only dreamfully, and is cheated
by its own impotence, or by contrary currents, in the
execution of them. Often the most fixed purposes and
the most vehement efforts are wasted; indeed, they are
always wasted in some measure, because no designer
can foresee all the circumstances of his work, or its
ulterior uses. Any work, when it exists, is a part of
the realm of matter, and has its fortunes there, far from
all control or intention. The saintly Henry the Sixth
founded Eton and King’s College for the salvation of
souls; they have served admirably together with the
playing-fields to form the pensive but quite earthly
ethos of the modern Englishman. In the works of
nature there is not this division, nor this irony; the uses
are not forecast in any purpose, consciously prophetic;
they are simply the uses which the thing finds or de-
velops, as it changes under the control of the changing
circumstances. Thus the precision of adjustment be-
tween organs and functions, far from being a miracle,
is in one sense a logical necessity or tautology; since
nothing has any functions but those which it has come
to have, when plasticity here with stimulus and oppor-
tunity there have conspired to establish them.

An organism is a concretion in matter which can
feed, defend, and reproduce itself. Its initial form of
expansion finds a natural limit, beyond which circum-

K


130 THE REALM OF MATTER


stances do not suffer it to go: then, unless it perishes
altogether, it reproduces itself: that is, it breaks up
nae into parts, some of which repeat the original
Scat form of expansion, while the others dissolve
history of into their elements and die. Expansion thus
organisms. ° .

becomes rhythmical, repeating a constant
trope; except that, if the force of concretion and
accretion is powerful at that centre, and if the circum-
stances are favourable, that trope may become inter-
nally more complex: in other words, the organism
may acquire fresh organs. ‘These will reappear in each
generation in their due place and season, if the environ-
ment continues to give them play; and in this way a
race and a species will be established, individual and
recognisable, yet subject to private variations and also
to generic shifts, by the atrophy of some organs and
the development of others.

If, then, we understood genesis we should under-
stand heredity; for an organ cannot arise, either the
Need final first time or the last, except spontaneously, and
eects as if it had never existed before. But how can
toform it arise at all? By what genetic impulse does
i some nucleus of matter modify its parts, and
complicate their sympathetic movements, without losing
its unity of action in respect to external things? It is
for the naturalists to reply, in so far as observation or
experiment enables them to trace the actual genesis of
bodies; for as to the verbal explanations which they
may offer, they are not likely to be on the scale or in
the terms proper to the flux or to the concretions of
matter at a depth so far below that of human language.
Let matter take shape as it will: all that concerns me
here is the nature of the teleology present in the result.
Organs must arise before they can exercise what we
call their function, and this function must be one which
the circumstances usually render possible and self-
maintaining. Is the philosopher reduced to impressions


TELEOLOGY 131


on the human scale? Must he blankly confess that
nature is mysteriously inspired, and that matter gathers
itself into organisms as if it were magically guided by
the love of that life and those achievements of which
such organisms will be capable?

Not quite. Moralistic physics is wiser than natural
science in not ignoring eventual spiritual issues; but
these issues are no factors in generation. On yp:
the contrary, they are themselves uncertain, because
conditioned, and precarious; so that if we presuppose
reach any depth or honesty in our reflection organisms.
We cannot attribute the movement of nature to the
antecedent influence of the future good which she
might realise. Instead, we must attribute the pursuit of
this good, and its eventual realisation, to her previous
blind disposition, fortified by the fact that circum-
stances were favourable to that development: and this
last fact is no accident, since (as we have just seen)
the adaptation of the parts of nature to one another
is necessary to their existence, and nature could not
retain any disposition for which circumstances did not
make room, at least for the moment. In a word, the
teleology present in the world must be distinguished
from final causes. The latter are mythical and created
by a sort of literary illusion. The germination, defini-
tion, and prevalence of any good must be grounded in
nature herself, not in human eloquence.

The conditions of existence, as I conceive it,
involve change and involve adaptation: perhaps if we
ponder these necessities we shall gain some Concretions
insight into the origin of organisms and the rise in-_
secret of life. Each natural moment has a 2 fux of
forward tension, it is a moment of transition, substance.
Its present quality was determined by the force of
lateral tensions guiding the previous dynamic stress of
its substance; and the issue, as this moment passes
into the next, will be determined by the lateral tensions


132 THE REALM OF MATTER


to which its inner or forward tension is now subject.
Is it not then native and proper to existence in its
primary elements to congregate and to roll itself to-
gether into shells fashioned by its seeds, and into
seeds fostered by its climate? And will not this initial
concretion at any point go on swallowing what it
can, destroying what it must, and harmonising its own
complexity, until some contrary wind or some inner
exhaustion disperses its elements? May not this dis-
ruption itself become less frequent with the exten-
sion of any cosmos, and the better co-ordination of
the motions within it? A natural moment may be pro-
longed or reiterated; it may be caught up in a trope
itself indefinitely recurrent, so that associated moments,
duly spaced and controlled by their mutual tensions,
may for a long time reappear in a fixed order. Any
trope will recur if within its substance, or near by, there
is generated a fresh natural moment, like the original
one, and under similar conditions. Nothing more is
required for a swarming or a hereditary life to cover
the face of nature.

Every natural moment, in which matter at any
point holds some essence unchanged, is fit to be the
Allmatter Seed of all creatures and the centre of all
is fittobe thought. Some sequels might be reached only
the matter b
of anything, by a great and prosperous development from
ieee that moment outward; others might require
draw itinto the dissolution of this complex, and a fresh
that form. beginning, in some other direction, from one
of its radical elements. But forwards or backwards,
everything might be arranged round any nucleus,
without the least violence or suppression of its original
life, if only it were planted in the requisite soil. This
profound naturalness of the greatest complications
becomes clear to us in health, when we move spon-
taneously and think smoothly; it is only in disease
that we tremble at our own incredible complexity, and


TELEOLOGY 133


that harmony becomes a problem. In fact harmony in
itself is neither more difficult nor rarer than disorder:
that which demands a rare concourse of circumstances
is harmony of this sort, here; and yet, in the special
circumstances in which anything arises, harmony with
that thing is presupposed, otherwise that particular
thing would not have arisen. When our own ready-
made being and action are the facts in the foreground,
we instinctively and justifiably take it for granted that
surrounding nature is in harmony with them and will
give them suitable play; they are not unconditioned
or omnipotent, but they are co-operative with their
world. It is only when a different harmony, not native
to us, is suggested, that it seems to us impossibly
dificult of attainment and, if actual, miraculous.
Before we could adapt our presumptions and impulses
to that alien order we should need to retrace our steps
and follow that other path of development. Every-
thing that is, except where it is, would be infinitely
improbable.

Thus the very fluidity of the flux, in its moving
equilibrium, causes every concretion that can arise to
arise, and every organism to maintain itself eoee
which can maintain itself. Such is the »§ Sac.
feeble yet ineradicable sympathy in the poor tion fow re
heart of matter towards the whole realm of from the
essence. With many a false start, with a same.
momentum and an organic memory often”
disastrous, with an inertia always trustfully blind,
existence passes inevitably and in many streams from
what it is to what it can be; it changes in the very act
of continuing, and undermines its condition in sur-
rounding it with developments and supports. ‘Then,
when any of these concretions collapses, as they must
all collapse in turn, it returns to the charge, perhaps
in the same direction, like Sisyphus, or like Proteus,
in quite another. In the first case we speak of repro-


134 THE REALM OF MATTER


duction, in the second of evolution: but these words
do not stand for different forces or principles but only
for different results. In reproduction the flux repeats
the same trope, in evolution it changes that trope for
one more complex or appropriate, imposed by a new
balance of forces.

That collapse is inevitable follows from the fact
that existence is essentially chaotic. Its parts, perhaps

infinite in multitude, will be always readjust-
Enough for - D : :
the day is ing their mutual tensions, so that, ultimately,
the good the ground gives way under any edifice.
thereof. :

And the catastrophe may ruin more than
that confident system; it may radically transmute the
elements which composed it, since every essence which
matter may wear is arbitrary and, if occasion offers,
may be exchanged for some other. Moreover, any
trope has limits. ‘The matter which executes or re-
produces it, having done so, falls back into the relative
chaos which remains the background of everything;
so that death, in every instance, is the end of life; and
in nature at large death can be only temporarily and
imperfectly circumvented by fertility. I speak of
fertility in a particular species and within one moral
world: for of new creations there is presumably no
end, and one perfection can neither remember nor
desire another.

I confess that the life of the spider, or my own life,
is not one which, if I look at it as a whole, seems to me
worth ‘realising; and to say that God’s ways are not
our ways, and that human tastes and scruples are
impertinent, is simply to perceive that moral values
cannot preside over nature, and that what arises is
not the good, in any prior or absolute sense, but only
the possible at that juncture: a natural growth which
as it takes form becomes a good in its own eyes, or
in the eyes of a sympathetic poet. Then this good
realised endows with a relative and retrospective


TELEOLOGY 135


excellence all the conditions favourable to its being, as
if with prophetic kindness and parental devotion they
had conspired to produce it. The spider is a marvel
of pertinacity, and I am not without affection for my
own arts and ideas; we both of us heartily welcome
the occasions for our natural activities; but when those
occasions and activities have passed away, they will
not be missed.


CHAPTER VIII
THE PSYCHE


OF all tropes the most interesting to the moralist is
that which defines a life, and marks its course from
Life not birth to death in some human creature. But
an effect a life is also the most crucial of tropes for the
oeiace natural philosopher; for here his congenial
matter. mathematical categories leave him in the
lurch, and he must either recognise their inadequacy
to express the intimate flux of substance, or else cut
his world in two, appending a purely literary or moral
psychology to his mathematical physics. If emotional
life preoccupies him, and he cannot simply ignore it,
he may even be tempted to revert to the most primitive
of dualisms, and to conceive the flux of existence as
the resultant of two opposite agents: one an inert
matter only capable of sinking into a dead sea of in-
distinction: the other a supernatural spirit, intrinsically
disembodied, but swooping down occasionally upon
that torpid matter, like the angel into the pool of
Bethesda, and stirring it for a while into life and shape.

Need I give reasons, after all that has preceded,
Matter je, 100 discarding this last conception? In the
by defini- first place it would be a materialistic and
Senet superstitious view of spirit to regard it as a
of all wind, an effort, or any kind of physical force.
motons: On the other hand, in conceiving matter to be
inert, merely heavy, and intrinsically blank, we should

136


THE PSYCHE 137


be forgetting our original reason for positing matter at
all; and instead of that existing substance, filling the
field of action, and necessarily fertile in everything
to be encountered there, we should be considering
some casual symbol for matter, such as ignorant
sensation or abstract science may have created. To
say that matter, as it truly exists, is inert or incapable
of spontaneous motion, organisation, life, or thought,
would be flatly to contradict the facts: because the
real matter, posited in action, and active in our bodies
and in all other instruments of action, evidently pos-
sesses and involves all those vital properties.
Nevertheless, the venerable tradition which attri-
butes the fashioning of the body to the soul might be
retained, if only we could restore to the word , .Vy
“ce ” : a Sano . 4
soul” all its primitive earthliness, potency, moulding
andmystery. Soul, as often in antiquity, would the Pedy
then signify an animating current widely itself
diffused throughout the cosmos, a breath un- ™*°"#!-
created and immortal as a whole, but at each point
entering some particular body and quitting it, in order
to mingle again with the air, the light, the nether dark-
ness, or the life of the god from which it came. Such
a warm, fluid, transmissible agent would evidently be
material. Industry requires hands: a traceable cause
of specific motions must travel through space in par-
ticular channels. And indeed, that the soul was material,
was once taken for granted both in India and in Greece.
On the other hand, the Platonic and Christian tradition
has come to identify the soul with a bodiless spirit, a
sort of angel, at first neglecting and afterwards deny-
ing the biological functions which were the primitive
essence of the soul; until in modern times the soul has
been discarded altogether and its place taken by con-
sciousness, something which in reality is the last and
most highly conditioned of the works of a natural
soul.


138 THE REALM OF MATTER


Thus a soul or an angel became, for the Christian
imagination, a supernatural substance, a personal spirit
Christian Without material organs, yet somehow still
notionof capable of seeing, loving, and thinking, and
the soul. ~~ even of exercising physical force and making
its presence felt in particular places. In man, and
perhaps in other creatures, an evil fate had imprisoned
some of these angelic souls in a natural body, and con-
taminated them with the vital principle—the old animal
heathen soul—proper to such a body. Sometimes,
under the influence of Aristotle and of the Apostolic
doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh, theologians
have endeavoured to bridge the chasm between these
two souls, one generative and the other degenerate.
Thus the orthodox Catholic doctrine declares that by
a special act of creation a rational immortal soul,
previously non-existent, is substituted during gestation
for the animal soul of the embryo: the new supernatural
soul taking on the functions of the previous natural
soul in addition to its own, and by that union becoming
subject to their influence; an influence which marks
the fallen state of the supernatural soul and its partici-
pation in the sin of Adam. A forced conjunction of two
incompatible beings is obvious here, yet this conjunction
is not without its dramatic propriety in expressing
theoretically the moral conflicts of the Christian life;
and the same incongruities reappear in any doctrine
which would make the soul immaterial and its functions
physical. A soul essentially generative and directive
must be capable of existing unconsciously and of exert-
ing material energy. If it were ever clearly identified
with consciousness it would evaporate into a passing
feeling or thought, something unsubstantial, volatile,
evanescent, non-measurable and non-traceable. Once
recognised in its spiritual actuality, this thought would
not only be obviously incapable of exercising the vegeta-
tive and propulsive functions of animal life,-but would


THE PSYCHE 139


loudly call for such an animal life to support its own
intuitions and lend them their place in nature and their
moral significance.

Avoiding, then, this poetical word, the soul, laden
with so many equivocations, I will beg the reader to
distinguish sharply two levels of life in the human
body, one of which I call the spirit, and the other the
psyche. By spirit I understand the actual light of con-
sciousness falling upon anything—the ultimate invisible
emotional fruition of life in feeling and thought. On
the other hand, by the psyche I understand jp. sion
a system of tropes, inherited or acquired, of the
displayed by living bodies in their growth Yh
and behaviour. This psyche is the specific form of
physical life, present and potential, asserting itself in
any plant or animal; it will bend to circumstances, but
if bent too much it will suddenly snap. The animal or
plant will die, and the matter hitherto controlled by
that psyche will be scattered. Such a moving equi-
librium is at once vital and material, these qualities not
being opposed but coincident. Some parcels of matter,
called seeds, are predetermined to grow into organisms
of a specific habit, producing similar seeds in their turn.
Such a habit in matter is a psyche.!

In literary psychology the psychic often means simply
the mental; and the reader may be disconcerted by the
suggestion that the truly psychic, the dynamic life of
both body and mind, is on the contrary material. Let
me remind him, in that case, of the following funda-
mental points:

1. The psyche is not another name for consciousness
ormind. Everything truly conscious or mental—feeling,
intuition, intent—belongs to the realm of spirit. We
may say of spirit, but not of the psyche, that its essence
is to think. The psyche is a natural fact, the fact that


1 A further illustration of this definition of the psyche may be found in
my Soliloquies in England, pp. 217-224.


140 THE REALM OF MATTER


many organisms are alive, can nourish and reproduce
themselves, and on occasion can feel and think. ‘This
is not merely a question of the use of words: it is a
deliberate refusal to admit the possibility of any mental
machinery. The machinery of growth, instinct, and
action, like the machinery of speech, is all physical:
but this sort of physical operation is called psychical,
because it falls within the trope of a life, and belongs
to the self-defence and self-expression of a living
organism. How should any unsophisticated person
doubt that the movements of matter have the nature of
matter for their principle, and not the nature of spirit?

2. By the word matter I do not understand any
human idea of matter popular or scientific, ancient or
recent. Matter is properly a name for the actual sub-
stance of the natural world, whatever that substance
may be. It would therefore be perfectly idle, and
beside the point, to take some arbitrary idea of matter
and to prove dialectically that from that idea none of
the consequences follow with which the true substance
of the world is evidently pregnant. What would be
thereby proved would not be that matter cannot have
the developments which it has, but that that particular
idea of matter was wrong or at least inadequate.

3. In calling the psyche material I do not mean to
identify her with any piece or kind of substance, an
atom or monad or ether or energy. Perhaps all sorts
of substances may enter into her system; she is not
herself a substance, except relatively to consciousness,
of which her movements and harmonies are the organ
and the immediate support. She is a mode of substance,
a trope or habit established in matter; she is made
of matter as a cathedral is made of stone, or the worship
in it of sounds and motions; but only their respective
forms and moral functions render the one a cathedral
or a rite, and the other a psyche.

4. The whole life of the psyche, even if hidden by


THE PSYCHE IAI


chance from human observation, is essentially observ-
able: it is the object of biology. Such is the only
scientific psychology, as conceived by the ancients,
including Aristotle, and now renewed in behaviourism
and psycho-analysis. ‘This conception of the psyche
also allows the adepts of psychical research to retain a
congenial name for the very real region, far removed
from everything that I call spiritual, in which occult
processes, unusual powers, and subtle survivals may be
actually discovered.

Biology aspires to be a part of physics, and this for
the best of reasons, since in describing the spontaneous
tropes that prevail in the flux of matter, Qotinuity
physics is simply biology universalised. The of physics
problem is not where to place the frontier ™¢>!°sy-
between two disparate regions, but only to discover
how the tropes most obvious in each of them are
superposed or grow out of one another. The inanimate
world must needs concern the zoologist, since it per-
vades and unites all living creatures; and the animate
world must needs concern the physicist, since it is
the crown of nature, the focus where matter con-
centrates its fires and best shows what it is capable of
doing. Obviously, if we could understand the inmost
machinery of motion we should understand life, which
on the biological level is simply a system of motions.

In one sense, indeed, all matter is alive. Its deadest
principles, like gravity and inertia, are principles of
motion. The dry dust and the still waters i ail the
which the wind sweeps into a vortex, if energies of
mingled, will breed. Even celestial matter, Pioverly
which might seem too tenuous and glowing vital or
to be alive after our fashion, is fertile in light, Pi
which may be, perhaps, the primary stimulus to life,
or a first form of it. Yet this universal ethereal trepida-
tion is too diffuse and elusive to seem life to our human
judgment, accustomed as we are to the crude contrast


142 THE REALM OF MATTER


between a barking dog and a dead one. Even in animals
and plants the life in which, so to speak, nature 1s
interested, the life which is transmitted and preserved,
is not their individual life, describable in a biography.
Its vegetative continuity takes a course which, from
our point of view, seems subterranean and unfriendly;
for it does not pass from one complete animal or plant
to the next (as the phases of each life succeed one
another for the observant spirit), but the child buds
at mid-branch, and the tree obdurately outlives its
seeded flowers. In fact, individuality and tenacity
never are more pronounced than in that old age which,
as far as the life of nature is concerned, is so much
dead wood and obstructive rubbish. Life at our level
has adopted a vehicle which—like all natural vehicles
—has a form and a story of its own, apart from the
inherited movement which it serves to propagate. . The
individual has outgrown his character of a mere moment
in a flux; his trope is not simply the general trope
repeated and passed on. It has become a redundant
trope, surrounding that other with epicycles and
arabesques and prolongations useless to the march of
transmissible life, yet enriching it at its several stations.

It is only metaphorically, therefore, that the general
movement of nature can be called a life, or said to be
Thereis  @nimated by a cosmic psyche. Nor would
no cosmic the attribution of these tropes to the universe
pus as a whole explain why they should arise
again within it. On the contrary, it is more natural
to find fish in the sea than within other fishes. We
may rather say that matter, although perhaps every-
where organic or at least ready to be organised, becomes
animate only when it forms hereditary organisms; and
that a psyche exists only in bodies that can assimilate
and redistribute the substances suitable for preserving
and propagating their type. Thus the cosmos—not
feeding or breeding—can have no psyche, but only


THE PSYCHE 143


psyches within it; and the spirit is no psyche, but
always has some psyche beneath, which sustains it.

Embryology, the most obscure part of biology, is
accordingly the fundamental part of it. In the present
state of knowledge, the psychologist is con- profound
demned to taking summary and superficial obscurity
views of his subject, for he sees gross results, psychic
gross variations, gross repetitions, and all the mechanism.
fine, individual, intricate labour of the psyche escapes
him. Physiology and organic chemistry work only
with ready-made materials, which already possess
inexplicable specific virtues and habits; and psycho-
analysis, in really opening a trap-door, as disease does,
into the dim carpentry of the stage, is compelled to
transcribe that intricacy into metaphors. Its reports
come to it in hectic language, the latest, most wayward,
most hypocritical ebullition of psychic life; while its
own theories, for lack of physiological knowledge, must
be couched in mythological terms. Thus the psyche
remains a mystery in her intrinsic operations; and if
something of that mystery seems to hang about the
feminine name we are giving her, so much the better:
we are warned that we do not, and probably cannot,
understand.

What our knowledge of the psyche lacks in precision
it makes up, after a fashion, in variety and extent. All
that is called knowledge of the world, of,

e psyche,
human nature, of character, and of the pas- iike other
sions is a sort of auscultation of the psyche; pews
and the familiarity of our verbal and dramatic is known to
conventions often blinds us to their loose us by her
application, and to our profound ignorance =~
of the true mechanism of life. Not knowing what we
are, we at least can discourse abundantly about our
books, our words, and our social actions; and these
manifestations of the psyche, though peripheral, are
faithful enough witnesses to her nature. She is that


144 THE REALM OF MATTER


inner moving equilibrium from which these things
radiate, and which they help to restore—the equilibrium
by which we live, in the sense of not dying; and to keep
us alive is her first and essential function. It follows
naturally from this biological office that in each of us
she is one, vigilant, and predetermined; that she is
selfish and devoted, intrepid and vicious, intelligent
and mad; for her quick potentialities are solicited and
distracted by all sorts of accidents. She slept at first
in a seed; there, and from there, as the seed softened,
she distributed her organs and put forth her energies,
always busier and busier in her growing body, almost
losing control of her members, yet reacting from the
centre, perhaps only slowly and partially, upon events
at her frontiers. If too deeply thwarted her industry
becomes distraction; and what we sometimes call her
plan, which is only her propensity, may be developed
and transformed, if she finds new openings, until it
becomes quite a different plan. But against brutal
obstacles she will struggle until death; that is, until her
central control, her total equilibrium and power of
recuperation, are exhausted. Her death may as easily
occur by insurrection within her organism—each part
of which is a potential centre on its own account—as
by hostile action from outside.

I hardly venture to say more. To watch a plant
grow, or draw in its leaves, to observe the animals in a
zoological garden, is to gain some knowledge of the
psyche; to study embryology or the nervous system or
insanity or politics, is (or ought to be) to gain more:
and every system of science or religion is rich in this
sort of instruction for a critic who studies it in order to
distinguish whatever may be arbitrary in it, based on
human accidents, and without any but a psychic ground.
All the errors ever made about other things, if we under-
stand their cause, enlighten us about ourselves; for the
psyche is at once the spring of curiosity and the ground


THE PSYCHE 145


of refraction, selection, and distortion in our ideas.
Summary reaction, symbolisation, infection with rela-
tivity and subjective colouring begins in the senses
and is continued in the passions; and if we succeed
in removing, by criticism, this personal equation from
our science of other things, the part withdrawn, which
remains on our hands, is our indirect knowledge of the
psyche.

Each man also has direct experience of the psyche
within himself, not so much in his verbal thoughts and
distinct images—which if they are knowledge qug aiso ’
at all are knowledge of other things—as in a directly,
certain sense of his personal momentum, a eRe a
pervasive warmth and power in the inner self-con-
man. As he thinks and acts, intent on external *““°""°*
circumstances, he is not unaware of the knot of latent
determinate impulses within him which respond to
those circumstances. Our thoughts—which we may be
said to know well, in that we know we have had them
often before—are about anything and everything. We
shuffle and iterate them, and live in them a verbal,
heated, histrionic life. Yet we little know why we have
them, or how they arise and change. Nothing could
be more obscure, more physical, than the dynamics of
our passions and dreams; yet, especially in moments of
suspense or hesitation, nothing could be more intensely
felt. There is the coursing of the blood, the waxing and
waning of the affections, a thousand starts of smothered
eloquence, the coming on of impatience, of invention,
of conviction, of sleep. There are laughter and tears,
ready to flow quite unbidden, and almost at random.
There is our whole past, as it were, knocking at the
door; there are our silent hopes; there are our future
discourses and decisions working away, like actors re-
hearsing their parts, at their several fantastic arguments.
All this is the psyche’s work; and in that sense deeply
our own; and our superficial mind is carried by it like

L


146 THE REALM OF MATTER


a child, cooing or fretting, in his mother’s arms. Much
of it we feel going on unmistakably within our bodies,
and the whole of it in fact goes on there. But the form
which belongs to it in its truly physical and psychic
character, in its vital bodily tropes, is even less known
to us than the mechanism of the heart, or that by which
our nerves receive, transmit, and return their signals.
The psyche is an object of experience to herself, since
what she does at one moment or in one organ she can
observe, perhaps, a moment later, or with another
organ; yet of her life as a whole she is aware only as we
are aware of the engines and the furnaces in a ship in
which we travel, half-asleep, or chattering on deck; or
as we are aware of a foreign language heard for the first
time, perceived in its globular sound and gesticulation
and even perhaps in its general issue—that all is prob-
ably a dispute about money—yet without distinguishing
the words, or the reasons for those precise passionate
outbursts. In this way we all endure, without under-
standing, the existence and the movement of our own
psyche: for it is the body that speaks, and the spirit
that listens.

The psyche is the self which a man is proud or
ashamed of, or probably both at once: not his body
in its accidental form, age, and diseases,


She is th Beata as Nig ORE
internal. ftom which he instinctively distinguishes those
pore initial impulses and thwarted powers which


organim are much more truly himself. And this is
and of its the self which, if he lives in a religious age,

’ he may say that he wishes to save, and to find
reviving in another world. Yet this self is far from
being a stranger to the body; on the contrary, it is
more deeply and persistently the essence of the body
than is the body itself. It is human, male or female,
proper to a particular social and geographical zone; it
is still the fountain of youth in old age; it deprecates
in a measure the actions and words which circumstances


THE PSYCHE 147


may have drawn from it, and which (it feels) do it
enormous injustice; and yet the words and actions
which it might have wished to produce instead are all
words and actions of the same family, slightly more
eloquent in the same human language, slightly more
glorious in the same social sphere. The psyche is so
‘much of us, and of our works, as is our own doing.
Conflicts between the flesh and the spirit, between
habit and idea, between passion and reason, are real
conflicts enough, but they are conflicts be- ay moral
tween one movement in the psyche and conflicts
another movement there. Hers is a compound ry ai
life, moulded by compromise, and compacted ‘2 her life.
of tentative organs, with their several impulses, all
initially blind and mechanical. Rarely will any par-
ticular psychic impulse or habit move in sympathy
with all the rest, or be unquestionably dominant. It
follows that what in religion or in moral reflection we
call the spirit is a precarious harmony. It is threatened
by subject powers always potentially rebellious, and
it necessarily regards them as wicked and material in
so far as they do not conspire to keep its own flame
vivid and pure. And yet the spirit itself has no other
fuel. Reason is not a force contrary to the passions,
but a harmony possible among them. Except in their
interests it could have no ardour, and, except in their
world, it could have no point of application, nothing
to beautify, nothing to dominate. It is therefore by
a complete illusion, though an excusable one, that the
spirit denies its material basis, and calls its body a
prison or a tomb. ‘The impediments are real, but
mutual; and sometimes a second nucleus of passion
or fleshliness rises against that nucleus which the
spirit expresses, and takes the name of spirit in its turn.
Every virtue, and in particular knowledge and thought,
have no other root in the world than the co-ordination
of their organs with one another and with the material


148 THE REALM OF MATTER


habitat. Certainly such a co-ordination could never
arise except in a psyche: the psyche is another name
for it: but neither could the psyche have any life to
foster and defend, nor any instruments for doing so,
if she were not a trope arising in a material flux, and
enjoyed a visible dominance there more or less prolonged
and extended.

Thus the first function of the psyche in the seed is
to create the outer body. With every organ which she
Formation Drings forth she acquires a new office and a
and new type of life. These changes and develop-
‘fie ments are not devised and suggested to the
psyche psyche by some disembodied spirit, whisper-
equay 4 ¢ ing in her ear. Were they not the natural
pe cal continuation of her innate tensions she

‘would be justified in regarding these prompt-
ings as deceits and snares of the devil. For from the
point of view of the psyche (whose innate impulse is
the arbiter of morals) every change of purpose is a
change for the worse: either a vain complication or a
hideous surrender. It is only lateral tensions, circum-
stances, external pressure, that can compel her to
recast her habits and become, to that extent, a new
psyche. Surrenders are indeed inevitable when the
action for which the soul is ready happens to be im-
possible, or organs once agile are atrophied by disuse;
and new acquisitions of function are inevitable too,
when new occasions induce a different mode of action,
and preserve and solidify it. The burden of the psyche
is in this way continually lightened in one quarter and
accumulated in another. If crippled at first by some
loss, she may ultimately heal the wound (healing being
one of her primary functions) and may live on with her
residual equipment all the more nimbly. On the other
hand she often hardens herself to some novel exertion
which at first was forced and distracting, until that
exercise becomes instinctive and necessary to. her


THE PSYCHE 149


health and peace, so that it is performed with alacrity
and sureness whenever an occasion occurs. Habitua-
tion tames the spirit, or rather kills it in one form and
recreates it in another. This forced attention to in-
strumentalities, this awkwardness, which marks the
acquisition of a new art, yields in time to love and
mastery; and the spirit rises again from its troubles and
threatened death to happiness and confidence.

At bottom, however, the whole psyche is a burden
to herself, a terrible inner compulsion to care, to watch,
to pursue, and to possess. Yet to evade this per mission
predestined career would be a worse fate; and eae
the psyche is more terribly corroded and an imposed
tormented for not doing, than she would be burden.
harassed in doing, or disappointed at having done.
Original sin must be purged, the burden discharged,
the message delivered. Happiness—for the surface of
the psyche is normally happy—lies for her in jogging
on without too much foresight or retrospect, along the
middle way, exercising her central functions heartily,
and reverting to them, as to hearth and home, from
those gambler’s losses or commitments into which she
may be, tempted. In this way she may healthfully
deliver herself in a long life of her native burden,
transmit the same in a healthful measure, and sleep
in peace.

Sleep is in a manner the normal condition of the
psyche, from which in her vegetative and somatic
labours she never awakes, unless it be to suffer; and we
may fancy that a sort of sub-soul or potential life sleeps,
and will always sleep, in the universe of matter, ready
to shape it, when opportunity occurs, into the likeness
of all essence. Yet as this labour must be in time, and
in some one of many alternative courses, the greater
part of that sleeping psyche remains unoccupied, and
the occupied part anxious and full of the fear of death:
from which indeed she cannot escape except by falling


150 THE REALM OF MATTER


asleep again and forgetting, but never really removing,
the peril of a new birth.

To be completely mastered by the psyche makes the
health, agility, and beauty of the body. This sort of
Completely Vittue is common among the brutes. It would

pletely
determinate seem to suffice that a very potent psyche—
psyches are one to which its matter completely submits—
but not should have entrenched herself in the seed
a and should surround it later with outworks
so staunch and perfect that no ordinary hazard will
pierce or bend them. Unquestioning fidelity to type is
always a marvel, a victory of form over matter, which
delights the contemplative spirit. In fragile organisms,
such as children or flowers, this fidelity seems to us
an appealing innocence; but in hard-shell organisms,
which attempt to resist change by force of rigidity, it
seems rather stupid. Brave and proud the conservative
psyche may be: she will not suffer minor accidents to
distract her from her first vows and native intentions;
but against major accidents she has no resource save a
total death; and on earth she must be extraordinarily
prolific to survive at all.

The peculiarity of the human psyche, on the con-
trary, is her great relative plasticity. I will not call it
intelligence, because that presupposes a fixed good to
to be attained, and invention only of new means of
attaining it. A total plasticity, that for greater con-
venience consents to change its most radical direction,
would hardly be life; its only assignable purpose would
seem to be survival, and even this would be illusory,
since the psyche that was to survive would have abdi-
cated in doing so, and would have committed suicide.
This the human soul is capable of doing, morally as
well as physically, as we see in madness, in conversion,
and in the-wilder passions; but ordinarily her plasticity
remains only a means to a native end, an incidental
adjustment in the interests of the major radical passions,


THE PSYCHE 151


which remain supreme at the centre. Yet this alert
human psyche, more intelligent than wise, often forgets
the treasure locked in the citadel, and lives by preference
in her own suburbs, in the outer organs of action and
perception. She then becomes distracted, frivolous,
loquacious; and we may doubt whether all this agitation
and knowingness relieve her of her inner burden, or
only add a dreadful fatigue to a profound dissatisfaction.

Nor is this all: friction at the periphery more or less
recoils to the centre and modifies the organisation there.
Changes of food, temperature, climate, and
rhythm may extend to the very substance Sdanetaae
of the seed whence the next generation is extend to
to grow; so that the psyche transmitted is not © °""”
always exactly similar to the psyche inherited. In the
history of the earth, the evolution and transformation
of psyches must have gone on from the beginning; and
this reconstruction, which in some directions seems to
have come to a temporary end and produced stable
types of animals, in the human race still continues at an
unusual rate. Not so much in the body—unless we
regard clothes and weapons as equivalents to fur and
claws—but in the singular equipment with instruments
by which modern man has surrounded himself, and in
the management of which he lives. The changes are
so rapid that we can observe and record them: some-
thing perhaps impossible and inconceivable to any
psyche except the human.

All this may be studied and described behaviour-
istically, as a chapter in natural history; yet 7y,. secting
we know that the psyche so occupied has an always _
inner invisible experience, which under these lie eg =
circumstances becomes very complex. The becomes in
eloquence of language, the multitude of sights aeaeadi
and sounds, the keen edge of silent emotion ein’
compose a perpetual waking dream—a view "°"8""
of the world which is not a part of the world and which


152 THE REALM OF MATTER


even in sleep continues and shifts fantastically in many
a muted development. ‘This unsubstantial experience,
which is alone immediate, is nothing new or paradoxical
in kind. The psyche is probably never unconscious;
she always feels, in some vague emotional form, the
inherent stress of her innumerable operations. Her
maturing instincts have their false dawn in her mind;
she warms and awakes for a moment at their satisfaction,
and simmers pleasantly when replete. But external
perception is a keener, more inquisitive form of atten-
tion; it is less interested in what is given esthetically,
or even in what might be given, than in the action of
things upon one another and on our bodies. At the
same time, perception cannot fail to supply us with
images—products of the inner psyche, like the feelings
of blind animals—which serve to name and to clothe
in our poetic consciousness those external objects of
her concern. These images and those feelings, together
with the constant flow of unspoken words which we call
thinking, compose a mental or inner life. Its moments,
though probably intent on external material events, are
yet directly but symptoms of psychic movements; so
that it requires only a shift in apperception to transform
all this immediate experience from active consideration
of dubious external objects into a certain and accurate
index to an internal psychic life.

Not that these moments of spirit, these mental
notes and mental vistas, are the psychic life in question.
Secondary ‘Lhey form a thin flux of consciousness, chiefly
or express- verbal in most of us, which in reflective moods
ofcon. becomes self-consciousness, recollection, auto-
sciousness. biography, and literature: all only the topmost
synthesis, or play of shooting relations, on the surface
of the unconscious. In this capacity, however, as a
mental symptom or expression, self-consciousness gives
infallible renderings of the agitation beneath. We may
therefore use it, in so far as we can recollect it or


THE PSYCHE 153


reconstruct it, to describe the psyche and her passions,
just as we use the essences given in perception to
describe pictorially those parts of the material world
on which the organs of perception react.

Hence a second approach to a science of the psyche,
this time not biological or behaviouristic, but personal,
through memory and repeatable mental dis- p,..ipitity
course; and this imagination of imagination of literary
may fill our whole lives, composing a dramatic, PS¥°!°8y-
social, religious world in which we suppose our-
selves to be living. Such a moral world, the world of
humanism, need not mislead in practice the psyche that
creates it. Sometimes she may become more interested
in this play-world—in religion, landscape, fiction, and
eloquence—than in her natural circumstances. Yet
all her imaginative life is interfused with language and
akin to language, so that it often becomes a convenient
‘or indispensable transcript for the march of things on
the human scale. It may be so disciplined and adjusted
to facts as to compose history and literary psychology.

The two sorts of psychology, the scientific and the
literary, are clearly distinguished by Aristotle where
he says that anger is a name for two different tis relation
things, anger being physically a boiling of the to the ::
humours and dialectically a desire for revenge. ene
Boiling of the humours would be an exterior the psyche.
and gross effect of the total movement of the psyche,
and the natural history of a passion is far more com-
plicated and far-reaching than any such symptom; yet
the boiling is on the same plane as the whole object
of biology, on the plane of behaviour, and gives us a
first glimpse of what anger is, substantially considered.
On the other hand, “ a desire for revenge ” is a current
verbal and dramatic expression for such a passion:
this too is summary and might be elaborated in
each case into an almost infinite network of motives,
memories, likes and dislikes, and delicate juxtapositions


154 THE REALM OF MATTER


of images and words; yet whatever figments we might
substitute for the conventional terms ‘“ anger” or
“‘ desire’ would be further literary figments, verbal
or intuitive units formed and re-formed by the dis-
coursing spirit, and non-existent in the realm of matter.
For this reason the most adequate and confident
knowledge of human nature, rendered in literary terms,
as in novels and plays, or in the gossip of busybodies,
covers only what might be called the reasoned element
in life—although it is for the most part foolish at
bottom. The same psychology remains helpless in the
presence of all the radical passions and all the natural
collocations of persons and events by which the life
of mind is determined.

Literature and literary philosophy are nevertheless
the most natural and eloquent witnesses to the life of
the psyche. Literature is conserved speech, speech is
significant song, and song is a pure overflow of the
psyche in her moments of free play and vital leisure.
And this overflow is itself double: biological and
ontological. Biologically it resembles the exuberance
of the psyche in all her well-fed and happy moments,
in the gambols of young animals, the haughtiness of
all accomplished strength, or the endless experimenta-
tion in colours, forms, and habits characteristic of the
psyche in fashioning her strange menagerie of bodies.
Yet the ontological overflow, the concomitant emergence
of consciousness, alone seems to arrest the wonder, not
to say the wrath, of philosophers; and they are so
surprised at it, and so wrathful, that they are inclined
to deny it, and to call it impossible. I have not myself
such an intrinsic knowledge of matter as to be sure
that it cannot do that which it does: nor do I see why
the proudest man should be ashamed of the parents
who after all have produced him. I am not tempted
seriously to regard consciousness as the very essence
of life or even of being. On the contrary, both my


THE PSYCHE 156


personal experience and the little I know of nature
at large absolutely convince me that consciousness is
the most highly conditioned of existences, an overtone
of psychic strains, mutations, and harmonies; nor does
its origin seem more mysterious to me than that of
everything else.

Let us, in this important matter, go back to first
principles. From the beginning it was in the very
nature of existence to be involved in indirect

j : a ‘ hange,
commitments. Being transitive, anything €X~ concretion,
isting is always in the act of becoming some- dissolution,

: : : ° : and varia-
thing which it was not, and yet which it was tion are
the sufficient cause for producing, according ittinsic to
to those irresponsible impulses which animate
its matter and predetermine its fate. The sequel is
always spontaneous and, if we are not dulled by habit,
seems miraculous; yet it is always natural, since no
other development would have been more so, and
some development was inevitable. Nature is not that
realm of essence where all variety and all relations are
perspicuous and intrinsically necessary. Necessity, in
nature, is only an irrational propulsion which, as a
matter of fact, is prevalent; existence could not have
begun to be, it could not have taken the first step
from one form of being to another, if it had not been
radically mad. But this madness not only has method
in it—a method in itself arbitrary and doubtless variable
—it has also a certain glorious profusion, a rising,
cumulative intensity and volume, coming to a climax
and then dying down. The flux thus runs inevitably
into dramatic episodes, even in its own plane of matter;
episodes in our eyes far more interesting than its general
movement, which is perhaps only itself an episode in
some more radical genesis of existence.

But the tacit commitments of such existence are not
limited to the material plane. Every fact involves many
a truth about it; it casts its shadow through infinite


156 THE REALM OF MATTER


distances and makes relevant to it everything that it
resembles and everything that it contradicts. By arising
The eternal and by disappearing it introduces an unalter-
truth about able event into history; it verifies or stultifies
it is 89 all prophecies concerning it and concerning
in it. the place which it fills in the context of
nature, and which might have been filled otherwise;
and it either justifies or renders false everything that
anyone may say or think of it in future.

Here, then, is a whole infinite world, visible only
to the intellect, but actually created and made precise
by the blind flux of matter, whatsoever that flux may
be. These are the indelible footprints which existence,
thoughtlessly running on, neither knows nor cares that
it is making, and which yet are its only memorial, its
only redemption from death, the eternal truth about it.

Now, when the flux falls into the trope which we
call a psyche, existence commits itself unawares to yet
Where the another complication; for now the reverbera-
flux isa tion of its movement in the realm of truth
psyche, |, becomes, so to speak, vocal and audible to
about it itself. Not indeed in its entirety—unless there
become sie ; E
occasions be some divine sensorium to gather all its
for feeling. echoes together—but in snatches. At certain
junctures animal life, properly a habit in matter, bursts
as with a peal of bells into a new realm of being, into
the realm of spirit. When does this happen, and how
is this consciousness diversified and guided? We may
presume that some slumbering sensibility exists in every
living organism, as an echo or foretaste of its vital
rhythms; and even when no assignable feeling comes
to a head, if there is life at all, there is a sort of field
of consciousness, or canvas spread for attention, ready _
to be occupied by eventual figures. Not by amy figures,
as if essences of their own initiative could come down
and appear; but only by certain predetermined classes
and intensities of sensation, possible to the particular


THE PSYCHE 157


organs whose suspended animation, or busy growth,
spreads that canvas and rings that ground-tone of
potential feeling. When ambient influences or inner
ripening modify this vital rhythm, or cause the psyche
actively to assimilate or to repel that stimulant, organic
slumber may easily awake to some special feeling or
image. ‘Thus sensations and ideas always follow upon
organic reactions and express their quality; and intui-
tion merely supplies a mental term for the animal
reaction already at work unconsciously. With each new
strain or fresh adjustment, a new feeling darts through
the organism; digestive sleep breaks into moral alert-
ness and sharp perception; and, once initiated, these
modes of sensibility may persist even in quiescent hours
—for they leave neurograms or seeds of habit in the
brain—and may be revived in thought and in dreams.
Consciousness, then, in its genesis and natural status,
is one of the indirect but inevitable outpourings proper
to an existence which is in flux and gathers ,...,
itself into living bodies. In consciousness the spiritual in
psyche becomes festive, lyrical, rhetorical; she SStoct:¥**


: . f é i materially
caps her life by considering it, and talking to conditioned,


herself about the absent parts of it. Con- [ess can be
sciousness is a spiritual synthesis of organic ep east
movements; and were it not this, no spirit and ° “S°°"°*
no consciousness would ever have any transcendent sig-
nificance or any subject-matter other than the essences
which it might weave together. Yet in fact, on account
of its organic seat and material conditions, consciousness
is significant. Its every datum is an index, and may
become in its eyes a symbol, for its cause. In other
words, consciousness is naturally cognitive. Its spiritual
essence renders it an imponderable sublimation of
organic life, and invisible there; yet it is attached his-
torically, morally, and indicatively to its source, by being
knowledge of it.

Thus, like truth, consciousness is necessarily faithful


158 THE REALM OF MATTER


to its basis in the flux of nature; it is a commentary on
events, in the language of essence; and while its light
is contemplative, its movement and intent strictly
obey the life of the psyche in which it is kindled.
fae Hence the whole assertive or dogmatic force
knowledge Of intelligence, by which the spirit ventures to
isnatural claim knowledge of outspread facts, and not
origin, merely to light up and inspect a given essence.
validity, ‘This whole extraordinary pretension rests on a
and scope. ‘ 5 i :
vital compulsion, native to the body, imposing
animal faith on a spirit in itself contemplative. For in
animals the organs are inevitably addressed to inter-
course with relevant external things, as well as to
internal growth and reproduction. Suspense outwards,
towards an object not within her organism, is habitual
to the psyche. Her tentacles and her actions hang
and grope in mid-air, like a drawbridge confidently let
down to meet its appropriate ulterior point of contact
and support. Even her vegetative life is prophetic,
conscious of maturation, and rich in preparations for
coming crises, vaguely prefigured but unhesitatingly
pursued. Under such circumstances and with such
organs, consciousness could not be pure intuition: it
must needs be intuition carried by intent. The intent
is adventurous; its object or ulterior development is
hidden and merely posited. Yet by thus torturing itself,
and uprooting itself from its immediate datum, spirit
becomes perception, and perception knowledge, in all
its transitive and realistic force. And this perception
and knowledge are, for the same reason, normally and
virtually true: not true literally, as the fond spirit
imagines when it takes some given picture, summary,
synthetic, and poetical, for the essence of the world;
but true as language may be true, symbolically, prag-
matically, and for the range of human experience in that
habitat and at that stage in its history.
So much for the claims of spirit to possess knowledge,


¢


THE PSYCHE 159


and for the range of it. But whence the original qualities
of feeling itself, the choice of essences that shall
appear in intuition, the spectrum of each sense,

the logic and grammar of each type of intelli- spectrum
gence? How does the psyche arrive at any 0 sense
of these creations, rather than at any other? categories
Certainly out of her own substance, and by of 20usht,
the natural diversity and fertility of the tropes creations of
which she imposes on her own matter. The ‘¢ P97
presumption of common sense, that these essences
belong in the first place to objects and pass from them
into the organs of sense, and somehow become evident
to spirit in the dark caverns of the brain, is unfortunately
untenable. We find it plausible—in spite of its in-
coherence and the many contrary facts—because we
begin our reflection at the end, armed with our working
conventions and dogmatic habits. We should readily
understand the enormous illusion involved, and the
false reduplication of our data, if we began at the
beginning, where in the natural world the psyche
begins. Surely pleasure and pain, hunger, lust, and
fear, do not first reside in external objects and pass
from them into the mind: and these are the primary,
typical data of intuition. All the rest—colours, sounds,
shapes, specious spaces and times and sensations of
motion—is hatched in the same nest; it all has a
similar psychic seat and dramatic occasion. If such
essences seem to be found in external things, it is for
the good and sufficient reason that outer things are
perceived by us in these sensible terms, and could not
be perceived were not the psyche sensitive, and fertile
in such signals to the spirit. All things might stand
facing one another for ever, clad in all the colours of
the rainbow; and were there no poetic psyche in any
of them, to turn those colours into feelings of colour
and intuitions of the soul, never would anything
perceive anything else.


160 THE REALM OF MATTER


The psyche is a poet, a creator of language; and
there is no presumption that she will perceive material


They things, including her own substance and
ee movement, at all in the terms or in the order
irectly


herown and scale in which they exist materially. On
movements the contrary, only the reactions of her organ-
and only g 5 5

indirectly ism are represented in her feelings; and these
and rela- __ reactions, which are tropes subsisting only in
ively their : a

external the realm of truth, resemble in nothing the
oceasion. imponderable feelings which are involved in
executing them. ‘The fountain of sense and of sensible
qualities lies indeed in the forward and inner tensions
of natural moments, with their conjunctions and flow
in a psyche. Pain, novel in essence, signalises a special
nervous affection, not another pain elsewhere; and
this signal is suitable, in as much as just such a cry
would be uttered by any psyche in such a predicament,
and for all psyches signifies predicaments of that sort.
The whole of life is a predicament, complex and pro-
longed; and the whole of mind is the cry, prolonged
and variously modulated, which that predicament
wrings from the psyche.

After the spirit is born, and in the midst of business
has begun to take note silently of the actual aspects
Joab and essences of things, the psyche may extend

sychic 5 : é . : :
origin and her action with more circumspection, in what
control of we call the arts. ‘That pause, as we may think

’ it, for wonder and contemplation, was only,
from her housewife’s point of view, a pause for breath:
in stopping to gaze, she gives herself time to readjust
her impulses and increase her range. Having, among
other organs, formed the human hand, she may proceed _
through that instrument to transform matter outside
her body; so that artificial instruments and works
become, as it were, organs of the psyche too. With
this extension of her instruments her spirit, which is
the fruition of them in act, also extends its basis.


THE PSYCHE 161


From her centre, where the spirit lives, she may now
control and watch a whole political, industrial, and
learned world. Civilisation may accumulate for her
benefit a great fund of traditions, which will foster
the spirit systematically and direct it rationally. Just
as in the growth of the embryo there was a marvellous
precision and timeliness in the production of the various
organs hereditary in the species, so in animal society
there is a great, though much looser, predetermination
of what the arts shall produce.

Art, as I use the word here, implies moral benefit:
the impulsive modification of matter by man to his
own confusion and injury I should not call The psyche
art, but vice or folly. The tropes of art and all her
must be concentric with those of health in Subject to
the psyche, otherwise they would not, on the disease.
whole, extend her dominion or subserve her need of
discharging her powers. Nature is everywhere full
of vices, partly apathetic, in that the impulse at work
does not avail to transmute new matter into its instru-
ment, and partly aberrant, in that the impulse itself
runs wild, and destroys, instead of buttressing, its
original organ—for without an organ an impulse can
neither exist nor operate. Thus the psyche continually
creates diseases in her substance, or invents scourges
and trammels to oppress her from without, as does a
false civilisation, through the mad work of her own
hands. These aberrations, if extreme, soon defeat them-
selves by the ruin which they cause; but often they
interweave themselves permanently into the strong woof
of life, rendering life wretched but not impossible.

In the very inertia of habit, however, as in inveterate
vices, there may be a certain luxury or compensation.
Impulse, having taken to that trope, may find a certain
pleasure in repeating it, a sort of dogged allegiance and
sense of rightness, more intimately native and satisfying


than any overt proof of its folly. The virtuous human
M


162 THE REALM OF MATTER


soul, so to speak, is then long dead and buried, and
the omnivorous vice has become a soul in its stead.
We are compacted of devils. Love and conscience,
like the rest, are initially irrational; and the conserva-
tive inner man may strenuously cling to methods in
art and to forms of sentiment which defeat his eventual
rational nature. The fatal imperative of his daemon
may lie deeper in him than any ulterior claim of beauty
or happiness.

Thus the spiritual function of the psyche is added
to her generative and practical functions, creating a
Meantime 1r¢8h and unprecedented realm of being,

eantime oe : . ojike 5
she had the realm of spirit, with its original esthetic
given birth snectrum and moral range and values incom-
to spirit and 5 =
attached it Mensurable with anything but themselves.
to earthly Yet this whole evocation is a concomitant
interests. . : S
function of the same psyche which presides

over bodily growth and action. Were it not so, spirit
would have no place in time or in nature, no relevance
to existence, and indeed, no existence of its own; and
even if by a flight of mythological fancy we imagined
it existing disembodied, it would thereby have for-
feited all its dramatic breathlessness, all its moral
aspiration, all its piety and potential wisdom. It
would be an abstract intellect without a spiritual life,
a hypostasis of the realm of truth or of essence, and
not a human virtue. So that the dependence of spirit
on animal life is no brutal accident, no inexplicable
degradation of a celestial being into the soul of a beast.
All the themes and passions of spirit, however spiritual
or immaterial in themselves, celebrate the vicissitudes
of a natural psyche, like a pure poet celebrating the
adventures of lovers and kings.


CHAPTER IX
PSYCHOLOGISM


Ir the movements of matter are due to the nature of
matter, not to that of spirit, should not the move-
ments of spirit likewise be due to the nature yy. uideq
press ; guide
of spirit, not to that of matter? It might seem attempts to
so: and a great part of human philosophy [ois
has been devoted to exploring this tempt- master of
ing path. Yet the issue has been complete Sov".
confusion; because the nature of spirit is and
not, like that of matter, to be a principle of °°"
existence and movement, but on the contrary a prin-
ciple of enjoyment, contemplation, description, and
belief; so that while spirit manifests its own nature
no less freely than matter does, it does so by freely
regarding and commenting on something else, either
matter or essence: its primary nature is to be secondary
—to be observant and intelligent. As grammar is
arbiter of the syntax of speech, yet contains no power
to determine when anyone shall speak or what he shall
wish to say, so spirit contains no principle to deter-
mine its own occasions, its distribution in time and
place, or the facts that shall seem to confront it. It
cannot originate the animal powers and passions which
it comes to express. Existence and movement, even
in spirit, are therefore the work of matter; while the
perception, the enjoyment, the understanding of both
matter and spirit are the life of spirit itself. If we
163


164 THE REALM OF MATTER


deny this, and insist on assigning to spirit the func-
tions proper to matter, spirit, before we. know it, has
become but another name for matter in our philosophy
and in our lives. In this chapter and in the next I will
endeavour to justify this assertion.

That a material force, or all material forces, should
be called spirit would be nothing new in the history
“here of language, but rather a reversion to the

pirit was Ce yet ° . .
aname for Primitive meaning of the word. Wind is
material invisible but mighty, and it combines a
orce berore ° ° ° ° .
itwasa potentiality of causing total ruin with a
name for gentler habit of filling our sails and doing

‘our work for us. Spirit, a synonym for such
a wind, might well be the principle of all action and
of all motion. So conceived, it would be precisely
that sustaining substance and connecting medium
which is requisite to produce feelings consecutively
and responsively to one another. It would be what I
call the psyche, a reservoir and fountain for the re-
distribution of energy in the material world, a centre
of bodily organisation and action, and simultaneously
an organ of sensation, passion, and thought. When
people feel a power of origination and decision within
them, so that, unless externally hindered, they are free
to do whatever they will, undoubtedly they are not
deceived. It is not the transforming power of the
human heart and brain that any historian of earthly
revolutions would be tempted to deny. Human
energies have polished the earth’s surface and pullulate
in it: and it is only too easy for random impulses and
contagious phrases to carry mankind away, like sheep
after a bellwether. But this guiding or organising
or explosive force in animal life is not spirit in any
spiritual sense. It is an obscure, complex, groping
movement of the psyche, or of many psyches in con-
tact: it is a perpetual readjustment of passionate habits
in matter.


PSYCHOLOGISM 165


When Descartes said that the essence of the soul
was to think he gave an excellent definition of spirit;
but he initiated a tendency which has dominated modern
psychology to its radical disadvantage, the tendency to
describe the mind apart from the body and to make
psychology merely literary. In his own system the psyche
or principle of bodily life was physical and mechanical,
and of this true psyche consciousness or thought could
only be a concomitant manifestation, and by no means
the essence or substance. Nevertheless it was pre-
cisely this collateral or ulterior manifestation of the
psyche, this conscious spirit, that (because it was the
actuality and light of knowledge) became for him and
for his followers the one sure existence, and the fulcrum
of philosophy: so that since his day philo- put taken
sophers have tended to assert that of existence s the.
we have but this single known or conceivable {nowledge,
instance—our own feeling or consciousness. spirit may
When the relativity of all things to the know- absorb the
ledge of them is emphasised, this principle ¥verse-
becomes transcendental idealism; but when only the
mental nature of all existence, perhaps scattered in
many moments and centres, is insisted on, the result
is a system of psychological physics which, for con-
venience, may be called psychologism. This system
professes to describe the stuff and constitution of the
universe; but it differs from ordinary physics in admit-
ting into its world no elements other than moments
of actual experience, as autobiography or dramatic
sympathy might catch and describe them. These
moments, each only too real in itself, will compose all
reality, with nothing latent beneath them, and nothing
save other conscious moments possible beyond.

Such a system, though easily conceivable in the
abstract, never occurred to the ancients, and would
probably never occur to any pure naturalist. Its origin
is rather political and poetical: it is humanism become


166 THE REALM OF MATTER


at once radical and sentimental. It sprang up, together
with Protestantism and liberalism, out of a worthy but
Psycholog- €XClusive interest in the inner man. It marks
ism grows the self-sufficiency of the adult moral indi-
eae vidual, forgetful of his origins, and of the
which it external forces which sustain his being. Such
attempts . .
tomake reforms often end by abandoning the prin-
absolute. — ciple which they seemed at first to exalt, and
psychologism in particular may end by denying the
existence of consciousness. ‘To one who has never
distrusted the orthodox traditions of the human
intellect, this conclusion may seem gratuitous and
absurd: but it is justified relatively, in compensation
for the error of psychologism in making mind absolute,
and in pursuance of its critical method: for after all
consciousness is directed upon its objects, and knows
them before it knows itself.

The impulse to reduce science to literature was
native to humanism and to the whole Renaissance.
Yet How much more interesting than logic or
humanism theology was the limitless experience which
presupposes ;- : 5
belief in literature could transcribe or suggest! Yet in
nature. life a system of science is always involved;
and the system assumed by humanists is probably
naturalism, which if pressed is materialism; but this
is assumed, as all men assume it in daily life, without
stopping to defend or to criticise it. To do either
would be to become the victim of one of those
precarious pedantic dogmatisms which the buxom
humanist despises. He lives by a loose naturalism or
by a loose religious convention, without examining
the principle on which he is living. Nevertheless he
is quite positive about the history of the human race,
and the variety of its languages, customs, and opinions,
including all those conflicting philosophies and re-
ligions which, if taken seriously, would prove so in-
human. He may even discourse freely about the


PSYCHOLOGISM 167


causes of events, indulging in prophecy, and leaning
towards the higher superstitions, such as the belief
in inevitable progress or in laws of history. These
prophecies and superstitions, however, can hardly
be more than dim perspectives which he thinks he
descries in the natural world. History cannot do
without geography and material documents and monu-
ments; psychology cannot do without the words and
actions of material persons. The humanist inevitably
assumes nature reliably at work within and around
mankind: a fact which need not prevent him, as it
does not prevent the avowed materialist, from rele-
gating the physical world to the background of his
thoughts and letting these play by preference on moral
and lyrical episodes.

Suppose, however, that we turn this superficial
humanism into a dogmatic philosophy and assert that
the literary and moral sphere is absolute, so j, a
that human experience has always gone on retreat into
in a vacuum, without any causes, occasions, DRE
or existing objects, other than these same suc- monado-

: 5 5 A logy.
cessive experiences of particular minds. Would
such an all-embracing psychologism compose an
adequate system of the universe? For the purposes
of the dramatic historian or religious moralist, I think
it would. The lives of individuals, as each appears
to his own memories and hopes, make up a sort of
universal Plutarch, a sufficient handbook for the cure
of souls, in which material circumstances need not
figure except as picturesque details or landscapes
diversifying the experience of those several minds.
In sentimental retrospect a man may easily view the
scenes of his childhood as having been unsubstantial,
and merely a visionary stage-setting to the drama of
his young soul. Extending this method to the present
-and future, we may regard the whole world of history,
science, and religion, as internal to the desultory


168 THE REALM OF MATTER


thoughts in which it is conceived. What a simplifica-
tion of philosophy, what a lightening of the burden of
conventional beliefs! At one stroke the spirit seems
to be liberated from all but spiritual preoccupations,
and all things are reduced to so many pleasing or
oppressive sensations, so many friends or enemies
of our internal liberty and peace.

Such were the systems of Berkeley and Leibniz,
which though very unequal in their technical elabora-
Berkeley tion, had this radical merit in common: that
and Leibniz they were perfectly lucid and frank about the
recognised - as :
the psychic ideal or visionary nature of all the possible
ground and data of experience. ‘These data were all
visionary ; ee : Se she
nature of all necessarily “‘inert ideas” or qualities of
phenomena. feeling; they were essences which did not
and could not exist on their own account. While
they were given they qualified the spirit that con-
templated or endured them, and they might then
be said to exist “in the mind ”’; but it was the per-
ception of them that alone really existed; they were
incapable of subsisting or generating one another in
their own specious or objective plane; they arose and
vanished im toto, as did the whole phenomenal world,
with every movement of attention. Thus all images
and terms of thought were impotent and unsubstantial,
yet they were not unmeaning; on the contrary, it was
the very secret of their being that they were signs. In
their variety and movement they composed the language
in which spirit might speak to spirit; and Providence
caused them to arise, as in a prophetic dream, in order
that by their monition and habitual sequence they
might forewarn us and make us ready for their future
harmonies.

These systems were essentially theological; they
invited mankind to substitute a metaphysical faith
in a metaphysical power for the animal faith in matter
by which we are accustomed to live Verbally the


PSYCHOLOGISM 169


exchange was easy, and might even be emotionally
accepted at certain moments of spiritual exaltation, by a
person like Malebranche, accustomed to think an ethereal
religiously; but the religiosity of Berkeley language
and Leibniz was only official; their idealism ele, ag
was, and was intended to be, perfectly interests.
mundane. Common sense, science, and commerce
had no cause to take alarm at it, nor religion to take
comfort. In their critical analysis they might sincerely
persuade themselves that in looking and touching, in
talking and travelling, they were in direct and un-
mediated communion with God or with other spirits;
but God, at least, was comfortably pledged never to
act otherwise than as if matter were acting for him.
The muscular idealist could remain wedded in heart
and imagination to that material world which he denied
in his verbal doctrine. Learning, business, and pro-
paganda, tar-water and diplomacy, might occupy him
far more absorbingly than any prayerful vision of God,
or any suspense of wondering hope on the daily manna
of sensation.

Indeed, even in theory, these philosophers were but
half-idealists. If they had so easily swept matter away
from the landscape of nature—which indeed The soul
is a mere image—it was only because, wit- remained

‘ Roe a natural
tingly or unwittingly, they had packed away psyche in
all the potency of matter and all its organisa- alits
tion into the mysterious mechanism of each and
soul, and into the mysterious interaction of ‘lations.
one soul with another. Spirit had not only become again
a wind, an invisible power, but each spirit separately,
or the swarm of spirits collectively, had become a
world of unfathomable generative processes—a world
far less observable, and no less mechanical, than the
earth and sky of vulgar philosophy. These souls
without bodies continued to be full of hidden poten-
tialities and blind passions; they lasted through a time


170 THE REALM OF MATTER


which being common to them all was not specious and
imaginary, but physical and independent of the tem-
poral perspectives within each of them. They were
buffeted by collateral contacts or compulsions which
virtually subjected them to existence in a physical
space. If they did not exert physical force upon one
another, at least they interchanged telephonic messages
through a sort of central exchange established in the
divine mind. Remove matter, thought Berkeley, and
you remove all danger of atheism. It did not occur
to him to ask in what respect God would differ from
matter if the divine function was simply to excite
sensation and to supply a medium for psychic tele-
graphy. He blandly supposed that the alternative
to matter was the God of Christianity: but we know
that his psychological scepticism, when carried out,
will undermine all Christian legend and all Christian
cosmology.

A God who was a supreme spirit, like the God of
Aristotle and Plotinus, would be immutable: his action
God, too, On the world could only occur through an
became —_ eternal attraction or effluence, enabling or
again a see
material  SOliciting matter to take such forms as matter
agent. at each point might be capable of taking. If
we wish to avoid this conclusion, and to regard divine
action as incidental and occasional, God becomes a
natural being, like the gods of legend and mythology,
living in time, discovering piecemeal his own pre-
ferences, recasting his plans, and parrying the blows
of fortune or of free-will in others, like any proud
animal, with ever-fresh ingenuity and explosions of
temper. Such are the moral powers actually at work
in the world; some of them might be superhuman;
but in any case they would be internal to the field of
action, and would inhabit the material agencies by
which they were manifested: so that the belief in
interaction and intercommunication between so-called


PSYCHOLOGISM 171


spirits is really a belief in the realm of matter, and in
the interplay there of various living centres.

This conclusion is indeed implicit in the principle
by which the realm of matter is posited in the beginning.
If spirits are agents, they can be discovered 4...

. . * S TOLLOWS
only by being posited in the field of action, from the
and only by virtue of their functions there, 2@ue and
Like matter they will be names for the respon- of animal
sive and calculable energies which are there **
at work. But that which fills the field of action, and
is unequally distributed there, being nearer or farther,
mightier or weaker, in discoverable measures; that
which is in perpetual motion, compelling us to act in
time by its definite pressure or allurements; that which
acts within us mysteriously in response, and which
preserves the effects of our action in the form of readi-
ness and habit—this, by definition, is matter itself:
and this definition, I think, is by no means arbitrary,
but scrupulously faithful to the normal force of the
word, and to its spontaneous application. ‘Therefore
the spirits posited by Berkeley, Malebranche, and
Leibniz, or by anyone who thinks of spirits as powers,
are simply mythological names for certain operations of
matter, poetically apprehended, and turned into dra-
matic units with reference to the observer’s interests or
emotions. Human spirits are such mythological units
corresponding to the actions or surviving effects of
human bodies; and God is such a mythological name
for the universal power and operation of matter.

Indeed, the more critical advocates of psychologism
have abandoned, at least in theory, all notion of spirits,
powers, or agents; and for them the universe 1, feelings
is composed exclusively of momentary feelings, have no
for whose existence, number, quality, or order fave they
no reason at all can be given or required. It an order?
is perhaps not very clear to a materialist how sensations
arise in bodies; but is it clearer to the pure psychologist


172 THE REALM OF MATTER


how they should arise in nothing and out of nothing?
It is true that existence is contingent in any case and
ultimately groundless; but in psychologism this initial
marvel is continually recurrent. Sensations and ideas
are supposed to be many: each pops of itself into
existence; yet nothing—since nothing else exists—can
possibly condition their genesis or subtend their
variety. Each, no less than the order of all, is absolutely
uncaused and might just as well have been entirely
different. Nevertheless the advocate of psychologism
seems never to doubt that they all spring up as seasonably
as the leaves of a tree; they seem to be miraculously
revealed to him, who is at any moment only one of them,
in their variegated character and precise distribution.
Something, which he says is nothing, compels each to
bide its own time and makes it cognisant of the existence
and order of the rest.

This assumption of inexplicable transcendent know-
ledge is so lightly made because psychologism is not an
Moral original or primary conviction, but a critical
poe reform introduced into a conventional natural-
of material 18M. Its categories are secondary naturalistic
relations. categories—those of history and social im-
agination—and they are employed unchallenged after
the primary categories—those of action and practical
art—have been theoretically abandoned. But this reli-
ance on the secondary is fallacious and must be short-
lived. Spirits and laws, for a natural philosopher, are
simply names bestowed humanly on the habits of
bodies. Remove the bodies, and the spirits and laws
have lost their sole natural status and means of mani-
festation. Nevertheless the literary psychologist may
still live on for a while, like the ruminating camel in the
desert, on the momentum of his unconsumed moral pro-
visions; and he may imagine spirits and laws to retain
their office in respect of his private experience, after
they have lost their meaning and application in nature.


PSYCHOLOGISM 173


He may deny the natural world, and yet suppose him-
self living in a natural society.

That psychologism leans throughout on a tacit
materialism appears clearly in the only principle which,
so far as I know, it has ever invoked to de- pow, in the
scribe the course of immediate experience— absence of
I mean the principle of association of ideas. dics, shall
This principle is clearly secondary: at best it expetience
is a principle of revival, occasionally exempli- or con-
fied in memory and reverie. Even supposing tolled?
(what is manifestly false) that we always reviewed events
in the order in which they first occurred, how should
this law explain the order in which they arose originally?
Yet the original order of events is the very subject of
natural philosophy—the one thing which science and
practical art are concerned to discover and to under-
stand; and of this order association affords no explana-
tion. If psychologism were not implicitly materialistic,
it would be a proclamation of complete isolation and
helplessness in the midst of a presumable chaos. Each
man at each moment would tremblingly be the sensation
he was: and if that sensation placed him in the presence
of any imagined story or any fantastic world, nothing
whatever would indicate that this groundless experience
of to-day would have any sequel to-morrow. ‘This is
actually the attitude of moral anarchists, such as some
of the heroes of modern fiction and some of the authors,
who seem actually to take seriously the romantic conceit
that experience is something absolute. But sanity.
assumes the opposite; and the prosperous arts which
are the fruit of sanity prove that experience is a per-
petually evanescent and most sensitive index to an order
of nature beneath it.

Let us still suppose, however, that the universe
might be simply a multitude of islets of feeling, each
existing for itself. Each would then be distinguished
from the rest only by its felt quality or (what is the


174 THE REALM OF MATTER


same thing) by the quality and complexity of the
essence revealed in it. There would be a sort of
How can nebula of states of mind; and we should have
absolute to ask ourselves in what sense, and in what
be sue medium, if in any, they could be said to be
cessive? — successive or in any way earlier or later than
one another. I have observed above! that when suc-
cession is actually enacted and is not merely specious
or intuited, it is an external relation: the first state is
lost in attaining the second. Now if these states were
feelings distinguished only by their essences, they
would stand in purely internal and eternal relations
to one another; they could not be successive; there
would be no possible transition from the one into the
other, since there would be neither a flow of substance
nor a leaping thought to effect the passage. I need
not dwell on the corollary that in that case they could
not even exist, but would have receded into their re-
spective essences, and would radically fail to compose
the elements or moments of a changing world. Let
me admit for the sake of argument that they might
exist by virtue of some stress or oscillation internal
to each of them: what meaning could there then be
in saying that they were successive or existed at different
dates? Within each there would be no conceivable
evidence of a time when it was not or of a time when it
no longer should be. If they are events, as in psycho-
logism they are taken to be, they must transform some-
thing pre-existent, which they at once replace and con-
tinue. ‘They must be portions of a longer event, in-
cidents in an existential field protracted beyond any
one of them. Is it not evident that we are positing a
physical time beneath and beyond them in which they
may be dated and distributed? But I have previously
found that physical time cannot be divorced from
physical space, nor either of them from the flux of


1 See pp. 11 and 80.


PSYCHOLOGISM 175


matter; and this conclusion will impose itself on the
critical psychologist quite apart from any mathe-
matical or astronomical arguments which may also
support it. For the psychologist differs from the
pure logician or poet in that he assumes memory to
be constitutionally veracious and self-transcendent, re-
porting a series of past or outlying events which have
been and are materially separate: he is a naturalist and
a realist in method. His world has a single history,
and involves lateral contacts and forward transmissions
which are external to the natural moments concerned.
One natural moment is, even for him, materially the
heir to another and physically the neighbour to a third
or a fourth. Psychological facts, if they are to be
temporal and connected events, are therefore incon-
ceivable except in the realm of matter.

Perhaps a critic inclined to a transcendental view
of mind might here take the bull by the horns and
might urge that of course psychological facts suesestion
are not temporal events at all, and that indeed that the:
they have only internal relations to one an- felations of
other. What affinity should spiritual exist- spiritual

: moments
ence have to a pervasive and endless flux, might
when the very nature of spirit is to be syn- suflice
thetic, and in each of its instances an absolute them ideally
centre of survey and of judgment? How successive.
should actual intuitions impinge upon a physical time
or be scattered over it like daisies in a field or pins in
a pin-cushion? ‘This is an alien relation imputed to
spiritual facts by the materialising imagination, which
attaches them to bodies and events in a conventional
world. In themselves, acts of cognition may picture
time but cannot sprawl over it; yet the pictured time
in them amply suffices to link them ideally together
into phases of a common ideal drama. Like the
episodes in a novel or the series of whole numbers,


without having any fixed physical date, they may


176 THE REALM OF MATTER


compose an order of logical succession by virtue of their
deliverance, if one contains, so to speak, a front view
and another a rear view of the same imaginary objects.
What to one living moment is a hope, to another living
moment is a memory; and these complementary per-
spectives place them vicariously in one specious time,
like the earlier and the later speeches in the same play,
without any actual or physical derivation of one
cognitive moment from another.

Who would not gladly dwell on these intrinsic
contrasts and harmonies in the moral spectrum, by
Moral rela- Which all possible states of the spirit are
tions cannot diversified? But I-am not here concerned
constitute ° - 42 ia .

a physical With establishing any spiritual hierarchy or
order. setting up any Jacob’s ladder; I am concerned
only with the current assumption that feelings and
ideas having no material basis may yet have a temporal
order. And is it not obvious that if we truly limited
our view to the mental sphere, it would be gratuitous
ever to posit anything not given? But that which is
given at any moment or in any experience is necessarily
internal to it. In pure intuition all perspectives con-
tain and exhaust their entire objects; time and space
are there specious only. The only thinkable or dis-
coverable sequence touching such states of mind is the
sense of succession perhaps given in some of them:
a succession which does not connect these states with
one another, but only the specious elements, within
each, between which it feels a transition. History
will all be contained in mirrors, themselves existing
in no temporal medium. Each moment of experience
will be a monad without windows, but with variously
painted walls. It will have no date and no surround-
ings; like a room in a historical museum it will bear
the name and suggest the atmosphere of some age and
country otherwise unknowable to us, and now non-
existent; but for the sincere idealist, who posits no


PSYCHOLOGISM 177


truth beyond his living intuition, this represented
existence will seem quite satisfying. Without ever
needing to quit his museum, he can survey the pano-
rama of all these historic essences in their fabulous
progression; the same history being surveyed at each
point from a different angle, and knitting all admissible
vistas together into one moral world.

We are at the threshold of transcendental idealism:
to pass through we need only add this reflection: as
all given times or spaces must be imaginary _.
and internal to the act of intuition which ft.
surveys them, so the assumed multiplicity psycho-__
of these acts must be itself imaginary and transcend-—
internal to the idea or sense of their multi- ental

spat - : idealism.

plicity. Self-consciousness will then have

truly swallowed up all its objects, and we shall have
passed out of psychologism by the subjective door.
We shall have retained and made absolute the activity
of spirit: and by force of this initial assurance we shall
have destroyed the presuppositions and the problem
of psychologism; for we shall no longer posit a natural-
istic flux of feelings and ideas, running down somehow
in a common time, and somehow divided into separate
series called individual lives. Those imagined feelings
and ideas, with the conventional divisions and con-
nections established among them, will be reduced to
elements in a picture painted by the spirit in the
idealist, and existing only under the unity of his
apperception, in which they are obviously interrelated
and inseparable. ‘The specious world so conceived, we
shall see presently, remains material; but the philosopher
has become a genuine idealist, because (except when he
forgets himself) he attributes no existence to that world
apart from his conception.

But psychologism, though inwardly condemned to
die, is free to choose among various forms of suicide.
Instead of perishing by concentration in the ego, it

N


178 THE REALM OF MATTER


may perish by diffusion among images, tropes, and
phenomena. The ingredients of the universe will still
Second way be Sought in feelings and acts of intuition
out: into which are spiritual events and subjective. Yet
pheno- , the philosopher will not banish from his mind
or pictorial the common assumption that nature exists in
physics. her own right and is a perfectly well-known
congeries of material objects and events. ‘The con-
sequence is that when he becomes a psychological
critic of experience, and endeavours to reform and
reconstruct his picture of reality exclusively out of his
immediate data, he continues in possession, de facto
though not de jure, of the conventional lines of nature
on which to hang the family linen of his mind.
Feelings and acts of intuition make manifest certain |
essences which, although intrinsically only logical,
zesthetic, or moral universals, are often impulsively
taken for parts of the objects which evoke them; or
in other cases, when feelings have only obscure physio-
logical causes, the moral essences given in these feelings
are regarded as parts of the body which feels them.
Thus a landscape is taken by the innocent tourist to
be the intrinsic essence of the region he traverses; and
a pain passes mythically for an existing force within
the aching part, causing its contraction and all its
ensuing acts. When this propensity is dominant in the
philosopher, and at the same time he is jealous of the
certitude of immediate experience, he is likely to
abandon his psychologism by the objective door. He
will overlook as far as possible the spiritual centre of
his experience and the organic seat and significance of
his perceptions, and he will construct out of his given
essences, like a poet, a many-coloured garment for
nature. His psychologism will become a sort of
sensuous realism or pictorial metaphysics. The
materials will be ideal, the events subjective, but they
will be deployed in a posited time and space, and


PSYCHOLOGISM 179


supplemented hypothetically by imaginary phenomena,
so as to compose a panoramic world—a continuum of
ephemeral images and impulses having a certain material
breadth and interconnection.

Theories of this sort might seem, in one direction,
more materialistic than materialism, since they ignore
or deny the existence of spirit; but perhaps fe
the omission is more apparent than real. In colnave
the lottery of opinion, when schools are be- description
wildered and categories are in solution, spirit vioual nee
may be eliminated in the ostensible result m@themati-
only because it was secretly presupposed in
the inquiry. Phenomenalism, logicism, and _ pictorial
realism all start from personal experience and are
abstractions from it; they analyse the objects engaging
a living spirit which prefers to forget itself, with its
perpetually central station and dogmatic energy. What
is a phenomenon? Is it an essence given in intuition?
Certainly that is what any phenomenon becomes to a
radical critic. Or is it a fact posited by an assertive
and aggressive mind that regards given essences as
substantive existences in their own specious plane?
That is what a phenomenon seems to be to animal
illusion and dramatic fancy. But the truth is that
immediate feeling, whether excited by the eye or by
some inner organ, is most thoroughly a product of the
living psyche, and expresses her animal passions: how
then should the qualities felt in these feelings be
detached from the psyche, in which alone they can
arise or live? How should they subsist, dead, dried,
and insensible, in the external cosmic order of the
objects posited and encountered in action?

Nor is it only the trembling visions visiting the soul
that suffer and die in that transposition; the dynamic
objects for which they are substituted suffer an equal
injury. For these are now emptied of their active un-
fathomable substance, which renders them co-ordinate


180 THE REALM OF MATTER


with the active self in our own bodies; they are re-
duced to films and concéived surfaces, if not to mere
Shadowy Words or mathematical equations. These thin
character of sensuous or intelligible essences are then
as multiplied and hypothetically interpolated ad
science.  [jhitum, in order to fill the enormous spaces
and the abysses of time which actual experience must
leave unexplored in any world supposed to be continuous
and self-subsisting. Recent science has been very in-
ventive in this direction, and technically profound in
proportion to the intellectual initiative displayed in it;
but, after all, the truth of all these images and tropes,
or even their applicability to nature, depends on their
just contacts, first, with the conventional field of action,
and secondly, with the experience of the questioning
soul.

A philosopher who would place all this literary
psychology and optical physics where they belong,
All object- needs to stand firm in his native centre. He
iveidealisms jg a spirit, and his life is a dream; but this
are funda- :
mentally dream when trusted and pressed, as it must
subjective. be in action, involves the mysterious fecundity
of a psyche which may breed this sustained dream in
its vegetative and passionate order; and this psyche
in turn involves a material world in which she may
weave her organism and try her fortunes. Her
fecundity as well as her adventures must be initially
blind, since they create in her the first glimmer of
ideas; and they must be mechanical, if they are sup-
posed to depend on the interaction of various psyches,
or various organic impulses, in some medium in which
they have arisen and continue to reside. Above all,
this cosmic flux is nothing phenomenal, nor composed
of visual images or tropes and mathematical laws: it
is in itself what it is, and for us what it does. Our
sensuous and conceptual experience touches but does
not lift the hem of that garment from which its virtue


PSYCHOLOGISM 181


flows. Phenomena are all like the rainbow, products
of a point of view. Permanent or surely recurrent
as they may sometimes be, they are so only from a
particular station; they vanish on a nearer approach,
and change their essence at a different angle. Up-
rooted from the organ and occasion that support them,
they vanish like ghosts without leaving even a bone
or a shroud behind. It is only in memory or fancy
that any vestige of phenomena remains; only legend can
record their order. And these evanescent views have
no seat in nature, except perhaps—indirectly and un-
observably—in some labouring brain. Traced home,
they are moments in some biography, revelations
within some personal experience. ‘They lead us back,
therefore, to a monadism or solipsism, in which the
philosopher finds himself in the presence of nothing
but a dream of which he can discern neither the extent
nor the meaning. Phenomenalism and its kindred
systems may indeed abolish the spirit from their
objective cosmos, because this cosmos is itself initially
and ultimately visionary, and exists only for the spirit
that conceives it.

There are advocates of psychologism to whom the
vanity of this conclusion is obvious and who revert
from it to the substantial part of their world, ,, .

r amie rd way
namely, to the self or psyche, since it is only out: into
there that any phenomenal system can touch panpsy-
actual existence. Yet for them the psyche
can be composed only of moments of consciousness;
feelings and intuitions form her whole substance; and
if reality is to lie anywhere deeper than the level of
conventional ideas or to explain their origin and com-
position, it will be necessary very much to extend the
field of literary psychology, and to supply no end of
unknown feelings and ideas between and beyond those
posited by common opinion. Evidence is not wanting
to convince us that many such feelings and ideas exist,


182 THE REALM OF MATTER


either buried and ignored in ourselves, or proper to
the different quality of other living spirits. Human
fancy, if inclined sometimes to invent spirits that do
not exist, is also constitutionally incapable of conceiv-
ing and crediting the experience of any existing spirits
too remote from itself. Nature is in every way richer
than our thoughts of nature, and the hypothesis de-
serves respect that many a form of experience exists,
within us and beyond, which our conventional human
thoughts cannot appreciate. Such unremembered,
dispersed, or alien sensibility is often called uncon-
scious mind—a relative and egotistical name for it,
__since if alien feelings are unconscious to us,
Unconscious . .
mindaname Our feelings are no less unconscious to them.
forconscious Yet perhaps, under this unjust designation,
whereorfor there may lurk a secret reversion. to pheno-
what isnet menalism. ‘‘ Unconscious mind ” may sug-
gest an essence or a series of essences which,
under other circumstances, would be manifest to a
mind generated by those circumstances: and these
essences may be conceived as existing somehow with-
out any intuition of them, as if they could be formed
and dissolved in the dark, by a sort of nebular evolution.
But the given or phenomenal is relative to spirit; it
cannot arise if not synthesised in an act of intuition;
and it cannot be preserved or revived in the uncon-
scious, or set out in a physical time and space to com-
pose a crepuscular mental cosmos, partly illuminated
and partly darkened, like the moon. The bright part
only will be the field of mind, the rest will be the field
of matter; and the field of mind will not be substanti-
ally independent or of fixed extent, but will describe
so much of the field of matter as the light of intuition
or understanding has chanced to play upon. If those
unconsidered sensations or wishes are mental at all,
they must shine each for itself, even if invisible to one
another. A pain or a sound is either felt and heard,


PSYCHOLOGISM 183


or it recedes into the structure, tension, and rhythms
of the material world; and only the latter can be
designated by the term “ unconscious ”’, if this term
be taken absolutely and not relatively. An appeal to
the unconscious would then mark the surrender of
psychologism.

If we disdain this surrender, and insist on con-
ceiving a universe made up of mental events, may we
not posit a compact flux of feelings, such as
our waking and dreaming life seems actually nieaesens
to be, only more voluminous, consequential, able hypo-

. . esis.

and complex, so that the interstices of our
remembered experience shall be filled in with con-
tinuous forgotten feelings and thoughts? And similarly,
might not the interstices between the experiences of
various selves be filled in with some sort of inner
animation, constituting the substance of the world
everywhere, even in all the apparently empty stretches
of space and time, when these stretches really exist
or lapse? This would imply psychic mortar no less
than psychic stones. Not only would all reality be a
flux of feelings and imagery, as in a dream, but all
dreams, divide them as we may into dramatic episodes
and private lives, would be continuous and mutually
derivative, so that no dream would ever begin save by
continuing or uniting previous dreams, nor end save
in the act of generating new ones.

This seems to be a logical possibility. Panpsychism
is free from that covert reliance on matter by which
all other idealisms subsist, and it seems less superficial.
Its universe is composed of states of mind generating
and emptying into one another; so that while its sub-
stance is feeling, to the satisfaction of our pensive self-
consciousness and moral pride, this feeling is distri-
buted and condensed just as matter would be in a
material world. Therefore while panpsychism seems
to cover the whole realm of matter and so to render


184 THE REALM OF MATTER


other matter superfluous, the question is how far it
differs from materialism in its texture. Is it anything
but materialism strained through a psychological sieve?
The use of psychological or even mythological
language—as is done in psycho-analysis—would not
But in mul- be of great consequence, if physical facts and
tiplying —_ relations were always signified: but the axiom
mental : :
states ad Of panpsychism is that all facts are mental,
infinitum it and the question arises: How can mental
eaves them
without facts compose a natural world? If the
connections. relations between them are mental, they are
not natural; and if they are natural they are not mental.
There is, for instance, a felt continuity in mental life,
of which many a moment is conscious, but this felt
continuity within given perspectives is not an actual
continuity between successive events. The first moment
of life begins without consciousness of beginning, and
the last moment ends without possible consciousness
of having ended. If in any experience the first moment
were also the last—as in some sense is always the case,
since each moment has a self-existent life which cannot
be stretched—this isolated moment of consciousness
would not be aware of its punctiform station in the
world of events, but would look before and after, and
blankly about, as if it had cognitive dominion and large
participation in the material universe to which its organ
belongs. It has such participation spiritually, being
spiritual itself: but the dramatic vista within it cannot
enable it to pass physically out of itself into the next
actual feeling. Those features in its internal revelation
between which a felt continuity obtains are given
essences, here forming a perspective in which moments
are not self-existent, but imperfectly realised by virtue
of felt contrasts, and therefore inseparable. Even if
the terms, half-distinguished in this uncertain con-
tinuum, were descriptive of ulterior events, the vision
of them (with its degree of the partiality and redundance


PSYCHOLOGISM 185


proper to mental reactions) would be a fresh event on
its own account. It would be as helpless as any other
immaterial fact to flow into other facts, or to lie among
them in a physical time and space.

On the other hand, the existence of continuity in
events, were there no material psyche to synthesise
and collect their successiveness in her enriched powers,
could not yield a sense of continuity, or any other sort
of knowledge. Merely being a fact can never cause a
fact to be discovered. An organ of sense must first
become sensitive to that fact and must impose some
subjective view of it on intuition. In a world of mental
events all the connections of these events must still
remain physical: they cannot be numbered among
those events. It is therefore not true, even on this
view, that the world is composed of mental events
exclusively; they are assumed to impinge on a deeper
medium in which they arise, and which supplies all
their existential relations.

Perhaps without altogether dismissing these con-
siderations, it might be urged that there is one spiritual
reality, the Will, which supplies precisely
the transitive bond required between living Wiis cither
moments. What is this Will? All that a Ehenonocnge
literary psychologist can consistently under- ¢ther, and
stand by the word is the sense of willing— impotent, or

. else a physi-
the feeling of glad action, the preferences, calor divine
expectations, wishes, purposes, and decisions eth
which may traverse his mind. Did he con- range of
ceive the Will to be a transitive power, by Rho
which ulterior states of mind were positively :
created or transformed, he would be appealing to some-
thing physical or divine beyond consciousness, some-
thing of which the wishes or decisions occurring in
consciousness would be only omens or symptoms.
Energetic idealists are victims of an illusion: the more
they insist on Will, Life, Vital Impulse, or the Eternal


186 THE REALM OF MATTER


Feminine, the more decidedly they turn away from
synthetic mind and lay up their treasures in the flux
of matter. What else is that mounting energy which
they feel within themselves and in all nature, and which
they justly recognise as far deeper and more pervasive
than any images or conceptions of the reasoning mind?
An immense and intricate flow of substance has formed
their organisms, and thereby determined their pur-
poses and passions: for evidently purposes, wishes, and
preferences are just as secondary, just as much synthetic
and expressive, as are the data of sense, and all images
and memories. All these are bred in animal organs and
presuppose a prior direction of unconscious life. /
Panpsychism accordingly involves and posits the
realm of matter: for it disposes the elements known to
literary psychology in a cosmic system which
Panpsy- :
chisrais they can neither compose nor support. The
materialism panpsychist merely maintains—what in some
translated 4
into psycho- Sense may be quite true—that the realm of
logical matter is throughout animate; and he chooses
terms. : . 3 s "i
to regard this animation, in deference to his
humanistic and literary habit of mind, as substantial,
ignoring the far deeper fatality, which he can hardly
deny, by which all this animation -is distributed: a
fatality which when recognised, posited, and studied,
alone justifies any mind in imagining and addressing
certain other minds, or its own natural destinies.
When the There is a final or vanishing form of pan-
regents psychism in which this implication is virtually
universe are admitted, and the universe is said to be com-
eee posed of mind-stuff, or matter of such a sort
scious, the that mind may arise out of it. This is a
Sieencton radically different theory from the panpsy-


from 5 : . j
materialism chism considered above, in which minds or
merely, sensations, conscious though perhaps feeble
verbal. and vague, were made the stuff of the universe.


That true matter is of such a sort that mind may arise


PSYCHOLOGISM 187


out of it every materialist must allow; the question
is only what conception of matter this circumstance
compels or permits us to form. Shall we think of it
as dust quickened, or as life dissipated, extinguished,
and reduced to atoms?

To assert that the substance of anything, much less
of the whole world, was psychic, and to call it mind-
stuff, would be inadmissible if we meant that Physical
minute but conscious spirits were the stuff of it: existence is
we have just seen the manifold impossibility of (cus to.
that. But the phrase becomes legitimate and mind than
significant if it serves only to remind us that * ‘°°:
physical, like spiritual, existence must be intensive,
centred in each of its parts, and capable of inner change
as well as of collateral reduplication. We should never
broach existence at all if we cut up phenomena into
minima sensibilia, or traversed the intellectual landscape
in a thousand ways in order to establish, by intense
intuition of its essence, all sorts of contrasts and
relations between its specious elements. Intellectual
landscapes vary with intelligence, not to say with
fashion; and minima sensibilia vary with the faculties
of sense. The actual reality in a man is himself, not
his imagined objects: and it is on the level of his active
being, and on the analogy of his progressive and self-
annihilating existence, that other existences are to be
conceived.

The substance of nature, thus diffused and, in spots,
concentrated into organisms, becomes in these organ-
isms also the substance of mind. It must evidently
have been perfectly fitted to produce everything which
it actually produces; it may therefore be decorated
retrospectively, by a Chinese piety, with all the titles
won by its children; indeed, these its eventual mani-
festations are the sole index which we possess to its


intrinsic nature. ;
Now the fact that substance can sometimes live and


188 THE REALM OF MATTER


think shows that any pictorial or mathematical descrip-
tion of it cannot be exhaustive or even intensively
Though Very penetrating; such descriptions mark
matter may rather the external order proper to substance
pe cata, in its diffusion and interaction, and supply
thatdesigna-g notation suitable for mapping it or build-
gmaland ing in it. At the same time that which
not central. thinks in an animal is unmistakably the same
substance as that which lives and moves in him: his
mind shares the fortunes of his body and exists only
by realising its contacts and its interests. ‘Therefore
while the designation of substance as mind-stuff is
correct, it is by no means exclusively, or even pre-
eminently proper. Even in animals, not to speak of
nature in general, the inclination of existence towards
thought is neither radical nor general; and the sub-
stance of this world is far more fundamentally designed
for sleeping than for waking. In so far as mind has
stuff at all under it and is not purely spiritual, the stuff
of it is ordinary matter. We can observe and trace
the organic bodies which naturally possess feeling, or
cause ‘spirit to awake within them; but who shall
observe or imagine an organic concourse of uncon-
scious atoms of mind? Moreover, organisation re-
quires a medium as well as a stuff; and the medium
in which mind-stuff moves is avowedly physical space
and time. But what can exist in space except matter,
and what except matter can be the vehicle of true
derivation and continuity in a truly lapsing time?
Mind-stuff is therefore simply an indirect name for
matter, given in deference to an idealistic bias surviving
the wreck of idealism; and nothing but a confusing
attachment to a psychological vocabulary could counsel
its frequent use.

I find, then, that in the psychological sphere, apart
from pure feeling or intuition, everything is physical.
There is no such thing as mental substance, mental


PSYCHOLOGISM 189


force, mental machinery, or mental causation. If actual
feelings or intuitions have any ground at all this
ground is physical; if they have a date, place, See
or occasion they have it only in the physical and con-
world. Physical, too, is the determination “¥°™-
of their quality and diversity, of their meaning or
intent, of their affinities and development; physical
their separation into particular lives as well as their
union, in each person, into a particular sequence or
strand of experiences. Physical, finally, is the sole
evidence open to any mind of the existence or char-
acter of minds in others. Psychology, therefore, when
it does more than evoke poetically various dramatic
feelings or intuitions, traces the behaviour of living
bodies—which includes their language—interpreting
it in moral terms; and it cannot compose a system of
the universe out of these moral terms abstracted from
their physical backing, because this backing alone
supplies their existential connections and_ historical
order. ‘Thus psychology reports certain complications
in the realm of matter: and the interpretations which
may be added in terms of spirit depend entirely for
their truth on the existence and spiritual fertility of
that material background.


CHAPTER X
THE LATENT MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS


Wuat is idealism? I should like to reply: Thought
and love fixed upon essence. If this definition were
Idealism a accepted idealism would be a leaven rather
moral inter- than a system, because although essence is
eee * everywhere present it never occurs alone,
system. but either as the form of some existing thing
or event, or else as a term given in intuition; so that
however sceptical or contemplative the philosopher
might be, his own existence at least would be a fact
eluding his idealism and prerequisite to it. He could
become a complete idealist only by forgetting himself,
and not inquiring into the origin or meaning of his
quite contingent existence and quite arbitrary visions.
To arrest attention on pure essence and to be an idealist
in a moral or poetic sense, would therefore be possible
to a man holding any system of physics. Even a
materialist might be a true idealist, if he preferred the
study of essence to that of matter or events; but his
natural philosophy would: keep his poetic ecstasies in
their proper place. Such an equilibrium, however,
has seldom recommended itself to professed philo-
sophers, whose virtue has impelled them rather to
push their favourite insights into the absolute, and
assert the universe to be the perfect mirror of their
minds. ‘Those who have been idealists by tempera-
ment have been accordingly inclined to substitute
190


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS Ig!


essence for matter in their theory of the universe.
Their hearts, had they not done so, would have been
painfully divided; for the most fervent and contempla-
tive idealist is still a man and an animal, and nature
has initially directed his attention and passion not on
essence, but on fact, on power, on the factors of his
material destiny. The more impetuous his idealism
and the more unitary his dogmatic mind, the greater
need he will find of fusing his physics with his visions,
and assigning to the system of essences which fills his
imagination the position and the powers of matter.
Hence a gnostic physics in which chosen ideas pass
for facts and felt values for powers: and it is this super-
stition, and not the pure study and love of essence,
that is commonly known as idealism.

The earliest and noblest form of this idealism was
the doctrine of the Platonic Socrates. In somewhat
playfully defining the current terms of speech, socratic
he very earnestly disentangled the types of idealism at
moral excellence and the goals of political abet ny
wisdom. His Ideas were fundamentally spiritual.
ideals, forms which things would approximate in
proportion as they approached perfection, each after
its kind. It was in this measure also that things de-
served their names and could be justly subsumed under
their class in the hierarchy of objects important to the
legislator and having fixed functions in the economy
of life. Nothing could have a nature unless it had a
possible perfection: that which rendered a bed “ really ”
a bed, or a bridle “‘ really ”’ a bridle was their respective
functions; for it was as better fitted to sleep in soundly
or to rein in horses effectively that beds and bridles
were better or worse, or were beds and bridles at all.
Reality and excellence thus coincided and came from
participation in some Idea; for this Platonic sort of
reality was altogether supernal and had nothing to do
with existence. Filth and hair also existed; but unless


192 THE REALM OF MATTER


they found a use and had a consequent standard of
perfection—for instance, as fur or as manure—they
fell under no Idea, and the rational moralist might
ignore them. The wise and prudent man was quick
to see the ideal in the material; and he prized existence
only for the sake of the ever-bright essence of the good
which in a thousand colours and degrees shone darkly
through it.

This initial phase of Platonism is pregnant with
several different possibilities, all of which, perhaps,
Allits vir. Dave not been noticed or developed. In
tue came —_ one direction, for instance, it points to super-
material naturalism, to the conviction that the soul
foundation. would never find her true good until she was
disembodied and identified in contemplation with the
ideas which were her natural food. Only in that
heaven would there be happiness, where, as in Nirvana,
there would be no change, no division, and in that
sense no existence. For if things draw all their virtue
from ulterior perfections which they can only embody
imperfectly, evidently it would have been simpler and
better to have begun at the end, to have always pos-
sessed the good in its perfection, and.to have been
spared the pain and indignity of alienation from it.
This view was actually recommended by the Platonic
Socrates in his last hours; probably at any other time
it would have proved embarrassing, and we need not
wonder that it remained in abeyance. Had it been
pressed, what would have become of that sane plebeian
wisdom of Socrates, austerely reducing all beauty to
health, all virtue to circumspect knowledge, and all
good to utility for pleasure? Evidently in heaven
there would be no place any longer for beds and bridles,
for ogling love, or for the restless yearning to bring
all things to birth in beauty. Indeed, it is much to
be feared that without those humble natural occasions
and animal functions demanding to be perfected, per-


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 193


fection itself and the good would have entirely vanished.
Had the divine sufficiency of the Ideas in their own
realm been seriously maintained, this supernaturalism,
by transcending morality and abolishing preference,
would have clearly shown that the foundation of
Socratic idealism was material.

Matter is indeed indispensable to any system in
which the supreme reality is divine and eternal, be-
cause without matter that reality could have Confusion
no manifestation in space, time, persons, of physical
and contingent circumstances. This was With teria
acknowledged by the Platonists more frankly ?7ma.
and intelligently than by modern idealists; yet while
admitting this fundamental function of matter, they
represented it as wholly negative and passive, the forms
which it took being imposed upon it from above, by
the divine virtue of Ideas regarded as magnets. This
view was protected by two equivocations, on which
the whole of Platonising physics depends. One
equivocation consisted in substituting the essence of
materiality, itself an Idea, for the locally existing and
variegated substance of material things. ‘The essence
of materiality, being defined by negation of all forms,
was pure nonentity; its vacuity could be easily proved
to contribute nothing to the positive essence of any-
thing; and the bewildered disciple was expected never
to perceive that, even if things owed no part of their
form to abstract matter, they owed to their concrete
matter the possibility of their existence. For if matter
was universal inertia, it was also universal potentiality:
and by admitting, as Ideas do not, a contingent selec-
tion and flux of forms, it admitted life, motion, and
particular existences, and enabled one Idea to manifest
itself here and another there in varying degrees of


perfection. ; :
The other equivocation, intertwined with this,
turned on the double use of the word “ make”: for


O


194 THE REALM OF MATTER


‘ >


a principle of form “‘ makes ” a thing what it is, by
justifying its title to a certain name or to a certain
Confusion ©Stimation; whereas its substance and origin
of formal cannot lie there, but must be supplied in the
with effi- flux of existence by matter predisposed to
cient cause. . .
assume that form, and material agencies at
hand, able to impose that possible form upon that
special matter. For the material cause of anything
is not the essence of materiality, but rather a certain
quantity of matter already endowed with form, with
local existence, and with internal and surrounding
tensions calculated to change its condition. This
existing matter in its spontaneous movement is the
force at work in the genesis of one thing out of another.
Ideas at best can be only the formal or final causes of
their exemplification: they are not forces at all, but
qualities and harmonies resulting from the concourse
of material facts: and to say that the form or function
of anything “‘ makes ”’ it what it is, is a mere play on
the ambiguity of words and a solemn mystification.
That the Ideas are powerless, and that power is
perpetually ascribed to them only by a figure of speech,
Eternal 4 due to a natural impulse in idealists toward
forms can- indiscriminate eulogy of whatever is formal
not be the and describable, I think may be made evident
particular by a single consideration. Platonic Ideas are
_ incidents. eternal. Whatsoever hierarchy they may
compose, and whatever radiance may issue from them,
magically capable of transmuting matter into their
likeness, this effluence is perpetual. All the Ideas are
always equally inviting and potent: their generous
creative virtue pours forth from them impartially at
all seasons, in all directions, and to all distances. In
a word, they are not physical facts or physical forces
at all, but purely logical essences. They are intrinsic-
ally without the least bond or the least relevance to
any particular point of time or region of space. What-


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 195


ever magic attraction they may be reputed to exercise
over matter, they will exercise over it equally every-
where and at all times. On the other hand, the face
of nature is diversified, and the facts that here exemplify
those essences are unevenly distributed, often repeated,
and almost always imperfect reproductions of their
ideal originals.

Why, then, is any Idea manifested here and not
there, perfectly or imperfectly, once, often, or not at
all? I know of but one conceivable answer. wy. cause
Because of the different predispositions of the can only be
diffuse matter concerned. In respect to any Mae pace
particular event, or to the form of any par- tions of
ticular thing or action, the cause of occurrence ™"**
or non-occurrence can only lie in the material situation
at the previous moment—the structure and movement
of the substance at hand under those material circum-
stances. We may rhetorically assign all virtue to the
Idea then realised, since this is the marvel open to
intuition in which alone the spirit is ultimately in-
terested. Yet it was matter that determined whether
that virtue should be exercised in any particular case;
so that matter alone is responsible for what occurs,
although the Ideas which it brings to light may get
all the credit of it.

This predisposition in matter illustrates the funda-
mental contingency of existence, and in that respect
may be likened to absolute free will; we might ,,
fancifully say that an absolutely free will in primal ac-
matter was the ground of everything. But cident like
such a radical and initial fatality has nothing free will,
in it of intelligent freedom, such as appears but morally


° ‘ . : A free will

in actions expressive of the ingrained bent of presupposes

living creatures, actions adapted to the circum- * formed

stances, and prophetic of the result which, if

fortunate, they are likely to have. Such moral power

cf self-expression is possible only because that previous
02


196 THE REALM OF MATTER


fatality, or free will in the sense of absolutely ground-
less action, has already established particular psyches
and initiated in them an effort towards specific kinds
of perfection. At whatever point we call a halt in our
backward survey of history, we find extant some
arbitrary state of things, determining the forms which
intelligent judgment and action shall then assume. A
psyche is presupposed distinguishing and declaring
good those characters which, were she omnipotent,
she would impose on everything: characters which
things will hardly acquire in fact, since many forces
besides those centred in the psyche will conspire to
shape the issue. Thus the initiation, distribution, and
transmission of existing forms, when traced to their
source, are entirely the work of matter.

If instead of matter we posit a deity or a moral
force or a special dialectic to be the first principle of
eee existence, the case is not essentially altered.
cfivient. Such a deity or dialectic or moral force would
cause would then be the primal accident, the groundless
e equally E 2 5
contingent fact, the one form of being which existence
and, inre- happened to wear in neglect of all other forms;
spect to ; aes :
spirit, and that which distinguishes matter from
equally _ essence—its_ exclusive potentialities—would

distinguish that supposed metaphysical agency
just as truly, and just as arbitrarily; so that in respect
to essence, and.to the clearness and eventual emancipa-
tion of spirit, it would be as material a fact as matter
ever could be. The question, in cosmology, is not
between matter and Ideas but between one sort of
matter and another; and it is for experiment and
science, not for logic, to discover what sort of matter
matter Is.

This decisive office of matter remains the same
when Souls are introduced into the Platonic cosmology,
where they tend to absorb the Ideas and to transpose
them into themes or goals of a purely spiritual life. —


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 197


The transformation is indeed glorious: from being
mere essences morally relative to the humblest earthly
needs and economy, the Ideas now become ».;, ;. true
spirits shining by their own light, living for of Platonic
themselves, and perfectly fulfilling and enjoy- °°":
ing their spontaneous destiny. But all this goes on
““Yonder’’, above, in heaven: ‘‘ Here”’, to souls awaken-
ing and painfully struggling on earth, those celestial
spirits remain mere ideals, patrons or models which we
may invoke and aspire to imitate; they can be as little
affected or moved by us as if they had remained pure
essences. Our existence and our vicissitudes are due
to an opposite principle. Why, indeed, did a ray from
one of those celestial luminaries fructify in this par-
ticular lump of clay, and animate me, and not another,
with a felt need and an awakening will, aspiring to
contemplate and ultimately to possess that, and no
other, heavenly perfection? What called down and
buried here, in my private animal psyche, a seed and
replica of that particular celestial spirit? Evidently,
again, some predisposition, readiness, or responsiveness
peculiar to my earthly substance. Perhaps, if my nature
at birth was not due to my material heritage, and to
the accumulated organisation of an endless series of
ancestors, it might be attributed, according to a vener-
able fable, to my own vicissitudes in previous lives.
In this case, if my transmigrations had no beginning,
my fatal character—or my fatal acts, making irruption
from moment to moment into my character—must be
among the primary free constituents of the universe.
They must be factors, combining with the other original
factors, if any, in determining the flux of existence.
We may give these factors a psychological name and
call them wills or acts of will; we may even represent
them to be conscious, or prophetic of an intended
result; and we may thus assimilate Platonism to pan-
psychism or to the world of literary psychology. But,


198 THE REALM OF MATTER


if the previous argument be cogent, we shall not
thereby avoid an ultimate materialism. ‘The founda-
tions of existence cannot in any case be other
iiewtions than existent, temporal, and arbitrary. Even
grations ’ b)
andcon- if the conscious universe were plaited together
junctions A é :
occur by Out of the biographies of everlasting souls,
incarnation dramatically interwoven, the realm of matter
’ would still be their only possible theatre. It
would establish their conjunctions, fix their dates,
measure their journeys, and impose on them, through ~
their bodies, all their providential adventures. Plato,
Plotinus, and the Indians never conceived the thing
otherwise: and this material underpinning to the migra-
tion of souls seems indeed indispensable, if they are
to be supposed to communicate and interact, as is
requisite for all the offices cf charity. The material
world could hardly be denied, so long as philosophy
remained frankly and dogmatically religious.

The case is changed, however, when we adopt a
strict monadology and ascribe the illusion of society
to the moral burden of each separate soul, and to its
infinite capacity for dreaming. Matter then seems
really to vanish from the universe; yet all its blind
fertility and mysterious involution has entered into
the soul. Whether the spiriting away of materialism
in this direction is nominal or real may be discovered
by the study of modern idealism.

Modern idealism has been in a great measure rooted
in psychologism and identical with it: in that measure
I have already indicated the surviving materialism on
which it leans. But through the transcendental door
the Germans long ago abandoned that uninhabitable
mansion; and their national idealism may be said to
begin where psychologism ends. What, then, are the
relations of this national philosophy to materialism?

In the first place, like Platonism, German idealism
seems to elude materialism by systematically sub-


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 199


stituting concepts for substances and descriptions of
things for the things themselves. It moves in the
plane of Ideas and leaves obscure their relation \odern
to particular passing facts. Or rather, it re- idealism
duces this relation to identity: for the choicc of $f Hebrew
concepts and descriptions is no longer dictated prophecy.
by moral preoccupations, or spiritual wisdom; it is
made in the act of surveying the facts themselves in
the spirit of prophecy. Its origin is biblical. Like
the Hebrew prophets, Protestant philosophers tend
to reject the supernatural and to search nature and
history for the divine plan of events. They are pro-
phets not so much in foretelling the future—though,
by way of warning, they sometimes venture to do so—
as in speaking in the name of the Lord, who is the power
in matter, delivering his judgments and magnifying
his ways. In contrast to the Platonists, they show
the greatest respect for the flux of existence. The
Ideas or laws which they proclaim and regard as powers
are simply tropes supposed to be discernable in that
flux. ‘This discernment is inevitably personal and
relative; for obviously a moving world, where divisions
are as fluid as positions, is rebellious to any specific
essence, even to fixed patterns or laws of change.
There may be a dialectic inherent in certain attitudes:
but how often does any mind or any revolution obey
it? The flux of actual existence is untamably complex,
and the tropes visible to the prophet will almost in-
evitably repeat the outlines of his religious or national
passions, his private insights, or his fine pleasure in
the inner complications of logic or mathematics. His
prophecy or history, seen from a distance, will seem
only to have added, by its own novelty, one more to
the multitude of unharnessable facts.

But let me suppose that he escapes this fatality, and
traces, for once, perhaps in the person of Hegel, the
exact essence realised in the flux of existence. ‘The Idea,


one THE REALM OF MATTER


or master-trope, enshrined in his system, will then
be a true summary of all truth. But truth is eternal:
The pro. neither as a whole nor in any of its parts 1s it
phecy could an existence, but only a description of exist-
poe tue ence. Granting, then, that the truth had
matter con- been revealed to the prophetic idealist and
spired to that he had described existence, on the whole,
progress- ag it actually is, this existence would still,
aEP for that very reason, remain outside of his
mind and of his description. A description could
not be true, or superior as knowledge to any rival
description, if things of their own accord and in their
own persons had not independently exemplified that
description and rendered the assertion of it true. ‘Thus
if any descriptive idealism were true, its very truth
would imply and posit the natural world, which is the
realm of matter, existing in itself, and justifying that
description.

I believe that many who call themselves idealists
take this for granted and have never doubted the
substantial existence of nature and society diffused
about them. If they protest that materialism is absurd
and exploded, they do so only because by matter they
understand some pictorial or mathematical idol sub-
stituted for the pregnant and unfathomable substance
of things; and they would disown their own idealism
no less decisively, as a rhetorical idol in its turn, if
they understood it to deny the scattered and measurable
existence of the natural world.

There are, however, a few masters of idealism who
acer ee despise such a crude philosophy and insist that

ure 1deal- . °

ism, if itad- descriptions are the only knowable facts and

mits truth descriptive only of their own essence. Being

or belief at : ‘ z

all, relapses and knowing, they say, are nothing but think-

es ing, and knowledge grows by closer inspec-
tion of consciousness, not by information

coming from outside or referring to anything ulterior.


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 201


Very well: this at least is a radical position; yet if we
take it consistently we renounce that claim to truth
in our ideas which had originally recommended idealism
to the innocent believer. We are abolishing the very
notion of truth; and if we retain any system of nature
or history, we retain it only as a fashionable mode of
thought, a fading dream for the moment entertaining
the spirit. Even this pleasing assurance about our-
selves, that we may create, survive, and develop our
absolute experiences, would forsake us unless we still
asserted, with a desperate inconsistency, the transcend-
ent validity of memory and expectation: an assertion
which reverts to the belief in truth, and restores
psychologism, if not humanism, with all its materialistic
implications. We cannot, in fact, outgrow materialism
without outgrowing belief altogether.. And unless I
am much mistaken, it is restiveness under belief of any
sort, because it is precarious and a check, while it lasts,
on spontaneous life, that has inspired all modern or
Protestant philosophy. The assertion of a new belief,
contradicting the old, is only a feint in the battle
against all dogma. The new belief would prove no
less odious, and probably far more absurd, than the
old, were it ever seriously established; but its very
weakness is a recommendation to a spirit unwilling to
be pledged, detesting to be taught, and wedded to
nothing but the romantic sport of imposing and de-
riding its successive illusions. All parties, all ages,
Hegel tells us, are mad; yet the folly of all the parts
secretly vindicates the rationality of the whole, since
every part destroys itself because of its irrationality.
Heraclitus of old had said something of the same
sort; but that freer and wiser man was not Vague will
deceived, or bound to deceive others, concern- is the ex-
§ eae ; 5 a sate pression of
ing the principle of this universal instability. matter ill
It was fire, it was matter: and what, indeed, organised.
is this barbarous self-ignorance and self-treason save


202 THE REALM OF MATTER


the voice of matter, profoundly rebellious to form, and
incapable of existing except in the act of leaping from
one form to another? Matter, to blind feeling, is but
force without, and will within. It seems everywhere
instinct with life; yet life and will are not really possible
without a modicum of material organisation, stable
enough to give foothold and some specific direction
to the tentative actions and conquests destined to
enlarge it. The paths of life are many, and most of
them without issue. Knowledge of nature and of self,
in clarifying the blind materialism of action, enlightens
this choice of direction, proves it to have been fruitful,
and enables it still to be so. The steady habit of matter
within, in the psyche, meets and feeds on its steady
variations without; and life attains the dignity of the
rational animal. Without this definition in character
and this recognition of matter, life can only grope and
flounder, vehemently agitated by a vague wretchedness,
without either courage to confess its limits or lucidity
to see its goal.

It is therefore by no means necessary that some
satirical critic should point out the fundamental
Idealism materialism of these idealists; it is plainly
transformed confessed by their own aspirations. There
into panthe- is nothing for which they manifest a greater
pathy with contempt than for the merely ideal; they are
existence intent on reality. Reason, Life, and Ideas,
when by definition existent and creative, evidently forfeit
their original moral values: for they are no longer
essentially fulfilments and perfections desired by that
which exists, but its actual nature or cause. They have
become, like matter, the primal accident; and this fact
is far from lowering them in the estimation of the
modern enthusiast. ‘The passion at work in his
bosom is the will to live; his idealism expresses his
vitality, not any squeamish requirements about the
conditions of existence or any sure promises concerning


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 203


its issue. Why should a few knocks, or a great many
holocausts, chill his ardour in living in God’s world?
His ancestors hardly required a touch of sardonic piety
to be edified by the prospect of almost universal damna-
tion. He may well brace himself in his turn to face
the same fatality spread thin, and distributed impartially
throughout the writhings of history. And if moral
judgment is jeopardised or quite surrendered in this
brave optimism, moral sentiment still remains; because
the happy adventurer is now convinced that in accepting
the universe as it is, and appropriating as much of it
as possible, he is partaking in the divine life more and
more abundantly.

I have said that the Ideas distinguished by Platonists
were for the most part ideals never realised in this world;
they were the sort of tropes interesting to , ~
moralists and poets, and essentially forms of eae
the good. But in modern idealism Ideas are has the

Cie he whip hand.
meant to be descriptions of the actual course
of nature and history: they are alleged laws. Now the
laws of nature are important in considering the means
to an end, but they are not ends nor relevant to the
choice of ends. For a Platonist a world governed by
natural laws—that is, obeying the habits which it once
has formed—would be formless, since its form would
not be relevant to the good. It could not become a
form of the good until a life arising under those material
auspices began to look to it as to a condition of its
happiness. In many modern Idealists a dose of this
Platonism is mixed with their pantheistic and optimistic
ethics, but only to the confusion of thought; for when
a sentimentalist becomes a historian, or in self-defence
a natural philosopher, he insensibly falsifies the facts
and laws which actually hold, in order to insinuate others
which have an edifying rather than a descriptive value.
Yet it is as little philosophical to beautify reality as to
be afraid of it. The face of existence, as open to an


204 THE REALM OF MATTER


omnivorously curious mind, is sublime and fascinating
enough, but it is surely more than human, less than
moral, other than dialectical. It is something like the
universe of Spinoza, which even if stretched a little by
his dogmatic logic and idealised by his traditional piety,
is essentially the natural world, the realm of matter.
This certainly embodies some essence—Spinoza thought
it embodied all essences—but the only ideal toward
which it moves is that all things shall become what in
eternity they are; that nature shall run its course, that
every appointed event shall occupy its allotted place,
and that opinions shall supersede one another as they
do, by a psychological and economic necessity: and this
is precisely the picture of the universe painted by
modern idealists, when they are strong-minded. Their
idealism adds nothing to Spinoza on the ideal. side,
rather subtracts: but it adds a transcendental preface
showing that this picture is the work of thought, as if
that improved it.

This pantheism, being Hebraic in origin, sees
reality in time rather than in space, and is historical
Respect for Tather than cosmological ; and being modern,
hes approaches reality through the discovery
ning of or experience of it, and is fundamentally
wisdom. subjective. But there is no moral idealism
left in it, unless it is by making the upshot of history
as flattering as possible to local or human interests;
in other words, by misrepresenting the truth. This
is not to say that pantheism is irreligious; on the
contrary, there is a sense in which moral idealism,
since it selects, protests, and aspires, is less religious
than the unqualified worship of reality. When the
heart is bent on the truth, when prudence and
the love of prosperity dominate the will, science
must insensibly supplant divination, and reverence
must be transferred from traditional sanctities to the
naked power at work in nature, sanctioning worldly


MATERIALISM OF IDEALISTS 205


wisdom and hygienic virtue rather than the maxims of
zealots or the dreams of saints. God then becomes
a poetic symbol for the maternal tenderness and the
paternal strictness of this wonderful world; the ways
of God become the subject-matter of physics. Matter,
the principle of genesis and the true arbiter of fortune,
has often been one of the realities symbolised under
the name of God, as truth has often been another; and
nothing is more normal than that the magnetism of
surrounding substance, with its thousand assaults and
its thousand responses, should exercise a sobering
guidance over the human soul. As the mere rigidity
and grimace of a stock or stone can bring primitive
man to his knees, annihilating his waywardness by
the relentless authority of its stark Being, so the dis-
covered march of nature in its treacherous fecundity
can hypnotise the philosopher, and cause him to disown
as impious his hopeless private idealisms. It is now
his only idealism to be humble, to be wise, to be con-
tent with his finitude. This form of religion is more
materialistic. than materialism, since it assigns to
matter a dignity which no profane materialist would
assign to it, that of having moral authority over the
hearts of men.

Yet in some measure matter deserves respect even
in the eyes of the Platonist, whose aspiration seems
at first sight to be to escape from it; for 4, ;, sequi-
goodness is a prerogative which matter may site fora full
acquire, as it acquires beauty, in so far as it ee
falls into living organisms and feeds their intelligence
capacity for intuition and feeling with an pow
abundance of kindred things. ‘The avowed materialist
also, who professes to be an intelligent animal, cannot
but place a part of his happiness in his understanding
of the world. It is easier to change one’s pleasures
than to change the nature of things. Why not adapt
these passionate demands of ours—so vague and


206 THE REALM OF MATTER


helpless beyond the circle of our domestic needs—to that
larger economy by which we must live, if we are to live
at all? The study of nature and the equalising blows
of experience tend to establish this sort of regenerate
and disillusioned piety in the place of the arrogant
idealisms of the will. Human utopias begin to seem
childish in the face of the facts, and the facts, in their
labyrinthine order and polyglot fertility, end by seem-
ing glorious as well as inevitable. There are always
compensations for the brave, even in death; and a
part of the soul rejoices and becomes immortal in its
sympathies when it countersigns the death-warrant of
all the other parts.

This fundamental materialism in all human wisdom
leaves the spirit perfectly free to exercise its originality
in the sphere of poetry and feeling; but it shows that
in so far as spirit takes the form of intelligence and of
the love of truth (which is also an ideal passion of the
soul) it must assume the presence of an alien universe
and must humbly explore its ways, bowing to the strong
wind of mutation, the better to endure and to profit
by that prevailing stress. It was in the act of making
this assumption that animal sensibility first became
intelligence. In its further explorations, spirit dis-
covers, as far as it is possible or needful, its urgent and
compulsory objects, as well as the organs, ailing or
healthful, which give it play. Finally, with this self-
knowledge, spirit completes its round and renders its
philosophy secure and its ambitions spiritual: for it
has now conceived how it came into existence and
how it is the natural light by which existence, in its
waking moments, understands itself.


INDEX


Action, posits the field for physics,
9; excludes doubt, 9; dis-
tinguishes fact from fancy, 21 ;
moves in a relative cosmos, 21-


22
Animal faith, the basis of physics,


3, 6

Apollo, a symbol for intuition, 32 ;
for light, 45

Aristotle, 20, 87,
170

Art, requires prior organisation,
129; extends the range of the
psyche, 160; implies benefit, 161

Association of ideas, 173

Atomic theory, its generic truth, 39

Atoms, pictorial units, 38; con-
tigent, 39 ; not existing as defined,
40, 82


igs -T41;05253,


Before and after, organic relations,


93. ; ath bs
Behaviour, the object of scientific

psychology, 123, 153, 154
Berkeley, 168-171


Change, not an illusion, 75, 76;
not internal to intuitions, 79 ;
how represented there, 80, 81

Chaos, fundamental, 99 ; would be
re-established by a sincere psy-
chologism, 173

Consciousness, cf. Spirit

Contingency, may be incidental, 110 ;
permeates facts and laws, 113,114

Continuity, inseparable from change,
81

Copernicus, 7


Dante, 54,55.

Democritus, viii, 19, 40, 98 ;

Derivation, necessary to successive-
ness, 16


Descartes, viii, 20, 40, 165
Dionysus, 31

Dog and the bone, 28, 29
Duration, 63, 80


Einstein, 7 ; his theory adumbrated,
6


9

Eleatic influence in physics, 19

Empiricism, its relative justification,
III

Epicurus, I

Essences, not causes, 84; nor com-
plete facts, 86

Evolution, cf. Flux

Existence, how felt, 9; a passage
from potentiality to act, 93

External relations, defined, 14;
necessary to existence, I1-13


Final causes exist, 119, 120; but
only in moral retrospect, 127, 131,
134, 135 ; mystification regarding
them, 193, 194

Flux, a corollary to contingency, 14;
essential to substance, 15, 16;
excludes synthesis, 77; requires
matter, 99; fertile in everything
possible, 133-135 .

Food, intrinsic function of sub-
stance, 92

Free-will, either accident, 195; or
expression of a formed nature,
196

Freud, 31


Sa pee the book of, 7 ; of moments,
9


Hegel, 199, 201

Henry VI, 129

Heredity, insecure, 126
History, philosophies of, 3
Homer, 95


207


THE REALM


Idealism, use of the term, 190, I91

Indian philosophy, 19, 198

Infinity, 56

Instants, 95

Intuition, not fundamental but
ultimate, 40 ; how contributes to
knowledge, 41; its relation to
physical time, 62; involves syn-
thesis, 69, 82

Ionian physiologers, 44.


208


Kant, 18, 33


Laws of nature, summary views of
derivation, 82, 83; their status,
109-114

Leibniz, 168, 169, 171

Life, vii; two meanings of the word,
94; requires material organs, 202

Light, its two meanings, 44-46 ; its
moral function, 51

Lucretius, ii, x


Malebranche, 169

Materia prima, an essence, not a
substance, 18 ; a classical category
of language, 86; wrongly sub-
stituted for existing matter, 193

Materialism, its chief tenet, 100 ; of
the heart, 202-205

Mathematics, why applicable, 49 ;
how inadequate, 88

Matter, the proper name of sub-
stance, 42, 43; its inherent
instability, 87 ; its function quoad
nos, 88 ; its dynamic essence, 92 ;
is universal food, 96; obviously
potent, 136 ; in what sense living,
141, 1423 contains the potential
and determines the possible, 149

Mechanism, 98, 106 ; alternative to
chaos, 107; its contingency and
spontaneity, 108

Memory, synthesises images, not
facts, 12 ; contains both belief and
intuition, zbid.; primary memory,
63

Mental events, even if causal, would
not be morally directive, 123,
124

Metaphysics, an abusive projection
of human categories, 5

Mind-stuff, oblique name for matter,
186-188

Monadology, or personal idealism,
167-169 ; a transposed material-
ism, 169, 170


OF MATTER


Moral life, inseparable from physical, |
116; its superficial empire, 120-
122 ; rests on animal passions, 170


Narcissus, 30, 31

Natural moments, 88-90

Natural philosophy, its risks, 1 ;
its claims, 2 ; its compulsions, 3 ;
its terms given essences, 6; how
considered in this book, 7; its
modern extension and confusion,


Ease
Necessity, 99
Newton, 7, 40


Organisms, defined, 129;
natural origin, 130-132


their


Panpsychism, 181-188

Parmenides, 19

Perfection precarious, 150

Permanence, implied in flux, 15;
how it belongs to substance, 16 ;
loosely ascribed to common
objects, 32 ; a postulate of action,
33 3; not proper to forms, 37

Perspectives, not natural relations,


175
Pharaoh’s dream, 29, 30
Phenomena, not substantial, 28;
but grounded in substance, 31,


323 impossible without it, 85 ;
ambiguity of the term, 179;
relative to intuition, 181; con-


nected only physically, 184, 185

Phenomenalism, 178-180

Physics, cf. Natural philosophy

Plato, 198

Platonic ideas, 191-198

Plotinus, ii, 18, 54, 170, 198

Potentiality, legitimacy of the notion,
94; exists in seeds, 125

Predisposition in matter determines
the selection of forms, 195

Present, the specious, 68, 69

Presentness, proper to all existence,
61, 62; prerequisite to being past
or future, 72-74

Psyche, a hereditary trope, 116;
further defined, 139, 164; incom-
prehensible, 143 ; variable, 148 ;
manifested in all action and
thought, 143-145; directly felt
at work, 145, 146; the arbiter of
morals, 147; the ground of
spirit, 156-160

Psychical research, 141


INDEX


Psycho-analysis, 143, 184

Psychologism, use of the word, 165 ;
its literary origin, 166;  pre-
supposes the material world, 167-
173

Ptolemy, 7

Pyramids, 38

Repetition, marks fundamental
tropes, 106

Russell, George, xii


Samkhya, 19

Seeds, typical of natural causes, 92 ;
modified in reproduction, 151

Simplicity, alien to nature, 108, 126 ;
not a criterion of truth, 116, 117

Socrates, 191, 192

Soul, various notions of it, 137-139 ;
in Platonism, 196-198

Space, intrinsic to substance, 46;
might vary, 47; self-measured,
48 ; pictorial space an image, 49 ;
its subjective centre, 51-52; its
bond with physical space, 53-55 ;
its varieties, 58 ; its moral dignity,
59

Spinoza, 20, 22, 204

Spirit, proper to animal bodies, 11,
13; expresses substance without
describing it, 27; feels material
tensions, 95; its relation to the
psyche, 139, 150-160; has no
physical force, 163-165

Substance, assumed in action, 8;
posited as diffused, 10; requisite
to lend existence to essences, 14 ;
internal to each agent, 15; un-
equally distributed, 17; not ex-
haustively describable, 26, 27 ;
might be intermittent, 34; yet is
not so, 35; but constant in
quantity, traceable, and measure-
able, 36. Cf. Matter


209


Succession, requires substance, 15,
16, 173-175 ; not an ideal relation,
79, 80

Supernatural, the, if real is a part of
nature, 4

Symbols, their mechanism, 50

Synthesis, unites only given essences,
II; is inherent in thought, 13 ;
incapable of uniting facts, 16


Teleology, prevalent in nature, 118,
119. Cf. Final causes

Tension, the bond between exist-
ences, 16; forward tension, 90;
becomes conscious in intent, 91 ;
lateral tensions, 95-97

Thales, 7

Time, physical time a name for the
flux of matter, 83; not prior to
events, 84, 85; sentimental time
an essence in intuition, 64, 65 ;
its modes, 65-68 ; vain notion of
absolute time, 78, 79

Tropes, 101 ; not perspectives, 102 ;
forms realised in movement, 103 ;
not exhaustive or exclusive, 104 ;
their values, 106 ; their status, 111,
rigig3

Truth, would
worlds, 23, 24;
bridges the flux, 77


connect separate
is static, -75 ;


Unconscious, the, 181, 183
Unity of substance, 22 ; of the field
of action, 22-25


Vendanta, 19 |
Vice prevalent in nature, 161


Will, a moral sign of natural tensions,
92; not a power, 121; cannot
connect events, 185 ; a name for
the force of matter, 186, 202.
Cf. Free-will


THE END


BD331.S33 1930a
The realm of matter
1H} ] HA |


3 0629 Oe4¥Oebb Y
