Platonism and the Spiritual Life (George Santayana, 1927)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/platonismspiritu0000geor_x3p0). Santayana's lectures on Platonism as a spiritual discipline for the modern mind.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PLATONISM AND
THE SPIRITUAL
LIFE


a NS
GEORGE SANTAYANA


Digitized by the Internet Archive
fae in 2025


https://archive.org/details/platonismspirituO000ger


PLATONISM AND THE
SPIRITUAL LIFE


BY THE SAME AUTHOR


LITTLE ESSAYS
THE LIFE OF REASON


INTERPRETATIONS OF POETRY
AND RELIGION


THE SENSE OF BEAUTY


CHARACTER AND OPINION IN
THE UNITED STATES


SOLILOQUIES IN ENGLAND AND
LATER SOLILOQUIES


SCEPTICISM AND ANIMAL FAITH
DIALOGUES IN LIMBO
POEMS


PLATONISM AND THE
SPIRITUAL LIFE


BY
GEORGE SANTAYANA


apa cca
j 4 ih I
| MEOW RAE Theology: OCT BATY |
ror Se Tae |
se a th Fe

hs 127, ENE Sen


NEW YORK
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
1927


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN,
CHISWICK PRESS! CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND GRIGGS (PRINTERS), LTD.
TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.


PLATONISM
AIND-THE SPIRITUAL LIFE


I


INTELLECTUAL anarchy is full of lights; its
blindness is made up of dazzling survivals,
revivals, and fresh beginnings. Were it not
for these remnants or seeds of order, chaos
itself could not exist; it would be nothing.
Without demanding from the men of to-day
anything final or solid we may be grateful to
them for those glimpses of great things past
and of great things possible, which flash
through their labouring minds. One of these
great things past is Platonism, and one of the
great things always possible is spiritual life.
There is, or there seems to be, a certain affinity
between these two, as if deep called unto deep.
Yet Iam not sure that everything in Platonism,
or even its first principles, can be called
spiritual; nor is it easy to discern what the
essence of spirituality may be, entangled as its
manifestations have always been with all sorts
of accidental traditions and prejudices.

In this perplexity I find a list of points

B


2


common to Platonism and to “ spiritual re-
ligion”’ drawn up by the competent hand of
the Dean of St. Paul’s.1 These points are “a
firm belief in absolute and eternal values as the
most real things in the universe—a confidence
that these values are knowable by man—a
belief that they can nevertheless be known
only by whole-hearted consecration of the
intellect, will, and affections to the great quest
—an entirely open mind towards the discoveries
of science—a reverent and receptive attitude
to the beauty, sublimity, and wisdom of the
creation, as a revelation of the mind and
character of the Creator—a complete indiffer-
ence to the current valuations of the world-
ling.” This faith “is distinguished, among
other things, by its deep love of this good and
beautiful world, combined with a _ steady
rejection of that same world whenever it
threatens to conceal, instead of revealing, the
unseen and eternal world behind. The Pla-
tonist loves . . . Nature, because in Nature
he perceives Spirit creating after its own like-
ness. As soon as the seen and the unseen
worlds fall apart and lose connection with
each other, both are dead.’ ‘‘ Values are


* Cf. The Platonic Tradition in English Religious Thought,
the Hulsean Lectures at Cambridge, 1925-6, by William
Ralph Inge, Dean of St. Paul’s, etc., Longmans, Green and


Co., London, 1926. All the phrases quoted are drawn from
this book.


=)


for the Platonist not only ideals but creative
powers.”

This, of course, is the language of a modern.
Dean Inge is not quoting Plato or Plotinus, but
expressing what he believes to be substantially
their view in words natural to a man of his
own country and religion. We must, therefore,
puzzle a little and hazard a guess before we
can recall the Platonic tenets to which some of
these phrases may refer. The term “ value”’
in particular is subjective, imageless, and in a
manner evasive. It may be taken as a neutral
term fairly representing the common quality
of what Plato called the good and the beautiful,
before these were hypostatized; but then to
hypostatize not only such values, but all
natural types and logical concepts, was the very
soul of Platonism; and when the good and the
beautiful have been hypostatized and have
become God or the One, the Ideas, the Demi-
urgus, or the Soul of the World, they are no
longer values, but independent beings, existing
long before the need or the admiration of
mortals could attribute any value to them.
Value is something relative, a dignity which
anything may acquire in view of the benefit
or satisfaction which it brings to some living
being. If God or the Ideas were mere values,
as are pleasure or health, they would be un-
substantial, and only a desired or achieved
perfection in something else. They might,


4


indeed, have value in their own eyes, but only
if they were alive. A man, or a god, cannot
prize his existence before he exists. An auto-
matic harmony must be established in his life
before he can distinguish its direction, suffer
at its diminution, or conceive and desire its
greater perfection. This harmony itself is a
good only because the spirit which it creates
so regards it.


If


Ir I were a theologian, or even a bishop, I
might be innocently led to ask Dean Inge what
he means by a value. Is it anything that any-
body values, or only that which some other
person thinks we ought to value? Is it the
fact that some satisfying aspect is found in
things, or rather a magic necessity providing
that such an aspect shall be found there? Or,
as we gather from other Cambridge philoso-
phers,’ is this necessity not magical but natural
and omnipresent in things, so that whenever
a wave rises and bursts into foam, or a snow-
flake takes shape in the air, or any other form
trembles for a moment in the flux of existence,
the realization of this visiting essence is intrin-
sically a value, whether it be watched and
prized by any spirit or not? Or on the con-
trary are values existing supernatural beings,
by their influence compelling or inclining
nature often to reproduce these satisfactory
aspects? And I might even like to ask, going
a little deeper, whether such supernatural
beings, granting that they exist, work in
nature towards the production of values of any


ft. For instance, in Whitehead’s Science in the Modern
World.
2


6


and every sort—as the law of the survival of
the fittest might work to produce harmony
between each sort of animal and its habitat,
but to make their forms and their pleasures
more and more diverse—or whether these
supernatural beings are biassed in favour of
certain natural forms and certain values to the
exclusion of others; and finally, whether it is
this congenital bias in supernatural powers
that we should understand by the eternal
reality of values.

In the modern notion—a very hazy one—
that values themselves might be forces there is
a contradiction, or at least an ellipsis. In any
single instance, indeed, a mind disinclined to
look for the causes or origins of things may find
in an actual value a final and satisfying fact.
Felt values reconcile the animal and moral
side of our nature to their own contingency: if
anything is well, we neglect to ask why it
happens. The inner connivance and peace of
our will explain it sufficiently. But when
values are supposed to sustain themselves in
being through a long tangle of circumstances,
and to reassert themselves intermittently by
their own strength, we are not merely content
not to inquire why they arise, but we profess
to explain their occasions and causes by their
future presence: a position not only impossible
to defend, but impossible to conceive clearly,
and one that can be held only under cover of


7


half-thoughts and cant phrases. Perception
carves out its conventional units, and final
causes insinuate themselves into the survey of
facts, when their patient genesis is ignored or
untraceable. Life on the whole is a proof of the
possibility of life; each sort of life is a proof
that circumstances made that sort of life
inevitable. A vigorous and courageous animal
assumes that fortune will not fail him. Did he
not assume it, how should he be able to live ?
This sense of safety may be expressed and
justified intellectually by finding the facts or
habits of nature which support our own
habits, and so bring the customary values
about in the round of our experience. If these
favouring circumstances are dominant in our
world we shall be as safe in fact as we feel our-
selves to be by instinct. This situation might
then be expressed elliptically, by saying that
the good is certain to prevail, or that values are
powers: the justification for such an expression
being that our assurance of safety and good
fortune rests on a substantial harmony between
our interests and our circumstances. But
when this harmony becomes audible, when fora
moment some value is realized, all potentiality
and material efficacy are left far behind: we
are in the realm of actuality, of music, of
spirit; and the value actualized lives and ends
in itself. The promise which often lies in it,
as well as the disillusion or disaster that may


8


ensue, will not be due to that value in its
moral nature, to that living and immaterial
good; it will be due to the organization of
nature beneath. All moral functions have their
material organs and their material effects; in
that context they are powers, or rather
vehicles of power—for as the Moslems say,
there is no power but Allah. Goods are, in
their material ground, an integral part of the
flux of events; and the healthy habit in nature
which creates them once may repeat them and
perfect them, if the season is favourable and
the fates allow.


III


For my purpose, however, it is fortunately
unimportant to dispel these ambiguities, dear
to half-hearted philosophies, because the
Platonic doctrine at least is clear. If for the
Platonist goods and evils are everlastingly
fixed and distinct, this moral dogmatism in
him is no accident of temperament, no mere
lack of moral elasticity, as in the bigot. If he
is sure that some goods often passionately
loved are nevertheless false goods, it is only
because he attributes a definite and unchange-
able constitution to the material world and to
human nature. Life, he thinks, has been
kindled and is alone sustained by the influence
of pre-existing celestial models. It is by
imitating these models in some measure that
we exist at all, and only in imitating, loving,
and contemplating them that we can ever be
happy. They are our good. In themselves,
however, they are inviolate beings, serenely
shedding, like the stars, an everlasting radiance,
and no doubt happy beings, if they are living
and self-contemplative: but they are by no
means mere goals which this nether world sets
freely for itself, or perfections which it might
enjoy intrinsically. God and the Ideas could
be ruling powers, because they were existing
S)


Io


beings, definite in their character and influence.
They exercised a miraculous, magnetic control
over formless matter, inducing in it here and
there an inward striving to imitate their forms.
They therefore had the greatest value for the
creature whose life was directed upon them
and who invincibly loved them; but this
value in them remained relative to the aspira-
tion of their lover, and variable in so far as
his nature might change; so that St. Thomas
Aquinas goes so far as to say that to the sinner
God becomes an evil—the Christian God, he
means, for I suppose the reprobate might still
find a divine friend in Bacchus or Venus. It
was never the actual values found in the world
that were separated from it, either in Platonism
or in Christianity, and conceived to compose an
eternal world behind it. The powers that were
creative, substantial, and permanent were not
values at all, but the underpinning which
values required if they were to arise; and
although this substructure had to be in itself
physical or metaphysical, the discovery of it
had momentous consequences for morals, in
that it enabled the enlightened believer to
distinguish possible attainable goods from the
impossible happiness after which the heathen
seek. Those goods which the nature of things
or the will of God assures and sanctions are
the “‘ eternal values’’; the others are “‘ the
current valuations of the worldling.” Thus


Teh


religion or philosophy was the great arbiter of
true values, the guide of life; it justified the
sense of sin and the hope of salvation. The
distinction between true goods and false goods
can never be established by ignorant feeling or
by conscience not backed by a dogmatic view
of the facts: for felt values, taken absolutely
and regarded as unconditioned, are all equally
genuine in their excellence, and equally mo-
mentary in their existence. The distinction
hangs on the system of forces, natural or super-
natural, believed to produce and sustain these
various goods, some for a moment, others for
ever. Some constitution the cosmos must
have, and must disclose to our faith or science,
if ever we are to decide which of our pleasures
or affections reveal ‘‘ the unseen and eternal
world behind,’’ and which of them threaten to
conceal it.


IV


THIS separation of the Platonic Ideas from the
things which manifested them has been much
blamed, yet it goes with another doctrine
which is much prized, often by the same critics.
The precious consequence of this abhorred
dualism was that the Ideas, if separate, might
be powers, creative forces that generated their
expressions. Separation is a pre-requisite to
causal connection: a thing cannot be derived
from a part of itself. If Ideas were only
values, if they were immanent in things, as the
form of a poem or its peculiar beauty is
immanent in that poem, there would be no
sense in saying that the beauty or the form
was a power that had produced the poem.
Not only would each be dead without the
other, as Dean Inge says, but each would be
nothing; the poem arises by taking that form,
and the form is merely that precise arrange-
ment of words and images. The beauty of a
thing is an essence which it manifests spon-
taneously, a pure quality of being revealed
there, and perhaps never to be revealed
again. The natural causes that produce the
thing and bring it to notice produce also this
manifestation of beauty in it; both spring into
existence together out of a complex of circum-
I2


13


stances and impulses among which it is
impossible to place that homeless essence, the
form of beauty thereby revealed; yet this form
is their only value for the spirit, a value which
that precise conjunction of causes was needed
to realize.

There is a sense—a somewhat esoteric sense
—in which such essences as beauty may be
called “ the most real things in the universe.”
They are the ultimate characters by which one
thing can be distinguished from another in the
flux of nature, or one thought from another in
the mind; and if the word “real’’ be used
sentimentally, to miean whatever is most clear
or important or nearest to the heart, such
values will be not only “ most real”’ but even
the only “ reality,’ because their presence or
absence, their purity or contradiction, make
up the spiritual sum of life, all that matters
in it, without which no one would care to raise
his head from the pillow of non-being. If,
however, by “‘ most real ’’ we understand most
primitive or fundamental physically, the roots
of existence, it is clearly impossible that the
most real things should be values. Values pre-
suppose living beings having a direction of
development, and exerting themselves in it,
so that good and evil may exist in reference to
them. That the good should be relative to
actual natures and simply their innate ideal,
latent or realized, is essential to its being truly


14


a good. Otherwise the term “ good” would
be an empty title applied to some existing
object or force for no assignable reason.

The good may nevertheless be called absolute
in several senses proper to current speech.
The good is by no means relative to opinion,
but is rooted in the unconscious and fatal
nature of living beings, a nature which pre-
determines for them the difference between
foods and poisons, happiness and misery. The
moralist may speak for others with authority
when he knows them better than they know
themselves, but not otherwise. Moreover, their
natural good may be absolute in the sense of
being fixed and unalterable, so long as the
living beings concerned and the circumstances
in which they flourish remain constant in type.
That human nature and the world are un-
changeable was an assumption of classic times
which survives often in modern moralists,
without its dogmatic justification. Finally,
the good may be called absolute in the sense
of being single and all-sufficient, filling the
whole heart, and leaving nothing in the rest
of the universe in the least tempting, inter-
esting, or worth distinguishing. It is in this
sense that lovers and mystics proclaim the
absoluteness of the good with which they are
united, and when the thing is true as a con-
fession it would be frivolous and ungracious to
quarrel with it as a dogma.


V


IF then the Ideas were immanent in things, as
the beauty of a poem is immanent in it, they
could not conceivably be powers producing
their occasional manifestation. The beauties
inivinsic to the tragedy of Hamlet could not
have caused Shakespeare to compose that play
since those values could not possibly come to
existence until the play had already composed
itself in his fancy, and burst into just those
beauties. In order to maintain seriously the
efficacy of Ideas and to conceive matters in the
orthodox Platonic way, we must make a differ-
ent supposition. Suppose Hamlet had been a
living prince, like the present Prince of Wales,
and that Shakespeare, with his company of
players, had happened to appear at this
prince’s court, and had conceived for him a
passionate Platonic attachment, such as he
seems to have conceived for the W.H. of the
Sonnets: and suppose further that, by the
prodigious inspiration of this passion, Shake-
speare had been led to imagine episodes and
phrases that might in part express so tender,
intellectual, and profound a character as that
living Prince seemed to him to possess; then
indeed a most real Hamlet, with a pre-existing
power and charm, might have been the “ only


a5


16


begetter ”’ of the play. In exactly this way the
Platonic Ideas, the Christian God, or the
Christ of devout Christians, may be conceived
to be the causes of their temporal manifesta-
tions in matter or in the souls of men. Evi-
dently a play written in such circumstances
might have the same intrinsic value as one
purely imaginary; but it would not be this
literary value that would constitute the model
or the creative influence which had produced
the play; this literary value would have been
begotten, like the play itself and inseparably
from it, by the influence radiating from the
living Hamlet, a prince having his existence
apart, who by chance had come for a moment
within the poet’s orbit.

This separation between the creator and the
created is not only the condition of derivation,
contact, and causal influence, but it is also
the condition of a genuine worship; because
then that which is expression in the poet is at
the same time homage in the lover, as it could
not be except fatuously and by a poetic
affectation if the being loved did not exist
separately. And “ only begetter ”’ is the right
phrase to indicate the relation between such a
creative influence and its work. A Platonic
Idea could never be the whole cause of its
temporal expressions; a material or feminine
element is involved that may receive that
influence and make it fruitful; a fact which


17


would also explain the many variants and the
many imperfections which things might exhibit
in response to the same unchanging virtue of
their divine model.

When the matter is so conceived all force
departs from the contention that if we separate
God or the Ideas from the temporal world,
“both are dead.’’ God and the Ideas, like the
living Prince Hamlet, would remain exactly as
they were, with all their intrinsic warmth and
virtue; and the temporal world, like the
Shakespearean tragedy, would also remain just
as it is, with all its literary values. The only
difference would be that the living prince would
have inspired no poet, and that the self-
inspired poet would have celebrated no living
prince. . Shakespeare’s Hamlet would be
reduced to what, in fact, he is, an object of
occasional imagination, a pure essence, and not
a power. Meantime the inexhaustible powers
which, if a divine life existed, would certainly
lie in it, would have continued to radiate un-
manifested, like those many rays of the sun
which are dissipated in space, not being by
chance reflected or absorbed and made tempor-
ally fruitful by any speck of an earth.

Platonism accordingly would be entirely
stultified and eviscerated if it were not suffered
to be all that modern criticism, inspired as it is
by a subjective and psychological philosophy,
most thoroughly dislikes; I mean, super-

Cc


18


naturalistic, realistic, and dualistic. This is
only another way of saying that, according to
the Platonic doctrine, God and the unseen
world really exist in themselves, so that they
can precede, create, attract, and survive their
earthly emanations.


VI


Is this to say that Aristotle and all the other
critics of Platonism have had no reason on their
side? Far from it: their criticism was amply
justified by the facts of nature, and their only
defect was perhaps not to have felt its full
force, and to have still attributed power to
those very Ideas to which they denied separate
existence... The Platonic system is mytho-
logical: if taken literally and dogmatically, it
can seem to cold reason nothing but a gratuit-
ous fiction, as all systems of religion or meta-
physics necessarily seem to the outsider. Of
course they are not inwardly gratuitous; they
are the fervent expression and product of the
deepest minds; and anyone capable of sharing
the inspiration which prompted them will
know them to be inevitable, persuasive, and
morally coherent. Thus Dean Inge says that
those who think Platonism dualistic have
simply not understood; that is (if I myself
understand him), they have not understood it
from within, genetically, historically, emotion-
ally; they have not recovered the experience


1 T have elsewhere ventured to suggest that perhaps Aris-
totle himself was not guilty of this inconsistency. Cf. Dza-
logues in Limbo: the Secret of Aristotle, pp. 181-193.


a)


20


and the immanent logic which, as a matter of
fact, held the Platonic dualism in solution.
This dualism appears only in the dogma pre-
cipitated and left, as it were, as a sediment ;
and the most sympathetic modern critic can
hardly take such dogma seriously. He exznot
receive it as a revelation, like a humble cais-
chumen, drinking-in the marvellous super-
natural facts from the lips of the masters.
Platonism, like Christianity, cannot now pro-
duce in him the illusion which it was its early
mission to produce. When he turns back to
the origin of such a faith, he cannot, for all his
sympathy, share the prophetic impulse which
carried the Fathers from their first intuitions to
the full expression of the same in consistent
and final dogmas. Truth for him means
historical, psychological truth; and the whole
force of his learning and imagination is spent in
dissolving those dogmas dramatically into their
subjective components, and showing them to be
but verbal expressions for certain radical
ambient values. This is what, in fact, they
were, or something of that kind: and he may
be assured of this not merely by the naturalistic
philosophy (perhaps unconsciously inspiring
him) which proclaims such dogmas to be
nothing else, but by the study of the surviving
documents. Plato’s writings in particular
show clearly that the eventual Platonic system
was but a moral and poetic fable.


21


The Ideas originally were really nothing but
values. Socrates had conceived them as forms
of the good, and this good itself was identical
with the useful, beneficent, or advantageous.
In the Republic we learn that anything—a
shepherd or a ruler, a bridle or a bed—is good
when it fulfils its natural function. Fitness to
control a horse for the purposes of war, com-
merce, or sport would be the Idea (or value) of
a bridle, and fitness to induce sound and com-
fortable sleep would be, I suppose, the Idea of
a bed; and as to the eternal Idea of a ruler or
shepherd, what should it be but to protect and
conduct his sheep or his people, and in due
season to shear them? This homely Socratic
wisdom may seem not far removed from “ the
current valuations of the worldling ’’; it rested
on no revelation, private or public, and had no
principle save the reasonableness of the simplest
mortal when forced by shrewd questions to
disentangle his prejudices and to discover what
he really wants. But great is the power of
logic, when the mind is single and the heart
open. In a trice it will bring the humblest
judgements into the clarifying presence of the
highest good. Socrates was a plain man, but
fearless; he was omnivorous, playful, ironical,
but absolutely determined. His one purpose
was to be rational, to find and do what was
best. If Anaxagoras would tell him what
profit men might draw from the sun and moon,


22


he would listen gladly; but if it was only a
question of the substance or motions of those
bodies, he would turn his back on Anaxagoras
and laugh. This cobbler’s wisdom was the
same that almost made saints of the Cynics; it
reappeared in the monks; it may reappear any
day in some popular*prophet. -A_ fervid
utilitarianism has a strangely revolutionary
force: in squeezing the world to get every drop
of pure good out of it, it leaves the world
worthless, and has to throw it away: nothing
remains but the immediate good of the spirit,
the naked soul longing to be saved.


VII


In Plato and in his followers this revolution
took more time and a larger sweep. Plato’s
mind was more accomplished and less conse-
crated than that of his master: that of his
followers was more dogmatic and single than
his own. Idealism, as 1t moves away from its
origins, may easily become idolatrous: while
leaving earthly things dry and empty, it may
worship the pure forms which these things
would have had if they had been perfect. In
criticizing and condemning this world the
prophet will find himself in the presence of
another world, its sublimated image. The gift
of thinking in myths, once native to the Greeks,
was not altogether lost; it could still fuse the
forms seen with a life unseen; it could trans-
form definition of terms into intuition of
Ideas; it could personify the functions of
things and turn their virtues into patron
deities animating those things and causing
them to shine with a strength and beauty alien
to their earthly substance. In the unclouded,
synthetic, believing mind of Plotinus this
chastened mythology crystallized into the
most beautiful of systems.

An inexhaustible divine energy—so the
system ran—poured perpetually down into the

23


24


chaos of matter, animating and shaping it as
well as that torpid substance would permit.
At the bottom or centre there was little life,
but it stirred more actively and nobly at each
successive level, somewhat as the light of the
sun floods the ether absolutely, the air variously,
the sea dubiously, and the earth only darkly,
with a shallow warmth. Hence the hierarchy
of created goods, which is itself a good; and
as to the defeats and confusions involved in
being other than the highest, and other than
one’s own Idea, they were due to the inoppor-
tune inertia of matter, or to blind accident, or
to a diabolical soul intervening and poisoning
the fountains of divine grace. All levels of
being were good in some measure, each after
its kind. Consistently, and yet perhaps only
with an effort and against the spirit of his
times, Plotinus defended the excellence of the
material world against the Gnostics, and the
worthiness of the state and of the traditions of
Hellenism, so that an emperor and even an
empress might be his auditors without offence ;
and his philosophy remained Socratic in prin-
ciple, a mythical underpinning to morals, and
not a view of nature founded on observation,
like those of the Stoics and the Epicureans.
Yet in the five or six hundred years since
Socrates, moral life itself had changed its
centre. The good of the soul and her salvation
had taken the place of domestic, military, and


25


political goods; so that while the various
spheres of being, like the terraces of Dante’s
Purgatorio, were all permanent and divinely
appointed, the spirit now moved through them
without rest. Its abiding-place was beyond.
They were but the rounds of a Jacob’s ladder
by which the soul might climb again to her
native heaven, and it was only “‘ there,” above,
that she truly lived and had been blessed from
all eternity.

Platonism, as Dean Inge observes, has no
tendency to become pantheistic. Its first
principle is the difference between good and
evil. Its final dogmas describe a half-astro-
nomical, half-dramatic setting for the phases of
spiritual life. The divine spirit burned with
such an intense and concentrated fire, it was so
rich in its inner being, it overflowed into a
celestial hierarchy of so many choirs, all
superior to man, even on earth it found so
many marvellous and amiable non-human
manifestations, that man, with his two-footed
featherlessness and his political artifices, lost
his ancient Hellenic dignity: it was almost a
disgrace for the soul to be expressed in a body
or a body in a statue. Thus the imagined
universe which was to shelter morality threat-
ened to outgrow its original office. Man and
his earthly fortunes began to seem to the con-
templative mind but incidents in the barn-
yard. The only ambition worthy of a philo-


26


sopher was to transcend and transfigure his
human nature, and to pass unsullied through
this nether world in adoration of the world
above.


WATE


PLotinus professed to be, and actually was,
an orthodox Platonist ; and yet this dominant
sense in him of the spiritual life was perfectly
foreign to Socrates and Plato. I say this with-
out forgetting the dialogues on love or the
almost Roman religiosity of the Laws. After
having been very poetical Plato became very
austere; but his philosophy remained political
to the end. To this descendant of Solon the
universe could never be anything but a crystal
case to hold the jewel of a Greek city. Divine
as the heavens were, they were but a mothering
and brooding power : in their refined materiality
and mathematical divinity they circled about
the earth, at once vivifying it and rebuking it
by the visible presence of an exemplary good.
The notion of the heavenly spheres was no
mere optical image, the dream of a philosopher
who, on a clear night, could measure the
radius of the universe with the naked eye: this
image was a moral parable. The realm of
ethics will always be a set of concentric circles.
Life necessarily radiates from centres; it stirs
here, in the self; from here it looks abroad
for supports and extensions, in the family, the
nation, the intellectual world, the parent and
subject universe. Wide as it may seem, this
27


28


prospect is homely, and taken from the hearth
of Vesta.

If the theology of Socrates and Plato was in
this way domestic, the remnant of traditional
religion in them was doubly so. Their attach-
ment to ancient piety was childlike and super-
stitious when it remained personal, but more
often it was expressly political and politic:
they saw in religion a ready means of silencing
dangerous questions and rebuking wickedness.
It was a matter of moral education and police,
and in no sense spiritual.

As to the Socratic philosophy of love, there
is an obvious spiritual tendency in it, inasmuch
as it bids the heart turn from the temporal to
the eternal; and it does so not by way of an
arid logic but by a true discipline of the affec-
tions, sublimating erotic passion into a just
enthusiasm for all things beautiful and perfect.
This is the secret of Platonism, which makes it
perennial, so that if it were ever lost as a
tradition it would presently be revived as an
inspiration. It lives by a poignant sense of
eternal values—the beautiful and the good—
revealed for a moment in living creatures or in
earthly harmonies. Yet who has not felt that
this Platonic enthusiasm is somewhat equi-
vocal and vain? Why? Because its renuncia-
tion is not radical. In surrendering some
particular hope or some personal object of
passion, it preserves and feeds the passion


29


itself; there is no true catharsis, no liberation,
but a sort of substitution and subterfuge, often
hypocritical. Pure spiritual life cannot be
something compensatory, a consolation for
having missed more solid satisfactions: it
should be rather the flower of all satisfactions,
in which satisfaction becomes free from care,
selfless, wholly actual and, in that inward
sense, eternal. Spiritual life is simple and
direct, but it is intellectual. Love, on the
contrary, as Plotinus says, is something
material, based on craving and a sense of want.
For this reason the beautiful and the good, for
the Platonic enthusiast, remain urgent values ;
he would cease to be a true Platonist or a rapt
lover if he understood, if he discounted his
illusions, rose above the animal need or the
mental prejudice which made those values
urgent, and relegated them to their relative
station, where by their nature they belong.
Yet this is what a pure spirit would do, one
truly emancipated and enlightened.


Lo.e


HERE, at the risk of parting company with
Dean Inge and even with Plato, I come to a
radical conclusion. Spiritual life is not a
worship of ‘‘ values,” whether found in things
or hypostatized into supernatural powers. It
is the exact opposite; it is disintoxication from
their influence. Not that spiritual insight can
ever remove values from nature or cease to feel
them in their moral black and white and in all
their aesthetic iridescence. Spirit knows these
vital necessities: it has been quickened in their
bosom. All animals have within them a
principle by which to distinguish good from
evil, since their existence and welfare are
furthered by some circumstances and acts and
are hindered by others. Self-knowledge, with
a little experience of the world, will then easily
set up the Socratic standard of values natural
and inevitable to any man or to any society.
These values each society will disentangle in
proportion to its intelligence and will defend in
proportion to its vitality. But who would
dream that spiritual life was at all concerned
in asserting these human and local values to be
alone valid, or in supposing that they were
especially divine, or bound to dominate the
universe for ever ?


30


31


In fact, the great masters of the spiritual
life are evidently not the Greeks, not even the
Alexandrian Greeks, but the Indians, their
disciples elsewhere in the East, and those
Moslems, Christians, and Jews who have
surrendered precisely that early, unregenerate
claim to be enveloped in a protecting world
designed for their benefit or vindication, a
claim of which Platonism after all was but a
refined version. To cling to familiar treasures
and affections is human, but it is not particu-
larly spiritual; to hypostatize these home
values into a cosmic system especially planned
to guarantee them, certainly expresses an
intelligible passionate need for comfort and
coddling in the universe, but with spirituality
it has nothing to do. If such confidence may
be called faith, it may also be called fatuity
and insolence; an insolence innocent in a
spirited child, but out of place in a philosopher.
Spirituality comes precisely of surrendering
this animal arrogance and this moral fanaticism
and substituting for them pure intelligence:
not a discoursing cleverness or scepticism, but
perfect candour and impartial vision. Spirit is
merciful and tender because it has no private
motive to make it spiteful; yet it is unflinch-
ingly austere because it cannot make any
private motive its own. It need have no
scientific or artistic pretensions; it appears
quite adequately in straight seeing of simple


32


things; these, to pure spirit, are speculative
enough and good to whet its edge upon; the
proudest dreams of science or theology are no
better for the purpose. The spirit is content
with the widow’s mite and a cup of cold water ;
it considers the lilies of the field; it can say
with literal truth: Inasmuch as ye did it unto
the least of these, ye did it unto me.

As the spirit is no respecter of persons, so it
is no respecter of worlds: it is willing to put up
with any of them, to be feasted in one or to be
martyred in another. And while it is allowed
to live—a point that concerns the world it
lives in rather than the spirit itself—it looks
with a clear and untroubled sympathy on such
manifestations of being as happen to be
unrolled before it. As it loves the non-human
parts of nature, so it loves the human parts,
and is in no way hostile to the natural passions
and to the political and religious institutions
that happen to prevail. If spirit was to be
incarnate and to appear in existence at all, it
had to be born in one odd world or another:
why should it quarrel with its earthly cradle?
This is not to say that all circumstances are
equally favourable to the spiritual life. On
the contrary, most circumstances exclude it
altogether; the vast abysses of nature seem
to be uninhabited; and even where spirit
feebly appears, it is in order to be, very often,
stifled at once, or long tormented. Almost


33


always its world is too much with it; the spirit
is so deeply engaged and distracted by current
events that it cannot realize its proper function,
which is to see such things as come in its way
under the form of eternity, in their intrinsic
character and relative value, in their transitive-
ness and necessity, in a word, in their truth.
This contemplative habit evidently finds a
freer course in solitude than in society, in art
than in business, in prayer than in argument.
It is stimulated by beautiful and constant
things more than by things ugly, tedious,
crowded, or uncertain. For this reason it is
more prevalent and freer in the East than in
the West, among Catholics than among Pro-
testants, among Moslems than among Jews.
For the same reason the Platonic system, up to
a certain point, is sympathetic to the spirit.
Its universe was compact and immortal; the
oscillations of fortune on earth could not
disturb its unchangeable order. If nature were
conceived to be, as in fact she 1s, barbarous and
in indefinite flux, giving rein to anything and
everything, there would seem hardly to be time
to reach perfection on any level of being before
the soil was undermined and the budding Idea
was lost and dissipated. The great merit of an
unchanging world is that all its inhabitants
can be adapted to it. If they ever fall out of
tune the cause will be but a passing disease
and an accidental slackness in the strings; it
D


34


will be easy to screw up the pegs, to renew a
snapped cord, and to restore the harmony.
Such a world offers an immovable basis and
sanction for the good: it establishes an
orthodox morality. Imperfection enters it
only below the circle of the moon, like bad
manners below stairs; and even here, on
earth, evil is but an oscillation and dizziness in
matter which nature perpetually calls back to
the norm, as the motion of a top rights it in its
gyrations.


xX


I AM not confident, however, that a pure spirit
would feel safe in such a seven-walled celestial
castle, or would prize the sort of safety which,
if it were real, it would afford. Existence is
contingent essentially. As things might just
as well have been different, so they might just
as well prove to be inconstant; and since they
cannot manifest their groundlessness by now
being other than they happen to be, they may
manifest it by being other at other times and
places. No existing being can have the means
of knowing that it will always exist or prosper
in the universe: the neatest cosmos and the
most solitary god might collide with something
unsuspected; or the unsuspected thing might
exist in its own preserves without being dis-
covered or coming into collision. Yet that
undiscovered world, for the spirit, would be as
real and as interesting as this world. Ignorance
cannot justify any negative prophecy: but
existence, while it is the home of particular
certitudes, is also a cage in which an inevitable
and infinite ignorance sings and dies imprisoned.
Existence is self-centred, limited in character
by the character which it chances to have,
and in duration by the crawling fact that it
exists while it is found existing. There is no


35


36


necessary and all-comprehensive being except
the realm of essence, to which existence is
irrelevant: for whether the whole exist or only
a part, or even if no part existed, the alterna-
tive fact would always be knocking at the
door; and nothing in the actual facts could
ever prove that the door would not suddenly
open and let the contrary in. Like people
living on the slopes of volcanoes, we ignore
these possibilities, although a catastrophe is
rapidly approaching each of us in the form of
death, and who knows how soon it may over-
take the whole confused life of our planet?
Nevertheless, except in the interests of detach-
ment and freedom, spirit has no reason for
dwelling on other possible worlds. Would
any of them be less contingent than this one,
or nearer to the heart of infinite Being? And
would not any of them, whatever its character,
lead the spirit inexorably there? To master the
actual is the best way of transcending it.
Those who know but one language, like the
Greeks, seem to find language a purer and more
transparent vehicle than those of us who notice
its idiosyncrasies and become entangled in its
meshes. So it is the saints most steeped each
in his traditional religion who are nearest
together in spirit; and if nature caused them
to change places, it is they that, after a
moment’s pause to get their bearings, would be
most at ease in one another’s skins. No one is


37


more unspiritual than a heretic, or more grace-
less and wretched than an unfrocked priest ;
yet the frock of the faithful is but an earthly
garment; it melts into the clouds which, in
their ascension, they leave behind them.


XI


In what places the spirit shall awake, and how
long and how freely it shall be suffered to
flourish are evidently questions of mundane
physics and politics: it is the world’s business
to call down spirit to dwell in it, not the spirit’s
business to make a world in which to dwell.
The friends of spirit, in their political capacity,
will of course defend those forms of society in
which, given their particular race and tradi-
tions, spirit may best exist: they will protect
it in whatever organs and instruments it may
already have appeared, and will take care that
it pursues its contemplative life undisturbed
in its ancient sanctuaries. Spirituality has
material conditions; not only the general
conditions of life and intuition (for a man must
exist before he can become a spiritual man),
but subtler and more special conditions such
as concentration of thought, indifference to
fortune and reputation, warmth of tempera-
ment (because spirit cannot burn clear except
at a high temperature) disciplined into chastity
and renunciation. These and other such con-
ditions the master of novices does well to
consider; but spirit itself, when once aroused,
does not look back in that direction. Many
Christian saints have qualified their spirituality
with too much self-consciousness; it was no
38


39


doubt their religious duty to examine their
consciences and study to advance in holiness;
but the holiness really did not begin until they
forgot themselves in the thought of God. So
with those who were consumed with zeal for
the Church, the conversion of sinners, and other
works of charity. These are moral interests or
duties accruing to men as members of some
particular society; they are political cares.
They may be accompanied by spiritual insight,
if it be really salvation or spiritualization of
souls that preoccupies the missionary, and not
some outward change of habit or allegiance,
that may make other people more like himself
and ensure the dominance of his home tradi-
tions. Political zeal even in the true friends of
spirit is not spiritual; a successful apostle
must have rather a worldly mind, because he
needs to have his hand on the pulse of the
world; his appeal would not be intelligible if

it were not threatening or spectacular or full of |
lewd promises. It will be only afterwards,
perhaps, when people have been domesticated
in the new faith, that the spirit will descend
upon them. The spirit itself is not afraid of
being stamped out here, or anxious to be
kindled there; its concern is not about its
instances or manifestations ; it is not essentially
learned or social; its kingdom is not of this
world. It leaves propaganda to those who call
themselves its friends but probably know


40


nothing of it, or are even its enemies, and only
the agents of some worldly transformation
ultimately quite nugatory.

Nor has the world, on its side, any obligation
to cultivate the spiritual life. Obligations are
moral; they presuppose a physical and social
organism with immanent spontaneous interests
which may impose those obligations. The
value and opportuneness of spiritual life, in
any of its possible forms, must be adjudged by
reason in view of the moral economy for
which, in any instance, reason may speak.
All values fall within the purview of ethics,
which is a part of politics. Spirituality is the
supreme good for those who are called to it,
the few whose intellectual thirst can be
quenched only by impartial truth and the
self-annihilating contemplation of all Being.
The statesman and the father of a family may
not always welcome this disposition; it may
seem to them wasteful and idle. Just as the
value of an artist must be judged by the world,
in view of all the interests which his art affects
or subserves, while the artist himself lives only
in his own labour, irresponsible, technical, and
visionary; so the value of spiritual life in
general, or in any of its incidental forms, must
be judged morally by the world, in view of its
own ambitions, while the spirit, standing
invisibly at its elbow, judges the world and its
ambitions spiritually.


XIT


It is impossible that spirit in a living creature
should ever be wholly freed from the body and
from the world; for in its inwardness it would
have ceased to follow and enact the fortunes
of that creature; it would either have been
absorbed in the contemplation of pure Being
and become virtually omniscient, or at least
it would contemplate its special objects equably
under the form of eternity, and not in the
perspectives determined by the station of its
body in time and place. Pure Being, or these
special essences and truths, would evidently
gain nothing by the fact that this new mind
had been lost in them; and this mind, in
gaining them, would have lost itself; 1t would,
in fact, have ceased to exist separately. Mean-
time the body of that creature might go on
living automatically; the mind which it had
previously fed, as a lamp feeds its flame, would
have evaporated, gone up into the sun, and
ceased to light the precincts and penumbra of
that particular vessel, or to be a measure of its
little oil. But a living automaton is by nature
conscious: the lamp has not been materially
extinguished: the creature is accordingly still
breeding a faithful if flickering mind, which
feels and notes its further vicissitudes. Evi-
4I


42


dently this fresh mind is the true continuation
of that creature’s experience; it is again con-
tinuously cognizant of that body in that world.
The effort to liberate souls from their bodies
or to transport them beyond their world .has
therefore a rather ironical result: the redeemed
soul ceases to be anybody’s soul, and the body
continues to have a soul that is quite personal
and unregenerate.

The difference between the life of the spirit
and that of the flesh is itself a spiritual differ-
ence: the two are not to be divided materially
or in their occasions and themes so much as in
the quality of their attention: the one is
anxiety, inquiry, desire, and fear; the other is
intuitive possession. The spirit is not a tale-
bearer having a mock world of its own to
substitute for the humble circumstances of this
life; it is only the faculty—the disenchanting
and re-enchanting faculty—of seeing this world
in its simple truth. Therefore all the worldly
hatred of spirit—and it is very fierce—can
never remove the danger that, after a thousand
persecutions and a long conspiracy of derision,
a child of the spirit should be born in the
bosom of the worldly family. The more
organic and perfect the life of the world be-
comes, the more intelligent it will be: and what
shall prevent intelligence from asking what all
this pother is about and driving the money-
changers from the house of prayer? Spirit


43


must have some organ; but when once aroused
it does not look in the direction of its organ or
care at all about preserving it. It looks rather,
as we see in Indian philosophy, to a realm
anterior to all worlds, and finds there a compre-
hensive object which in one sense includes all
worlds, since it is infinite Being, but for that
very reason excludes the enacted existence of
any one of them, since they can be enacted, as
the moments of time are enacted, only by
excluding and ousting one another. This
world, for a speculative mind, is exactly
analogous to this moment. It seems alone
real to those who inhabit it, but its pre-
eminence is relative and egotistical: if main-
tained dogmatically it becomes at once illusory
and absurd.


XIII


Nor that the existence of a particular world—
perhaps its exclusive existence—is an evil. If
the lovers of pure Being are ever tempted to
say so, it is only in their human capacity,
because some rude fact may have wounded
their feelings. These feelings are a part of the
world which they condemn, inevitable as this
world is inevitable, and unnecessary in the
sense in which this world is unnecessary. The
contradiction or self-dislike which they betray
in that world is, no doubt, a defect from the
-point of view of the parts in it which are
quarrelling, each of which would wish to have
it all its own way. But this fact does not
render that world, or the conflicts in it, evil
absolutely. Evil can arise only within each
world when it becomes faithless to some Idea
which it has begun to pursue, or is crossed in
the pursuit of it either by some external enemy
(if any) or by the inward contradiction and
complexity of its impulses, which allow it only
to drift towards uncertain, tragic, and romantic
issues. But, as we see in some desperately
romantic philosophers, this very disorder may
please an imagination which is stirred by that
stimulus more deeply than by any impulse
towards harmony and fixity of form. Some
44


45


impulse towards form, some initial essence or
essences, a world must preserve so long as it
exists, else it would dissolve into chaos or into
that metaphysical non-entity, matter without
form: but this modicum of form may be
composed by the perpetual defeat of every
particular endeavour, and the greatest evil of
the greatest number of souls may fulfil the
romantic ideal. The theologians who have
maintained that the damnation of the great
majority is no evil in the sight of God, and
leaves his intrinsic holiness and glory unsullied,
have understood the matter speculatively ;
and although the ferocity of the Calvinists was
not spiritual, and their notion of “an angry
God ”’ was grotesque, there was spirituality in
their elevation above the weak judgements of
the flesh and even of the heart; only that the
speculative sword really cuts both ways, and
their sense for the superhuman should also
have dissolved their moral fanaticism. Pure
Being is infinite, its essence includes all
essences; how then should it issue particular
commands, or be an acrimonious moralist ?
The two-edged sword falls again here. If it
be true that the world can be evil only in its
own eyes and therefore only partially and pro-
visionally, until the eyes are closed or are
hardened like the eagle’s to that wounding
light, so it is true also that it can be good in its
own eyes only: and more, that the spiritual


46


life and the pure Being to which its contempla-
tion is addressed, can be good only in relation
to the living souls that may find their good
there. Plotinus and many other mystics have
admitted that the One, though habitually
called good, is not properly so called. It is the
good of religion, because religion is a conversion
from one object of pursuit to another, under
the form of the good: but in the One itself, or
in attainment, the pursuit is absent, and the
category of the good no longer has any applica-
tion. The title may be retained, in human
parlance, to indicate that the attainment
really satisfies the aspiration which preceded,
and does not disappoint it; for to end there,
to end absolutely, was the very aim of that
aspiration. The case is like that of a man
building his tomb, or bequeathing his property
to his son; the result is a good for him in that
he desired it, but not in that he survives to
enjoy it. So is the peace that passeth under-
standing, that annuls desire, and that excludes
the gasping consciousness of peace.


XIV


SPIRIT, which is ultimately addressed to pure
Being, is not itself this pure Being. It is the
gift of intuition, feeling, or apprehension: an
overtone of animal life, a realization, on a
hypostatic plane, of certain moving unities in
matter. So, at least, I understand the word;
but its original meaning was a breath or wind,
and hence, often, an influence. In this last
sense it is used in Christian theology; the Holy
Ghost is not the Father nor the Son, but pro-
ceeds from them and animates the world, or at
least the souls of the elect. It is the fountain
of grace. We also read in the gospel that God
is a spirit, to be worshipped in spirit and in
truth. Here the word evidently bears more
than one sense; the spirit in which God is
worshipped is a disposition of the mind, where-
as God himself, we may presume, is a spirit in
the mighty sense in which Jehovah swept the
void, a breath or a word, bringing order out of
chaos; the same voice that spoke to Job out
of the whirlwind, with the sheer authority of
power. Spirit thus seems to be sometimes a


47


creative energy, sometimes a sanctifying influ-
ence. Soin the Latin hymn:

Veni creator Spiritus

corda tuorum visitans

imple superna gratia

quae tu creastt pectora.

This double function of spirit, if we investi-
gated its origin, would bring back the double
source of Christian doctrine, here Hebraic and
there Platonic: a profound dualism which
custom scarcely avails to disguise or theology
to heal. Creative power and redeeming grace
point in opposite directions; but a complete
religion needs to look both ways, feeding
piously at the breast of nature, yet weaning
itself spiritually from that necessary comfort
to the contemplation of superhuman and
eternal things. The object of piety is necessity,
power, the laws of life and prosperity, and to
call these things spirit is pure mythology; they
are indeed a great wind, sometimes balmy,
sometimes terrible; and it is the part of wis-
dom to take shelter from it, or spread wings or
sails in it, according as it lists to blow. But to
what end? To live, to have spirit, to under-
stand all these things.

There is also a conventional modern sense in
which we speak of the spirit of an age, a place,
or a book, meaning some vague tendency or
inspiration either actually dominating that
thing or suggested by it to the mind of a third


Ls


person. This is a verbal survival of myth,
poetry become cant: spirit here means those
characters of a thing which a myth-making
mind would have attributed to a spirit.

In contrast to all these uses I am employing
the word spirit to mean something actual;
indeed, the very fact of actuality, the gleam
of intuition or feeling. But this gleam ordin-
arily serves only to light up material life and
the perspectives in which it moves in time and
in space: an incessant sketchy sense of the
affairs of the body and of its world. The
digestion and preparation of action (as the
behaviourists have shown) is a physical matter.
In that business the spirit is entirely superfluous.
The behaviourists even affect to deny its
existence, on the ground that it is invisible and
would be a useless luxury in nature: excellent
economy, as if a man, the better to provide for
his future, should starve himself to death.
The spirit in us is that which, morally, we
actually are: if anything is to be expunged
from the complex face of reality it might
rather be our material and social setting and
all the strange and incoherent stories told us in
history and science. Certainly all these appar-
ent or reported facts would be perfectly vain,
if they did not create the spirit, and teach it
to observe and enjoy them. So we are brought
back to the immediate revelation of things,
which is also their ultimate value: we are


E


50


brought back to the spirit. Its life is composed
of feelings and intuitions, in many stages and
degrees; and when spirit is free and collected
it has no life but this spiritual life, in which the
ultimate is immediate. All the experiences of
the spirit, until they are so exorcized and
appropriated—so enshrined in pure Being—are
sheer distraction.


XV


WERE any world perfect, as the Platonists
thought that this world was in its upper parts,
its spirit would view it with the same contem-
plative satisfaction with which it views any
pure essence that spontaneously engages its
attention. It would not, in respect to that
perfect world, be harassed by remorse, as it
must be in an imperfect world when it counts
the cost of existence and considers the dreadful
sufferings which plagued it like a nightmare,
before something beautiful and good could
appear even for a moment. I say remorse,
because such is the feeling that comes over me
when I remember the travail which, at least in
man, the spirit has had to endure in bringing
its better life to birth: but the spirit itself has
no guilt in the matter; it was caught in a vice;
,and it may accept and overlook that terrible
gestation when at last it reaches the open and
rewards itself with an hour of freedom and
gladness. These are its natural notes: it is
born out of an achieved harmony, only in
creatures already formed and in some measure
fit to live: contradiction and torment are
inexplicable to it, and danger a cause of laugh-
ter. How should spirit, the very essence of
radiance, ever become morose? It runs and
51


52


sparkles wherever it may, the free child of
nature. It has no grudge against its fostering
world; on the contrary, nothing but delighted
wonder. It has no native enmity towards the
flesh—that comes to it afterwards from the
sad flesh itself; it has no disinclination to folly.
The difference between folly and wisdom,
between crime and piety, is not naturally
known to spirit; it is a lesson learned by
experience, in view of the conditions of material
life; spirit would of itself gladly take a turn
with the devil, who is also a spirit. Yet all this
innocent joy and courage native to spirit bind
it to the world with no tie. That which is tied,
that which cannot live save in its home climate
and family nest, is only the mortal psyche, the
poor, absurd, accidental human person. The
psyche in each of us is like Vesta, the goddess
of the Hearth, mother of the Promethean
flame, mother of spirit; and she needs to learn
the difficult unselfishness of the parent—or of
the foster-parent: for her child is of another
race. She must be content to be abandoned,
revisited only in haste on some idle holiday,
with a retrospective piety; and even as she
embraces her full-grown over-topping son he
will seem a stranger to her, and she will catch
sight of his eyes, gazing over her head into a
far country.

At the same time this homelessness of spirit
is not romantic; it is not impatience of this


58)


and longing for that; it is not the snobbery of
learning and culture so characteristic of intel-
lectual people who are not spiritual. No: the
homelessness of spirit comes from detachment,
detachment no less from the grander thing
which the snob respects and pretends to know
as from this humbler thing which he despises.
Anything is enough if it be pure; but purity
itself comes to things from the simplicity of the
spirit which regards them, not indeed with
indifference, rather with joy, but without any
ulterior interest; in other words, purity comes
of detaching the thing seen and loved from the
world that besets and threatens it and attach-
ing it to the spirit to which it is an eternal
possession. But this thing eternally possessed
by the spirit is not the thing as the world
knows and prizes it; it is not the person, or
nation, or religion as it asserts and flaunts
itself, in a mortal anxiety to be dominant ; it is
only that thing in its eternal essence, out of
which the stress and the doubt of existence
have wholly passed. It is that thing dead,
immortal, its soul restored, as Plotinus would
have said, to the soul of the universe where,
together with all other souls, it has always been
contained in its purity and perfection. But
the truth of it there is not the fact of it here;
and therefore the world, though the spirit loves
it far more truly and tenderly than it loves
itself, is chilled and rebuked by that look of


54


divine love, which, if it were heeded, would
transmute its whole life and change it from
what it so passionately and cruelly is, in time,
into that which the spirit sees it to be in
eternity.


XVI


THE human heart is full of political, religious,
metaphysical ambition; it hugs all sorts of
pleasant projects in art and in fortune. These
are moral interests and, if not misguided, may
bring hidden or future facts before the mind,
and broaden the basis for rational action. So
the Platonic philosophy sets the scene in one
way for the play, the Christian system in a way
somewhat different, and modern science, if we
make a naturalistic system out of it, in still
another. I will not say that the question
which of these is true, or truer, is indifferent to
the spirit; its fortunes and temper will evi-
dently vary if it is bred in one or another of
these climates. But if the facts were dis-
covered, whatever they might turn out to be,
the spirit would be equally ready and able to
face them. It is not in the least bound up with
the supposition, whatever it may mean exactly,
that any “ values are the most real things in the
universe.” What should the spirit care if
moralistic metaphysics ceased to invade the
field of natural philosophy, venturing there
upon some guesses flattering to human vanity ?
What if the most real—that is, I suppose, the
most fundamental and dynamic—things in the
universe were utterly inhuman? Would spiritu-


55


56


ality be thereby prevented from being spiritual,
from seeing and judging whatever world
happened to exist in the light of spirit ?

When I say the light of spirit I might as well
say light simply; for what is spirit but the act
of making light actual, of greeting, observing,
questioning, and judging anything and every-
thing? Spirit is awareness, intelligence, recol-
lection. It requires no dogmas, as does animal
faith or the art of living. Human morality,
for the spirit, is but the inevitable and hygienic
bias of one race of animals. Spirit itself is not
human; it may spring up in any life; it may
detach itself from any provincialism; as it
exists in all nations and religions, so it may
exist in all animals, and who knows in how
many undreamt-of beings, and in the midst of
what worlds? It might flourish, as the Stoics
felt, even in the face of chaos, except that chaos
could not sustain the animal life, the psyche,
which spirit requires for its organ. From the
existence of spirit a psychologist may there-
fore argue back to the existence—at least local
and temporary—of some cosmos of organized
matter: but this dependence of mind on body
is a lesson taught by natural philosophy, when
natural philosophy is sound; it is not a free
or evident requirement of spirit in its first
deliverance. On the contrary, the body which
is the matrix and cradle of spirit in time, seems
a stumbling-block to it in its spontaneous


o7


career; and a rather long discipline and much
chastening hardly persuade this supernatural
nursling that it is really so domestic, and that
it borrows its existence from a poor, busy,
precarious animal life; or that the natural
rhythms, pauses, and synthetic reactions of
that life are the ground of its native affinity
with the eternal. Yet such is the fact: spirit,
as I have said, is a hypostatic unity which
makes actual and emotional the merely formal
unities or harmonies of bodily life; and since
the living psyche is in flux, any actual exist-
ence which bridged its processes and relations
would have to transcend time in its survey,
and not be attached or confined to any of the
moments which it overlooked and spanned.
Therefore spirit is essentially dateless, and its
immediate terms are essences in themselves
eternal; which is not to say that one form
of spirit does not continually replace another
in the world. There is a continual variation
in themes, and there may be intermittences in
intuition itself; but each of these themes is an
essence overarching a part of the existential
flux, and each moment or node in intuition
looks out of its narrow window upon a vista
which, whether broad or confined, is not
anchored in the place of any of its sundry
objects.

To this organ and to this temporal basis
spirit can accommodate itself perfectly when


58


once it has discovered them. Naturalism has
its modest way of doing the spirit honour. In
whatever manner natural forces may operate,
if ever they issue in life, it can be only because
they already have established rhythms, such
as day and night, favourable to that life, to its
renewal and inheritance. Any world, any
society, any language has a natural inertia or
tendency to continue; it satisfies and encour-
ages the spirit which it creates. It fits the
imagination because it has kindled and moulded
it, and it satisfies its resident passions because
these are such, and such only, as could take
root and become habitual in precisely that
world. This natural harmony between the
spirit and its conditions is the only actual one:
it is the source of every ideal and the sole
justification of any hope. Imperfect and shift-
ing as this harmony must be, it is sufficient to
support the spirit of man; and if this spirit be
clear and open, it is sufficient to unroll before
it all the proper objects of its contemplation in
their invincible beauty and eternity. That the
vision, considered as an event in history, must
change and pass is indifferent. It isnot because
other people love what I love that, if I ama
free spirit, I love it, nor because I have always
loved it or must always love it in future, but
because it is lovely as I see it now. Such is the
assurance that is proper to life, to actuality, to
intuition: the rest is weariness of spirit, and a


59


burden to the flesh. But the animal in man is
wretched unless he can imagine that his
language, nation, arts, and sentiments are
destined to be supreme in the world for ever;
he is hardly content to suppose that he may
not rise again to take part in celebrating some
final, yet unending, victory; and he demands
eternity not for the lovely essences which he
may have beheld, which have eternity in
themselves already, but for the manifestation
of those essences, which cannot have it.


XSVIT


SINCE spirit is an emanation of natural life
there would be impiety on its part in flouting
or denying its own source: yet this has always
been a temptation for spirit when self-conscious
and self-contained: hence the pride of Lucifer,
the mock independence of the Stoic sage, the
acosmism and absoluteness of the Indian
mystic, and the egotism of German philosophy,
thinking to create and recreate its world in
its flight through nothingness. The trouble
with such forced attitudes is that they attempt
to divorce spirituality from piety, which is the
other half, and the fundamental half, of a
sound religion. In Platonism and Christianity
this divorce has been avoided, but without
establishing a happy and stable marriage;
because the object of piety is the power, what-
ever it may be, on which life depends; and it
is not true piety to invent or posit other sources
for life or welfare than those which experience
shows to exist: piety is wisdom. Nor does the
spiritual life profit in the end by trespassing in
this way on the preserves of a sober piety anda
sober science; because the spirit is thereby
entangled in the fanatical defence of fantastic
dogmas, as if these were indispensable to its
life; so that its peace is poisoned, and its
60


61


wings are clipped. What folly to suppose that
ecstasy could be abolished by recognizing the
true sources of ecstasy! Yet ecstatic, and not
addressed to matters of fact, the spirit is in its
essence, whenever it arises at all. It actualizes,
in an intuition which is through and through
poetical and visionary, various movements,
rhythms, potentialities, and transcendent rela-
tions which physical life involves but which are
not parts or moments of its moving substance,
and remain merely formal facts for the external
observer.

The attachment of spiritual minds to some
particular system of cosmology, Platonic,
Christian, Indian, or other, is, therefore, a
historical accident—a more or less happy
means of expression, but a treacherous article
of faith. The truth of any of these systems is a
question for science, not at all a postulate of
the spiritual life. Accordingly, as Dean Inge
says, ‘‘ an entirely open mind towards the dis-
coveries of science ”’ would be characteristic of
a purely spiritualreligion. Butit is not possibly
characteristic of a convinced Platonist or a
convinced Christian. In Platonism, as in
Christianity, the spiritual life is not pure, but
incarnate in a particular body of dogma,
historical and cosmological: both systems are
pledged to the magic ascendancy of certain
supernatural powers, posited in order to guar-
antee certain particular human values. No


62


such system, giving an unnatural fixity, in a
special cosmos, to a special morality or civiliza-
tion or to a private personality, can look upon
the hypotheses of a free science with anything
but terror, perhaps mitigated by contempt:
terror, because it has laid up its treasure in an
eventual material heaven, which it feels in its
bones to be mythical; and perhaps contempt,
because free science is but human discourse,
in which one shaky hypothesis is always
replacing another; whereas the dogmas of an
allegorical religion, for the very reason that
they express elementary human feelings and
fancies, can appeal to the heart so long as the
heart is human. To cultivate this contempt
for free science, and to endure that terror with
fortitude, aided by hypnotic ritual influences
and the contagion of many voices crying in
unison, must be the policy of any such system ;
it must stand by its guns. It can cultivate
its own learning and arts and philosophy, but
with free science it can have nothing to do.
It is not to-day or yesterday, as Dean Inge
seems to think, that science has discredited
these mythical dogmas. Science is but a name
for consecutive observation and understanding,
and science had amply disproved those.dogmas
before they arose: a fact which did not prevent
them from arising and from prevailing exceed-
ingly.

The interests which these dogmas expressed


63


and sanctioned were respectable interests,
political, moral, and emotional. The civilized
mind is still very much more at home in such
a cosy world than in the universal flux of
nature, which not only opens material im-
measurable abysses on every side of our human
nest, but threatens us with an indefinite flux in
our own being, in our habits, institutions,
affections, and in the very grammar and cate-
gories of our thought. Yet neither science nor
spirituality share this classic dislike or fear of
the infinite. Science, although its occasion is
the description and manipulation of the field
of action, is heartily willing to describe it and
manipulate it in any convenient way. It is
perhaps the best sign of a scientific, as dis-
tinguished from a doctrinaire, temper not to
lay great store on science itself, that is, on its
forms, language, and theories, but to keep it
plastic in the presence of its existing subject-
matter, and of the spontaneity of human
fancy, which, at any moment, may suggest new
methods of notation, new abbreviations, new
syntheses. As to spirit, it has a far deeper
reason than science for eluding every conven-
tion and not regarding institutions, whether
political, ecclesiastical, or intellectual, with
more than a resigned courtesy. Such things
must needs be: it would be foolish to reject
them instead of profiting by them. The body,
which is an institution of nature, is the indis-


64


pensable organ of spirit in man; political and
religious institutions are organs necessary also
for certain kinds of spiritual life; and if the
cosmos, too, is a permanent institution, the
spirit can very well acknowledge that acci-
dental fact and submit, herve, to the limitations
thereby imposed upon it. But it would be,
for spirit, a limitation; its proper field is there,
in the world which is eternal by inward neces-
sity and essence, not by a longevity presumed
to be perpetual; a world which for the same
reason is infinite, as a world of change, even if
endless, cannot be, since it expressly excludes
any order of events other than the one which
it happens to realize.


XY fil


THE Platonists, like all typical Greeks, shud-
dered at the infinite and hardly thought of
it, even in the optical form of infinite space.
This is of itself a sufficient proof that they
were fundamentally political philosophers,
moralists, humanists, and not men living
primarily in the spirit. They thought the
infinite formless—a conception which is possible
only in the absence of concentration upon that
idea; for, when considered intently, the
infinite is seen to contain all forms: it is the
realm of essence. This observation, if they
had stopped to make it (and it requires no
special intelligence, only pause) would have
dispelled any aesthetic dislike which they may
have had of the infinite; yet it would not have
changed their radical indifference to it. The
Greeks were not aesthetes; their love of form
and their approach to perfection in it were not
aesthetic but moral, political, hygienic: like
noble animals they were proud and content in
their own bodies, faculties, and loves; words
could not express their indifference to what
was not human; and when some divine shaft
rent those bodies and blackened that mind, the
cry of their mourning was brief but absolute.
Their love of finitude was vital; it was the
FP


66


love of existence, and of perfection in existence ;
and for that reason, not for any idle aestheti-
cism, they were clear discerners of beauty.
Aestheticism is incapable of producing the
beautiful or, in the end, even of loving or
discerning it; it has cut off the vital and moral
roots of form which render one form more
beautiful than another, and which, deeper
still, give unity of form to objects at all. These
vital roots of form were alive in the Greeks:
they flowered into sundry finite perfections ;
and evidently they could not flower into forms
contrary to these particular perfections, rooted
in a particular living seed, limited to the play
of a particular animal body and its appropriate
mind. The infinite was valueless: and from
the moral point of view, from the point of view
of some natural organism striving to be free
and perfect, valueless the infinite certainly is.
But spirit is a terribly treacherous inmate of
the animal soul; it has slipped in, as Aristotle
says, from beyond the gates: and its home is
the desert. This foreignness is moral, not
genealogical: spirit is bred in the psyche
because the psyche, in living, is obliged to
adjust herself to alien things: she does so in
her own interest: but in taking cognizance of
other things, in moulding a part of her dream
to follow their alien fortunes, she becomes
intelligent, she creates spirit; and this spirit
overleaps the pragmatic function of physical


67


sensibility—it is the very act of overleaping it
—and so proves itself a rank outsider, a child
rebellious to the household, an Ishmael ranging
alone, a dweller in the infinite.

This infinite is the infinite of forms, the
indestructible and inevitable infinite that con-
tains everything, but contains it only in its
essence, in that eternal quality of being in
which everything is a companion and supple-
ment to everything else, never a rival or a con-
tradiction. These essences, when thought con-
siders any of them without knowing whether
they describe any earthly object or not, may
be called ideal; but they are not ideal intrinsic-
ally, either in the sense of being figments of
thought or of being objects of aspiration. They
become ideal, or enter into an external moral
relation to the animal soul, when this soul
happens to conceive them, or to make them
types for the objects of its desires. A perfectly
free spirit (if it could exist) would not consider
eternal beings in their ideal capacity, because
it would no longer refer them to the fancies or
hopes of some living creature, but would con-
sider them in themselves, ranging from one to
another quite speculatively, that is, guided by
the intrinsic formal relations of similarity or
inclusion which obtain between them. It
would therefore virtually traverse the infinite,
its path not being hedged in by pre-existing
irrelevant interests in one form of being rather


68


than in another. But evidently this perfect
impartiality is not human; it is contrary to the
initial status of spirit, as the hypostatic syn-
thetic expression and realization of some dis-
cursive phase of animal life—some adventure,
some predicament, some propensity, some pre-
occupation. It is therefore natural that the
intrinsic infinity of Being should remain in the
background, even in the spiritual life, and that
essences should be contemplated and dis-
tinguished rather as ideals for the human
imagination than as beings necessary in them-
selves.


xX


For this reason the Platonic philosophy
opens a more urbane and alluring avenue
towards spiritual enlightenment than does the
Indian, although the latter runs faster towards
the goal and attains it more perfectly. The
limitation of the divine intellect, or the Ideas,
to the types of earthly or celestial bodies, and
to the values proper to their lives, leaves the
afterglow of passion upon them; the eternal
profits by the interest which its worshippers
have in the temporal. This accommodation is
also conspicuous in the Catholic tradition: it
seems doubtful sometimes whether that other
world is a liberation from this one, or a re-
duplication of it, with all its temporal, moral,
social, and diplomatic business extended inde-
finitely. This is the price which the spiritual
life has to pay for being made amiable. A
universe is composed on purpose to facilitate
it; life there becomes so easy and natural, it
retains so many human values, that it threat-
ens to be choked in a system of anxious hopes
and adjustments, worse than those involved in
mundane life, because inescapable. In this
world, at least, the spirit can flee to solitude,
to nature, to play, to the delicious irony of
despising the passions which one is forced to


69


.79


share; but from heaven, ennobled and sancti-
tied as it would be by so many immortal per-
sonages, so many high maxims, marvellous
dogmas, and moral exclusions, whither should
the spirit tlee? Of course the spiritual sense
for those celestial facts might be recovered ;
even in heaven one might be a philosopher.
The other world would be but a second touch-
stone for the spirit if, like this world and its
moral order, it were a fact existing in itself.
In the Catholic, as in the Platonic, kingdom,
the spirit must still blaze its own trail; the
carpets spread accommodatingly before its
feet, leading to the celestial courts, will never
lead it, of themselves, to spiritual lhberation.
Consider the universe ot Plotinus: a process
of emanation from the One through the Ideas
to the Soul of the World, whence, like rays
from different stars, human and animal souls
descend on occasion to animate material
bodies. This system was designed to encourage
the spirit to rise from its animal prison—
prison was the word—reversing that emanation
until it recovered the primal bliss of contem-
plative union with pure Being. But what is
there in the system, 1i we accept it as describing
the facts, to compel or even to invite the spirit
to rise at all? The cosmology of Plotinus
might almost be adopted by a Hegelian inter-
ested only in evolution and not in the least in
redemption; he might behold with rapture the


7


successive embodiment of linked Ideas in the
thoughts and institutions of men; far from
wishing to reverse the process in his heart, and
renounce all these endless transformations,
conflicts, and cumulative cares, his only joy
might be to share them, to be the first to
announce them, and at every turn in the battle
to drop the cry of yesterday in order to pick
up that of to-morrow. Since it was the nature
of things to emanate from the One, he would
hasten to emanate with them. All his angels
would be seen descending Jacob’s ladder, and
none ascending. Yet only the ascent concerns
the spiritual life. The descent is the creation
of the world and the work of the world, by
which the spirit, when it awakes at last, finds
itself entangled in animal passions and foolish
ambitions. Starting from whatever facts and
predicaments may seem to envelop it, its
function is then to detach itself from them one
by one, escaping the flux and urgency which
they have in the realm of existence, unravelling
and synthesizing their temporal perspectives,
in order to transpose them all into the realm
of truth, where they form an eternal picture ;
and then to let this picture itself recede into its
setting in the realm of essence, where it is but
one form of being, which this world by chance
has manifested, amid the countless forms of
being which perhaps have not been manifested
anywhere. The angels, even in their descent,


72,


will then be messengers to the philosopher
from an eternal world, to which, in ascending
again, they carry up his heart; whereas if the
angels were born in transit and lived only in
their apparition in time, he might have perhaps
a pleasanter casual environment, but no
heavenly treasure; and his attitude would be
that of a lover and gloating denizen of this
world, not that of the spirit. Even from the
best world the spirit must depart. Beauty calls
it away no less than confusion; and happiness
is only a more amiable sacrament than suffering
to carry it to the impassible Being which
infinitely outruns all these accidents of exist-
ence.


XX


SPIRIT, since its essence is to aspire, comes to
life at the foot of the ladder; it lives by con-
templation, by knowing the thing above it.
It is not its own object, as the Platonic Ideas
seemed to become in Aristotle’s theology, when
they were identified with a cosmic intellect
eternally contemplating its own structure.
Spirit might indeed attain to such a condition
if its natural organ were, as Aristotle supposed,
some perfectly harmonious and immortal revo-
lution of the heavens. Even then spirit would
properly be the rapt aspiration towards those
Ideas, the immortal love of them, which kept
the moving spheres constant in their round:
for the soul of each sphere was intently fixed
upon the Idea (or, as we might say, the
formula) which it was to realize by its motion
and to turn into a sustained note in the
celestial symphony. Even in this astronomical
theology spirit would be the third person of the
Trinity rather than the second; it would be the
Soul of the World looking towards the Ideas,
rather than the Ideas looking towards the One.
This One, if we may identify it with the Brahma
of the Indians, would be infinite Being; it
would not be any longer conformable or proper
to any particular cosmos or to any particular
<3


74


moral life. Relevance to nature would begin
with the divine intellect or the sphere of the
Platonic Ideas: they would be finite in number
and exclusive in type; they would compose the
morphology of this world. The third person or
hypostasis in the eternal, would be the divine
spirit, the love or attention by which those
particular forms were made the theme of an
actual life. This divine spirit looks towards
the Ideas; it is hardly different from the God
of Aristotle; and it may be said to descend
(although inwardly still wholly attentive to the
beings above it) and to animate the world, in
the sense in which heavenly souls may be said
to descend to animate our bodies; namely, in
that an echo or imitation of them or obedience
to them keeps the world or the body alive.
The immortal soul of the world could never
itself look downwards or be troubled by the
vicissitudes of the matter which imitates its
form: no more could the immortal soul of any
man be compromised by the imperfections of
its earthly shadow.

We are here in the region of speculative
fiction; souls have become so perfect in their
eternal abode that other souls have to take
their places in living bodies. Indeed, an
organic inherited soul, a principle of material
growth and action, is no spirit; spirit is first
generated in it when it awakes to some actual
feeling or thought. Such a spirit evidently can


HO


hever envisage pure Being, or the realm of
essence, in its infinite fullness and detail; the
essences which will appear to it will be such,

and such only, as its material organ evokes by
its quite special processes and contacts. But
quantity is not a category important to spirit ;

as it is indifferent to duration, because it lives
in the eternal, so it is indifferent to the endless
multiplicity of things, existing or not existing,
which may lie beyond its ken. It is not
anxious, like an animal soul hounded by
curiosity and fear, to dominate and possess
everything, lest by overlooking some secret
enemy, it should live in a fool’s paradise, and
to-morrow be ruined. The limitations of
experience, when experience is spiritual, are
not invidious; what it possesses it cannot lose ;
what it leaves out is not denied or condemned
or demanded. As Dante says, there is no envy
in these spheres. The sense that the rest is
there (since all essences are implied in infinite
Being) suffices to give the spirit room, to
detach it from all partiality, from all unjust
affection; while the essential eternity of that
which is manifested suffices to wed the spirit
to it with an absolute confidence, without the
least ignoble hankering to look beyond. Spirit
differs from animal intelligence less in material
scope than in inward quality; its distinctive
object is not pure Being in its infinity, but
finite being in its purity.


XXI


EVEN in rare moments of attainment, when the
human spirit has seemed to be united or even
identified with the supreme Being, the reports
which reach us of that ecstasy indicate that the
chasm has never really been bridged. These
reports are avowedly inadequate; words can-
not render what has been seen, nor would it be
lawful, perhaps, to reveal it. Ultimate insights
have a tendency to undermine the orthodox
approaches by which they have been reached.
The saint pulls his ladder up with him into his
private heaven; and the community of the
faithful, on whose sturdy dogmatic shoulders
he has climbed, must not be deprived of the
means of following his example. Hence any
dissolving culmination of the religious life must
be kept a secret, a mystery to be divulged only
to the few whom the knowledge of it can no
longer scandalize or discourage. Besides this
prudence and this consideration for the weaker
brethren, there is a decisive reason for silence:
the revelation has been essentially a revelation
of the illusion inherent in all language, in all
experience, in all existence. It cannot be com-
municated save by being repeated.

Doubtless the state of being achieved in
ecstasy is intrinsically immensely positive, but

76


7]


it is the negation of every human wish and idea ;
there are, and can be, no human words to
express its nature. So true is this, that if the
mystic uses this very suspension of thought, this
ecstasy itself, as a true rendering of his ultimate
object of contemplation, he falls into a worse
error than the animal and worldly mind. For
at least, in current experience, scattered and
accidental manifestations of being appear;
they are illusions if taken for more than appear-
ances, relative to particular animal organs and
interests; they are trivial and competitive;
yet they are distinct, and each of them, by its
positive character, enriches that revelation of
essence to spirit which animal life necessarily
affords, in spite of its distraction. It would
suffice to suspend the urgency of the animal
will (as sometimes happens to children and
poets in their simplicity) in order to disinfect
this sensuous revelation of its distraction and
illusion; it would not reveal much, but it
would reveal something of pure Being. In
poets and children this is but play; they revert
from it at once to what the world thinks serious
interests and sound knowledge of facts. When
on the contrary the same disillusion is attained
laboriously, by a long spiritual discipline, the
adept attempts to maintain and propagate his
insight; and then there is trouble, for in the
very act of defending this insight, he is likely
to lose it. In so far as the objects of his con-


78


templation are familiar to everyone and have
accepted names, these names will carry animal
faith with them, and when he uses them they
will conceal or even contradict the new quality
of pure being which things have acquired in his
eyes; to him they have become eternal
essences, to his hearers they will still be
temporal facts. Meantime, in that realm of
essence which he now envisages, vistas may
have opened to him into all sorts of regions
which are not of this world, which have no
names at all in human discourse; how should
he be able to express or even to remember their
intricate and unearthly nature? Even in
ordinary dreams, composed as they are,
presumably, out of bits of earthly imagery and
puffs of animal anxiety, there are many
marvels and vicissitudes, momentous to them-
selves, which we cannot recover in the light
of day: how much harder the vision must be
to recompose if its elements*were original or its
mood sublime! If spiritual attainment could
ever be complete and infinite Being could
reveal itself (which I do not believe) in its
entirety, evidently the disproportion would be
overwhelming between the number and variety
of things to report and the human means of
reporting them.

Silence is therefore imperative, if the mystic
has any conscience; he cannot have perceived,
andhe cannot retain, the fullness of his ultimate


79


object. This fullness came to him, and remains
in him, merely as a sense of fullness, the brilli-
ancy of a blinding light, without any specifica-
tion of the infinity of essences which were there
to be lighted up. He therefore can only assure
us that it was a great revelation, freeing him
from the oppression of ordinary existence and
thought; it was peace, it was bliss, it was
virtual knowledge ; but beyond that his powers
of perception and retention could not go.


XXIT


HERE the mystic—he who feels he has passed
beyond the veil and seen things not to be
uttered—if he lacks humility and discipline,
may fall, and may lead us, into a sad illusion.
He may take his dazzled feeling itself, the
blinding glory of mere light, for the supreme
reality, or for the true description of its nature.
He may say that infinite Being is itself simply
feeling, or intensity without quality or dis-
tinctions, or the pure light of spirit falling, not
on everything, but only on itself. He would
then be confusing his own incapacity with the
object which infinitely exceeds it. The glass
dome, far from creating the many colours of
infinite Being, fuses and neutralizes them into
a white liight—the blurred effect of a rude and
summary vision. This unitary feeling, rather
than a revelation of pure Being, is the custom-
ary sense of one’s own bodily existence. The
words existence and being are often used inter-
changeably, and this verbal ambiguity serves
to obscure the infinite difference between the
realm of essence—pure Being in all its eternal
modes—and the pressure of external things
and of internal change in a living organism. ~
This sense of existence, essentially transitive
and restless, may sometimes be lulled into a
80


81


simmering warmth and voluminous comfort, a
pleasant animal trance in which spirit dives as
deep as it can into the life of the matter. This
feeling has a true depth of its own, a kinship
with universal substance. Brahma is some-
times likened to deep sleep, and Nirvana to
nothingness ; and in modern philosophy we are
sometimes told that the true reality is pure
duration or pure sentience. These expressions
ignore pure Being, and even the presumable
substance of the natural world, which must
somehow be diversified and unevenly distri-
buted; but they describe fairly enough the
sentiment which the presence of overwhelming
things inspires, or the trail which their passage
leaves in the animal mind. Persons far
advanced in the spiritual life often use language
of this kind, as they use pious or erotic lan-
guage; but their language must not be taken
amiss; they use, like all of us, the words they
find. To the true mystic even things are
symbols; how should he worship words? The
Spanish mystic, for instance, San Juan de la
Cruz, represents all virtues and graces as by-
paths diverging from the straight but diffi-
cult way, the name of which is Nothing,
Nothing, Nothing. In the end the spirit
indeed claims nothing, posits nothing, and is
nothing in its own eyes, but empties itself
completely into the Being which it contem-
plates; but if this Being itself were said to be
G


82


nothing, our mysticism would evidently have
slipped into a bad heresy, not to speak of the
flat contradiction. So Nirvana may be called
annihilation in that it annihilates personal-
ity, desire, and temporal existence; yet the
“Buddha teaches that all beings are from
eternity abiding in Nirvana’ so that far
from being nothing Nirvana embraces the
whole realm of essence—-pure Being in its
infinite implications—from which, of course,
existence is excluded; because since existence
is necessarily in flux and is centred in some
arbitrary moment, it itself exists only by
exclusion and with one foot in the grave.
Existence is that realm of Becoming which
combines Being and Non-Being so much to
Hegel’s satisfaction, and which generates those
unstable but “‘ current valuations of the world-
ling ’’ to which the spirit, according to Dean
Inge, is so completely indifferent.


1 Dasgupta, Hstory of Indian Philosophy.


XXIII


THE spiritual life, then, is distinguished from
worldly morality and intelligence not so much
by knowledge as by disillusion: however
humble may be its career, it lifts those few and
common adventures into the light of eternity.
This eternal aspect of things summons spirit
out of its initial immersion in sensation and in
animal faith and clarifies it into pure spirit.
This eternal aspect of things is also their imme-
diate aspect, the dimension in which they are
not things but pure essences; for if belief and
anxiety be banished from the experience of
any object, only its pure essence remains
present to the mind. And this aspect of
things, which is immediate psychologically,
ontologically is ultimate, since evidently the
existence of anything is a temporary accident,
while its essence is an indelible variation of
necessary Being, an eternal form. The spirit
lives in this continual sense of the ultimate in
the immediate. Mortal spirits, the spirit in
animals, cannot possibly survey pure Being in
its infinity; but in so far as they free them-
selves from false respect for the objects of
animal faith and animal passion, they may
behold some finite being in its purity. For this
reason, established morality and religion, by
83


84


protecting the eye from too much distraction
and fixing it on noble objects, may make a
better soil for spirit than does wayward living.
Not that spirit may not crop out marvellously
in the sinner, as it may in the child or the poet.
It notoriously does so; and even in the saint
it remains profoundly indifferent to the occa-
sion that may have kindled its flame, be this
occasion religious faith or sensuous vision, be it
passion, study, or practical dominion over the
world. All is grist for the mill, if only there
be force of intellect actually to grind that
experimental substance and reduce it to some
pure essence on which contemplation can feed.
But moralities and religions, if they merely
extend or exaggerate the pressure of circum-
stance on the soul, are as dreadful an incubus
on the spirit as ever was the animal search for
food, love, or safety; indeed, they are but a
monstrous and terrifying shadow of these
radical compulsions cast needlessly on the
screen of heaven.

I ask®? myself sometimes, is not morality a
worse enemy of spirit than immorality? Is it
not more hopelessly deceptive and entangling ?
Those romantic poets, for instance, whose lives
were often so irregular—were they not evidently
far more spiritual than the good people whom
they shocked? Shelley, Leopardi, Alfred de
Musset were essentially children of the spirit :
they were condemned to flutter on broken


85


wings only for lack of measure and discipline ;
they were spiritual waifs, untaught to see the
relativity and absurdity of their proud passions.
The perfect spirit must be a patient hearer, a
sober pupil, not an occasional automatic sky-
lark. Yet when spirituality, as in Words-
worth, has to struggle instead against a black
coat and a white choker, it seems to be more
sadly and decisively stifled, buried alive under
a mountain of human alarms and a heavy
tombstone of sanctimony. The world, he
sighed, is too much with us; but the hills and
even the mock Tritons blowing their wreathed
horns were not able to banish the world from
his conscientious concern. Nothing is able to
banish the world except contempt for the
world, and this was notin him. It would even
have been contrary to his Protestant religion
—that so unspiritual determination to wash
the world white and clean, adopt it, and set it
up for a respectable person. The world is not
respectable; it is mortal, tormented, confused,
deluded for ever; but it is shot through with
beauty, with love, with glints of courage and
laughter; and in these the spirit blooms
timidly, and struggles to the light among the
thorns.

Such is the flitting life of this winged thing,
spirit, in this old, sordid, maternal earth. On
the one hand, in its innocence, spirit is happy
to live in the moment, taking no thought for


86


the morrow; it can enjoy the least gift as
gladly as the greatest; it is the fresh, the pure
voice of nature, incapable of learned or moral
snobbery. It ignores its origin, so buoyant is
it; its miraculous light seems to it a matter of
course. Its career is everywhere conditioned
and oppressed from without, yet it passes
through the fire with a serene incredulity, an
indomitable independence. On the other hand,
the eye of spirit, in its virtual omniscience, sees
the visible in its true setting of the invis-
ible; it is fixed instinctively on the countless
moments that are not this moment, on the
joys that are not this sorrow and the sorrows
that are not this joy, on the thousand opinions
that are not this opinion and beauties that are
not this beauty; understanding too much to
be ever imprisoned, loving too much ever to be
in love. Spirit chills the flesh and is itself on
fire; thought, as Dean Inge says, “‘ becomes
passionate, the passions become cold’; or
rather they are confronted and controlled by a
profound recollection, in which laughter and
tears pulse together like the stars in a polar
sky, each indelibly bright, and all infinitely
distant.


XXIV


IF with these considerations in mind I turn
back to the characteristics of Dean Inge’s
“ Platonic tradition in religious thought ”’ I find
that some of these characteristics belong to the
spiritual life everywhere, but not to the
Platonic system. Such is openness to science,
or (what this openness implies) tolerance of any
dogmatic conception, and readiness to accept
any kind of world. Other characteristics are
indeed proper to Platonism, but irrelevant to
the spiritual life; such is the mythical cos-
mology meant to secure the perpetual preval-
ence of particular human or divine goods, in a
particular Hellenic universe. Still other char-
acteristics seem to belong both to the spiritual
life and to Platonism; but I find on closer
inspection that these qualities are ambiguous,
and are not assignable to both in the same
sense. Of these apparently common properties
the most important is the gift of seeing the
eternal in the temporal. But what is the
eternal? For pure spirit the eternal means the
timeless; all images of sense and all events in
time offer eternal themes for contemplation
andare themselves eternal in the realm of truth.
This spiritual insight has been frequent among
Platonists, and may indeed have been at the
87


88


root of that trance-like vision of essences
which enabled Plato to turn the general terms
of Socratic logic into individual and immortal
beings. But, if his sense for the eternal had
been absolutely direct and pure, he would have
seen the eternal in the figments of sense, no less
than in those of logic or ethics: for all forms
equally are essences, and all essences equally
are eternal.

It is true that “‘ things seen are temporal,”
if by “seeing’’ we understand that animal
reaction by which we turn towards material
objects which affect our eyes, so that we are
prompted to grasp them or to get out of their
way. This animal sensibility is what has
usually been understood by sense, so that sense
has been conventionally regarded as revealing
matter, and a man immersed in sense as a
materialist. But this kind of “seeing,” if it
be more than a bodily reaction, is also more
than a pure intuition: it is a belief. Sense
thereby engages the spirit in the observation
and pursuit of material things; and these
obviously are temporal. But in this belief and
pursuit pure intuition must have intervened
to supply the terms of the experience; and
this pure intuition is no vision of material
things, but of the essences which we call and
think to be the qualities of material things, or
of whatever else we think about; and these
essences in themselves are eternal forms of


89


Being. One whose attention was wholly
absorbed in them would be an extreme idealist,
a poet or dreamer not suspecting that he was
living in a material world, falling into every
pit, and hugging every ghost to his bosom, as
the most solid of possible realities. And
though the world would laugh at him, the
angels would not; for after life is done, and the
world is gone up in smoke, what realities may
the spirit of a man boast to have embraced
without illusion, save the very forms of those
illusions by which he has been deceived ?
These, and not the things which he thought he
saw, were his eternal discoveries.

In the Platonic system, however, the eternal
also has another signification; it may mean
the everlasting. This system was cosmological
and quasi-scientific; it sought for the sub-
stances and the permanent shapes of existing
things. God, the Ideas, and the Soul of the
World, though invisible, were in a wide sense
physical, since they were powers at work in
nature. Like the laws of modern physics
they were presumed to be unchangeable; but
this persistence of their expression in matter
was evidently an entirely different sort of
eternity—a presumptive eternity—from that
intrinsic to them as essences. Yet the same
word eternal designates now the pure objects of
the contemplative faculty and now certain
special objects of scientific presumption, belief


go


in which is unnecessary, audacious, and, to be
frank, superstitious. That anything existent
should be eternal in the spiritual sense is
logically impossible, because existence has to
verify itself from moment to moment and must
always remain temporal, no matter how long
it lasts. That any recognizable existing thing
should last for ever seems improbable and
contrary to all the analogies of nature. It is
contrary, too, to that profound natural philo-
sophy of Heraclitus which Plato had adopted
and which, by a happy counterblast, had
quickened his sense for the truly eternal—for
the inviolate and super-existential being of
forms.

If this hazardous belief in permanent natural
powers were abandoned the comfortable moral
assurances of Platonism would also lapse. It
would cease to be popular with tender minds,
and a nest of sentimental fancies. The beauty
and goodness actually found in the world would
no longer be alleged to reveal the forces at
work in it more truly than do its ugliness and
confusion. It would become impossible to
maintain that goodness and beauty are some-
how intentional in the world, and their oppo-
sites interlopers. Values would be seen not to
be powers, but harmonies—the very thing
which Plato, in his purely moral wisdom, had
made the first and highest principle of the
good. Indeed, that superstitious belief, with


ot


which he thought to buttress the crumbling
virtues of antiquity, is useless to human morals.
Human morals draw their vigour from earthly
economy, and find their sanction there. Nor
is that superstitious belief helpful to the
spiritual life or even compatible with it at
bottom. For while to accept and love the
constituted order of nature and society is easy
for a pure spirit, which is without prejudices
or claims, for this same reason it is impossible
for spirit to deny or detest the other forms of
being which nature or society for the moment
does not happen to manifest.


XXV


THE manner of combining unworldliness with
the love of nature and of man is another point
not understood in the same sense in Platonism
andin the spiritual life. Platonism is moralistic:
it will love in man and in nature so much as
conforms to the patterns which its mathe-
matical physics, its zoology, and its political
idealism prescribe for things: all that deviates
from these norms will seem to it sad, unaccount-
able, terrible, and dangerous. In fact, the
love of nature and of man, though the beauty
of order and harmony in both was still felt in
the Greek manner, does not seem to me con-
spicuous in Platonism. It was a censorious,
puritan, prescriptive love; it was not spon-
taneous, it was not sympathetic, it was not
love of nature at all, but of a political, human
good, and of so much in nature as might illus-
trate or sanction it. Free spirit would be more
generous. When the renunciation of the world,
and of existence itself, has been hearty and
radical, the love of nature can be universal;
I will not say unqualified by sadness, because
the spirit, having itself suffered, recognizes
in many an alien form of existence a maimed
effort and a lost glory analogous to its own;
but a love unqualified by prejudice, by envy,


g2


3


by fear of being outshone or discountenanced
by the marvels which nature or society may
elsewhere bring to light. It is of the essence of
spirit to see and love things for their own sake,
in their own nature, not for the sake of one
another, nor for its own sake.

Meantime it is a question for scientific
speculation, on which pure spirit remains
ignorant and impartial, whether there are in
existence organisms so vast (measured by the
human scale) as the Platonic cosmos, with its
deity or deities animating its concentric
spheres. If so, spirit would have for its habita-
tion and organ other bodies larger and more
long-lived than the bodies of men or of kindred
animals: and the concert of so many happier
spirits would certainly be sublime, singing in
their Pythagorean symphonyso calmly together.
Yet even then, we should remember that the
human scale is relative, and that this Platonic
cosmos (or the Christian cosmos which, though
historical rather than astronomical, is not very
different in principle) is vast only in that
perspective. Seen from without, and beyond,
it might be infinitesimal, and an insignificant
ingredient in some greater world. Its longevity,
too, would be relative; and the traditional
attribution of eternity to it must be regarded
as a rhetorical hyperbole, expressing the sense
that its duration is incalculable in terms of
human chronology; but true eternity, as I


94


have said, is not of that kind. In the end such
a universe, floating like a bubble in the flux
of things, would almost certainly dissolve. It
is not there that an enlightened heart would
lay up its treasure. The flood itself is a nobler
companion, and the spirit moves at ease upon
the waters.


OPINION OF FHE WORK _OF
GEOR GE SAN TAY AN A


CRRA OTOWIONNAANO MONO.


BERTRAND RUSSELL in the NEW STATESMAN : ‘‘ The book
(‘Scepticism and Animal Faith’) has all Mr. Santayana’s
well-known merits; beauty of style, a truly philosophic
temper, a wide survey of history and thought. It is full of
sayings that are profound, delightful, or amusing. And it
has the great merit of not pretending, by bad arguments, to
establish doctrines which we accept on instinct but cannot
hope to prove.”


NATION AND ATHEN4uUM: ‘‘ There is another respect in
which Mr. Santayana’s system differs from those of most
professional philosophers, namely, that it is wholly sincere.
. . . This merit of sincerity, in a man of Mr. Santayana’s
breadth of intellectual sympathy, would suffice to make
the book important, even if it stood alone. There are many
other merits, notably perspicuity and beauty of style.”


DAILY TELEGRAPH: ‘‘In the person of Professor Santa-
yana the philosophic temperament survives with a simple
dignity which is almost Hellenic in quality. To escape out
of the roaring traffic of modern publicity into the green and
shady academy of his dreams, is to be reminded once more,
with refreshing emphasis, of the sublime stability of
philosophic truth... .

‘Here, in the cool cloister of thought, we return to
problems which are eternal, and to solutions which repeat
themselves from generation to generation. We moderns
boast of our progress in material conveniences and re-
sources, but in the quiet kingdom of the mind we have
advanced nothing since the days when the youth of Athens
sat at the feet of Socrates.”


CODOONNO2 OW TAOTOUTNOUAUNUNURY


Ast i Sit) ©) Meme Sr AGN edn VaAuNrAl cS
BiOIO KES MAY, BB ArD EE ROM
ANY BOOKSELLER


LONDON: CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND GRIGGS (PRINTERS), LTD.
CHISWICK PRESS, TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.


oa


aah


i:
Se led
iv i ;


ii


ee
