Dialogues in Limbo (George Santayana, 1925)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.173669). Platonic dialogues among the dead on philosophy, religion, and the modern world.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


BOOKS  BT  THE  SAME  AUTHOR


SCEPTICISM  AND  ANIMAL  FAITH

SOLILO(^UIES  IN  ENGLAND  AND  LATER
SOLILOQUIES.

CHARACTER  AND  OPINION  IN  THE
UNITED  STATES  With  Reminiscences
of  William  James  and  Josiah  Royce  a^d
Academic  Life  in  Ameiica

LITTLE  ESSAYS  DRAWN  FROM  THE
WRITINGS  OF  GEORGE  SANTAYANA
Edited  by  Logan  Pearsall  Smith

INTERPRETATIONS  OF  POETRY  AND
RELIGION

THE  LIFE  OF  REASON  Five  Volumes
THE  SENSE  OF  BEAUTY.


POEMS.


DIALOGUES  IN
LIMBO

by

GEORGE  SANTAYANA


lu^at  tntfgros  accedere  /antes.


LONDON

CONSTABLE  AND  CO.  LTD.
1925


Pfinicd  in  Great  Britain  by  R.  R.  R.  Clark,  Limitid,  Vdinhin^h,


CONTENTS


PA.GE

i.  The  Scent  of  Philosophies  . . , . i
IL  Vivisection  of  a Mind  . . . . .21

III.  Normal  Madness  ......  36

IV.  AutolcIgos  , , -58

V.  Lovers  of  Illusion 70

VI .  Self-Government,  First  Dialogue  ...  89

VI I .  Self-Government,  Second  Dialogue  . .107

VIIL  The  Philanteiropist 124

IX.  Homesici^ness  for  the  World  . . .163

X.  The  Secret  of  Aristotle  . . -173


V


PERSONS  OF  THE  DIALOGUES


The  Shades  of

Democritus,

Alcibiades,

Aristippus  the  Cyrenaic,

Dionysius  the  Younger,  once  Tyrant  of  Syracuse,
SoCRATESj

Avicenna,

And  the  Spirit  of

A Stranger  still  living  on  Earth


vii


I


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES

Democritus.  Bring  the  Stranger,  bring  the
Stranger.  Let  us  see  how  he  is  put  together.  I
smell  one  goodish  ingredient,  but  the  compound
is  new-fangled,  yes  {sniffing),  and  ill  mixed.

Alcihiades.  You  can’t  possibly  scent  him  at
this  distance.  Not  even  a dog  could.  For  a
Christian  he  is  rather  well  washed.

Democritus.  Before  you  contradict  an  old  man,
my  fair  friend,  you  should  endeavour  to  under-
stand him.  The  Stranger  might  be  as  clean  as  a
river-god,  who  cannot  live  out  of  running  water,
and  I should  not  be  prevented  from  discerning  the
odour  of  his  thoughts.  Your  barbarians,  I know,
have  no  proper  regimen.  The  few  bathe  too
often,  out  of  luxury  or  fussiness,  perhaps  in  steam
or  in  hot  water  ; and  the  many  never  bathe  at  all.
Thus  those  who  wash  among  them  are  quite
washed  out,  and  yet  the  sodden  smell  of  them  is
perceptible  and  most  unpleasant.  But  it  was
not  of  their  soft  bodies  that  I was  speaking,  but
of  their  rotten  minds.  Did  you  never  hear  that
a philosophy  can  be  smelt  ?

Alcibiades.  You  are  in  your  laughing  mood.

B


2 DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

Democritus.  Impudence  ! Am  I a jester  on  a
sophist,  like  your  pop-eyed  Socrates  ? Do  I stpdy
to  tickle  the  fancy  of  young  fops  with  midnight
drinking-bouts  and  myths  and  mock  scepticism,
in  order  to  confirm  them  in  the  end  in  all  their
guard -room  prejudices  and  ignorance  ? Know
that  I am  a scientific  observer.  Philosophies
diffuse  odours.

Alcibiades.  It  will  take  a long  argument  to
prove  it.

Democritus.  What  has  argument  to  do  with
truth  ? True  knowledge  is  nothing  but  keen
sensation  and  faithful  remembrance,  penetrating
to  that  fine  texture  of  nature  which  your  fluent
talker  cannot  stop  to  see.  The  soul  is  a fluid,
finer  and  warmer  than  air,  yet  somewhat  viscous,
and  capable  of  retaining  or  renewing -the  most
intricate  and  mighty  motions.  She  continually
rushes  forth  from  her  hearth,  as  from  a furnace,
through  the  veins  and  ventricles  of  the  body,
vivifying  all  its  parts,  healing  wounds,  and  har-
monizing motions ; and  she  also  escapes,  or
exudes  her  waste  products,  through  the  mouth  and
nostrils  in  breath,  through  the  eye  in  glances,  and
in  seed  through  the  organs  of  generation.  Parcels
of  the  soul  issue  thereby  entire,  like  colonists  from
their  mother-town,  ready  to  renew  abroad  her
complete  life  and  economy.  And  just  as  the
parents  of  the  new-born  soul  are  two,  one  who
sheds  the  seed  and  one  who  receives  and  fosters
it,  so  in  sensation  and  knowledge  there  is  a
feminine  as  well  as  a masculine  faculty  ; for  the


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  3

thing  perceived  is  the  father  of  perception  and  the
soul  perceiving  is  its  fertile  mother.  Now  you  are
not  to  suppose  that  man  alone  is  animate,  or  only
beasts  similar  to  man.  Everything  natural  is  held
together  by  circling  streams  of  magnetic  atoms,
stronger  thSn  hoops  of  steel.  These  are  its  soul  ;
and  the  form  which  this  soul  impresses  on  the
body,  it  impresses  also  on  the  surrounding  air,
radiating  images  of  itself  in  all  directions,  and  a
kindred  influence.  Light  and  aether,  which  fill  the
heavens,  are  a great  medium  of  propagation  for
these  seeds  and  effluvia  of  things,  which  the  eye
and  ear  and  nostrils  and  sensitive  skin  (being
feminine  organs)  receive  and  transform  according
to  their  kind,  sometimes  bringing  forth  a genuine
action  or  thought,  the  legitimate  heir  and  image
of  its  father,  and  sometimes  a spurious  changeling,
or  fancy-child.  Thus,  after  her  marriage  with
things  external,  the  soul  issues  charged  with  a
new  motion,  appropriate  to  those  external  things,
and  directed  upon  them ; so  that  a sensitive
observer,  by  the  quality  of  that  response,  can
discern  whether  the  soul  has  been  healthfully
fertilized  by  her  experience,  or  only  dissolved  and
corrupted.  In  the  one  case  the  reaction  will  be
firm  and  fit,  in  the  other  loose,  tremulous,  and
wasted.  Almost  always,  in  the  sensitive  life  of
animals  there  is  an  element  of  true  art  and  know-
ledge, together  with  an  element  of  madness.
When  the  inner  heat  of  the  body  is  excessive
(which  heat  is  but  rapid  and  disordered  motion)
actions  and  thoughts  are  bred  too  hastily,  without


4 DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

attention  to  things  ; then  in  the  shaking  hand  and
rolling  eye  and  words  inapt  and  windy  the  physician
easily  recognizes  the  symptoms  of  delirium.  So
even  in  health  the  look  and  (as  we  say  aptly)  the
air  of  a man  will  reveal  his  ruling  passions,  every
secret  impulse  causing  some  deviation  or  special
crowding  of  the  rays  that  flow  from  him  in  mov-
ing or  looking  or  speaking.  Now  these  rays,  so
compacted  and  directed,  are  far  from  odourless.
The  sweet  scent  of  love  is  exciting  and  to  one
himself  amorous  is  irresistible  ; and  the  scent  of
anger  is  acrid,  and  that  of  sorrow  musty  and  dank  ;
the  scent  of  every  state  of  the  soul,  though  name-
less, being  perfectly  distinct.  So  a soul  vibrating
in  harmony  with  the  things  that  nourish  and
solicit  her  has  an  aura  which,  without  spreading
any  sharp  odour,  refreshes  every  creature  that
inhales  it,  causing  the  nostrils  and  the  breast  to
expand  joyfully,  as  if  drinking  in  the  sea-breeze
or  the  breath  of  morning.  When,  on  the  contrary,
the  soul  issues  from  the  eyes  or  lips  turbid  and
clotted,  by  virtue  of  the  distorted  imprints  which
she  bears  of  all  surrounding  things,  she  also  stinks  ;
and  she  stinks  diversely  according  to  the  various
errors  which  her  rotten  constitution  has  imposed
upon  her.  Hence,  though  it  be  a delicate  matter
and  not  accomplished  without  training,  it  is
possible  for  a practised  nose  to  distinguish  the
precise  quality  of  a philosopher  by  his  peculiar
odour,  just  as  a hound  by  the  mere  scent  can  tell
a fox  from  a boar.  And  when  the  hound  of
philosophy  is  keen,  this  is  a surer  method  of  dis-


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  5

cerning  the  genuine  opinions  and  true  temper  of
philosophers  than  are  their  own  words  ; for  these
may  be  uttered  by  rote  without  self-knowledge,
or  made  timidly  conformable  to  fashion  or  policy  ;
whereas  the  trail  which,  without  intention,  a mind
leaves  in  psrssing  through  the  air  is  a perfect  index
to  its  constitution.

Aldhiades.  Since  you  despise  argument,  pray
prove  your  doctrine  by  experiment.  Smell  me,
and  describe  my  philosophy.

Democritus.  In  your  case  I can  perceive  nothing
at  this  distance.

Alcibiades  {letting  his  curly  head  almost  touch  the
great  white  beard  of  Democritus).  There  ! is  that
near  enough  ?

Democritus.  Now  I inhale  a whole  perfumer’s
shopful  o^[. scents,  but  no  intellect.

Alcibiades.  Has  this  sorry  Stranger,  then,  a
stronger  intellect  than  mine,  that  you  smell  it  a
furlong  off,  while  mine  at  three  inches  is  im-
perceptible ? I discard  your  philosophy,  vain
Sage,  and  pronounce  it  a delusion.

Democritus.  The  million  have  already  rejected
my  discoveries  for  the  same  excellent  reason.
Their  conceit  is  offended,  and  they  refuse  to  be
cured  of  madness  by  acknowledging  themselves
mad.  As  for  the  Stranger,  odoriferous  virtue  is
not  proportional  to  the  mass  of  the  radiating
substance,  and  his  intellect  need  not  be  greater
than  yours  merely  because  it  carries  further.  A
single  skunk,  by  emitting  a little  fluid,  will  qualify
space  further  than  a herd  of  elephants,  and  one


6 DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

he-goat  browsing  amid  the  crags  of  the  acropolis
will  neutralise  from  certain  quarters  the  whole
agora  full  of  voting  democrats.

Aldbiades.  Vain  excuses.  You  are  none  the
less  caught  and  convicted  in  pretending  that  you
smell  ointments  in  my  hair.  False  impostor,  I
have  not  put  on  anything  for  two  thousand  years.

Democritus.  What  of  that  ? Had  you  distilled
all  the  pale  laurel  and  asphodel  that  bloom  in  this
wilderness,  sunned  only  by  the  mild  phosphor-
escence of  some  wandering  spirit,  do  you  think
that  such  a weak  disinfectant  could  have  washed
out  the  traces  of  those  rough  young  years  when
you  wallowed  so  recklessly  in  the  mire  ? Indeed,
you  have  not  even  taken  that  precaution,  but
trusted  to  sheer  time  to  erase  every  vestige  of  the
truth.  What  is  time  ? That  which  to  your  sleepy
sense  seems  a long  lapse  and  empty  is  brief  and
full  in  the  economy  of  nature,  who  has  other
measures  than  a fool  may  find  by  counting  his
fingers.  To  a good  eye  you  would  appear  still
dyed  and  spotted  with  every  vile  pigment  and
nasty  oil  with  which  you  have  ever  beautified
yourself,  whether  on  skin  or  hair.

Dionysius.  ’Tis  fortunate  that  in  granting  us
immortality  the  gods  have  granted  it  also  to  all  the
ornaments  of  our  life,  and  that  the  fragrance  of
youth  envelops  our  spirits  even  in  this  twilight
world.  Had  fate,  in  making  me  a phantom,  for-
bidden me  to  wear  a phantom  crown,  and  still  to
wrap  me  in  this  semblance  of  the  silks  of  Tartary,
I should  have  frankly  declined  to  be  immortal,


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  7

and  would  have  sunk  by  preference  into  the  com-
ruon  dust,  like  a man  of  no  eminence.  Happily,
the  mind  is  not  more  stable  than  its  possessions,
and  as  our  pleasures  fade,  life  itself  fades  with
them  into  nothingness.

Aristippus.  As  for  me,  I am  not  aware  of  having
faded.  A subtler  influence  is  sufficient  to  stimu-
late a subtler  organ,  and  I live  as  merrily  here  on
wind  as  I did  in  Sicily  on  cakes  and  onions.
There  can  be  nothing  more  positive  than  a
pleasure,  though  it  be  felt  by  a ghost.

Alcibiades.  And  so  you  can  actually  smell  the
old  stuff  ?

Democritus.  Perfectly  : and  a very  musty  com-
bination of  stale  perfumes  it  is,  and  so  powerful
that  it  would  entirely  overwhelm  and  smother  the
sweet  emanations  of  intellect,  I will  not  say  in  you,
but  evei!  in  Empedocles  or  me  or  Leucippus,  had
we  ever  defiled  ourselves  with  such  decoctions.

Alcibiades.  You  pretend  to  rail  and  to  denounce
my  former  habits,  which  were  more  refined
than  yours  ; but  I see  by  your  smiling  that  you
are  insidiously  laying  the  flattery  on  me  thicker
than  any  unguent,  in  the  vain  hope  of  converting
me  to  your  extravagant  opinions.  For  if  you
could  not  smell  my  intellect  what  would  follow  ?
Surely  not  that  I have  none,  since  I am  notori-
ously intelligent,  but  rather  that  my  mighty
intellect  is  all  of  that  purest  sort  which,  as  you
have  explained,  reacts  with  perfect  propriety  on
everything  and  is  deliciously  inodorous.

Democritus.  We  shall  see.  Science  has  means


8


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


of  penetrating  to  the  most  hidden  things.  Come
to  me  on  another  day,  when  there  is  a high  wind
blowing ; it  will  drive  the  coarsely  streaming
essences  of  your  apothecary  all  in  one  direction,
which  I will  avoid  ; but  the  effluvia  of  mind  (if
any)  are  far  more  subtle  than  the  air  £\pd  cannot
be  swept  aside  by  its  currents,  but  continue  to
radiate  in  all  directions,  even  as  the  light,  without
being  deflected,  cuts  through  any  wind.  Thus
the  scent  of  your  intellect  will  reach  me  to  the
windward  of  you  separate  and  unalloyed  ; and
may  destiny  make  it  sweet.  Then  you  shall  know
yourself  far  more  surely  through  my  olfactory
sense  than  you  ever  could  by  ignorant  reasoning
and  quibbling,  after  the  manner  of  Socrates.

Dionysius.  By  my  royal  authority,  venerable
Democritus,  I forbid  you  to  abuse  Socrates,  whom
the  divine  Plato,  my  dear  friend  and  'chief  of
idealists,  acknowledges  for  his  master.

Democritus.  By  your  royal  leave,  chief  of  dis-
semblers, I deny  that  you  have  any  authority,  or
that  Plato  ever  was  your  dear  friend,  or  that  the
doctrine  of  ideas  which  he  purloined  from  Socrates
is  at  all  precious  to  you,  or  more  than  a pretty
fable  or  play  upon  words.  Not  that  I am  an
enemy  to  idealists,  though  they  be  all  sworn
enemies  to  me ; for  I am  a friend  of  nature,  and
nature  is  not  an  enemy  to  anything  that  she
breeds.  Vegetables,  too,  in  so  far  as  they  think
at  all,  are  dreamers  and  idealists,  and  neither
nature  nor  I have  any  quarrel  with  vegetables.
What  can  be  sweeter  than  the  souls  of  flowers,


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  9

which  neither  defend  their  own  being  nor  assert
that  of  anything  else  ? There  are  huraan  souls
also  of  this  innocent  sort,  which,  though  highly
scented,  are  far  from  offensive,  because  like
flowers  they  diffuse  their  odours  idly,  not  pre-
tending to«describe  an5^hing  truly,  and  therefore
distorting  nothing,  but  freely  disseminating  their
harmless  fancies,  like  smoke  curling  in  wreaths.
Such  are  the  minds  of  poets  and  of  our  voluptuous
friends  here,  Aristippus  and  Dionysius  ; and  it
would  be  a dull  sense  indeed  that  did  not  perceive
their  aroma.  But  blooming  is  not  knowing,  and
roses  and  cabbages  should  not  be  founders  of
sects.  Your  true  idealist  is  rightly  convinced
that  he  beholds  nothing  but  specious  and  vanish-
ing objects,  products  of  his  own  substance  pro-
jected outwards  by  illusion  ; and  with  every  puff
of  his  humours  his  dream  of  a world  is  trans-
formed in  his  mind’s  eye.

Dionysius.  Without  intending  it,  you  confirm
the  doctrine  of  the  divine  Plato,  that  the  liver  is
the  seat  of  inspiration.

Democritus.  I rejoice  in  that  agreement,  all  the
more  that  if  that  saying,  as  usual,  was  inspired,
it  was  not  the  politic  Plato  who  uttered  it  in  his
waking  mind,  but  his  honestly  dreaming  liver
that  uttered  it  for  him.  Yet  observe  this  circum-
stance : the  proper  secretion  of  the  liver  is  bile,
fit  only  for  internal  consumption  and  bitter  if
exuded  ; and  so  it  is  also  with  that  other  product
of  the  liver,  inspiration  : a healthful  and  necessary
lubricant  of  the  inner  life,  in  fancy  and  poetry  and


lo  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

pleasant  dreams,  but  poisonous  if  exuded  in  the
guise  of  action  or  pretended  knowledge.  You,
Dionysius  and  Aristippus,  wisely  abstain  ffom
such  an  abuse  of  your  flowering  genius  ; you
detest  action  and  laugh  at  science,  and  cultivate
only  exquisite  sensation  and  free  discourse.  For
this  reason  I find  much  pleasure  in  your  merry
company,  without  cruelly  investigating  any  opinion
which,  in  an  unguarded  moment,  you  may  seem
to  adopt.  Would  that  your  masters,  Socrates  and
Plato,  had  been  as  wise  in  this  as  their  disciples  !
An  oracle  admonished  Socrates  to  know  himself
and  not  to  dabble  in  natural  philosophy  ; and  in
so  far  as  he  obeyed  that  admonition  I honour  him.
For  by  self-knowledge  he  understood  knowing
his  own  mind  or  thoroughly  discerning  what  he
meant  and  what  he  loved  ; whereby  he  framed
maxims  excellent  for  the  legislator,  ancf  fixed  the
grammar  or  logic  of  words.  But  when,  forgetting
the  oracle,  he  averred  that  the  sun  and  moon  are
products  of  reason,  and  are  intended  for  human
advantage,  he  blasphemed  against  those  gods,  as
if  the  blood  and  gall  within  him,  proper  to  the
health  of  his  little  body,  had  burst  their  bounds
and  filled  the  whole  heaven.  By  this  presumption
he  turned  his  inspiration  into  sophistry,  and  what
should  have  been  self-knowledge  became  mad-
ness and  grotesque  errors  about  the  world ; and
incidentally  he  showed  how  unventilated  an  organ
his  liver  was,  and  when  uncorked  out  of  season
how  ill-smelling  ; so  that  when  such  a prophet
opens  his  mouth  I must  hold  my  nose.


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  ii

Alcibiades.  For  that  reason,  probably,  you  can
smell  the  Stranger  so  far  off.  He  is  a disciple
of ’Socrates.

Democritus  {sniffing  as  before).  Not  altogether.
Oil  and  water  are  still  being  shaken  up  in  that
cruet ; aifd  no  wonder,  for  he  is  still  alive.

Dionysius.  Still  alive,  and  here  ?

Democritus,  There  are  evident  symptoms  in
him  of  that  fever  which  is  called  life.

Alcibiades.  Very  true.  At  least  he  himself
says  so,  and  professes  to  have  some  sort  of  an  old
body  still  toddling  on  earth.

Aristippus.  Why  then  notice  him  at  all  ? Those
who  are  now  alive  have  lost  the  art  of  living.

Dionysius.  Are  there  no  barriers,  no  guards  to
prevent  such  intrusions  ? If  such  a thing  is
allowed,,  what  becomes  of  our  seclusion  and  of
our  safety  ? I appeal  to  Minos  and  Rhada-
manthus.  You  remember,  Alcibiades,  that  even
purified  as  you  and  I were  by  death  and  the
funeral  pyre,  we  were  admitted  with  difficulty.
The  thing  is  incredible,  and  if  true  would  be
scandalous  ; and  I think  the  act  of  spreading
such  needless  alarms  should  be  punishable  in  our
commonwealth.

Democritus.  Compose  yourself,  uneasy  tyrant.
This  visitor,  though  I can  clearly  perceive  that
his  substance  is  still  earthly  and  mutable,  comes
to  us  in  the  spirit  only  ; his  flesh  and  bones  will
not  intrude  here,  to  disturb  the  equilibrium  of
our  forms  by  their  rude  mass.  Nor  does  alliance
with  such  gross  matter  render  his  spirit  more


13  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

formidable : far  otherwise.  We  are  images  of
bodies  long  since  dispersed,  which,  being  non-
existent, cannot  send  forth  different  and  contrary
images  to  confuse  or  obliterate  those  early  ones
which  are  our  present  substance  : like  a deed
done  we  are  safe,  and  so  long  as  we  endure  at  all
we  must  retain  our  perfection.  His  flickering
mind,  on  the  contrary,  is  still  receiving  constantly
fresh  effluvia  from  his  earthly  body,  and  lives  in
a state  of  perpetual  indecision  and  change.  We
are  like  books  long  written  and  sealed  : he  is
still  in  the  agonies  of  composition,  and  does  not
know  what  he  will  become.  His  passage  near  us
in  these  inter-mundane  spaces  will  not  affect  us  ;
rather  will  our  stable  forms  impress  some  trembling
reflection  of  themselves  upon  his  lapsing  thoughts,
as  the  huge  immovable  effigies  of  Egyptian
monarchs  are  mirrored  brokenly  in  the  flowing
Nile.

Dionysius.  You  forget  that  Heracles  stole  back
Alcestis  from  the  Shades,  and  that  Orpheus  and
Odysseus  and  Theseus  and  other  intruders  have
spread  on  earth  false  reports  about  our  condition,
much  to  our  dishonour.  Even  if  the  impertinent
wight  cannot  injure  our  persons  here,  he  may
tarnish  our  reputations  there.  And  who  knows
if  by  some  enchantment  or  by  lying  promises  he
might  not  entice  some  one  of  us  to  relinquish
his  fair  place  in  eternity,  and  escape  once  more
into  the  living  world  .?  Consider  the  disgrace  of
that,  as  if  a man  by  magic  should  be  turned  again
into  a crying  and  kicking  child  !


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  13

^ Democritus.  How  many  absurdities  can  pre-
judice pack  into  a few  words  ? You  quote  the
poks  as  if  their  fictions  were  science,  you  assume
that  the  opinions  of  mortals  can  honour  or  dis-
honour us,  and  you  dread  that  life  may  call  you
back,  and*that  time  may  reverse  and  repeat  itself,
as  if  it  stammered.  But  indeed,  you  are  a pupil
of  the  poets,  and  I must  not  grudge  you  the
thrills  of  your  fantastic  tragedy.

Alcibiades.  Why  may  not  Homer  and  the  other
poets  actually  have  visited  these  regions  in  spirit,
as  the  Stranger  is  doing  to-day  ? But  not  being
philosophers  they  shrank  from  eternity,  and
depicted  our  state  as  shadowy  and  sad,  whereas
it  is  neither  sadder  nor  mender  than  material
existence,  but  only  safer,  being  but  the  truth  of
that  existence,  whatever  it  may  have  been.  As
for  this  Stranger,  far  from  disparaging  our  con-
dition, he  professes  to  envy  it,  and  slips  in  thus
among  us  whenever  he  is  able,  in  order  to  assimi-
late his  form  of  being  as  much  as  possible  to  ours.

Aristippus.  In  that  he  is  wise.  I always  dwelt
in  foreign  republics,  in  order  to  escape  the  plagues
of  citizenship  ; and  following  my  illustrious
example,  the  Stranger  exiles  himself  from  earth,
in  the  hope  of  finding  elsewhere  more  peace  and
better  company.  But  good  company  requires  a
sound  wit  to  enjoy  it ; and  the  only  maxim  for
pilgrims  is  to  make  merry  on  the  way,  for  the
journey’s  end  may  prove  disappointing.  Is  he
happy  here  ?

Alcibiades.  He  is  civil  enough  to  say  so  ; but


14


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


I suspect  that  in  his  heart  he  is  a sort  of  poet  or
idealist.  The  truth,  though  he  may  frigidly
assent  to  it,  leaves  him  weary  and  cold  ; and  all
he  asks  of  the  world,  be  it  here  or  in  the  realm  of
mortals,  is  that  it  should  suffer  him  to  compose
a picture  of  what,  to  his  mind,  it  ought  to  have
been.

Democritus.  If  that  be  the  quality  of  the
Stranger’s  thoughts,  let  him  approach  no  nearer.
Wave  him  away,  Alcibiades,  wave  him  away.

Alcibiades.  See  how  when  caught  napping  you
betray  the  hollowness  of  your  pretences  ! You
can  smell  his  philosophy  only  when  I report  it  to
you  in  audible  words.  You  are  a rank  mytho-
logist,  Democritus ; and  your  fabled  scent  for
philosophies  is  only  a figure  of  speech,  expressing
metaphorically  those  immaterial  motioiis  of  the
thinking  mind  which  only  a thinking  mind  can
retrace,  and  which  many  words  are  needed  to
convey.  In  saying  this — ^which  I declare  to  be
a brief  but  unanswerable  exposure  of  your
fallacies — I have  proved  not  only  that  I possess
an  intellect  much  vaster  than  the  Stranger’s
(which  goes  without  saying),  but  also — though
before  uttering  this  truth  I will  retreat  to  a safe
distance — ^that  my  scent  for  philosophies  is  more
sagacious  than  yours.

Democritus  (laughing).  You  hardly  believe  what
you  are  saying,  and  yet  you  are  right,  quite  right.
The  physician  knows  madness  in  one  way  ; he
collects  the  symptoms  of  it,  the  causes,  and  the
cure  ; but  the  madman  in  his  way  knows  it  far


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  15

better.  The  terror  and  glory  of  the  illusion,
which,  after  all,  are  the  madness  itself,  are  open
only  to  the  madman,  or  to  some  sympathetic
spirit  as  prone  to  madness  as  he.  Any  madcap
may  mimic  a clown’s  antics,  cleverly  taking  the
mad  words  out  of  his  mouth  and  telling  him  what
he  might  be  fool  enough  to  think  before  he  has
been  fool  enough  to  think  it.  Such  is  the  art  of
sophists  and  demagogues  and  diviners  ; an  art
which  perhaps  Socrates  has  taught  you,  because
though  he  inveighs  against  it  in  others  he  is
eminent  in  it  himself.  Theirs  is  a sort  of  know-
ledge of  illusion,  a divination  of  waking  dreams
like  the  player’s  art,  which  without  penetrating  to
the  causes  of  appearance,  plausibly  represents  its
forms  and  movement ; and  in  such  aping  and
guessing  -lat  human  illusions  your  nimble  wit,
Alcibiades,  is  probably  quicker  than  mine,  since
science  has  accustomed  me  to  look  away  from
appearance  and  to  consider  only  the  causes  of
appearance.  Now  in  the  sphere  of  causes  illu-
sions and  dreams  are  nothing  but  streams  of
atoms  ; words,  too,  and  systems  of  philosophy,  in
the  realm  of  substance,  are  nothing  else  ; and
when  a word  or  a dream  or  a system  of  philosophy,
having  first  taken  shape  in  one  soul,  is  by  the
multiple  currents  in  the  aether  transmitted  to
another,  this  second  soul  repeats  and  mimics  the
dream  or  word  or  philosophy  native  to  the  first,
and  in  the  sphere  of  illusion  may  be  said  to  under-
stand it ; but  neither  the  soul  first  begetting  that
fancy  nor  the  soul  repeating  it  knows  anything  of


i6  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

that  stream  of  motions  which  is  its  substance.
Only  the  sharp  nose  of  science  can  follow  that
aethereal  trail.  Thus  every  event  in  nature,  being
a moving  conjunction  of  atoms  pregnant  with
destiny,  is  but  an  obscure  oracle  to  those  who  hear
in  it  only  a rumble  of  words,  or  see  it  as  a painted
image.  In  their  ignorance  of  nature  they  must
piece  out  each  shallow  appearance  with  some
shallower  presumption,  and  they  are  still  dream-
ing when  they  interpret  their  dreams.  In  crowds
the  poor  busy  lunatics  run  down  daily  to  the  agora
to  gather  rumours  and  gossip  and  to  fortify  their
madness  with  that  of  the  majority  ; yet  mean-
time, perhaps,  in  the  solitude  of  the  temple,  some
silent  augur  scents  the  course  of  the  atoms  and
sees  the  intent  of  the  gods.  To  him  the  scornful
smile  of  Apollo  in  its  radiance  brings  a joy  mixed
with  terror  ; he  must  laugh  at  the  triumph  of
nature,  ever  renewed  and  glorious  in  the  midst
of  human  folly  ; yet  he  must  tremble  at  the  ruin
of  his  country  and  of  his  soul.

Thus  in  the  sphere  of  nature  the  whole  life
of  mind  is  a normal  madness.  Perception  and
passion  and  painted  thoughts  are  all  illusions  ;
and  all  human  philosophy,  except  science  reckon-
ing without  images,  is  but  madness  systematic,
putting  on  a long  face.  Reason  dawns  upon
mortals  only  in  the  last  thought  of  all,  when  seeing
that  nothing  is  real  save  the  atoms  and  the  void
(not  as  fancy  may  picture  them  but  as  they  truly
are),  the  mind  crowns  itself  for  the  supreme
sacrifice,  and  lays  down  all  its  flowering  illusions


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  17

upon  the  altar  of  truth.  Not  that,  so  long  as  life
lasts,  appearance  can  disappear,  or  that  images  and
sounding  words  can  cease  to  flow  as  in  a dream,
since  these  have  their  substance  and  perpetual
cause  in  the  rhythmic  dance  and  balance  of  the
atoms,  which  sing  that  song,  like  a chorus  in  'a
comedy.  If  there  were  no  appearance  there  could
be  no  opinion  and  no  knowledge  of  truth  ; and
true  science  in  discounting  appearance  does  not
dismiss  appearance,  but  sees  substance  through
it ; for  the  face  of  truth  cannot  be  unveiled  to
mortals  by  any  novelty  or  exchange  of  images,  but
only  when  in  some  deep  and  contrite  moment  of
understanding  the  mask  of  ancient  illusion  be-
comes transparent  altogether,  loses  its  magic  with-
out losing  its  form,  and  turns  into  disillusion.

Accordingly,  if  in  calling  me  a mythologist
you,  clever  rascal,  had  a playful  desire  to  vex  me,
you  missed  your  mark.  It  is  not  easy  to  vex  a
lover  of  nature.  He  is  already  well  aware  of  his
own  inevitable  frailty,  and  entirely  expects  that
young  monkeys,  naturally  more  foolish  than
himself,  should  mock  him  in  their  wantonness.
Believe  me,  Alcibiades,  I would  rather  have  you
rail  than  lisp.  Socrates  was  a bad  master  for  you  ;
by  preaching  virtue  and  abstinence  he  filled  you
with  admiration  for  his  doctrine,  but  you  went
on  lisping,  and  were  every  day  softer  and  more
corrupt.  Cajolery  and  eloquence  and  argument
simply  propagate  prejudice,  to  which  alone  they
appeal,  whereas  the  truth,  if  a man  saw  it,  would
make  him  silent.  I was  indeed  a mythologist  in

C


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


saying  that  philosophies  smell.  Scent  is  only  an
appearance  to  me  : a philosophy  is  only  an  appear-
ance to  the  philosopher ; and  neither  can  one
appearance  be  a quality  of  another,  nor  can  any
appearance  be  a part  of  the  substance  which
produces  it.  There  is  a motion  of  atoms  in  the
sophist  and  a motion  of  atoms  in  me  ; yet  these
pure  motions,  dreamer  that  I am,  I call  and  feel
to  be  a foul  odour  in  him  and  a rising  displeasure
in  myself.  What  madness  is  this,  that  when  a
plain  reality  is  before  me,  I behold  not  that  reality
but  an  appearance  wholly  unlike  it  ? Yet  the
night  was  appointed  for  dreams,  and  myths  are
the  joy  of  children.  Let  us  not  quarrel  with  fate  ;
but  as  the  myths  of  Greek  poets  are  truer  to  nature
and  sweeter  to  a healthy  mind  than  the  myths  of
the  barbarians,  so  may  the  dreams  of  one  philo-
sopher be  sweeter  and  saner  than  those  of  another  :
and  with  this  wisdom  I am  content,  to  be  sober
and  frank  in  my  folly.

Alcibiades.  You  have  magnanimously  rewarded
my  gibes  with  a profound  answer  which  they  did
not  deserve.

Dionysius.  Democritus  was  not  replying  to  you,
but  like  the  great  mythologist  that  he  professes  to
be,  he  was  nobly  carried  away  by  his  own  afflatus  ;
and  without  pretending  to  understand  what  he
said  (which  is  probably  not  intelligible)  we  were
all  charmed,  I am  sure,  with  the  fragrance  of  his
words.  There  is  one  phrase  in  particular  which
he  let  fall  which  I wish  he  might  develop  at
leisure,  I mean  normal  madness.  Plato  has  on


THE  SCENT  OF  PHILOSOPHIES  19

that  subject  some  wonderful  and  comforting
thoughts,  showing  us  the  divine  wisdom  of  being
sometimes  mad  ; and  Euripides  in  his  Bacchae,
a rapturous  and  mystical  tragedy,  has  expressed
the  same  truths  in  action.  Let  Democritus  com-
plete the  picture  and  prove  to  us  on  medical
grounds  the  necessity  of  a divine  madness  in  all
men,  and  especially  in  himself.  It  will  be  a novel
discourse,  in  which  comedy  and  tragedy  will  be
combined  with  science.

Democritus.  Madness  is  a large  subject ; it
would  require  a formal  disquisition  which  would
weary  you  all,  and  especially  Aristippus,  who  does
not  find  enough  pleasure  in  knowledge  to  deem
it  a good.

Aristippus.  I am  indeed  indifferent  to  know-
ledge, which  in  itself  is  neither  pleasant  nor  un-
pleasant, but  I am  far  from  indifferent  to  your
discourses,  which  are  always  agreeable  ; and  I
should  have  a particular  pleasure  in  hearing  you
speak  about  madness  ; you  would  not  fail  to
illustrate  the  subject  amusingly,  both  by  describ-
ing the  absurdities  of  others  and  by  exhibiting
your  own.  So  pungent  and  novel  a confession
should  not  be  missed.

Alcihiades.  I join  in  urging  you  to  consent,
for  I believe  you  will  show  that  madness,  even  if
common  and  inevitable,  is  not  divine,  but  bestial,
and  that  if  a divine  inspiration  sometimes  descends
on  us  in  madness,  whether  in  prophecy  or  love,
it  comes  to  dissipate  that  madness  and  to  heal  it ;
for  Socrates  says  (and,  I think,  truly)  that  the  best


20  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

inspiration  that  can  visit  the  soul  is  reason  ; and
he  quotes  Homer  in  support  of  his  opinion,  wljere
Hector  cries  :

The  best  of  omens  is  our  country’s  good.”

Democritus.  A truce  to  Homer  and  to  Socrates  !
I have  already  observed  that  in  the  sphere  of
nature,  where  there  is  no  better  or  worse,  reason
itself  is  a form  of  madness,  since  it  comes  to
establish  that  vain  distinction  in  obedience  to
human  passions  and  interests.  But  the  under-
standing of  this  matter  requires  a fresh  mind,  not
cloyed  with  disputation  ; and  we  will  defer  it,  if
you  please,  to  another  occasion.


II


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND

Alcibiades.  With  some  difficulty,  O Sage  of
Abdera,  I have  led  back  the  Stranger  into  your
presence,  because  he  had  overheard  you  express-
ing the  intention  of  separating  him  into  his
elements  ; and  although  the  vivisection  is  to  be
of  the  spirit  only,  and  will  not  kill  him,  he  fears
it  may  hurt  his  feelings.

DemoQritus.  He  deserves  to  suffer,  if  he  is  not
willing  to  discover  how  he  is  composed.  A
philosopher  cannot  wish  to  wear  a mask  in  his
own  eyes  or  in  those  of  the  world,  nor  can  he  be
ashamed  of  being  what  he  is,  since  the  scorn  or
the  praises  of  men  are  but  unsubstantial  opinions,
foolish  and  only  important  to  themselves  ; and
he  knows  that  he  too  is  a part  of  nature,  entirely
explicable  and  necessary.

The  Stranger.  In  this  as  in  much  else,  venerable
Sage,  I am  your  convinced  disciple,  and  neither
ashamed  to  be  what  I am  nor  averse  from  knowing
it.  Nevertheless,  there  are  garments  which  those
who  are  not  young  or  beautiful  do  well  to  wear,
not  because  they  wish  to  deceive  themselves  or
others  concerning  their  bodily  form  or  infirmities.


21


32  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

but  because  it  is  not  seemly  to  display  without
necessity  things  not  pleasing  to  the  eye  ; and  I
fear  that  my  thoughts,  in  this  exalted  society,  may
not  seem  worthy  of  exposure.

Democritus.  Be  reassured.  I know  that  Alcibi-
ades  is  already  your  friend  ; and  if  Dionysius  or
Aristippus,  who  are  frivolous  wits,  should  mock
you  in  an  unmannerly  fashion,  they  shall  be
severely  rebuked  and  restrained  by  me.  To  the
physician  the  diseases  which  the  vulgar  call  loath-
some, and  the  animals  which  they  call  reptiles  and
worms,  are  all  worthy  of  attentive  study  ; and
even  if  you  seemed  a monster  to  human  con-
vention, to  the  eye  of  science  you  would  be  neither
ridiculous  nor  unexpected.

The  Stranger.  No  ; but  I might  be  common-
place and  unimportant,  and  therefore  better  left
in  the  shade.

Democritus.  You  would  not  have  found  your
way  into  this  placid  heaven  if  you  did  not  love
the  light ; and  if  you  love  the  light,  why  should
you  fear  it  ? Let  me  observe  at  once,  in  order
to  encourage  you,  that  in  one  respect  you  are  no
ordinary  person,  since  you  are  my  disciple.
Superstition  is  as  rife  in  your  time  as  it  was  in
mine.  The  vapours  of  vanity  exuding  from  the
brain  if  blown  away  here  must  gather  there  into
some  new  phantom  for  fools  to  worship  ; and  it
requires  courage  to  stand  alone,  smiling  at  those
inevitable  follies,  and  recognizing  the  immense
disproportion  between  nature  and  man,  and  her
reptilian  indifference  to  her  creatures.  They  are


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


23


of  her  own  substance,  indeed,  which  must  return
to  her  undiminished  : and  meantime  she  spawns
them  without  remorse  at  their  hard  and  ephemeral
fortunes.  Even  her  favours  are  ironical ; and  if
she  lend  anybody  strength,  unless  it  be  the
strength  (rf  reason,  it  serves  only  to  prolong  his
agony,  and  enable  him  to  trample  more  cruelly
and  obstinately  on  all  the  rest.  The  severity  of
reason  in  disabusing  us  of  these  vain  passions
shows  true  kindness  to  the  soul ; nor  is  it  a
morose  severity,  but  paternal  and  indulgent
towards  every  amiable  pleasure  ; for  nature  is
nothing  but  the  sum  of  her  creatures,  and  laughs
and  rejoices  in  them  mightily  when  they  are
beautiful  and  strong.  Of  these  triumphs  of
nature  in  us  true  philosophy  is  the  greatest,  by
which  s]ie  understands  herself.  You,  in  becom-
ing my  disciple,  have  tasted  something  of  that
purest  joy  ; and  not  only  have  become  in  that
measure  excellent  and  unassailable,  but  any
morbid  or  rotten  parts  that  may  remain  in  you
by  accident  should  be  objects  of  indifference  and
cold  observation  to  you,  as  not  portions  of  your
free  mind  ; and  if  by  my  help  you  can  disown
and  extirpate  them,  you  will  never  again  have
cause  to  blush  or  to  tremble,  I will  not  say  before
men,  but  before  the  gods  and  the  decrees  of  fate.
Much  less  need  you  tremble  before  us  here,  who
are  but  shades  and  wraiths  of  the  thinnest  atoms.
We  shall  be  grateful  to  you  even  for  your  vices  ;
they  will  have  the  savour  of  the  living  world,
which  the  gods  love  to  inhale  ; and  in  you  we


24


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


shall  see  a specimen  of  the  fauna,  curious  if  not
beautiful,  that  flourishes  to-day.

The  Stranger.  I am  afraid  that  even  in  that
capacity  I am  not  worth  dissecting.  I have  been
a stranger  in  all  my  dwelling-places,  and  I should
hardly  have  strayed  into  this  sanctuary  if  I had
been  a man  of  my  own  time.

Democritus.  You  are  mistaken.  Small  differ-
ences, at  close  quarters,  seem  to  you  great ; in
reality  you  are  but  one  leaf  in  the  tree.  That
you  should  turn  for  comfort  to  our  pallid  sun  is
no  wonder  : all  your  souls  are  in  the  dark  ; you
have  bred  a monstrous  parasite  that  envelops
you,  and  cuts  off  your  own  sunlight.  How
astonishing  this  tree  of  yours  looks  at  a distance,
the  giant  of  the  ages,  with  its  crown  of  unheard-of
tentacles,  like  streaming  grasses,  spreayling  far
into  the  aether  ! But  on  inspection  what  a flimsy
marvel  it  all  is,  how  sterile  and  unhappy  ! These
far-reaching  organs  are  but  machines  ; they  drop
no  seeds  ; they  have  no  proper  life  ; and  the  sad
stump  on  which  they  are  grafted,  your  naked
human  nature,  must  supply  them  all  with  sap,
else  in  one  season  they  would  shrivel  and  drop
to  pieces,  nor  would  the  least  plan  or  the  least
love  of  them  subsist  anywhere  in  nature,  whence
they  might  be  reborn.  Meantime  the  proper
fruits  and  seeds  of  your  species  are  lost  or  stunted,
and  it  is  doubtful  whether  mankind,  smothered
under  its  inventions  and  tools,  will  not  dry  up  at
the  root  and  perish  with  them.

The  Stranger.  I do  not  think  so.  The  tools


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


25

and  those  pale  men  and  nations  that  are  the  slaves  of
tools  will  no  doubt  disappear  in  time ; such  arts
have  probably  been  invented  and  lost  many  times
before.  But  there  is  a lusty  core  in  the  human
animal  that  survives  all  revolutions  ; and  when  the
conflagratiSn  is  past,  I seem  to  see  the  young  hunters
with  their  dogs,  camping  among  the  ruins.

Democritus.  Human  wit  is  seldom  to  be  trusted
in  prophecy.  The  mind  thinks  in  gaudy  images
and  nature  moves  in  dark  currents  of  molecular
change,  careless  whether  those  images  repeat
themselves  or  not  like  rhymes.  What  is  your
present  plight  ? Dispersion  and  impotence  of
soul.  Here  a vein  of  true  knowledge  ; there  a
vestige  of  prudent  morality  ; perhaps  a secret
love  ; idle  political  principles  that  alienate  you
from  politics  ; a few  luxurious  and  vapid  arts  ;
and,  poisoning  the  rest  of  your  economy,  the  taint
of  antique  superstition,  for  which  you  have  no
antidote.  The  wonder  is  that  you  exist  at  all,
for  life  demands  some  measure  of  harmony.

The  Stranger.  May  there  not  be  a kind  of
harmony  in  non-interference,  when  each  circle
in  the  state  or  each  interest  of  the  mind  lives  its
inner  life  apart,  yet  in  things  indifferent  and
external  they  pull  well  enough  together,  like  the
team  of  a four-horse  chariot }

Democritus.  Four  horses  are  by  nature  four
separate  bodies,  which  only  the  reins  and  harness
have  yoked  together,  whereas  in  a well-ordered
city  or  in  a living  mind  all  the  parts  form  one
system  by  a vital  necessity  ; unless,  indeed,  as


26  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

seems  to  be  the  case  with  you,  that  mind  or  that
city  is  not  a living  unit  at  all,  but  a colony.  You
think  appearance  pleasant  and  important,  but
substance  you  think  unimportant  and  unpleasant  :
an  accident  which  could  not  befall  you  if  you  had
a whole  soul.  *

The  Stranger.  I wish  I might  find  appearance
always  pleasant  and  important ; but  as  to  sub-
stance, since  the  better  and  the  worse  are  a part
of  appearance,  is  not  substance  necessarily  in-
different ?

Democritus.  There  is  indeed  no  wisdom  like
that  of  the  atoms,  which,  being  compelled  to  move
by  fate,  move  without  caring  whither.  But  when
by  this  very  motion  life  and  will  have  arisen,  and
the  foolish  heart  must  be  set  on  something,  it  is
the  part  of  a relative  wisdom  to  set  it  on  jdie  truth.
Such  was  my  good  fortune,  and  in  some  measure
that  of  my  nation.  Now  circumstances  have
condemned  you  to  be  all  your  lives  students  of
error,  of  sensation,  fiction,  fancy,  and  false  philo-
sophies ; by  all  of  which  your  spirits,  if  not
deceived,  have  been  sadly  bemused.  You  are
content  at  best  to  salute  the  truth  from  a distance,
with  a facile  gesture  ; you  have  never  delved  in
her  garden  or  eaten  her  wholesome  fruits  ; and
if  ever  she  opens  her  divine  lips  and  vouchsafes
to  address  you,  you  begin  to  mumble  to  your-
selves some  old  canticle  till  you  fall  asleep.

The  Stranger.  Is  not  the  truth  about  error  a
part  of  the  truth  ? Can  the  living,  whose  whole
life  is  a dream,  know  any  other  part  of  it  ?


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


27


Democritus.  The  dreamer  can  know  no  truth,
not  even  about  his  dream,  except  by  awaking  out
of  it.  If  you  spin  one  dream  to  explain  another,
as  do  your  talking  philosophers,  how  will  you
ever  come  out  of  the  labyrinth  ? The  physician,
who  is  the*'  only  veritable  soothsayer,  will  inquire
concerning  your  diet,  and  the  causes  of  your
dream,  and  will  perhaps  dispel  those  vapours.
There  is  no  other  truth  to  be  learned  from  dreams,
and  the  science  of  them  is  also  a medicine.

Alcibiades.  When  I was  a child  and  learned
Homer  by  heart,  I became,  so  to  speak,  his  pupil
in  my  dreams  ; and  that  was  a benefit  to  me,
because  some  dreams  are  better  than  others,  and
Homer’s  are  the  best.  The  Stranger  has  had
many  masters  of  that  kind,  and  he  may  have
learned  tf^ie  truth  about  them  merely  by  comparing
one  with  another  and,  all  within  the  realm  of
dreams,  perceiving  which  was  best.  That  is  a
truth  about  them,  as  it  seems  to  me,  more
important  than  their  causes.

Democritus.  Is  the  nature  of  truth  known  to
you,  young  man,  that  you  can  tell  whether  the
Stranger,  in  preferring  one  dream  to  another,
discerns  a truth  or  not  ? Are  you  not  both  of
you  habitually  employed  in  jesting  and  scoffing
and  making  fanciful  speeches  ? How  many  times,
for  once  that  you  mention  the  atoms  and  the  void,
do  you  not  mention  beauty  ?

Alcibiades.  Beauty,  as  Socrates  would  prove  to
you  if  you  would  listen,  is  the  truest  of  things.

Democritus.  Nonsense,  Beauty  is  a fleeting


28  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

appearance  ; and  though  the  Stranger  (wiser,  I
admit,  in  this  respect  than  either  you  or  Socrates)
knows  that  it  is  an  appearance,  he  nevertheless
cherishes  it  more  than  reality  : such  is  the  mixture
of  waking  and  dreaming,  of  health  and  rottenness,
in  his  composition.  *

The  Stranger.  Can  the  surgeon’s  knife,  Demo-
critus, separate  appearance  from  reality  ?

Democritus.  No,  indeed  : and  I am  far  from
blaming  you  for  seeing  the  beautiful,  when  the
atoms  passing  in  clouds  before  your  eyes  or
through  the  ventricles  of  your  body  waft  the
scent  of  beauty  upon  you  : it  is  not  your  fault
that  they  do  so.  I too  must  see  colours  in  the
flowers  and  must  hear  the  sweet  warbling  of  the
fountain  or  the  flute.  But  when  I see  them  I
mock  them,  and  when  I hear  them  I r«tnember
faithfully  the  true  causes  of  sound  : because
though  I am  alive  and  must  behold  appearances,
I am  sane  and  can  know  reality.  But  you,  my
friend,  are  too  often  delirious  ; and  though  that
is  a frequent  accident  in  fever  and  in  dreams,  it
is  a disgrace  to  a professed  philosopher  and  a
nuisance  to  a man  of  sense.

The  Stranger.  I confess  that  sometimes  the
fair  vision  intercepts  my  reason,  and  the  passers-
by  point  at  me  in  derision  for  standing  amazed
at  nothing  in  particular  and  seeing  gods  in  the
commonest  creatures.  It  is  as-  if  the  light  of
sense  were  a divine  medium  on  which  the  moving
matter  of  things  could  make  no  other  impression
than  to  evoke  their  eternal  forms.


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


29

Democritm.  I know,  I know.  Moonstruck  in
the  sunshine.  It  is  a bad  symptom.

Alcibiades.  Is  this  circumstance  of  being  sub-
ject to  pleasant  trances  the  only  disease  that  you
discover  in  the  Stranger  ?

Democritm.  Not  at  all : out  of  consideration  to
a guest  I have  begun  with  the  least  obnoxious.
Sensation  is  in  itself  a symptom  of  health,  coming
when  the  body  passes  from  rest  to  some  appro-
priate action  ; and  a trance  is  but  the  momentary
suspension  of  this  action,  the  tension  which
prepares  it  alone  remaining  : and  in  a lazy  man,
whose  actions  in  any  case  are  slow  and  trivial,
such  suspension  makes  no  great  difference.  Yet
a philosopher  cannot  be  subject  to  trances  with
impunity.  Dwelling  fondly  on  images,  he  very
likely '■wiSl  say  to  himself  that  they  are  not  only
lovelier  than  substance,  but  somehow  surer  and
more  exalted  ; and  who  knows  what  metaphysical
nonsense  he  will  presently  be  talking  about  them,
as  if  inspired  ? Is  not  the  Stranger  a disciple  of
Plato  as  well  as  of  me  ?

The  Stranger.  Indeed  I am,  but  without  con-
tradiction. In  respect  to  the  substance  and  origin
of  things  I profess  allegiance  to  you  only  : in  such
matters  Plato,  knowing  his  own  ignorance,  was
always  playful,  inventing  or  repeating  such  myths
as  he  thought  edifying  for  children  or  for  patriots.
Yet  when  he  closed  his  eyes  on  this  inconstant
world  he  was  a great  seer.  I honour  and  follow
him  for  what  then  he  saw,  which  was  a heaven  of
ideas,  rich  in  constellations  ; I disregard  the  trick


30


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


of  words  or  the  superstitious  impulse  by  which
he  added  something  which  he  certainly  could  not
see,  namely,  that  those  ideas  were  substances  and
powers  ruling  the  world.  Such  a notion  is  not
only  false  to  the  facts  but  vapid  in  logic.  Things
take  what  shapes  they  can,  as  a poet  bubbles  with
the  words  of  his  mother-tongue  which  his  present
passion  evokes  : the  words  chosen  cannot  have
chosen  him  or  created  his  passion.  So  without
deeming  words  sacred  or  ideas  magical  I am  a
friend  of  both,  and  I wait  for  the  flux  of  matter
to  bring  them  to  light  as  it  will  in  its  infinite
gyrations.

Alcibiades.  Why  are  you  displeased  with  a fair
answer  ? Philosophers  are  as  jealous  as  women  ;
each  wants  a monopoly  of  praise.

Democritus.  I am  not  jealous  of  Venus  ;^ou  may
praise  the  meretricious  Muse  of  a Plato  as  much
as  you  please  ; but  I warn  you  as  a physician
that  these  rapturous  fancies  are  signs  of  a feeble
health  : they  comport  effeminacy  in  action.

Dionysius  (aside  to  Aristippus).  Now  that  he
has  touched  on  effeminacy  he  will  soon  be  railing
at  us  also.  Any  refined  nature  seems  effeminate
to  the  old  savage.

Democritus.  Yes,  my  royal  friend,  although  I
cannot  hear  you  plainly,  I know  what  you  are
murmuring.  You  may  apply  all  that  I am  about
to  say  to  your  own  person  and  regard  yourself  as
accused  and  convicted.  Yet  the  Stranger’s  is  the
worse  case.  You  at  least  were  a king,  Aristippus
was  an  adventurer,  Alcibiades  was  the  equal  of


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


31

kings  and  the  seducer  of  queens.  All  three  of
you  could  flaunt  your  effeminacy  upon  a public
stage,  your  masquerade  became  a sort  of  action,
you  threw  your  all  into  the  fray  and  made  a gallant
pose  of  your  treason.  But  a private  and  obscure
person  like  the  Stranger  has  only  his  small  heart
in  which  to  display  his  inventions,  and  must  be
more  deeply  and  silently  consumed  by  their
vanity.  Man  is  a fighting  animal,  his  thoughts
are  his  banners,  and  it  is  a failure  of  nerve  in
him  if  they  are  only  thoughts.  A philosopher
especially,  whatever  his  birth  or  station,  is  com-
missioned by  the  gods.  He  may  raise  his  voice
against  folly  ; in  his  own  person  he  may  be  stern,
stripping  himself  bare  of  all  human  entanglements.
Ferocity  becomes  him,  as  it  does  the  lion  ; and
if  no  will  be  his  companion  in  a life  of  virtue,
he  can  resolutely  walk  alone.  His  mere  example
will  be  a power,  or  if  not,  at  least  his  self-assertion
will  be  an  action.  But  if  he  sits  in  his  closet,
fancifully  rebuilding  the  universe  or  reforming
the  state,  he  is  little  better  than  a maniac  ; or
if  in  sauntering  through  the  market-place  and
observing  its  villainies,  because  his  nook  is  safe
and  his  liver  is  in  good  order,  he  tolerates  the
spectacle,  he  is  like  a woman  in  the  theatre
shuddering  at  the  tragedy  and  eating  sweets.

Aristippus.  Wise  man  too,  if  he  does  so.  I
pronounce  it  worthier  of  a philosopher  to  eat
sweets  than  to  count  the  number  of  the  atoms,
and  less  foolish  to  smile  or  to  shudder  at  the  world
than  to  attempt  to  reform  it.  If  in  watching  such


32


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


an  inglorious  tragedy  and  such  a dull  comedy  as
the  earth  presents  in  his  day,  the  Stranger  can
still  be  merry  and  relish  his  small  comforts,  I beg
to  be  allowed  to  honour  him  for  his  good  nature.
Do  not  think,  excellent  Traveller,  that  among  the
Shades  all  philosophers  are  scolds,  singly  bent  on
browbeating  people  into  a meddlesome  virtue
which  is  always  half  criminal.  There  is  wisdom
here  of  another  stripe,  and  if  you  bravely  make
the  best  of  a crazy  world,  eternity  is  full  of
champions  that  will  defend  you.

The  Stranger.  Both  of  you,  Democritus  and
Aristippus,  seem  to  me  to  have  spoken  justly  : in
your  censure  and  encouragement  alike  there  is
good  counsel,  and  I thank  you  both  for  your
words.  Intrepid  virtue,  O Sage  of  Abdera,  is  a
gift  of  the  gods,  and  how  often  do  they  bestow  it  ?
You  yourself  were  no  Pythagoras,  nor  even  a
Diogenes.  As  for  me,  disillusion  was  my  earliest
friend,  and  never  were  chagrin  and  hope  strong
enough  to  persuade  me  that  anything  was  to  be
gained  by  rebelling  against  fortune.  Men  may
sometimes  destroy  what  they  hate  : that  will  be
a ferocious  joy  to  them,  although  perhaps  a sorrow
to  others  more  reasonable  than  they.  But  never
by  any  possibility  can  men  establish  what  they
love  ; once  there,  the  dreamt-of  object  is  another
and  a ghastly  thing.  Unless,  then,  they  are  to
fret  away  their  lives  in  impotent  hatred,  the  living
must  find  something  amiable  in  things  transitory
and  imperfect,  the  fruits  of  circumstance  and  of
custom.  We  are  such  fruits  ourselves,  and  our


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


33


hearts  have  no  prerogative  in  the  large  household
of  nature.  Each  of  us  indeed  has  his  animal
strength,  and,  if  he  has  unravelled  them,  his
constant  loves  ; and  the  way  always  lies  open  to
adventure  ^d  sometimes  to  art.  Had  there  been
some  wise  prophet  in  my  day,  summoning  man-
kind to  an  ordered  and  noble  life,  I should  gladly
have  followed  him,  not  having  myself  the  gift  of
leadership.  I should  not  have  asked  him  for  the
absolute  truth  nor  for  an  earthly  paradise  ; I
should  have  been  content  with  a placid  monastery
dedicated  to  study  or  with  a camp  of  comrades  in
the  desert.  But  I found  no  master.  Those  who
beat  the  drum  or  rang  the  church-bell  in  my  time
were  unhappy  creatures,  trying  to  deceive  them-
selves. Better  not  be  a hero  than  work  oneself
up  into"Tieroism  by  shouting  lies.  Green,  quiet
places  and  boyish  sports  arc  more  moralizing  than
these  moralists.  I should  honour  heroic  viituc  if
it  were  sane  and  beneficent ; but  I find  satis-
faction also,  and  perhaps  oftencr,  in  little  things.

Dionysius.  Experience  speaks  through  the
Stranger’s  mouth.  In  my  varied  life  I ran  the
whole  gamut  of  human  occupations  and  pleasures
and,  among  them  all,  I remember  now  with  the
greatest  satisfaction  those  which  came  unasked
and  departed  unregretted,  like  my  kingly  crown.
The  beautiful  is  a winged  essence,  and  a wise
Psyche  does  not  seek  to  detain  her  lover.

Akihiades.  Democritus,  who  is  the  wisest  of
us  here,  nevertheless  demands  a bold  spirit ; it
may  be  but  a more  impetuous  vortex  of  atoms,

D


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


34

yet  there  is  a hazard  in  it  more  glorious  than
slackness.  I think  it  a defect  of  nature  in  a man
with  a clear  mind  not  to  have  also  an  imperious
will : knowing  his  most  secret  and  profound
desires  and  seeing  his  opportunities  he  should
leap  to  the  goal.  My  conclusion  is,  then,  that
to  love  the  beautiful,  even  if  it  be  only  an  appear-
ance, is  no  disease  in  the  Stranger  or  in  any  other
creature,  but  it  is  indeed  a disease  not  to  love
glory  and  material  dominion.

Democritus.  Disease  is  a word  employed  con-
ventionally ; it  has  no  meaning  in  nature.  Neither
the  Stranger  nor  a dead  dog  suffers  any  corrup-
tion, if  his  present  state  or  immediate  promise
be  the  standard  for  his  perfection  : happy  they
if  they  relish  their  fate.  I was  speaking  of  a
philosopher,  whose  perfection  is  set  on  4Snowledge
of  the  truth  and  on  friendship  with  nature.  The
Stranger  admits  that  nothing  is  beautiful  in  itself,
yet  he  cultivates  the  illusion  that  many  things  are
beautiful  ; he  confesses  that  a barbarous  life  is
an  evil  to  his  soul,  yet  he  condones  the  barbar-
ism of  the  world,  and  pleases  himself  in  it.  I
therefore  conclude  that  his  is  a torpid  organism,
disjointed,  and  incapable  of  fighting  its  way
victoriously  to  the  easement  of  its  own  lusts.  To
an  eye  that  follows  the  multiform  life  of  nature,
a whole  lion  is  nobler  than  half  a man.

The  Stranger.  And  for  this  pitiful  lameness
in  my  soul,  can  you  propose  a remedy  ?

Democritus.  Yes,  if  you  will  allow  me  to
change  your  ancestors,  your  bodily  complexion.


VIVISECTION  OF  A MIND


35

your  breeding,  and  the  time  and  place  of  your
existence.  On  that  condition,  I agree  to  obliterate
every  trace  of  disease  or  sluggishness  in  your
constitution.

The  Stranger.  I salute  that  admirable  being,
designed  by  Democritus,  that  should  have  borne
my  name,  and  I wish  him  a glorious  life,  if  ever
he  arises.  Meantime  I beg  leave  to  go  and  finish
on  earth  the  allotted  term  of  my  present  illness,
and  I bid  my  incomparable  doctor  farewell,  until
another  visit.

Alcibiades  {aside  to  the  Stranger,  as  the  latter
prepares  to  depart).  You  see  that  you  had  nothing
to  fear.  The  old  man  has  cut  you  up  without
hurting  you.

The  Stranger.  The  operation  was  unnecessary,
and  has-not  been  painless,  but  I might  have  fallen
into  worse  hands.  It  is  a new  form  of  health  to
be  inured  to  disease,  and  in  that  sense,  like  a true
wonder-worker,  this  physician  has  sent  me  away
cured.


Ill


NORMAL  MADNESS

Democritus.  You  reappear  in  season,  inquisitive
Pilgrim,  and  to-day  you  must  take  a seat  beside
me.  These  young  men  are  compelling  my  hoary
philosophy  to  disclose  the  cause  of  all  the  follies
that  they  perpetrated  when  alive.  They  still
wear,  as  you  see,  their  youthful  and  lusty  aspect ;
for  when  we  enter  these  gates  Minos  and  Rhada-
manthus  restore  to  each  of  us  the  semWance  of
that  age  at  which  his  spirit  on  earth  had  been
most  vivid  and  masterful  and  least  bent  by
tyrant  circumstance  out  of  its  natural  straightness.
Therefore  Alcibiades  and  Dionysius  and  Aris-
tippus walk  here  in  the  flower  of  their  youth,  and
I sit  crowned  with  all  the  snows  and  wisdom  of
extreme  old  age  ; because  their  souls,  though
essentially  noble,  grew  daily  more  distracted  in
the  press  of  the  world  and  more  polluted,  but
mine  by  understanding  the  world  grew  daily
purer  and  stronger.  They  are  still  ready  for  every
folly,  though  luckily  they  lack  the  means  ; and
the  chronicle  of  vanity  remains  full  of  interest
for  them,  because  they  are  confident  of  shining
in  it.  Yet  the  person  whom  this  subject  most

36


NORMAL  MADNESS  37

nearly  touches  is  you,  since  you  are  still  living,
and  life  is  at  once  the  quintessence  and  the  sum
of  madness.  Here  our  spirits  can  be  mad  only
vicariously  and  at  the  second  remove,  as  the
verses  in  vdiich  Sophocles  expresses  the  ravings
of  Ajax  are  themselves  sanely  composed,  and  a
calm  image  of  horror.  But  your  thoughts,  in  the
confusion  and  welter  of  existence,  are  still  re-
bellious to  metre  ; you  cannot  yet  rehearse  your
allotted  part,  as  we  do  here,  with  the  pause
and  pomp  of  a posthumous  self-knowledge.  My
discourse  on  madness,  therefore,  will  not  only
celebrate  your  actions,  but  may  open  your  eyes  ;
and  I assign  to  you  on  this  occasion  the  place  of
honour,  as  nearest  of  kin  to  the  goddess  Mania,
who  to-day  presides  over  our  games.

There  is  little  philosophy  not  contained  in  the
distinction  between  things  as  they  exist  in  nature,
and  things  as  they  appear  to  opinion ; yet  both
the  substance  and  its  appearance  often  bear  the
same  name,  to  the  confusion  of  discourse.  So  it
is  with  the  word  madness,  which  sometimes  desig-
nates a habit  of  action,  sometimes  an  illusion  of
the  mind,  and  sometimes  only  the  opprobrium
which  a censorious  bystander  may  wish  to  cast
upon  either.

Moralists  and  ignorant  philosophers  like
Socrates — of  whom  women  and  young  men  often
think  so  highly — do  not  distinguish  nature  from
convention,  and  because  madness  is  inconvenient
to  society  they  call  it  contrary  to  nature.  But
nothing  can  be  contrary  to  nature  ; and  that  a


38  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

man  should  shriek  or  see  wild  visions  or  talk  to  the
air,  or  to  a guardian  genius  at  his  elbow,  or  should
kill  his  children  and  himself,  when  the  thing
actually  occurs,  is  not  contrary  to  nature,  but  only
to  the  habit  of  the  majority.  The  diseases  which
destroy  a man  are  no  less  natural  than  the  instincts
which  preserve  him.  Nature  has  no  difficulty
in  doing  what  she  does,  however  wonderful  or
horrible  it  may  seem  to  a fancy  furnished  only
with  a few  loose  images  and  incapable  of  tracing
the  currents  of  substance  ; and  she  has  no  hostility
to  what  she  leaves  undone  and  no  longing  to  do
it.  You  will  find  her  in  a thousand  ways  un-
making what  she  makes,  trying  again  where
failure  is  certain,  and  neglecting  the  fine  feats
which  she  once  easily  accomplished,  as  if  she  had
forgotten  their  secret.  How  simple  it  was  once
to  be  a Greek  and  ingenuously  human  ; yet
nature  suffered  that  honest  humanity  to  exist
only  for  a few  doubtful  years.  It  peeped  once
into  being,  like  a weed  amid  the  crevices  of  those
Aegean  mountains,  and  all  the  revolving  aeons
will  not  bring  it  back.  Nature  is  not  love-sick  ;
she  will  move  on  ; and  if  to  the  eye  of  passion
her  works  seem  full  of  conflict,  vanity,  and  horror,
these  are  not  horrors,  vanities,  or  conflicts  to  her.
She  is  no  less  willing  that  we  should  be  mad  than
that  we  should  be  sane.  The  fly  that  prefers
sweetness  to  a long  life  may  drown  in  honey  ;
nor  is  an  agony  of  sweetness  forbidden  by  nature
to  those  inclined  to  sing  or  to  love.

Moral  terms  are  caresses  or  insults  and  describe


NORMAL  MADNESS


39


nothing  ; but  they  have  a meaning  to  the  heart,
and  are  not  forbidden.  You  may,  therefore,
without  scientific  error,  praise  madness  or  deride
it.  Your  own  disposition  and  habit  will  dictate
these  judgements.  A weak  and  delicate  animal
like  man  could  have  arisen  only  in  an  equable
climate,  in  which  at  all  seasons  he  might  hunt
and  play,  and  run  naked  or  gaily  clad  according
to  his  pleasure  : he  therefore  at  first  regards  the
Hyperborean  regions,  where  summer  and  winter
are  sharply  contrasted,  as  cruel  and  uninhabitable  ;
yet  if  by  accident  or  necessity  he  becomes  hardened
to  those  changes,  he  begins  to  think  his  native
forests  pestiferous  and  fit  only  for  snakes  and
monkeys.  So  it  is  also  with  the  climates  of  the
mind.  Every  nation  thinks  its  own  madness
normal  and  requisite  ; more  passion  and  more
fancy  it  calls  folly,  less  it  calls  imbecility.  Of
course,  according  to  nature,  to  possess  no  fancy
and  no  passion  is  not  to  possess  too  little,  and  a
stone  is  no  imbecile  ; while  to  have  limitless
passion  and  fancy  is  not  to  have  too  much,  and
a drone  among  bees  or  a poet  among  men  is  not
a fool  for  being  all  raptures.  In  the  moralist
aspiration  is  free  to  look  cither  way.  If  some
gymnosophist  sincerely  declares  that  to  move  or
to  breathe  or  to  think  is  vanity,  and  that  to  become
insensible  is  the  highest  good,  in  that  it  abolishes
illusion  and  all  other  evils,  to  him  I object  nothing  ;
if  starkness  is  his  treasure,  let  him  preserve  it.
If  on  the  other  hand  Orpheus  or  Pythagoras  or
Plato,  having  a noble  contempt  for  the  body,


40


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


aspire  to  soar  in  a perpetual  ecstasy,  and  if  with
their  eyes  fixed  on  heaven  they  welcome  any
accidental  fall  from  a throne  or  from  a housetop
as  a precious  liberation  of  their  spirits,  fluttering
to  be  free,  again  I oppose  nothing  to  their  satisfac-
tion : let  them  hug  Icarian  madness  to  their
bosoms,  as  being  the  acme  of  bliss  and  glory.

What,  Aristippus  and  Dionysius,  are  you  so
soon  asleep  ? I confidently  expected  you  at  this
point  to  applaud  my  oration.  But  sleep  on,  if  you
prefer  dreams  to  an  understanding  of  dreams.

Perhaps  you  others,  whose  wits  are  awake,  may
ask  me  how,  if  in  nature  there  be  nothing  but
atoms  in  motion,  madness  comes  to  exist  at  all.
I will  not  reply  that  motion  and  division  are  them-
selves insanity,  although  wise  men  have  said  so  ;
for  if  division  and  motion  are  the  deepest  nature
of  things,  insanity  would  be  rather  the  vain  wish
to  impose  upon  them  unity  and  rest.  For  by
sanity  I understand  assurance  and  peace  in  being
what  one  is,  and  in  becoming  what  one  must
become  ; so  that  the  void  and  the  atoms,  unruffled
and  ever  ready,  are  eminently  sane.  Not  so,
however,  those  closed  systems  which  the  atoms
often  form  by  their  cyclical  motion  : these  systems
are  automatic  ; they  complete  and  repeat  them-
selves by  an  inward  virtue  whenever  circum-
stances permit ; yet  even  when  circumstances  do
not  permit,  they  madly  endeavour  to  do  so.  This
mad  endeavour,  when  only  partially  defeated,
may  restore  and  propagate  itself  with  but  slight
variations,  and  it  is  then  called  life.  Of  life


NORMAL  MADNESS


41

madness  is  an  inseparable  and  sometimes  a pre-
dominant part : every  living  body  is  mad  in  so  far
as  it  is  inwardly  disposed  to  permanence  when
things  about  it  are  unstable,  or  is  inwardly  dis-
posed to  change  when,  the  circumstances  being
stable,  there  is  no  occasion  for  changing.  That
which  is  virtue  in  season  is  madness  out  of  season,
as  when  an  old  man  makes  love  ; and  Prometheus
or  Alexander  attempting  incredible  feats  is  a
miracle  of  sanity,  if  he  attempts  them  at  the  right
moment.

So  much  for  madness  in  action,  inevitable
whenever  the  impulses  of  bodies  run  counter  to
opportunity.  But  life,  both  in  its  virtue  and  in
its  folly,  is  also  expressed  in  fancy,  creating  the
world  of  appearance.  In  the  eye  of  nature  all
appearance  is  vain  and  a mere  dream,  since  it  adds
something  to  substance  which  substance  is  not ;
and  it  is  no  less  idle  to  think  what  is  true  than  to
think  what  is  false.  If  ever  appearance  should
become  ashamed  of  being  so  gratuitous  and  like
an  old  gossip  should  seek  to  excuse  its  garrulity
by  alleging  its  truth,  neither  the  void  nor  the  atoms
would  heed  that  excuse  or  accept  it.  Are  they,
forsooth,  insecure  that  they  should  call  upon  that
sleepy  witness  to  give  testimony  to  their  being  ?
Their  being  is  indomitable  substance  and  motion
and  action,  and  to  add  thought,  impalpable  and
ghostly,  is  to  add  madness.  Indeed  fancy  as  if
aware  of  its  vanity,  makes  holiday  as  long  as  it
can  ; its  joy  is  in  fiction,  and  it  would  soon  fade
and  grow  weary  if  it  had  to  tell  the  truth.  The


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


42

heroes  in  the  Iliad,  instead  of  doing  a man’s  work
in  silence,  like  honest  atoms,  love  to  recite  their
past  exploits  and  to  threaten  fresh  deeds  of  blood  :
had  they  respected  reality  they  would  have  been
content  to  act,  but  they  must  prate  and  promise,
because  they  live  by  imagination.  If  their  boasts
are  lies,  as  is  probable,  they  are  all  the  more  elated.
These  fools  might  almost  have  perceived  their  own
idiocy,  if  they  had  merely  described  their  true
actions,  saying,  “ I am  standing  on  two  legs  ; I
am  hurling  a spear,  I am  running  away,  I am  lying
flat  and  dead  on  the  ground.”  The  truth,  my
friends,  is  not  eloquent,  except  unspoken  ; its
vast  shadow  lends  eloquence  to  our  sparks  of
thought  as  they  die  into  it.  After  all  there  was
some  sense  in  that  nonsense  of  Socrates  about
the  sun  and  moon  being  governed  by  reason,  for
they  go  their  rounds  soberly,  without  talking  or
thinking.

That  the  intoxication  of  life  is  the  first  cause
of  appearance  you  have  all  observed  and  experi-
enced when  you  have  danced  in  a chorus,  or  per-
formed your  military  exercises,  stamping  on  the
ground  in  unison  and  striking  your  swords
together ; ordered  motion  being  naturally  fertile
in  sound,  in  flashing  light,  and  in  gladness.  Such
appearances,  in  the  safe  and  liberal  life  of  a god,
would  not  be  deceptive,  since  a god  need  not  be
concerned  about  his  own  existence,  which  is  secure,
or  that  of  other  things,  which  is  indifferent,  and
he  is  not  tempted  to  assert  falsely,  as  men  do,
that  sound  and  splendour  and  gladness  are  the


NORMAL  MADNESS


43


substance  of  those  things  or  of  himself.  In  him
the  intoxication  of  life  in  creating  appearance
would  not  create  illusion,  but  only  an  innocent
and  divine  joy.  Accordingly,  when  the  voice  of  a
god  traverses  the  air,  the  burden  of  it  is  neither
true  nor  false  ; only  the  priest  or  the  people,
anxiously  interpreting  that  oracle  according  to
their  fears  and  necessities,  render  false  or  true  by
their  presumption  such  scraps  of  it  as  they  may
hear.  The  god,  however,  was  not  mindful  of
them  but  was  singing  to  himself  his  own  song.
This  divine  simplicity  of  nature  is  ill  understood
by  mortals,  who  address  everything  to  their  mean
uses  and  vain  advantage  ; whereby  in  the  struggle
to  lengthen  their  days  a little  they  fill  them  with
distraction.

This  is  a third  and  most  virulent  form  of  mad-
ness, in  which  the  dreams  of  the  vegetative  soul
are  turned  into  animal  error  and  animal  fury.
For  animals  cannot  wait  for  the  slow  ministra-
trations  of  earth  and  air,  but  as  you  see  in  birds
and  kittens  and  young  children,  must  be  in  a
fidget  to  move ; prying  in  all  directions  and
touching  and  gobbling  everything  within  reach.
This  is  their  only  entertainment,  for  they  have
lost  all  fine  inner  sensibility,  and  their  feelings
and  fancies  arise  only  when  their  whole  soul  is
addressed  to  external  things  of  which  they  are
necessarily  ignorant — for  what  can  a simpleton
know  of  the  streams  of  atoms  actually  coursing
about  him  ? His  mind  is  furnished  only  with
feelings  and  images  generated  within,  but  being


44


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


distracted  by  the  urgency  of  his  lusts  and  fears,
he  takes  those  images  and  feelings  for  pleasant
lures  or  fantastic  and  stalking  enemies.  Thus
whereas  locomotion  by  itself  would  be  unconscious
and  fancy  by  itself  would  be  innocent  and  free
from  error,  fancy  married  with  locomotion,  as  it
must  be  in  the  strife  of  animals,  begets  false
opinion  and  wraps  the  naked  atoms  in  a veil  of
dreams.

Such  is  the  origin  of  opinion  ; and  as  the  chief
endeavour  of  the  animal  body  is  to  defend  and
propagate  itself  at  all  costs,  so  the  chief  and  most
lasting  illusion  of  the  mind  is  the  illusion  of  its
own  importance.  What  madness  to  assert  that
one  collocation  of  atoms  or  one  conjunction  of
feelings  is  right  or  is  better,  and  another  is  wrong
or  is  worse ! Yet  this  baseless  opinion  every
living  organism  emits  in  its  madness,  contradict-
ing the  equal  madness  of  all  its  rivals.  They  say
the  stars  laugh  at  us  for  this,  but  what  is  their  own
case  ? The  sun  and  the  planets  may  seem  to
gaping  observation  to  lead  a sane  life,  having
found  paths  of  safety ; yet  to  the  sharp  eye  of
science  the  ambush  is  visible  into  which  they  glide.
If  they  think  themselves  immortal  gods,  and  feast
and  laugh  together  as  they  revolve  complacently,
they  are  mad,  because  a sudden  surprise  awaits
them,  and  the  common  doom.  Had  they  been
wise,  like  philosophers  who  know  themselves
mortal,  they  should  have  consented  and  made
ready  to  die,  seeing  that  they  are  not  pure  atoms
or  the  pure  void,  and  that  in  forming  them  nature


NORMAL  MADNESS  45

was  not  in  earnest  but  playing.  They  would  have
done  well  to  laugh,  if  they  had  laughed  at  them-
selves ; for  those  who  will  not  laugh  with  nature
in  her  mockery  and  playfulness,  turn  her  sport
first  into  delusion  and  then  into  anguish.

Such  being  the  nature  and  causes  of  madness,
is  there  no  remedy  for  it  ? In  answering  this
question  I broach  the  second  and  kindlier  part  of
my  discourse,  when  having  described  the  disease
I bring  hope  of  health  and  prescribe  the  cure.  A
radical  cure,  though  it  exists,  I will  not  propose
to  you,  for  you  are  young  and  inquisitive  and
not  ready  to  renounce  all  life  and  all  knowledge.
Only  some  great  and  heroic  sage  can  begin  by
disowning  madness  altogether  and  felling  the  tree
of  opinion  at  the  root ; nor  would  he,  by  leaping
into  total  salvation,  attain  to  any  understanding
of  his  former  distress.  In  abolishing  illusion  he
would  have  forgotten  its  existence  and  virtually
denied  it ; so  that  for  the  blatant  errors  of  his
lusty  years  he  would  have  substituted  one  great
mute  and  perpetual  error  ; the  total  ignorance
which  besets  the  atoms  regarding  the  patterns
and  the  dreams  which  in  fact  they  generate.
Suddenly  to  renounce  all  madness  is  accordingly
to  miss  the  truth  about  madness,  together  with
the  whole  comic  rout  of  this  world,  which  is
marvellously  fertile  in  comedy.

My  physic  accordingly  will  be  more  gentle  ;
I will  not  prescribe  instant  death  as  the  only
medicine.  Wisdom  is  an  evanescent  madness,
when  the  dream  still  continues  but  no  longer


46  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

deceives.  In  all  illusions  there  is  some  truth,
since  being  products  of  nature  they  all  have  some
relation  to  nature,  and  a prudent  mind  by  lifting
their  masks  may  discover  their  true  occasions.
Doubtless  the  number  and  swiftness  of  the  atoms,
even  in  a little  space,  must  always  elude  human
discernment ; but  the  more  foolish  images  of
sense  may  be  disallowed  in  favour  of  others  more
faithful  to  the  true  rhythms  and  divisions  of  nature.
Thus  to  the  innocent  eye  the  six  stout  spokes  of  a
chariot-wheel  revolving  rapidly  are  merged  and
blurred  in  one  whirling  disc  ; but  the  philosopher,
though  no  less  subject  than  other  men  to  this
illusion,  on  seeing  the  disc  will  remember  the
spokes,  and  in  all  his  fevers  and  griefs  will  be
mindful  of  the  atoms  ; his  forced  illusions  will
not  deceive  him  altogether,  since  he  knows  their
cause,  and  it  is  in  his  power,  if  the  worst  befall,
by  a draught  of  atoms  artfully  mingled,  to  dispel
all  his  griefs  and  fevers  for  ever.  Meantime,  in
the  interests  of  human  life,  without  inquiring  into
its  ultimate  vanity,  a conventional  distinction  may
be  drawn  between  madness  and  sanity.  Belief  in
the  imaginary  and  desire  for  the  impossible  will
justly  be  called  madness  ; but  those  habits  and
ideas  will  be  conventionally  called  sane  which  are
sanctioned  by  tradition  and  which,  when  followed,
do  not  lead  directly  to  the  destruction  of  oneself
or  of  one’s  country.  Such  conventional  sanity  is
a normal  madness  like  that  of  images  in  sense,
love  in  youth,  and  religion  among  nations.

Two  protecting  deities,  indeed,  like  two  sober


NORMAL  MADNESS  47

friends  supporting  a drunkard,  flank  human  folly
and  keep  it  within  bounds.  One  of  these  deities
is  Punishment,  and  the  other  Agreement.  The
very  mad  man  chokes,  starves,  runs  into  the  sea,
or  having  committed  some  fearful  rape  or  murder
is  sentenced  to  death  by  the  magistrate.  Even
if  harmless,  he  is  tied  with  a chain,  and  dies  like
a dog  in  his  kennel.  Punishment  thus  daily
removes  the  maddest  from  the  midst  of  mankind.
The  remnant,  though  their  thoughts  be  in  their
homely  way  still  dull  or  fantastic,  then  plod  on
in  relative  safety,  while  the  unhappy  souls  whom
Punishment  has  overtaken  rest  from  their  troubles.
For  no  sooner  has  the  system  of  atoms  forming
an  animal  body  lost  its  equilibrium  and  been
dispersed  in  death,  than  no  pain  or  fancy  or
haggard  hope  subsists  in  that  system  any  longer,
and  the  peace  of  indifference  and  justice  returns
to  the  world  ; and  if  here  or  in  the  memory  of
men  some  echo  of  that  life  reverberates,  it  rings
without  anguish,  the  note  once  sounded  repeating
itself  perpetually,  pure  and  undisturbed.  This
is  the  good  work  which  Punishment  does  daily,
healing  and  harmonizing  the  worst  of  follies.

Yet  before  dying  in  the  arms  of  Punishment
madness  may  be  mitigated  and  tamed  by  Agree-
ment, like  a young  colt  broken  in  and  trained  to
gallop  in  harness.  The  automatism  of  life,  which
is  necessarily  spontaneous  and  blind,  may  by
adjustment  with  its  occasions  become  a principle
of  health  and  genius,  the  parent  of  noble  actions
and  beautiful  works.  Fancy,  too,  in  creating


48  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

images  which  have  no  originals  in  nature — since
in  nature  there  is  nothing  but  atoms  and  the  void
— ^may  by  union  with  the  times  and  order  of
natural  events  become  the  mother  of  names,
pleasant  and  familiar,  by  which  those  events  are
called  in  the  language  of  sense.  Thus  the  most
diverse  imaginations  in  various  species  of  animals
may  be  rendered  compatible  with  sagacity  and
with  a prosperous  life.  Migratory  fowl  do  not
record  their  voyages  in  books,  like  human  geo-
graphers, yet  they  have  appointed  dreams  and
secret  sensations  which  warn  them  of  the  season
for  flight,  and  they  are  well  informed  about  Egypt
without  consulting  Herodotus.  If  omens  were
observed  scientifically  and  not  superstitiously
interpreted,  augury  might  be  a true  art  of  sub-
stitution, like  language.  There  are  many  false
tales  told  both  by  Greeks  and  barbarians  which
at  times  are  useful  to  the  state,  because  by  an
artful  disposition  of  signs  and  sounds  they  dispose
the  inner  parts  of  men  favourably  for  breasting
labour  or  war.  Thus  the  most  deed-dyed  illusion,
if  it  be  interwoven  with  good  habits,  may  flourish
in  long  amity  with  things,  naming  and  saluting
them,  as  we  do  the  stars,  or  the  gods,  without
understanding  their  nature.

Such  amity  can  the  god  Agreement  establish
even  between  aliens,  but  between  brothers  he
weaves  a subtler  and  a sweeter  bond.  For  when
kindred  bodies  have  the  same  habitat  and  the
same  arts  they  also  have  the  same  illusions  ; and
their  common  madness  gives  to  each  a perfect


NORMAL  MADNESS


49

knowledge  of  the  other’s  mind.  Whereas  the
images  in  the  eye  or  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  can
agree  but  loosely  and,  as  it  were,  politically  with
material  things,  they  may  agree  exactly  with  the
images  in  another  eye,  and  the  thoughts  of
another  heart.  This  free  unanimity  was  called
friendship  by  the  Greeks,  who  alone  of  all  nations
have  understood  the  nature  of  friendship.  Bar-
barians of  course  may  fight  faithfully  in  bands,
and  may  live  in  tribes  and  in  cities,  hugging  their
wives  and  children  to  their  bosom  ; but  such
instinctive  love,  which  all  animals  manifest,  is  not
friendship.  It  moves  in  the  realm  of  nature,  and
concerns  only  action  and  fate,  whereas  friendship
is  agreement  in  madness,  when  the  same  free
thoughts  and  the  same  fraternal  joys  visit  two
kindred  spirits.  It  was  not  for  fighting  loyally
side  by  side  that  the  Spartan  phalanx  or  the
Theban  band  were  incomparable  in  the  annals
of  war,  but  for  fighting  side  by  side  for  the  sake
of  the  beautiful,  and  in  order  that  the  liberal
madness  of  their  friendship  might  not  end,  unless
it  ended  in  death.  All  the  glories  of  Greece  are
the  fruits  of  this  friendship  and  belong  to  the
realm  of  madness  tempered  by  Agreement ; for
out  of  the  very  fountain  of  madness  Apollo  and
the  Muses  drew  that  intoxication  which  they
taught  to  flow  in  the  paths  of  health  and  of
harmony.  The  Greeks  in  the  intervals  between
their  wars,  instead  of  sinking  into  luxury  and
sloth,  or  into  a vain  industry,  instituted  games,
in  which  peace  was  made  keen  and  glorious  by  a


50  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

beautiful  image  of  war.  Actual  war  is  a conflict
of  matter  with  matter,  as  blind  as  it  is  inevitable  ;
but  the  images  which  it  breeds  survive  in  peace,
as  we  survive  in  these  removed  spaces  after  the
battle  of  existence.  So  even  the  wisest  when
alive  play  with  images  and  interests,  and  the
glitter  of  many  rival  opinions  hides  the  deep
harmony  with  nature  by  which  these  opinions
live.  There  is  sweetness  and  quaint  reason  in
these  frail  thoughts  of  our  after-life,  as  in  the
wisdom  of  children.  What  could  be  madder
than  a ghost  ? Yet  by  the  harmony  which  each
of  us  has  long  since  attained  with  himself,  and  by
the  freedom  and  peace  which  we  gladly  grant  to
one  another,  we  immortalize  the  life  of  friendship
and  share  it  with  the  gods.

Let  such,  then,  be  my  discourse  upon  madness.
Philosophers  are  unjust  to  the  madness  of  the
vulgar,  and  the  vulgar  to  that  of  madmen  and
philosophers,  not  seeing  how  plausible  a sub-
stitute it  is  for  their  own,  because  everybody
thinks  himself  sane  ; wherein  precisely  shines  his
blinding  illusion.  I have  wished  in  a manner  to
remove  the  mystery  and  the  odium  from  this
universal  predicament  of  mortals,  and  to  show  it
to  be  no  anomaly.  Madness  is  natural  and,  like
all  things  natural,  it  loves  itself,  and  often,  by  its
innocence  or  by  its  signification,  it  lives  in  harmony
with  the  rest  of  nature  ; otherwise,  by  the  action
it  comports,  it  finds  its  quietus  in  punishment
and  death.

Alcibiades.  Your  discourse,  indomitable  Sage,


NORMAL  MADNESS


51


has  filled  us  all  with  wonder,  and  left  us  without
the  wish  to  speak.  The  Stranger,  if  he  had  dared,
should  have  broken  this  silence  rather  than  I,
for  you  tell  us  that  madness  comes  of  being  alive,
and  very  likely  he  thinks  that  such  an  opinion
comes  of  being  dead.

Democritus.  Very  likely,  but  let  him  speak  for
himself.

The  Stranger.  I should  not  hesitate  to  do  so
if  I had  anything  to  object  to  so  persuasive  a
discourse,  but  words  on  my  part  are  superfluous,
since  I recognize  the  truth  of  every  part  of  it.
To  show  you,  however,  that  the  living  are  not
always  unwilling  to  confess  their  plight,  I will
repeat  an  old  story  of  the  sort  which  we  compose
for  children.  It  seems  curiously  to  confirm  all
that  the  noble  Democritus  has  taught  us.

Once  upon  a time,  so  the  story  runs,  the  whole
world  was  a garden  in  which  a tender  fair-haired
child,  whose  name  was  Autologos,  played  and
babbled  alone.  There  was,  indeed,  an  old  woman
who  tended  the  garden,  a goddess  in  disguise  ;
but  she  lived  in  a cave  and  came  out  only  at  night
when  the  child  was  asleep,  for  like  the  bat  and  the
astronomer  she  could  see  better  in  the  dark.  She
had  a sharp  pruning- hook  on  a very  long  pole,
with  which  she  silently  pruned  every  tree  and
shrub  in  the  garden,  even  the  highest  branches,
cutting  off  the  dead  twigs  and  shaking  down  the
yellow  leaves  in  showers  ; and  often,  mxittering
surly  words  to  herself  which  were  not  intelligible,
she  would  cut  off  some  flower  or  some  bud  as


52  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

well,  so  that  when  the  child  awoke  he  missed
them  and  could  not  imagine  what  had  become
of  them.  Now  the  child  in  his  play  gave  names
to  everything  that  he  liked  or  disliked  ; and  the
rose  he  called  Beauty,  and  the  jasmin  Pleasure,
and  the  hyacinth  Sweetness,  and  the  violet  Sad-
ness, and  the  thistle  Pain,  and  the  olive  Merit,
and  the  laurel  Triumph,  and  the  vine  Inspiration.
He  was  highly  pleased  with  all  these  names,  and
they  made  those  flowers  and  plants  so  much  more
interesting  to  him,  that  he  thought  those  names
were  their  souls.  But  one  day,  having  pricked
himself  with  the  thorns  of  a rose,  he  changed  her
name  to  Love  ; and  this  caused  him  to  wonder
why  he  had  given  those  particular  names  to  every-
thing rather  than  quite  different  names  ; and  the
child  began  to  feel  older.  As  he  sat  brooding
on  this  question,  for  he  had  stopped  playing,  a
man  in  a black  gown  came  into  the  garden  who
was  a botanist,  and  said  : “It  matters  little  what
names  you  give  to  flowers  because  they  already
have  scientific  names  which  indicate  their  true
genera  and  species  ; the  rose  is  only  a rose,  and
is  neither  Beauty  nor  Love  ; and  so  with  all
the  other  flowers.  They  are  flowers  and  plants
merely,  and  they  have  no  souls.”  Hearing  this
the  child  began  to  cry,  very  much  to  the  botanist’s
annoyance,  for  being  a busy  man  he  disliked
emotion.  “ After  all,”  he  added,  “ those  names
of  yours  will  do  no  harm,  and  you  may  go  on
using  them  if  you  please  ; for  they  are  prettier
than  those  which  truly  describe  the  flowers,  and


NORMAL  MADNESS


53


much  shorter  ; and  if  the  word  soul  is  particularly
precious  to  you,  you  may  even  say  that  plants
and  flowers  have  souls  : only,  if  you  wish  to  be
a man  and  not  always  a child,  you  must  under-
stand that  the  soul  of  each  flower  is  only  a name
for  its  way  of  life,  indicating  how  it  spreads  its
petals  in  the  morning  and  perhaps  closes  them
at  night,  as  you  do  your  eyes.  You  must  never
suppose,  because  the  flower  has  a soul,  that  this
soul  does  anything  but  what  you  find  the  flower
actually  doing.”  But  the  child  was  not  com-
forted, and  when  the  wind  had  dried  his  tears,
he  answered  : “ If  I cannot  give  beautiful  names
to  the  plants  and  flowers  which  shall  be  really
their  souls,  and  if  I cannot  tell  myself  true  tales
about  them,  I will  not  play  in  the  garden  any
more.  You  may  have  it  all  to  yourself  and
botanize  in  it,  but  I hate  you.”  And  the  child
went  to  sleep  that  night  quite  flushed  and  angry.
Then,  as  silently  as  the  creeping  moonlight,  the
old  woman  came  out  of  her  cave  and  went  directly
to  the  place  where  the  child  was  sleeping,  and
with  a great  stroke  of  her  pruning-knife  cut  off
his  head  ; and  she  took  him  into  her  cave  and
buried  him  under  the  leaves  which  had  fallen  on
that  same  night,  which  were  many.  When  the
botanist  returned  in  the  morning  and  found  the
child  gone  he  was  much  perplexed.  “ To  whom,”
said  he  to  himself,  “ shall  I now  teach  botany  ?
There  is  nobody  now  to  care  for  flowers,  for  I
am  only  a professor,  and  if  I can’t  teach  any-
body the  right  names  for  flowers,  of  what  use  are


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


54

flowers  to  me  ? ” This  thought  oppressed  the
poor  man  so  much  that  he  entirely  collapsed,  and
as  he  was  rather  wizened  to  begin  with,  he  was
soon  reduced  to  a few  stiff  tendons  and  bones,
like  the  ribs  of  a dry  leaf ; and  even  these  shreds
soon  crumbled,  and  he  evaporated  altogether.
Only  his  black  gown  remained  to  delight  the  rag-
picker. But  the  goddess  in  guise  of  that  old
woman  went  on  pruning  the  garden,  and  it
seemed  to  make  no  difference  in  her  habits  that
the  child  and  the  botanist  were  dead.

I think  we  may  surmise  that  the  true  name  of
this  goddess  must  have  been  Dike,  the  same  that
the  wise  Democritus  was  calling  Punishment ;
and  the  botanist’s  name  must  have  been  Nomos,
whom  he  was  calling  Agreement  ; and  of  course
the  child  Autologos  was  that  innocent  illusion
which  was  the  theme  of  his  whole  discourse.

Aristippus.  If  this  be  the  nature  of  madness,
I propose  that  we  immediately  raise  an  altar  to
that  deity,  and  worship  him  hereafter  as  the  only
beneficent  god  ; and  in  order  to  avoid  the  protests
of  the  vulgar,  who  think  madness  an  evil,  we  will
disguise  our  deity  under  the  name  of  Autologos,
borrowed  from  the  Stranger’s  tale  ; and  we  will
not  identify  him  with  the  Furies  or  Harpies,  but
with  Pan,  Apollo,  Orpheus,  and  Dionysus.

Dionysius.  Agreed:  and  since  my  name  is
derived  from  that  of  Dionysus,  who  must  have
been  my  ancestor,  I proclaim  myself  high  priest
of  the  new  temple.

Democritus.  You  pay  my  speech  a great  tribute.


NORMAL  MADNESS


55

I have  celebrated  the  mad  god  so  fitly  that  I have
filled  his  votaries  with  a new  frenzy  of  worship.

Alcibiades.  Aristippus  and  Dionysius  are  enemies
of  science,  and  you,  Democritus,  are  a believer  in
it.  Being  no  judge  in  the  matter,  I will  not  pro-
nounce between  you,  but  I can  conceive  that
a man  who  has  spent  his  whole  long  life  dis-
tilling herbs  and  grinding  stones  into  powder
should  believe  that  he  knows  something  of  their
substance.  Nevertheless,  intense  study,  too,  is
hypnotic,  and  might  not  the  lucid  theory  of  nature
which  you  think  partly  awakens  you  out  of  the
dream  of  life,  be  but  a dream  within  a dream  and
the  deepest  of  your  illusions  ? My  whole  career
seems  a myth  to  me  now  in  memory  ; yet  when
I interpret  it  in  terms  of  your  philosophy  and
imagine  instead  nothing  but  clouds  of  atoms  drift-
ing through  a black  sky,  I seem  to  be  descending
into  an  even  deeper  cavern  of  reverie.  Suppose
I was  dreaming  of  a chariot-race,  hearing  the
shouting  crowds,  blushing  to  be  myself  the  victor,
and  reining  in  my  quivering  steeds  to  receive  the
crown,  and  suppose  that  suddenly  my  dream  was
transformed,  and  Olympia  and  the  sunshine  and
myself  and  my  horses  and  my  joy  and  the  praises
of  the  Athenians  turned  to  atoms  fatally  com-
bined— I am  afraid  that,  like  the  child  in  the
Stranger’s  tale,  I should  burst  into  tears  at  that
change  of  dreams.

Democritus.  Do  you  think  I should  blame
you  ? Is  the  sublimity  of  truth  impatient  of
error  ? I know  well  the  shock  that  comes  to


56  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

innocence  on  discovering  that  the  beautiful  is
unsubstantial.  The  soul,  too,  has  her  virginity
and  must  bleed  a little  before  bearing  fruit.  You
misconceive  my  philosophy  if  you  suppose  that  I
deny  the  beautiful  or  would  madly  forbid  it  to
appear.  Has  not  my  whole  discourse  been  an
apology  for  illusion  and  a proof  of  its  necessity  ?
When  I discover  that  the  substance  of  the  beautiful
is  a certain  rhythm  and  harmony  in  motion,  as  the
atoms  dance  in  circles  through  the  void  (and  what
else  should  the  substance  of  the  beautiful  be  if  it
has  a substance  at  all  ?)  far  from  destroying  the
beautiful  in  the  realm  of  appearance  my  cliscovery
rais^  its  presence  there  to  a double  dignity  ; for
its  witchery,  being  a magic  birth,  is  witchery
indeed ; and  in  it  its  parent  nature,  whose  joy  it
is,  proves  her  fertility.  I deny  nothing.  Your
Olympian  victory  and  your  trembling  steeds,
spattered  with  foam,  and  your  strong  lithe  hand
detaining  them  before  the  altar  of  Apollo,  while
you  receive  the  crown — how  should  science  delete
these  verses  from  the  book  of  experience  or  prove
that  they  were  never  sung  ? But  where  is  their
music  now  ? What  was  it  when  passing  ? A
waking  dream.  Yes,  and  grief  also  is  a dream,
which  if  it  leaves  a trace  leaves  not  one  of  its  own
quality,  but  a transmuted  and  serene  image  of
sorrow  in  this  realm  of  memory  and  truth.  As
the  grief  of  Priam  in  Homer  and  the  grief  of
Achilles,  springing  from  the  dreadful  madness  of
love  and  pride  in  their  two  bosoms,  united  in  the
divine  ecstasy  of  the  poet,  so  all  the  joys  and  griefs


NORMAL  MADNESS  57

of  illusion  unite  and  become  a strange  ecstasy  in
a sane  mind.  What  would  you  ask  of  philosophy  ?
To  feed  you  on  sweets  and  lull  you  in  your  errors
in  the  hope  that  death  may  overtake  you  before
you  understand  anything  ? Ah,  wisdom  is  sharper
than  death  and  only  the  brave  can  love  her.  When
in  the  thick  of  passion  the  veil  suddenly  falls,  it
leaves  us  bereft  of  all  we  thought  ours,  smitten
and  consecrated  to  an  unearthly  revelation,  walk-
ing dead  among  the  living,  not  knowing  what  we
seem  to  know,  not  loving  what  we  seem  to  love,
but  already  translated  into  an  invisible  paradise
where  none  of  these  things  arc,  but  one  only
companion,  smiling  and  silent,  who  by  day  and
night  stands  beside  us  and  shakes  his  head  gently,
bidding  us  say  Nay,  nay,  to  all  our  madness.  Did
you  think,  because  I would  not  spare  you,  that  I
never  felt  the  cold  steel  ? Has  not  my  own  heart
been  pierced  ? Shed  your  tears,  my  son,  shed
your  tears.  The  young  man  who  has  not  wept  is
a savage,  and  the  old  man  who  will  not  laugh  is
a fool.


IV


AUTOLOGOS

Alcibiades.  Receive  us  with  honour,  noble  De-
mocritus, for  we  are  heralds  of  a god.  The  divine
Autologos,  patron  of  madness,  now  has  his  temple
in  our  midst,  and  is  about  to  deliver  oracles  ; but
we  are  in  doubt  whether  to  invoke  him  as  the  god
of  all  madness  or  of  sublime  madness  only  ; and
since  your  wisdom  first  disclosed  to  us  (perhaps
against  your  intention)  that  the  god  of  madness
is  the  most  human  of  deities  and  the  only  one
truly  beneficent,  we  come  to  inquire  of  you  with
what  rites  we  should  approach  him,  and  what
words  duly  pronounced  will  render  him  propitious.

Democritus.  If  you  have  your  god,  inquire  of
him,  and  let  him  prescribe  his  own  mummeries.
For  the  cult  of  health  I might  give  you  some
precepts,  but  who  can  foretell  the  whims  of
delirium  ?

Dionysius.  Ah,  you  have  not  divined  the  simple
profimdity  of  our  new  religion.  We  have  a
shrine,  small,  rustic,  and  mysterious  ; it  is  but  a
great  urn  which  we  have  erected  upside  down  in
a rocky  grotto,  over  a huge  cleft  stone  ; and
through  this  cleft  each  of  us  in  turn  will  creep

58


AUTOLOGOS


59

and,  crouching  within  the  hollow  vessel  like  a
child  in  the  womb,  will  whisper  to  himself  his  own
oracles.  For  the  great  Autologos  is  no  mannikin
of  wood  or  stone,  the  object  of  a degraded  idolatry  ;
he  is  the  speaking  Spirit  in  all  of  us,  whenever  it
speaks  ; and  the  reverberating  urn  will  give  back
our  words  with  an  impressive  echo  and  an  in-
crement of  meaning,  which  will  be  the  divine
revelation  of  ourselves  to  our  own  thoughts.

Democritus.  Excellent.  You  come  to  ask  me
what  words  to  utter  in  your  automatic  capacity,
so  that  when  they  are  sublimated  by  the  rumble
of  a concave  stone,  you  may  revere  them  as  your
own  inspiration  !

Aristippus.  Being  without  prejudice,  we  en-
large our  pleasures  in  every  quarter  and  from  any
source  ; and  if  your  words  should  please  us  we
will  gladly  repeat  them,  as  we  do  the  verses  of
Homer,  without  taking  the  useless  trouble  of
composing  others  that  might  not  flow  so  har-
moniously or  ring  so  true.

Alcibiades.  Yes,  venerable  Sage,  we  beg  you  to
compose  the  liturgy  of  our  god  Autologos,

Democritus.  The  task  is  new  for  a philosopher.
In  my  time  I have  been  asked  to  devise  laws  for
the  state,  and  precepts  for  shipbuilding,  mining,
and  weaving,  and  many  a new  instrument  have  1
contrived  in  these  and  in  other  crafts  ; and  I have
mixed  herbs  for  purging  many  diseases,  and
established  a holy  regimen  for  the  cure  of  rage  :
but  now  I am  bidden  to  institute  a cult  of  madness
and  babble  some  litany  fit  for  a foolish  god.  So


6o  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

be  it : there  is  leisure  for  everything  in  eternity.
But  I warn  you  that  my  invocations  may  be  so
potent  that  the  god  himself  may  be  transformed
and  spirited  away  ; so  that  when  you  crawl  down
from  your  mystic  tripod  you  may  find  yourselves
sane.

Dionysius.  Sweet  madness  will  not  be  driven
from  me  by  any  incantation,

Aristippus.  If  health  be  as  pleasant  as  disease
I will  allow  you  to  heal  me.

Alcibiades.  We  sometimes  beseech  a god  to
spare  us,  sometimes  to  descend  and  fill  us  with
his  spirit ; and  since  there  seems  to  be  a cruel
and  a kindly  madness,  your  rites  should  ward  off
the  one  and  attract  the  other.

Democritus.  Truly  there  is  a madness  that  men
dread  and  another  that  they  love,  for  to  dance,
laugh,  love,  and  sing  is  a happy  madness,  but  to
sit  mumbling  and  whining  with  one’s  face  to  the
wall,  or  to  rage  with  a drawn  sword  calling  oneself
Medea  is,  according  to  human  opinion,  a dreadful
fate.  Since  I am  employed  for  the  moment  in
honouring  your  god,  I will  feign  to  bow  to  this
convention : as  when  I framed  laws  or  admin-
istered medicine  I allowed  myself  to  serve  ^
human  prejudice,  although  my  heart  knew  well
that  according  to  nature  health  was  not  better
than  disease,  nor  a city  than  a desert.  Your  first
invocation  of  Autologos  must  accordingly  be  an
acceptance  of  his  gift,  which  is  illusion.  But  if
your  worship  is  to  be  pleasing  to  him  and  ulti-
mately healthful  to  yourselves  you  must  not  grudge


AUTOLOGOS


6i


him,  as  common  votaries  do,  his  kingly  freedom
in  bestowing  his  favours  ; you  must  not  prescribe
the  particular  madness  which  he  shall  infuse  into
you.  If  you  are  oppressed  like  Orestes  by  some
fancied  guilt,  or  by  some  irrational  love  or  in-
veterate sorrow,  prepare  your  hearts  to  renounce
it  and  to  put  it  away,  not  of  course  in  exchange
for  sanity  and  knowledge  of  the  truth — ^these  are
not  gifts  for  Autologos  to  give — but  in  exchange
for  a different  madness  : make  ready  to  welcome
the  inspiration  of  the  god  if  he  should  suddenly
turn  your  remorse  to  complacency,  your  love  to
sneers,  your  sorrow  to  the  hunter’s  joy.  This
deity  is  the  impartial  patron  of  every  error,  and
those  who  devoutly  approach  his  shrine  must  be
eager  to  cultivate  them  all  in  turn,  and  to  be  mad
daily  in  some  new  and  wonderful  manner.  Such
a surrender  of  any  pet  folly,  such  an  openness  to
folly  of  every  kind,  is  essential  to  the  neophyte  :
let  it  be  the  first  and  preliminary  purification  of
your  souls  in  approaching  these  mysteries.  For
lack  of  such  initiation  much  anguish  has  been
prolonged  in  the  world  without  necessity.  The
jesters  and  the  dull-witted,  the  dwarfs  and  the
giants,  the  deaf-mutes  and  the  blind  have  all
insulted  one  another,  and  felt  uneasy  and  guilty
in  their  own  hearts.  What  a blessing  if  they  had
known  that  they  were  all  equally  the  children  of
Autologos,  and  not  one  of  them  saner  or  more
perfect  than  the  other  ! If  the  dwarfs  or  the  deaf-
mutes  were  left  to  breed  by  themselves,  far  from
impertinent  censors,  they  would  think  they  had  a


62  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

civil  quota  of  wit  and  virtue,  such  as  we  thought
we  had  in  Athens  or  in  Abdera  ; and  they  would
be  as  proud  of  their  divine  beauty  as  are  chatter-
ing monkeys  or  blind  moles  or  any  other  sort  of
creature  capable  of  forming  habits  and  expecta-
tions. All  living  souls  welcome  whatsoever  they
are  ready  to  cope  with ; all  else  they  ignore,  or
pronounce  to  be  monstrous  and  wrong,  or  deny
to  be  possible.  So  the  mother  of  the  first  tailless
child — for  men  formerly  had  tails — ^wept  bitterly
and  consulted  the  soothsayers,  elders  conspicuous
for  their  long  and  honourable  tails,  who  gave  out
oracles  from  the  hollow  of  ancient  trees  ; and  she
asked  what  unwitting  impiety  she  or  her  husband
could  have  committed,  that  the  just  gods  should
condemn  their  innocent  child  to  such  eternal
disgrace.  When,  however,  other  tailless  births
began  to  occur,  at  first  the  legislators  had  the  little
monsters  put  rigorously  to  death  ; but  soon,  as
the  parents  began  to  offer  resistance,  they  suffered
a scapegoat  to  be  sacrificed  instead  ; and  persons
without  a tail  were  merely  condemned  to  pass
their  lives  in  slavery,  or  at  least  without  the  rights
of  citizenship ; because  the  philosophers,  who  all
belonged  to  the  elder  generation  with  ample  tails,
declared  that  without  a tail  no  man  was  really
human  or  could  be  admitted  after  death  into  the
company  of  the  gods.  Yet  later,  when  that  hinder
ornament  had  become  rare,  opinion  was  reversed,
until  the  priests,  legislators,  and  sages  gathered  in
council  and  decreed,  by  a majority  vote,  that  a
tail  in  man  was  unnatural,  and  that  the  tradition


AUTOLOGOS


63

that  such  things  had  existed  was  an  invention  of
ignorant  poets,  and  absurd.  When,  however,  by
a casual  reversion,  and  sport  of  nature,  a child  with
a tail  was  born  here  and  there,  not  only  was  the
infant  instantly  despatched,  but  the  mother  was
burned  alive  for  having  had  commerce  with  a devil.

Thus  among  those  who  know  not  Autologos
the  greatest  odium  attaches  to  being  as  the  vulgar
are  not,  or  to  lacking  some  usual  organ  or  instinct,
however  useless  ; and  the  exceptions  are  reduced
to  lead  a pitiable  existence,  not  so  much  by  any
actual  defect  in  their  constitution  as  by  the  con-
tempt and  cruelty  of  the  majority,  always  a tribe
of  intolerant  coxcombs.

Nor  will  it  suffice,  in  the  pure  and  acceptable
worship  of  Autologos,  to  dismiss  all  passionate
and  exclusive  attachment  to  any  one  form  of
madness  ; you  should  not  suffer  the  remnants  of
one  dream  to  survive  and  confuse  the  next,  but
allow  deep  sleep  to  intervene  between  vision  and
vision.  Though  three  tragedies  and  one  comedy
be  played  in  one  day  in  the  same  theatre,  the
stage  is  thoroughly  cleared  in  the  intervals,  and
the  masks  and  straggling  chorus  of  one  are
not  allowed  to  disfigure  the  other,  disturbing  its
harmony  and  dishonouring  their  own  function  ;
for  the  elements  of  illusion  become  ghastly  when
the  rush  and  glamour  of  action  no  longer  vivifies
them.  Cleanse  the  cup  perfectly,  therefore,  before
each  libation,  that  every  draught  may  be  pure,
the  illusion  unqualified,  and  the  peace  after  it
profound.


64  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

Remember  also  that  you  are  votaries  of  mad-
ness and  not  mad  unwittingly.  It  was  a disgrace
to  the  barbarians,  and  sometimes  to  the  Bacchic
orgies  which  Phrygia  had  lent  us,  that  diseased
and  unseemly  madmen  mingled  there  with  those
who  were  mad  only  devotionally  and  in  the  spirit
of  the  festival.  The  actor  must  not  fall  from  the
stage  or  rant  out  of  metre  ; he  must  not  linger
beyond  his  time  or  lengthen  his  speeches.  The
very  plasticity  of  his  art,  which  makes  him  ready
to  be  now  a man,  now  a woman,  now  a clown,
and  now  a prophet,  requires  a substance  in  its
Protean  changes,  so  that  each  part  may  be  learned
and  recited  faithfully,  in  due  order  and  on  the
right  occasions.  The  divers  inspirations  of  the
god  would  not  be  received  worthily  unless  the
soul  was  stable  in  her  docility  and  invincibly
herself,  even  as  the  winds  would  raise  no  storm
and  never  manifest  their  vehemence  if  the  water
of  the  sea  which  they  drive  violently  heavenward
had  not  its  inalienable  weight  and  did  not  fall
back  with  an  equal  violence,  perpetually  returning
to  its  ancient  level.  Remember,  accordingly,  in
all  your  slashing  madness  that  this  is  madness
which  you  enact : bend  to  the  inspiration  of  the
god,  and  wait  for  it  to  pass.  The  void  is  no  less
real  than  the  atoms,  and  larger  : it  does  not  resist
them,  and  while  by  their  sport  they  diversify  it,
it  does  not  change.  So  let  your  ship  have  an
anchor  laid  deep  in  nothingness  : on  that  anchor
you  may  ride  any  storm  without  too  much
anxiety.  In  your  loves  be  devoted,  not  agonized


AUTOLOGOS


65

or  frenzied.  The  consciousness  of  vanity  is  a
great  disinfectant  : it  fills  religion,  as  it  fills  life,
with  fortitude,  dignity,  and  kindness.

Let  the  liturgy  of  Autologos  therefore  be  as
follows,  and  whenever  you  enter  your  sacred  urn,
chant  to  yourselves  these  words  :

Wor} , O work  within  nie,  divine  Autologos,  the
miracle  of  madness,  that  what  exists  not  in  nature
may  arise  in  thought.

From  the  abyss  of  nothingness  draw  what  dream
thou  wilt.

May  it  he  a pure  dream,  perfect  and  entire.  Why
should  one  nothing  devour  another  nothing  in  fear
and  hate  ?

Suffer  each  day’s  sun  to  set  in  peace : slowly,
after  the  pause  of  night,  another  will  rise  to  lighten
the  morrow.

As  all  suns  pass  before  the  face  of  darkness,  and
hide  it  awhile  with  their  splendour,  so  on  many-
coloured  wings  thought  flies  through  the  silence,  but
the  silence  endures.

Blessed  be  thy  coming.  Autologos,  and  more
blessed  thy  going.

Dionysius.  Our  best  thanks,  excellent  hiero-
phant. The  archaic  flavour  of  our  liturgy  and  its
metaphysical  depth  are  all  we  could  desire  ; and
I believe  we  may  account  it  veritably  an  ancient
mystery,  which  after  being  disused  for  ages,  has
been  restored  by  your  inspiration  ; so  that  we
may  celebrate  at  once  the  antiquity  of  our  ritual
and  our  originality  in  re-establishing  it  to-day.

Alcibiades  {after  glancing  at  Aristippus).  We

F


66  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

also  thank  you,  and  are  charmed  more  than  ever
with  the  new  worship  we  are  adopting.  Now
without  delay  we  will  return  to  the  fane  and
begin  to  rehearse  our  festival.  {He  places  one
hand  on  the  shoulder  of  Aristippus  and  the  other
on  that  of  Dionysius,  and  the  three  glide  away
obliquely,  first  to  the  right  and  then  to  the  left,  in
a measured  dance.)

Democritus.  You,  silent  Stranger,  do  not  follow
the  others  on  their  festive  errand,  and  have  not
to-day  opened  your  lips.  Perhaps  you  are  offended
at  our  enlightened  religion.

The  Stranger.  Not  offended,  but  helpless  and
envious,  like  a boy  admiring  from  afar  the  feats
of  an  athlete  or  the  gleaming  armour  of  soldiers
on  the  march.  It  is  rash  to  intrude  upon  the
piety  of  others  : both  the  depth  and  the  grace  of
it  elude  the  stranger.

Democritus.  Religion  is  indeed  a convention
which  a man  must  be  bred  in  to  endure  with
any  patience ; and  yet  religion,  for  all  its  poetic
motley,  comes  closer  than  work-a-day  opinion  to
the  heart  of  things.  In  invoking  the  aid  of  the
gods  and  in  attributing  all  things  to  their  pro-
vidence and  power,  each  of  us  shatters  his  greatest
illusion  and  heals  his  most  radical  madness.
What  madness,  you  will  ask,  and  what  illusion  ?
This  : that  his  thoughts  produce  one  another  or
produce  his  actions  : the  very  illusion  of  Auto-
logos. These  young  fops,  dancing  away  to  their
mock  mysteries,  are  ingenious  sophists  and  pleasant
companions,  but  they  are  utterly  without  religion  ;


AUTOLOGOS


67

and  if  your  heart  held  you  back  as  if  from  sacrilege
from  following  in  their  train,  it  did  not  deceive
you.  Autologos  is  the  one  perfect  atheist : he
is  persuaded  that  he  rules  and  creates  him-
self. What  madness  ! And  yet  how  irresistible
is  the  voice  of  sensation,  and  will,  and  thought,  at
every  moment  of  animate  existence  ! The  open-
mouthed  rabble  shouting  in  the  agora  suppose
that  nothing  controls  them  but  their  pert  feelings
and  imaginations,  by  miracle  unanimous  ; and
even  the  demagogue  who  is  pulling  the  strings
of  their  ignorance  and  cupidity  fancies  that  he  is
freely  ruling  the  world,  and  forgets  the  cupidity
and  ignorance  in  his  own  soul  which  have  put
those  empty  catch- words  into  his  bawling  mouth.
Miserable  puppets  ! the  most  visionary  of  mystics
is  wise  in  comparison.  He  knows  how  invisibly
fly  the  shafts  of  Apollo  : let  but  the  lightest  of
them  cut  the  knot  of  the  heart,  and  suddenly
there  is  an  end  of  eloquence  and  policy  and
mighty  determination.  He  knows  that  it  suffices
for  the  wind  to  change  and  all  the  fleets  of  thought
will  forget  their  errand  and  sail  for  another  haven.
Religion  in  its  humility  restores  man  to  his  only
dignity,  the  courage  to  live  by  grace.  Admonished
by  religion,  he  gives  thanks,  acknowledging  his
utter  dependence  on  the  unseen,  in  the  past  and
in  the  present ; and  he  prays,  acknowledging  his
utter  dependence  on  the  unseen  for  the  future.
He  sees  that  the  issue  of  nothing  is  in  his  hands,
seeing  that  he  knows  not  whether  at  the  next
moment  he  will  still  be  alive  ; nor  what  ambushed


68  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

powers  will  traverse  his  path,  or  subtly  undo  the
strength  and  the  loves  in  his  own  bosom.  But
looking  up  at  the  broad  heaven,  at  returning  day
and  the  revolving  year,  he  humbly  trusts  the
mute  promises  of  the  gods,  and  because  of  the
favour  they  may  have  shown  him,  he  may  trust
even  himself.  For  what  is  the  truth  of  the
matter  ? That  the  atoms  in  their  fatal  courses
bring  all  things  about  by  necessity,  and  that  men’s
thoughts  and  efforts  and  tears  are  but  signs  and
omens  of  the  march  of  fate,  prophetic  here,  and
there  deceptive,  but  always  vain  and  impotent  in
themselves,  never  therefore  wise  save  in  con-
fessing their  own  weakness,  and  in  little  things
as  in  great,  in  their  own  motions  as  in  those  of
heaven,  saluting  and  honouring  the  gods.

The  Stranger.  But  can  the  atoms  be  called
gods  ?

Democritus.  As  the  sun  is  called  Phoebus  and
the  sea  Poseidon,  and  the  heart’s  warmth  Love,
and  as  this  bundle  of  atoms  is  called  Democritus.
The  name  is  a name,  and  the  image  imaginary,
yet  the  truth  of  it  is  true.

The  Stranger.  But  in  this  bundle  of  atoms
called  Democritus  Autologos  just  now  was  speak-
ing, and  thought  in  you  was  alive  ; and  the  poets
feign  Autologos  to  be  speaking  also  in  the  sun
and  in  the  sea.  Does  living  illusion  then  haunt
all  the  atoms  in  their  flight,  and  is  the  whole
universe  the  body  of  Autologos  ?

Democritus.  Fancy  can  conceive  only  a kindred
fancy,  such  as  might  spring  from  organs  similar


AUTOLOGOS


69

to  its  own  ; but  if  life  is  lavish  in  illusion  here,
why  not  also  there  ? A prudent  man  will  not
blaspheme  against  any  god.

The  Stranger.  Then  Autologos  is  truly  a great,
a boundless,  an  irrepressible  spirit  ?

Democritus.  He  is  indeed,  else  even  in  jest  I
should  not  have  sung  his  praises.


V


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION

Democritus.  What  means  this  rout  ? Why  this
rush  and  clamour  in  eternity  ? Have  you  been
celebrating  the  rites  of  your  new  god  of  madness,
that  you  come  breathless,  dragging  the  unhappy
Stranger  as  if  he  were  a prisoner  of  war  ? And
why  these  ridiculous  crowns  of  thistle  and  burrs,
as  if  you  had  turned  a funeral  into  an  orgy  ?

Alcibiades.  We  should  have  preferred  laurel
and  roses,  but  we  took  what  we  found.

Dionysius.  We  had  long  since  taken  counsel,
venerable  Sage,  how  to  destroy  your  philosophy.
We  come  to  refute,  as  we  utterly  disown,  your
preference  for  truth  over  illusion.  We  have
restrained  ourselves  with  difficulty  until  to-day  ;
but  we  know  that  you,  now  being  immortal,
cannot  change  your  mind  even  if  thrice  refuted  ;
and  we  had  decided  to  wait  until  the  Stranger
should  reappear,  for  the  wretch  is  your  disciple,
and  a witness  to  our  former  disputes  ; but  being
alive,  he  can  be  compelled  to  recant,  and  we  are
determined  that  his  conversion  shall  mark  your
defeat  and  our  triumph.  Therefore  we  no  sooner
spied  the  rash  mortal  than  we  seized  him  as  a

70


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  71

hostage,  and  we  mean  to  hold  him  down  until
he  has  made  amends  for  you  both  ; and  the  sooner
he  forswears  your  errors,  the  sooner  he  shall  be
suffered  to  depart.

Democritus.  If  you  use  force,  you  will  not  seem
confident  of  exercising  persuasion,  and  will  never
know  whether  you  have  done  so.  Leave  the
poor  Stranger  in  peace  ; he  is  pestered  enough,
I fancy,  in  his  own  world.  And  let  me  at  once
hear  your  refutation,  and  if  your  tumult  subsides
you  may  be  able  to  hear  my  answer,  even  if  not
to  understand  it.

Alcibiades.  Tremble,  discredited  Sage ; we
bring  against  you  not  one  refutation  but  three,
because  while  united  in  attacking  you,  we  have
by  no  means  agreed  to  defend  one  another.  Nor
will  our  three  spears  pierce  the  same  point  in
your  shield  ; for  my  shaft  will  transfix  your
allegation  that  reason  is  a form  of  madness,
whereas  Dionysius  will  destroy  your  assertion
that  science  is  better  than  illusion,  and  Aristippus
will  abolish  the  difference  which  you  have  made
between  them  in  respect  to  truth  and  will  prove
that  at  most  they  differ  only  in  duration  and
pleasantness.

Democritus.  At  least  you  are  pleasant  assailants,
who  exhibit  your  wooden  weapons  before  the
fight,  so  that  my  panoplied  philosophy  need  not
fear  the  slightest  wound.  Come  on,  then,  young
braggarts,  and  let  me  endure  your  first  assault.

Dionysius.  I deliver  it,  and  under  good  auspices:
for  I come  as  priest  of  Autologos,  our  new  divinity.


72


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


to  whom  in  scorn  of  ancient  superstition,  we  have
vowed  perpetual  worship  ; and  I speak  also  in
the  name  of  the  divine  Plato,  master  of  mystics,
initiates,  and  madmen,  and  of  all  who  in  derision
of  cold  reports,  science,  or  calculation,  behold
the  absolute  truth  face  to  face  in  an  inward  vision.
Madness,  I declare  in  my  name  and  in  theirs,  is
a divine  gift.  Prophets,  poets,  and  priests,  who
are  notoriously  mad,  are  nevertheless  held  in  the
highest  esteem  by  all  well-ordered  nations  ; and
any  rebellion  against  their  dogmas  in  the  name  of
reason  is  well  known  to  be  ill-bred,  pert,  super-
ficial, and  destructive  of  morality  and  of  the
state.  A touch  of  madness,  even  in  the  dullest
of  us,  is  a saving  grace,  and  it  is  well  that  in  feasts,
mysteries,  and  tragedies  we  should  enact  the
various  cries  and  obsessions  of  madmen  as  vividly
as  possible,  and  as  religiously,  in  order  to  relax
a little  the  punctilious  sanity,  or  rather  the  weary
and  mean  artificialities,  which  the  vulgar  world
imposes  upon  us.  Far  above  your  science,  O
wise  and  mad  Democritus,  I prize  the  mystic
vision  of  those  souls  who,  inverting  the  cup  of
reason,  pour  their  spirits  out  in  a rapturous
libation  to  my  ancestor  Dionysus,  and  go  to
rejoin  the  deep  soul  of  the  earth.  You  possess,
no  doubt,  much  curious  knowledge  of  herbs,  and
atoms,  and  the  disgusting  inner  organs  of  the
body — knowledge  of  no  importance  to  monarchs
or  to  liberal  minds  ; but  in  the  higher  things  of
the  spirit  you  are  not  versed.  The  value  of  mad-
ness is  not  such  as  you  attribute  to  the  normal


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  73

illusions  of  sense  or  opinion,  which  Punishment
and  Agreement  bring  into  a blind  and  external
harmony  with  nature.  On  the  contrary,  such
madness  is  almost  sane,  and  quite  uninspired  ;
but  divine  madness  wafts  the  soul  away  altogether
from  the  sad  circumstances  of  earth,  and  bids  it
live  like  a young  god  only  among  its  own  chosen
creations.  Had  we  not  licence  to  be  mad,  we
should  not  be  our  own  masters,  but  the  ignoble
product  of  other  things  ; and  to  be  mad  is  simply,
in  spite  of  gods  and  men,  to  be  indomitably  free.

In  one  respect,  Democritus,  I admit  that  you
separate  yourself  from  the  vulgar  and  denounce
their  prejudice,  for  you  deny  that  illusion  is  an
evil  in  itself  since  nothing,  according  to  you,  is
good  or  evil  in  the  eye  of  nature.  But  you  soon
seem  to  forget  your  own  precept,  and  talk  as  if  to
discover  things  actual  and  material,  which  you
say  are  clouds  of  dust  whirling  in  the  air,  were
better  than  to  dwell  on  things  dreamt  and  in-
vented : an  opinion  that  I should  have  expected
to  hear  only  from  some  man  of  no  cultivation.
Of  course,  I am  not  deceived  by  your  gruff  airs,
and  pretended  scorn  of  human  illusions  : when
was  there  a human  illusion  more  admirably  un-
substantial than  your  philosophy  ? In  the  art
with  which  you  sustain  your  fancy  at  that  pre-
carious height,  I recognize  your  scientific  genius.
Your  condemnation  of  other  species  of  madness
is  but  a part  of  your  playful  imposture,  and  far
from  offending  me,  makes  me  your  friend ;
because  illusion  would  lose  half  its  charm  if  there


74


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


were  not  variety  in  it.  So  in  you,  Aristippus,  I
prize  the  affectation  of  simplicity.  The  genuine
simplicity  of  the  boor  would  be  insufferably
tedious  ; but  in  you  it  is  the  pose  of  a subtle  wit,
and  exquisite  in  its  unreality.  No  less  charming
was  the  express  rusticity  of  my  Sicilian  Theocritus,
the  artifice  of  an  accomplished  man,  to  whom
the  rough  comedy  of  country  manners  is  a remote
memory  or  satirical  jest;  although  I do  not  say
that  here  and  there  his  own  tears  or  enchantments
may  not  have  pulsed  in  these  rustic  measures.
Fancy  is  not  a falsification  of  nature,  because
nothing  in  nature  is  worth  noting,  or  even  possible
to  note,  save  for  the  fancy  which  overlays  it.  I
have  known  many  a masquerade  in  my  time,
royal  splendour,  love,  friendship,  philosophy,
treachery,  and  exile  ; but  in  all  I have  loved  only
the  image,  so  that  here,  where  images  are  all,  I
enjoy  my  life  again  more  truly  than  when  I was
distractedly  undergoing  it  in  that  other  un-
mannerly world.  Each  phase  of  experience  has
left  me  a theme  for  reflection,  each  tiresome  farce
some  song  pleasant  to  remember.  Had  I had,
among  my  royal  and  other  cares,  leisure  for  the
poet’s  art,  I might  have  composed  an  epic  out  of
my  life  while  I was  still  living  it,  and  entirely
eclipsed  Homer  and  his  Odyssey.  For  I should
have  described  not  material  monsters  or  obvious
charmers,  like  Calypso  and  Nausicaa,  but  the
subtle  mixture  of  light  and  shadow,  of  force  and
impotence  in  my  own  soul.  I should  have  set
forth  the  first  virgin  glow  and  all  the  false  after-


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION


75


fustian  of  patriotism,  of  prophecy,  and  of  science.
I should  have  shown  that  there  is  nothing  worth
having  in  kingship  but  what  a penniless  dreamer
may  enjoy  in  conceiving  it,  and  that  the  illusion
in  love,  in  wisdom,  and  in  enthusiasm  is  the  true
and  only  virtue  in  them.  To  have  a clean  and
scentless  intellect,  my  noble  Democritus,  that
should  merely  report  things  as  they  are,  would
be  almost  like  not  existing ; so  clear  and  trans-
parent a medium  would  hardly  be  a soul.  Happily
mine  was  like  a grain  of  incense  that,  thrown  by
some  deity  into  the  embers  of  a mortal  body,
rose  in  a voluminous  and  sweet-smelling  cloud  :
and  the  god  that  let  my  spirit  fall  from  heaven
unawares,  as  he  scattered  the  seeds  of  a myriad
other  lives,  now  breathes  it  in  again  with  voluptu-
ous surprise  ; for  he  perceives  that  it  was  a part
of  his  own  substance,  having  the  divine  gift  of
creation.

You  observe  that  my  onslaught,  O Sage  of
Abdera,  has  not  been  malicious.  In  showing  the
falseness  of  your  doctrine  I have  not  denied  its
magnificence : on  the  contrary,  its  very  falseness
makes  all  its  charm  in  my  eyes,  and  I have  no
murderous  intent  in  my  refutation.  Only  a child
drives  a sword  through  a painted  monster.  I
have  ever  loved  philosophers,  overlooking  and
pardoning  the  foolish  doctrines  which  they  chose
to  profess,  since  necessity  and  custom  compelled
them  to  profess  something.  All  philosophers,  if
they  were  eloquent  and  original,  were  equally
welcome  at  my  court ; and  now  that  I have


76  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

become  in  turn  a courtier  of  Pluto,  I rejoice  that
he  has  added  you,  with  your  mocking  wisdom,  to
the  famous  circle  of  my  intimates.

Democritus  {who  has  drawn  his  cloak  over  his
head).  Tell  me,  Alcibiades,  has  Dionysius  finished
his  bawdy  speech  ?

Alcibiades.  So  it  seems.  Why  do  you  cover
your  face  ?

Democritus.  The  incense  of  this  sacrifice  may
be  sweet  to  your  god  Autologos,  but  it  sticks  in
my  throat.

Alcibiades.  I am  sure  he  has  finished.  He  is
adjusting  his  mantle.

Democritus.  Then  I may  lift  my  head.  Glorious
monarch  happily  dethroned,  I have  listened  to
your  words  with  averted  face,  for  fear  of  being
blinded  by  their  splendour  ; my  thin  unpoetical
soul  could  not  have  interposed  a veil  thick  enough
to  obscure  them.  I am  well  aware  that  the  truth
is  not  pleasant  to  everybody.  Children  are  natural
mythologists  : they  beg  to  be  told  tales,  and  love
not  only  to  invent  but  to  enact  falsehoods.  Young
and  old  agree  in  finding  it  irksome  to  see  things
as  they  are  ; even  in  husbandry  and  brutal  war
(in  which  facts  have  to  be  faced)  they  play  and
lie  to  themselves  as  much  as  they  dare  ; and  they
turn  from  their  work  at  the  first  opportunity  to
pursue  their  true  good  in  gaming,  drinking,  kiss-
ing, singing,  witnessing  endless  tragedies  and
comedies,  and  shouting  for  revolution  in  the
public  assembly  ; for  they  are  men  of  imagination.
So  were  you  ; and  I should  be  far  from  hinting


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  77

that  you  ought  to  have  been  otherwise,  if  I did
not  remember  that  you  were  a monarch.  Your
philosophy  would  be  perfect,  if  instead  of  being
a king  you  had  been  a cabbage.  The  cabbage
cannot  move  ; it  therefore  matters  nothing  if  its
soul  ignores  the  motions  and  positions  of  outer
things,  or  fails  to  distinguish  them  according  to
their  natures  ; it  is  enough  that,  fostered  by
ambient  influences  which  it  cannot  modify,  its
soul  should  circulate  inwardly  and  flower  as  it  will.
But  a cabbage  cannot  give  direction  to  others  ; it
makes  a poor  king.  So,  Dionysius,  did  you,  for
circumstances  escaped  you.  Ah,  if  you  had  only
been  born  a cabbage,  how  entirely  your  atten-
tion might  have  been  devoted  to  that  more  than
Homeric  epic  about  yourself  ! There  is  no  diffi-
culty in  dreaming  ; the  heart  of  nature  is  full  of
dreams  ; and  I daresay  there  is  a poet  in  every
nut  and  in  every  berry.  But  the  soul  of  animals
must  be  watchful ; they  cannot  live  on  mere  hope,
fortitude,  and  endurance  ; they  must  hasten  to
meet  perils  and  opportunities,  and  dreams  are
fatal  to  them  when,  action  being  necessary,  true
perception  is  indispensable.  Thus  a creature
endowed  with  locomotion  lies  under  a mighty
compulsion  to  discover  the  truth.  Hence  I and
the  Stranger,  who  have  both  been  observant
travellers,  have  discovered  so  much  more  of  it
than  you.  When  a flea,  enticed  from  a distance
by  the  wafted  warmth  and  fragrance  of  your  body,
jumps  from  a beggar’s  rags  and  lodges  snugly  in
some  fold  of  your  royal  flesh,  it  is  a wise  flea,


78  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

not  only  according  to  Socrates  and  Aristippus,  in
that  it  prefers  the  better  to  the  worse,  but  also
according  to  me,  in  that  it  has  a keen  scent  and
true  knowledge  of  nature.  But  when  presently
sated  and  swollen  with  your  rich  blood,  this  same
flea  begins  to  have  poetic  visions,  such  as  your
philosophy  approves,  and  dreams  he  is  a god  in  a
red  heaven,  then  from  this  ecstatic  flea  wisdom
jumps  back  to  you  ; for  you  awake  at  the  prick  of
its  snout  from  your  epic  slumber  and  begin  search-
ing for  that  flea  with  all  a poor  man’s  sagacity,  until
you  catch  it,  torpid  as  it  has  become,  and  crush  it
between  your  two  thumb-nails.  If  you  envy  that
sated  flea  or  that  poetic  cabbage,  their  fate  will  not
be  denied  you  ; but  I,  being  in  the  alert  state  of
a waking  animal,  prefer  knowing  and  jumping.

Dionysius.  Democritus  is  pleased  to  rail,  like
the  Cynics  of  old  in  my  palace,  to  whom  I never
denied  an  alms  for  having  perhaps  abused  me  ;
and  he  reminds  me  of  what  I always  said  in  those
days,  that  you  philosophers  agree  in  nothing
except  in  taking  yourselves  too  seriously.  The
graceful  Plato,  at  his  best,  is  an  exception  ; and
therefore  I follow  him.

Alcibiades.  Let  us  admit  that  pleasure  in
illusion  is  perilous  and  brief.  But  is  not  mortal
life  in  any  case  brief  and  perilous,  especially  when
it  is  boldly  lived  ? Here  in  eternity  all  durations
of  existence  become  equal,  but  all  its  qualities
remain  unlike.  Now  we  see  clearly  that  true
happiness  is  once  to  have  touched  perfection,  and
not  to  have  jogged  on  for  ever  in  mediocrity.


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION


79

Aristippus.  Courage,  Alcibiades.  If  Demo-
critus attacks  you  for  that  noble  sally,  rely  on  me.

Dionysius.  I too  will  sustain  you.

Alcibiades.  Like  a hero  in  Homer  I defy  you
with  taunts,  O anatomist  of  nature.  I am  in-
vincible. A dethroned  monarch  and  a reprobate
moralist  support  me  on  either  hand.

Aristippus.  Why  reprobate  ? Because  I meas-
ure goods  by  their  goodness  and  not  by  their
origin  ? What,  I pray,  lends  dignity  to  one
source  of  pleasure  rather  than  to  another,  save  that
pleasure  flows  from  it  more  pure  and  abundant  ?
If  a drug  can  stir  up  my  brain  or  my  kidney,  and
out  of  particles  caught  up  from  those  worthy
substances  can  create  lovely  forms  and  curious
motions  which  I trace  in  a dream,  why  is  that
worse  than  if  nature  had  caught  up  atoms  from
the  slime  of  the  earth  or  from  the  air  and  outside
my  body  had  composed  flowers  or  animals  that
I could  gaze  upon  and  love  ? Both  beauties  are
delightful  and  both  are  transitory,  and  to  have
pleasure  in  both,  while  they  last,  is  the  part  of
wisdom.

Democritus.  Wisdom,  if  you  had  it,  would
enable  you  to  discern  what  lies  in  your  fancy  from
what  lies  in  the  outer  world.

Aristippus.  Vain  discernment,  since  the  better
and  the  worse  are  not  concerned  in  it.  You  pro-
fess, I know,  to  ignore  moral  distinctions  and  to
describe  reality  without  fondness  or  displeasure ;
but  in  fact  you  are  full  of  scorn  for  the  dreamer,
even  if  he  is  willing  to  admit  frankly  that  he  merely


8o  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

dreams.  You  are  secretly  convinced  that  to  per-
ceive facts  is  a blessed  privilege,  and  to  create
imaginary  beauties  a disgraceful  self-delusion.
You  would,  I think,  express  your  moral  judge-
ments better  if  you  acknowledged  them  to  be
vapours  of  your  private  soul,  and  not  implications
of  your  alleged  science.  It  is  perfectly  indifferent
to  me  whether  what  gives  me  pleasure  is  a solid
body  or  an  airy  illusion.  Whichever  object  is  the
more  delightful  seems  to  me  the  better,  and  I no
more  care  whether  it  exists  within  or  without  my
skull,  than  I ask  whether  the  zephyr  that  refreshes
me  blows  from  the  east  or  the  west.

Alcibiades.  Sailors  and  augurs,  Aristippus,  are
alive  only  to  that ; their  skin  is  hardy  and  their
eye  sharp,  and  they  are  not  without  joy  in  their
keen  perceptions.  There’s  no  fancy  like  a fact.

Aristippus.  I admit  that  material  objects  usually
produce  a more  violent  pleasure  than  imaginary
ones  ; whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the  worst  plagues
and  torments  are  fantastic,  turning  as  they  do  on
fear,  shame,  and  love,  all  three  of  which  are  un-
necessary. Why  let  present  pleasure  be  spoilt  by
such  spectres  of  fancy  } Your  poet  is  by  nature
a melancholy  booby  and  a ridiculous  weakling;
whereas  your  jolly  huntsman  and  wine-bibber,
your  lusty  rogue,  and  your  laughing  homely
philosopher  are  brave  and  cheery  souls.  On  that
ground  I might  share  the  preference  of  Demo-
critus for  external  perception  and,  as  he  calls  it,
an  elastic  intellect ; but  I prize  the  rough  breezes
of  nature  only  because  they  blow  health  and


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  8i

pleasure  upon  me  ; while  he  seems  somehow  to
think  that  not  to  be  deceived  is  an  absolute  good.

Dionysius.  Democritus  is  too  wise  to  take  up
such  a position.  He  does  not  assert  that  illusion
is  an  evil — for  nothing,  according  to  him,  is  evil
in  nature — but  only  that  illusion  is  not  true  know-
ledge : and  so  much  should  be  granted  him  on  all
hands.  Whether  true  knowledge  is  beautiful  or
whether  illusion  is  beautiful  remains  in  any  case
a matter  of  opinion  ; and  if  our  loves  differ,  every
man  is  free  to  lead  his  own  bride  home.

Alcibiades.  As  for  me,  if  ever  I was  wedded  to
Illusion,  I hereby  repudiate  and  divorce  her  ; and
though  people  may  call  me  a traitor,  I renounce
all  alliance  with  Aristippus  and  Dionysius  and
pass  over  to  the  camp  of  the  valiant  Democritus.
Illusion  may  be  truly  pleasing  while  we  think  it
true  ; but  to  cling  to  it  knowing  it  to  be  illusion
is  ignominious  and  wellnigh  impossible.  A dream
exists  by  playing  upon  some  disposition  of  the
soul  which  would  have  been  better  satisfied  in
action,  because,  as  Democritus  says,  man  is  an
animal  addressed  to  action  and  adventure  ; he
will  never  be  content  to  cheat  his  instincts  with
images  unless  he  is  a cripple  or  a coward.  If  you
prefer  illusions  to  realities,  it  is  only  because  all
decent  realities  have  eluded  you  and  left  you  in
the  lurch  ; or  else  your  contempt  for  the  world  is
mere  hypocrisy  and  funk,  as  when  a boy  says  that
swimming  is  unworthy  of  a man  and  fit  only  for
fishes,  because  he  is  afraid  of  the  cold  water.  Not
that  there  is  anything  effeminate  in  fine  fancies

G


82  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

when  they  come  honestly.  I like  a youngster  who
falls  in  love  or  who  makes  verses  because  he  can’t
help  it — the  thing  has  happened  to  me  more  than
once— but  if  he  cultivates  and  fondles  his  emotions
on  purpose,  he  is  a coxcomb.  You  two  dis-
reputable sluggards  have  never  willingly  moved
except  from  the  bed-chamber  to  the  baths  and
from  the  baths  to  the  banquet-hall,  and  to  relieve
the  tedium  and  stuffiness  of  your  existence  you
have  summoned  the  poets  or  your  own  sickly
philosophy  to  flatter  you  in  your  sloth.  But
imagination,  even  that  of  Homer,  is  pale  and
sterile  compared  with  the  lightnings  of  fortune.
How  should  it  be  otherwise  when  fancy  is  itself
but  a cryptic  part  of  nature  ? It  flickers  in  the
dark,  like  a lamp  in  the  inmost  chamber  of  an
Egyptian  temple  ; whereas  under  the  sun  stretch
all  the  zones  and  all  the  nations,  filled  with  an
undreamt-of  variety  of  goods  and  evils,  beauties
and  absurdities.  All  these  an  intrepid  philo-
sopher might  scour  and  pillage,  if  he  did  not  shut
himself  up,  as  most  philosophers  do,  within  the
walls  of  his  native  city,  to  a petty  legal  life  and
trite  disputations.  My  own  life,  I allow,  was  but
ill-conducted  ; it  passed  among  storms  and  ended
in  shipwreck  ; yet  I account  it  better  than  dream-
ing or  beating  time  to  the  syllables  of  some  verse.
I would  rather  be  the  soldier  I was,  even  with  my
mottled  fortunes,  than  imagine  myself  a meta-
physical hero,  like  Dionysius  in  the  epic  which
he  never  composed.  The  fruit  of  my  experience
is  that  I despise  rhetoricians  and  demagogues  and


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  83

moralizers  and  comedians,  and  respect  rather  the
rough  arts  and  passions  of  mariners  and  soldiers,
the  patience  of  ploughmen,  and  the  shrewdness  of
merchants  or  of  the  masters  in  any  craft ; all
people  acquainted  with  danger  and  hardship  and
knowing  something  well,  though  it  be  a small
matter,  and  each  striking  out  bravely,  like  an
honest  blind  creature,  to  have  his  will  in  the  world.

Aristippus.  I congratulate  Democritus  on  this
accession  to  his  strength.  Alcibiades  is  a moralist
who  cannot  divide  good  from  evil.

Democritus.  That  is  a division  which  all  men
are  constrained  to  make,  whether  they  be  called
moralists  or  not.  All  nature  falls  for  every  living
creature  into  two  strands,  the  friendly  and  the
hostile,  the  beloved  and  the  detested.  There  is
not  a young  glutton  or  an  old  woman  but  has  a
moral  philosophy,  Aristippus,  as  genuine  as  yours.
The  question  is  only  by  how  noble  a nature  the
division  is  made,  and  with  how  much  knowledge
of  the  world  ; and  all  your  effrontery  will  not
persuade  you,  or  any  one  else,  that  you  know  the
world  better  than  Alcibiades,  or  have  a nobler
nature.

Aristippus.  He  is  taller  and  I am  fatter  : but
I have  yet  to  learn  that  on  that  account  he  is  the
better  man.  His  length  came  to  him  without  his
doing  ; my  breadth  is  the  fruit  of  wisdom.

Democritus.  Now  that  by  this  conspicuous  de-
fection your  cohort  is  dispersed  and  your  attack
upon  me  turned  to  derision,  it  remains  only  to
discover  whether  you  have  persuaded  the  Stranger ;


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


84

and  as  numbers  are  now  equal  in  our  two  camps,
the  intimidation  which  you  would  have  practised
upon  him  is  also  rendered  abortive.  He  may
speak  his  mind  without  fear  of  ill-usage.

The  Stranger.  Nothing  I have  heard  to-day
has  shaken  in  the  least  my  old  allegiance  and
much  has  confirmed  it.  Nevertheless,  I am  not
without  a certain  sympathy  with  Dionysius  and
Aristippus  when  they  extoll  the  pleasures  of  the
simple  mind  and  cling  passionately  to  immediate
experience.  After  all  I am  a child  of  my  time  ;
our  very  anarchy  has  driven  us  to  a kind  of  pro-
fundity, by  convincing  us  that  the  farther  we  travel
from  appearance  the  more  we  expose  ourselves  to
illusion.  Your  hypothesis,  Democritus,  may  be
absolutely  right ; but  what  assurance  can  you
have  of  its  truth  ? Your  scientific  imagination
draws  a picture  of  minute  geometrical  solids
swimming  in  space  : this  picture  did  not  exist
until  your  genius  composed  it ; it  is  a thing  of
yesterday  and  Abdera  gave  it  birth,  utterly  remote,
then,  in  time  and  existence  from  the  atoms,  the
motion,  and  the  void  which  may  have  formed
the  substance  of  nature  from  all  eternity.  As  the
words  substance  and  atoms  are  audible  signs  by
which  our  groping  discourse  names  and  designates
that  ancient  reality,  so  your  bright  images  of  cubes,
pyramids,  and  spheres,  and  your  dark  image  of  an
infinite  void,  are  graphic  signs  for  that  same  reality.
Doubtless  they  are  the  best  symbols  for  it  calli-
graphically— for  what  can  be  cleaner  than  the
clean  or  clearer  than  the  clear  ? — and  also,  as


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  85

experience  has  shown,  the  best  in  calculation  and
practice  ; but  still  in  their  visionary  aspect  signs
only  and  symbols,  products  of  the  human  eye  and
imagination.  If  all  this  be  admitted  as  obvious
and  as  corresponding  with  your  constant  intention
in  your  doctrine  of  atoms,  I accept  the  latter  ; and
all  the  mathematical  veils  which  my  contem-
poraries have  spun  between  crude  appearances
and  the  notion  of  atoms  only  remove  its  applica-
tion to  a deeper  level  of  nature  ; for  somehow  the
place  where  a thing  is  to  be  found  must  in  the
end  differ  substantially  from  the  surrounding
places.  But  if  you  meant  that  by  a sort  of  revela-
tion the  eternal  atoms  and  void  and  motions,
exactly  as  they  are,  have  appeared  in  your  mind’s
eye,  and  that  there  never  was  and  never  can  be
anything  in  nature  save  what  your  scientific
imagination  at  this  moment  conceives,  then  I
should  agree  with  Dionysius  that  you  are  making
idols  of  your  ideas  and  forgetting  that  reason,  as
you  yourself  maintain,  is  a form  of  madness,
checked  only  by  Punishment  and  Agreement.
Never  was  a theory  of  nature  more  chastened  than
yours  or  more  harmonious  with  the  practice  of  the
arts  ; but  can  any  thought  kindled  in  a human
brain  burn  with  a light  so  infinitely  powerful  and
pure  as  to  reveal  the  whole  universe  in  its  utter-
most reaches  and  exact  constitution  ?

Dionysius.  Stranger,  we  thank  you  : not  that
what  you  urge  is  particularly  intelligible  to  us  or
of  ultimate  consequence  ; yet  it  serves  to  remind
our  headstrong  system-builders  of  their  humanity


86  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

and  to  show  them  how  much  wiser  they  would
be  if  they  remembered  that  they  are  mad.

Democritus.  You  thank  the  Stranger  for  an
ill  service,  when  he  repeats  the  sophistry  of  his
contemporaries  who,  wallowing  in  sensation  and
having  little  understanding,  think  that  under-
standing is  a form  of  sense,  and  science  but  an
exchange  of  images.  Such  is  the  pleasant  fallacy
of  idlers  to  whom  the  plough  is  only  the  picture
of  a plough,  because  they  never  have  followed  it.
When  my  dog  smells  a rat  and  busily  digs  up  the
ground  to  dislodge  the  beast  from  its  hiding,  what
images,  think  you,  do  the  dog’s  senses,  for  all
their  keenness,  supply  to  his  mind  ? A faint  scent
only.  Yet  on  occasion  of  that  scent,  understand-
ing in  the  dog  leads  him  to  dig  and  watch,  because
a living  rat  is  there  of  which  he  has  a great  lust
but  no  imagination.  So  Leucippus  and  I,  being
keen  hounds,  have  been  warned  by  smell,  sight,
touch,  and  all  the  senses  that  there  is  a substance
at  hand  ; lying  in  wait  for  it,  we  have  traced
its  motions  and  divided  its  parts,  following  and
measuring  and  counting  all  the  transformations
of  bodies  ; and  the  atoms  we  have  unearthed  are
not  images  to  the  eye  or  syllables  sounding  in
the  ear,  but  bits  of  the  substance  for  which  we
hungered  ; and  by  our  patient  digging  we  have
caught  the  rat.  Certainly  our  true  knowledge,
since  we  were  dreaming  mortals,  was  still  con-
veyed or  accompanied  by  words  and  images,  even
as  the  dog  in  devouring  the  rat  might  receive  new
and  confused  sensations  ; but  these  our  under-


LOVERS  OF  ILLUSION  87

standing  traversed  and  overlooked,  and  far  from
imposing  the  likeness  of  any  image  on  substance,
disowned  all  images  and  saluted  the  substance  in
its  natural  seat  and  effective  motion.  No  man
has  seen  the  atoms  ; nor  do  the  forms  which,  for
excellent  reasons,  we  believe  them  to  possess  ever
appear  in  any  dream  to  the  eye  or  to  the  fancy.
How  are  the  Egyptians  assured  that  their  Pyramids
are  pyramids  ? Is  it  by  scent  or  by  touch,  or  by
sight  which  can  never  present  an5^hing  of  a
pyramid  but  some  vague  triangle  or  rhomboid  or
square  ? No  ; that  assurance  comes  to  them  by
cutting  and  counting  and  measuring  the  stones,
and  by  much  pacing  and  exploration  ; above  all
it  comes  to  them  by  building,  for  art  and  science
are  a single  gift,  called  science  inasmuch  as  art
refashions  the  mind,  and  called  art  inasmuch  as
by  science  the  world  is  refashioned.  No  doubt
the  art  of  the  Egyptians  was  madness  to  heap  up
so  many  stones  to  no  purpose  ; and  it  was  madness
in  me  and  in  Leucippus  to  sweat  after  vain  know-
ledge ; yet  that  art  of  theirs  was  true  art,  as  their
monuments  attest  by  still  standing,  and  our  know-
ledge is  true  knowledge,  and  nature  for  ever  will
give  it  proof.

As  for  you,  you  are  all  lovers  of  illusion  and
banded  against  me  in  your  hearts.  Dionysius
and  Aristippus  are  like  children  in  arms,  most
royal  in  their  impotence,  demanding  that  sub-
stance shall  bear  them  aloft  always  prosperously
by  no  contrivance  of  theirs,  while  they  live  cooing
and  crooning  between  sleep  and  wake.  Alcibiades


88  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

is  a little  man  in  comparison,  and  can  run  about
on  his  own  legs,  but  only  to  chase  the  bubbles  of
adventure  and  peril,  and  command  for  the  sake
of  commanding ; and  this  folly  let  loose  puts  him
in  marvellous  conceit  of  his  own  prowess.  As  for
the  Stranger,  having  a paler  soul,  if  he  salutes
the  atoms  from  a distance,  it  is  only  in  con-
descension to  the  exigences  of  art  or  calculation,
which  he  knows  are  not  obedient  to  magic  ; but
he  honours  reality  only  for  illusion’s  sake,  and
studies  in  nature  only  pageants  and  perspectives,
and  the  frail  enchantments  which  are  the  food  of
love.  I bid  you  immediately  liberate  him  on
your  own  terms,  as  having  recanted  and  disowned
my  philosophy,  which  will  not  tolerate  that
substance,  the  master,  should  be  received  only
that  it  may  minister  to  appearance,  the  slave.
I therefore  stand  alone  and  am  content  to  do  so.
The  universe  is  my  sufficient  companion.  Who
was  ever  more  faithful  than  that  silent  friend  ?
I will  dismiss  and  expel  every  remnant  of  illusion
even  in  myself,  in  order  that  nothing  of  me  may
remain  save  the  atoms  that  compose  me,  and  to
them  I will  transfer  all  my  fond  being,  placing
my  treasure  where  my  substance  has  ever  been  ;
so  that  dwelling  wholly  there,  when  you  who  are
all  vanity  have  perished  and  the  part  of  me  which
is  vain  has  also  dissolved,  my  glad  strength  shall
be  the  force  that  destroys  me,  and  while  the
atoms  are  I shall  be.


VI


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT
First  Dialogue

Socrates.  Whom  do  I see  approaching  with
downcast  looks  ? My  friend  the  Stranger  ? Have
you  come  to-day  to  remain  with  us  for  good,  or
is  this  but  another  brief  excursion  into  the  realm
of  sanity,  from  which  you  hope  to  return  presently
to  your  crazy  world  ?

The  Stranger.  I can  hardly  hope,  Socrates,  to
dwell  in  your  distinguished  company  after  I am
dead.  Therefore  I take  every  opportunity  to  visit
you  now  while  I may.

Socrates.  ’Tis  at  rare  intervals.  Probably  you
think  you  are  better  employed  in  the  sunlight,  or
can  see  better  in  it.  My  own  eyes  are  more  like
the  owl’s  than  like  the  eagle’s,  and  I can  see
farther  in  this  twilight  than  ever  in  the  glare  of
the  Athenian  day.  I was  always  an  ignorant  man,
depending  on  my  disciples  for  sure  first  principles
and  for  irrefragable  facts,  knowledge  of  which
they  seemed  to  possess  by  nature,  although  my
dullness,  or  some  divine  impediment,  had  pre-
vented me  from  discovering  all  those  certain
truths  when  I was  of  their  age.  That  old  blind-

89


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


90

ness  of  mine  is  now  redoubled  in  respect  to  the
living  world  ; for  whereas  liberation  from  the
body  has  opened  to  me  a large  prospect  towards
the  past  and  the  future,  it  has  cut  off  my  old
channels  of  dubious  communication  with  material
things  ; and  it  is  only  the  truth  of  them  before
they  arise  or  after  they  perish  that  lies  spread  out
before  me  for  direct  inspection.  In  their  transit
through  existence  they  are  eclipsed  in  these
heavens,  and  I can  know  them  only  by  report  of
travellers  such  as  you  from  the  antipodes.  My
information  about  your  affairs  is  accordingly  most
incomplete,  and  worst  of  all  is  brought  to  me  by
unphilosophical  messengers  ; for  only  whimsical
and  ill-bred  spirits  now  seem  to  reach  this  place.
I have  heard,  for  instance,  of  an  obscure  oracle
which  you  may  be  able  to  interpret  for  me.  The
god  must  have  delivered  it  in  some  barbarous
tongue,  and  perhaps  in  verse,  which  has  been  ill
translated  : but  the  monumental  inscription  which
my  informant  had  seen  seems  to  have  read  as
follows  :

RIGHT  GOVERNMENT

RESTS  ON  THE  WILL
OF  THE  GOVERNED

The  Stranger.  We  need  no  god  and  no  oracle
to  tell  us  that.  It  is  a commonplace,  and  the
foundation  of  all  our  politics.

Socrates.  I rejoice  to  hear  it ; for  if  the  maxim
is  always  on  your  lips,  you  will  probably  be  able
to  tell  me  what  it  means.  Does  right  govern-
ment, I pray,  mean  good  government  ? And


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


91


does  the  will  of  the  governed  mean  their  wishes
for  the  moment,  or  their  habitual  ruling  passion,
or  their  true  and  ultimate  good  ?

The  Stranger.  I am  hardly  able,  Socrates,  to
answer  all  these  questions  at  once  ; and  even  if
you  put  them  to  me  singly,  I am  afraid  I should
not  be  ready  with  glib  replies,  unless  it  were  half
in  jest,  without  expecting  that  they  would  bear
inspection.  Nowadays  I place  less  reliance  than
ever  upon  exact  words  and  (although  you  will
rebuke  me  for  it)  I feel  that  there  is  a current  in
things  that  carries  all  our  thoughts  away  : not
only  that  oracle,  as  you  call  it,  about  right  govern-
ment, but  also  any  wiser  maxims  that  we  might
substitute  for  it.  In  my  youth  my  ears  were
deafened  by  a variety  of  shrill  cries,  Liberty,
Progress,  Science,  Culture ; but  time,  and
especially  this  last  revolution  in  our  affairs,  has
taught  me  how  little  it  mattered  what  we  thought
the  cries  meant,  since  events  in  the  long  run  will
falsify  any  policy,  and  render  obsolete  any  con-
viction ; and  the  only  significance  I can  still
attach  to  those  watchwords  is  no  definable  sig-
nificance, but  only  a vague  association  of  each  of
them  with  some  shift  in  our  manners  or  politics
or  industrial  arts.  But  why  should  I trouble  you
in  your  immortal  serenity  with  these  squabbles
and  delusions  of  living  men  ? It  was  not  to  talk
about  them  that  I came  into  your  presence,  but
rather  to  escape  from  them  into  your  surer  wisdom.

Socrates.  You  will  not  escape  them,  my  friend,
unless  you  learn  to  understand  them.  You  know


92  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

well  that  my  wisdom  lies  only  in  asking  questions.
What  you  come  to  take  refuge  in  is  not  my
philosophy,  but  yours,  which  you  think  I may
help  you  to  discover  and  to  put  into  words  ; and
if  this  occurs,  it  will  not  be  wonderful  that  you
should  approve  the  answers  to  my  questions,
since  it  is  you  who  will  give  them.  But  to-day
you  may  be  disappointed,  for  there  is  evidently
something  new  on  your  conscience,  and  you  may
not  know  your  own  mind.  Formerly,  if  I in-
quired of  you  concerning  the  affairs  of  your
provisional  world,  you  stinted  your  answers,  and
changed  the  subject ; apparently  you  hardly
followed  the  events  of  your  own  day  more  closely
than  we  can  follow  them  here  by  report,  as  if
they  were  things  long  past ; and  you  seemed  to
feel  an  indifference  (premature  on  your  part)  to
mortal  things,  and  an  early  immunity  from  care.
But  now  the  wasp  of  actuality  seems  to  have  stung
you,  and  you  bring  with  you  a heavier  scent  of
earth  and  of  new-shed  blood.  I am  not  surprised
at  your  distress.  Under  the  blue  sky  society  is
like  Zeus,  who  is  lord  over  it ; it  expresses  its  will
less  by  law-giving  than  by  nods  and  thunder-
bolts. Strange  that  in  the  light  of  day  there
should  be  so  much  blindness,  and  here  where
Pluto  in  comparative  darkness  rules  over  far  vaster
multitudes  there  should  be  never  a murmur  nor
a nunble,  but  a just  estimation  of  all  things,  and
a place  for  all.  Let  us  not  miss  the  opportunity,
then,  while  we  are  together,  I to  hear  your  tragedy,
and  you  to  ponder  its  moral.


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


93

The  Stranger.  Our  tragedy  is  an  old  one,  of
which  you  drew  the  moral  long  ago  ; it  is  the
tragedy  of  those  who  do  as  they  wish,  but  do  not
get  what  they  want.  It  is  the  tragedy  of  self-
government.

Socrates.  It  would  be  a terrible  tragedy  indeed
if  such  an  excellent  thing  as  self-government  came
to  a bad  end.  But  I cannot  credit  the  report,
because  a people  who  had  learned  self-government
would  be  a race  of  philosophers,  each  governing
himself  and  himself  only,  and  inwardly  safe  from
any  real  misfortune.  I rejoice  that  the  republic
of  the  living,  contrary  to  expectation,  should  have
become  in  my  absence  so  similar  to  this  happy
commonwealth  of  immortals,  where  no  spirit
molests  any  other,  or  needs  another’s  support.

The  Stranger.  Irony,  Socrates,  cannot  shame
the  facts,  which  have  an  irony  of  their  own.  Of
course  by  self-government  we  do  not  mean  the
government  of  self.  We  mean  that  people  col-
lectively issue  the  orders  which  they  must  obey
individually.

Socrates.  How  surprising  ! Am  I to  under-
stand that  under  self-government,  as  you  prac-
tise it,  no  man  governs  himself  in  anything,  but
that  each  is  governed  in  everything  by  all  the
others  ?

The  Stranger.  It  would  come  to  that,  if  our
system  were  perfect.

Socrates.  Then  your  democracy,  which  I sup-
pose intends  to  express  the  autonomy  of  the  indi-
vidual, in  effect  entirely  abolishes  that  autonomy  ?


94  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

The  Stranger.  Yes,  but  without  violence.  There
is  an  unwritten  and  plastic  law  in  the  modern
world  which  we  call  fashion  ; and  the  more
thoroughly  we  conform  to  it  the  freer  and  the
finer  we  think  ourselves.  Fashion  without  magis-
trates rules  by  the  will  of  the  governed  : it  is
pleasant  to  go  where  everybody  goes,  to  think
what  everybody  thinks,  and  to  dance  as  every-
body dances.  In  fashion  I might  find  an  answer
to  that  nestful  of  questions  which  you  were  putting
just  now  : for  the  will  of  the  governed,  by  which
fashion  rules,  on  the  surface  is  a passing  caprice  ;
but  this  caprice  is  grafted  upon  an  habitual  passion,
namely,  on  a rooted  instinct  to  lead,  to  follow,  or
somehow  to  lose  oneself  in  a common  enjoyment
of  life  with  one’s  fellow-men,  especially  those  of
one’s  age  and  class  ; and  finally  this  ruling  passion
leads  to  the  ultimate  good,  as  the  followers  of
fashion  conceive  it ; for  they  think  the  ultimate
good  is  life  itself,  in  its  pervasive  immediacy,
made  as  intense  and  vigorous  as  possible  by
continual  novelty  and  emulation,  not  for  the  sake
of  any  prize  or  result,  but  just  for  the  running’s
sake.  Thus  fashion  governs  us  with  our  hearty
consent,  not  only  in  our  manners  and  appoint-
ments, but  in  our  religion  and  science,  and  above
all  in  our  politics.  There  is  nothing  that  recom-
mends any  opinion  or  custom  to  us  more  than
to  hear  that  it  is  the  latest  thing,  that  everybody
is  adopting  it,  and  that  it  is  universal  nowadays
in  the  leading  circles.  Even  our  philosophers
have  their  ear  to  the  ground,  and  tell  us  with


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


95

unction  how  the  world  is  marching.  Their  con-
science would  reproach  them,  and  they  would
wish  to  hang  themselves,  if  they  were  not  on  the
winning  side.  The  event,  they  say,  is  always  the
judgement  of  God.

Socrates.  Long  ago  Heraclitus  said  so  ; but
the  sentence  which  divine  justice  passes  on  each
new  birth  is  severe  ; it  is  always  death.

The  Stranger.  Yes,  but  a natural  death,  followed
by  some  natural  resurrection.  Why  be  afraid  of
revolution  ?

Socrates.  Why  indeed,  if  you  mean  the  revolu-
tion of  the  heavens  or  of  the  seasons  or  the  descent
of  each  generation  in  its  turn  to  the  grave  ? That
which  I fear — ^no  longer  for  myself  but  for  you —
is  that  you  should  not  govern  yourselves  well
while  you  live,  and  should  thereby  condemn
yourselves  here  to  an  eternal  bitterness.  Are  all
fashions  equally  good  ? Are  all  transitions  equally
happy  ? Are  youth  and  age,  in  their  appointed
round,  always  beautiful  and  perfect } Have  you
learned  how  to  live  ? Do  you  know  how  to
die  ? If  you  neglected  these  questions  your  self-
government  would  not  be  an  art,  but  a blind
experiment.  Art,  which  is  action  guided  by
knowledge,  is  the  principle  of  benefit,  and  without
art  the  freer  a man  is  the  more  miserable  he  must
become.

The  Stranger.  Government  among  us  is  cer-
tainly not  an  art,  but  a fatality.  In  so  far  as
it  is  not  a matter  of  mere  tradition  and  routine,
it  results  from  contrary  purposes  and  parties


96  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

pulling  against  each  other  in  a tug-of-war,  for
the  sake  of  office  or  of  some  immediate  reform
or  relief.  Whether  the  effects  of  government  are
beneficent  in  the  end  nobody  can  tell,  because
nobody  can  foresee  the  infinite  radiations  of  those
effects  in  the  future  ; nor  even  in  the  present
have  we  any  clear  or  authoritative  notion  of  the
uses  of  government,  or  any  criterion  by  which
to  measure  the  various  goods  that  various  people
might  regard  as  ultimate,  such  as  health,  friend-
ship, knowledge,  laughter,  or  heaven.  And  so
far  is  government  among  us  from  regarding  any
ultimate  good,  that  many  are  inclined  to  look
in  other  directions  for  true  guidance  in  their
allegiances,  and  for  the  means  to  happiness  ; and
they  regard  politics  with  aversion,  and  politicians
with  contempt,  thinking  that  government,  at  best,
is  a nuisance.

Socrates.  And  is  that,  pray,  your  own  opinion  ?

The  Stranger.  I will  not  venture  to  make  it
mine  before  you  have  examined  it.  I remember
the  fate  of  all  those  innocents  who  have  fallen  into
your  hands  and  have  had  to  eat  their  own  words.

Socrates.  Very  well ; let  me  ask  you  this  other
question  instead  : if  government  is  not  an  art,
how  can  you  or  your  friends  ever  determine  what
measures  to  approve  or  what  magistrates  to  raise
to  office  ?

The  Stranger.  Nothing  easier.  We  support
such  as  express  our  ideas  or  share  our  desires.

Socrates.  And  your  ideas  and  desires  are  formed
on  what  principle  ?


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


97

The  Stranger.  On  none,  of  course.  They  come
to  us  gaily,  like  song  to  the  lark.  If  we  had  to
find  a reason  for  liking  what  we  like,  we  should
never  be  able  to  like  anything.

Socrates.  Your  politics  is  a matter  of  taste  ?

The  Stranger.  Certainly  ; but  taste  is  some-
times modified  by  indigestion.

Socrates.  I see  : you  simply  obey  your  whim
or  inclination,  until  perhaps  you  sicken  and  are
in  danger  of  death.  Your  rulers  are  physicians
summoned  in  your  extremity : you  have  no
trainers  in  your  youth.  We  Greeks  held  our
trainers  and  legislators  in  greater  honour  than  our
physicians  : for  no  doctor  could  save  us  from
death,  but  a trainer  might  render  us  fit  for  an
Olympian  victory.  Perhaps  your  doctors  promise
to  make  you  immortal ; which  I should  not  think
a benefit  if  you  were  never  to  be  well.  Art  cannot
be  improvised  under  pressure.  The  man  with  a
hole  in  his  shoe  is  not  forthwith  a cobbler  ; much
less  does  a landsman  become  a pilot  whenever
he  is  seasick.  Imagine  yourself  (who  I suspect
are  no  sailor)  appointed  to  command  a trireme
in  a storm  or  in  a fog  or  in  the  thick  of  the  battle
of  Salamis,  not  knowing  the  draught  of  your
vessel,  or  the  position  of  the  rocks,  or  the  tactics
of  the  enemy,  or  even  the  words  of  command  or
with  which  hand  to  steer,  but  asking  yourself
what  death  to  expect,  while  all  hands  waited  on
you  for  direction  ; and  I think  your  anxiety  and
suspense  in  such  a nightmare,  and  the  confusion
and  agony  with  which  you  would  implore  every

H


98  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

god,  or  the  most  hximble  fellow-creature,  to
relieve  you  of  that  task,  though  the  fate  of  only
one  trireme  was  at  stake,  would  be  as  nothing  to
the  anguish  which  must  assail  the  heart  of  an
ignorant  man  voting  in  a moment  of  danger  upon
the  government  of  his  country.

The  Stranger.  No  ignorant  man  among  us,
where  the  leaders  are  often  ignorant,  feels  the
least  compunction  in  such  a case,  but  only  irrita-
tion and  ill-will  towards  every  other  land-lubber
who,  in  equal  ignorance,  insists  on  giving  different
orders ; and  each  attributes  the  general  con-
fusion to  the  fact  that  his  own  voice  was  not
heeded  in  time.  Nevertheless  we  exist ; and  life
among  us  is  in  many  ways  safer,  freer,  more
comfortable,  and  more  entertaining  than  it  was
in  your  model  cities,  with  their  divine  founders
and  law-givers.  There  is  an  automatism  in
nature,  Socrates,  more  fruitful  than  reason.
Human  beings,  in  all  their  dynamic  relations,  are
bodies,  although  when  they  talk  to  themselves
they  may  think  they  are  minds.  All  their  vital
organs  are  unconscious  and  hereditary,  and  by
instinct  and  imitation,  without  understanding,
they  learn  to  eat,  to  breed,  to  talk,  and  to  govern.
Every  sturdy  race  stews  its  home-made  dishes,
to  which  its  stomach  is  hardened  and  which  it
fondly  relishes  as  incomparably  the  best.  Few
cooks  anywhere  are  inventive  — a fact  which
saves  many  lives  ; and  our  traditional  govern-
ment, like  our  home  religion,  though  there  is
no  science  in  it,  is  not  too  poisonous.  The


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


99

sun  rises  in  spite  of  it,  and  our  children  have
red  cheeks.

Socrates.  The  wild  beasts,  too,  thrive  on  that
principle.  Nature  has  supplied  them  with  all
sorts  of  curious  and  complicated  organs  which
mature  in  their  season  and  insist  on  performing
their  unintended  functions.  Your  institutions
seem  to  be  organs  of  that  sort,  for  in  following
fashion  or  in  trying  private  experiments  you
apparently  obey  some  spontaneous  instinct,  or
some  balance  of  secret  forces,  and  leave  the  issue
to  fortune.  But  the  privilege  of  human  reason,
where  reason  exists,  is  to  turn  us  into  philo-
sophers by  teaching  us  to  survey  our  destiny  and
to  institute,  within  its  bounds,  the  pursuit  of
perfection.

The  Stranger.  Perhaps  the  spirit  in  us,  like
that  of  some  half-tamed  beast,  is  not  quite  recon-
ciled with  its  humanity.  We  prefer  not  to  know
our  destiny  and  not  to  have  any  perfection  set
before  us  which  we  are  not  free  to  elude.  Beneath
what  may  seem  to  you  our  blind  expedients  in
government — that  we  count  heads  as  if  we  paid
out  money  by  weight,  without  asking  whether  it
was  gold  or  silver — I think  there  is  a profound
instinct  of  freedom.  Society  itself  is  an  accident
to  the  spirit,  and  if  society  in  any  of  its  forms
is  to  be  justified  morally  it  must  be  justified  at
the  bar  of  the  individual  conscience.  In  putting
everything  to  a vote  we  are  not  so  much  supposing
that  the  majority  must  be  right  as  we  are  acknow-
ledging, even  at  the  risk  of  material  disaster,  the


100


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


indefeasible  right  of  each  soul  to  determine  its
allegiances.

Socrates.  Eloquence,  by  venting  the  feelings,
sometimes  clears  the  mind.  Would  you  now
be  able,  I wonder,  to  answer  a simple  question
which  I asked  you  at  the  beginning  ? Does  right
government  mean  good  government .?

The  Stranger.  No  : I see  now  that  there  is  a
difference.  Legitimacy  in  a government  depends
on  the  origin  of  its  authority  : excellence  depends
on  its  fruits.

Socrates.  Then  right  government,  resting,  as
your  oracle  has  it,  on  the  will  of  the  governed,
may  be  bad  government  ?

The  Stranger.  Of  course ; nothing  is  commoner,
especially  when  passions  run  high  and  nations  or
individuals  attempt  the  impossible.

Socrates.  You  mean,  for  instance,  that  if  an
assembly  with  a great  shout  voted  that  every  citizen
should  receive  a large  dole  from  the  public  treasury,
that  measure  would  accurately  express  their  living
desires,  and  the  free  choice  of  every  bosom  ; yet
it  might  bring  no  good,  if  at  that  moment  the
treasury  was  empty.

The  Stranger.  Evidently ; but  in  that  case  at
least  the  illusion  would  be  short-lived.  The
bubbles  we  pursue  in  love  or  ambition  often  take
longer  to  burst.

Socrates.  And  would  you  say  that  these  bubbles,
even  when  they  lead  you  so  long  astray,  are  the
right  principles  of  action,  and  that  you  ought  to
follow  them  ?


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


lOI


The  Stranger.  I am  at  a loss  how  to  reply.  If
I say  no,  I condemn  all  life ; if  I say  yes,  I sanction
every  folly.

Socrates.  Life,  my  good  friend,  is  hard  for  you
to  understand  because  you  are  still  living.  Here
we  understand  it.  Not  every  passion  pursues  a
bubble  ; not  every  treasury  is  empty.  But  living
impulse,  borne  as  it  needs  must  be  on  its  own
wings,  cannot  distinguish  ; it  cannot  foresee  the
end,  so  as  to  push  on  where  success  is  promised,
and  halt  in  time  where  it  is  denied.  Experience
arrives  too  late  for  each  of  us,  and  the  young,
though  more  or  less  fortunate  in  disposition,  are
never  born  any  wiser.  But  by  instruction  experi-
ence may  be  transmitted  ; a father  may  train  his
son  ; the  gods  too  are  merciful  and  send  down
precepts  and  inspirations  ; and  the  legislator,  if
we  live  in  a civilized  state,  has  instituted  games
and  festivals  and  exercises  by  which  youth  can  be
moulded  and  turned  towards  such  ambitions  as
may  be  satisfied  with  innocence.  Life  to  this
extent  becomes  an  art  and  wisdom  a tradition.
The  living  cannot  live  well  unless  the  dead  govern
them.  Ah,  if  the  Athenians,  after  dismissing  me
from  their  midst  in  a manner  which,  whether  a
benefit  to  them  or  not,  was  certainly  a great
advantage  to  me,  had  wisely  decided  to  dis-
enfranchise themselves  in  a body  and,  at  every
election,  to  ask  the  Shade  of  Socrates  alone  to
decide  and  had  counted  only  my  single  vote,
Athens,  I say,  would  still  be  standing,  more
beautiful  in  her  simplicity  than  Pericles  ever  made


102


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


her  with  his  brand  new  marbles,  and  richer  in  true
poets  and  true  philosophers  than  she  ever  was  in
sophists  and  comedians.  But  the  living,  twitter-
ing on  the  green  bough,  despise  the  wisdom  of
the  dead  which  might  insinuate  something  im-
mortal into  them  and  keep  them  from  wholly
dying.

The  Stranger.  Immortality,  Socrates,  although
people  often  declaim  about  it,  is  a thing  for  which
the  truly  living  do  not  care.  They  wish,  indeed,
to  go  on  living,  because  they  are  wound  up  to  go,
and  any  accident  which  threatens  to  stop  them
short  is  odious  to  them  ; but  that  all  their  habits
and  thoughts  should  lapse  successively  and  yield
to  something  new,  or  to  a timely  silence  which,
being  absolute,  will  never  be  perceived,  does  not
disturb  them  ; such,  they  know  by  instinct,  is  the
nature  of  existence.  For  this  reason  they  allow
only  living  desires  to  count  in  action,  however
frivolous  or  fatal  those  desires  may  be  ; they  wish
to  live  and  not  merely  not  to  die.  Your  Shade
in  its  wisdom,  annulling  their  wills  and  stopping
their  bawling  mouths,  would  have  seemed  to  them
the  most  horrible  of  ghostly  tyrants,  and  worse
than  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians  or  an
infallible  pope  ; and  you  would  have  preserved
your  austere  Athens  to  no  purpose  by  your  eternal
decrees,  because  the  living  would  have  fled  from
it  and  left  it  empty.  It  is  not  right  to  impose  old
loves  on  a young  soul  or  ancient  justice  on  a new
society.  No  tyranny  is  worse  than  that  of  a
belated  or  fanatical  conscience,  oppressing  a world


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


103

it  does  not  understand  in  the  name  of  another
world  which  is  non-existent.

Socrates.  How  often  have  I heard  speeches  like
that  from  the  clever  men  who  filled  the  living
Athens — or,  since  living  and  dying  seem  to  be
identical — ^the  dying  Athens  of  my  day  ! A small
question,  however,  troubled  me  in  the  midst  of
your  eloquence.  Imagine,  as  a mere  hypothesis,
that  the  Great  King  or  my  Shade  interrupted  the
orgies  or  the  star-gazing  in  which  (as  they  say)
we  are  habitually  plunged,  and  that  we  commanded
a useful  bridge  to  be  built,  or  unjust  tax-gatherers
to  be  punished,  or  temples  and  groves  to  be  re-
newed and  beautified,  or  that  by  resisting  the
desire  of  the  people  for  largesses  in  their  holiday
moods,  we  were  actually  able  to  distribute  doles
to  them  in  some  year  of  famine,  or  by  our  fore-
sight in  fostering  agriculture  had  prevented  their
distress,  would  all  these  acts  of  ours  have  been
wrong  and  tyrannical  because  done  on  our  own
initiative,  and  not  at  the  people’s  bidding  ?

The  Stranger.  I confess  that  practically  it  would
make  little  difference  who  exercised  the  right  of
legislation,  if  in  any  case  the  laws  and  the  spirit
of  the  government  were  to  be  the  same  ; but
experience  has  taught  us  that  the  Great  King  and
the  assembled  people  would  not  pass  the  same
laws  or  govern  in  the  same  interests.

Socrates.  Your  prejudice  against  the  Great
King  or  against  my  Shade  as  perpetual  archon  is
then  not  absolute.  You  might  consent  to  be
governed  by  us  if  you  thought  us  likely  to  govern


104  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO,

well,  but  you  fear  that  our  thoughts  might  be  too
kingly  or  too  ghostly,  and  might  divert  your
energies  to  royal  or  fantastic  ends,  despising  your
homely  needs  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes,  that  is  what  we  fear.

Socrates.  In  such  measure,  however,  as  we
actually  governed  well,  would  you  not  think  us
tyrants  or  our  government  illegitimate  ?

The  Stranger.  No  doubt  in  that  case  you  would
be  accepted  without  credentials  ; in  fact,  if  your
government  was  half  decent,  people  would  soon
overflow  with  loyalty  to  you,  and  would  build
statues  or  altars  in  your  honour.

Socrates.  Then  good  government  is  always
right  government  ?

The  Stranger.  That  seems  to  follow  from  your
argument,  but  I am  not  convinced.  Compulsion
is  degrading  in  itself,  and  there  is  an  intrinsic
dignity  in  freedom.

Socrates.  Is  there  an  intrinsic  dignity  in  the
freedom  of  a blind  man  when  the  degrading
restraint  exercised  by  the  dog  or  the  child  leading
him  is  removed,  and  he  walks  over  a precipice  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes,  if  he  is  weary  of  being
blind  and  of  being  led,  and  prefers  to  commit
suicide.

Socrates.  The  dignity  which  you  attribute  to
suicide  would  disappear,  I suppose,  if  the  moment
the  man  felt  himself  falling  through  the  void,  he
repented  and  gave  a shriek  of  terror  and  despair  ?

The  Stranger.  I assume,  of  course,  that  he
knows  his  own  mind.


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


105

Socrates.  Ah,  that  is  an  important  conditi<^,
a most  important  condition.  And  there  are  other
things  that  perhaps  he  would  need  to  know,  if
the  dignity  of  his  freedom  was  to  be  preserved.
Suppose  that  at  the  very  time  of  his  suicide,
Asclepius  or  some  other  healer  of  men  was
approaching  with  a salve  which  applied  to  the
eyes  would  have  restored  them  to  sight ; in  kill-
ing himself  just  then  would  he  not  be  a victim
of  tragic  ignorance,  acting  contrary  to  his  true
desires  ?

The  Stranger.  How  can  you  expect  any  one  to
adjust  his  action  to  what  lies  beyond  his  ken  ?

Socrates.  How  indeed  ? What  freedom  can
there  be  in  the  helpless  solitude  of  ignorance  ?
What  autonomy  in  being  driven  this  way  and  that
by  wishes  without  self-knowledge  It  is  know-
ledge and  knowledge  only  that  may  rule  by  divine
right,  no  matter  who  possesses  that  knowledge
and,  possessing  it,  gives  the  word  of  command.
Without  knowledge  there  is  no  authority  in  the
will,  either  over  itself  or  over  others,  but  only
violence  and  madness.  And  this  knowledge  neces-
sary to  virtue  and  to  the  right  to  will  looks  in
two  directions,  first  into  the  soul,  to  disentangle
her  true  nature  and  discern  the  pursuits  in  which
her  innate  powers  might  be  liberated  and  de-
veloped ; and  then  again  into  the  world,  to  dis-
cover the  opportunities,  the  aids,  and  the  dangers
which  the  soul  must  count  upon  in  the  exercise
of  her  freedom.  And  with  this,  in  consequence
of  yotir  patient  explanations,  I think  I may  venture


io6  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

to  interpret  that  oracle  which  at  first  seemed  so
obscure.  If  the  god  had  spoken  in  prose,  without
wishing  to  be  oracular,  he  would  have  said  that
there  is  no  right  government  except  good  govern-
ment ; that  good  government  is  that  which  benefits
the  governed  ; that  the  good  of  the  governed  is
determined  not  by  their  topmost  wishes  or  their
ruling  passions,  but  by  their  hidden  nature  and
their  real  opportunities  ; and  that  only  knowledge,
discovering  this  hidden  nature  and  these  real
opportunities,  and  speaking  in  their  name,  has  a
right  to  rule  in  the  state  or  in  the  private  conscience.

I will  not  ask  you  to-day  whether  you  agree
with  these  conclusions,  for  I perceive  that  your
mind  is  agitated,  and  you  may  prefer  to  reserve
your  decision.  Another  day  we  will  renew  the
argument.


VII


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT
Second  Dialogue

The  Stranger.  When  I saw  again,  after  our  last
conversation,  the  blue  vault  under  which  we
mortals  think  that  we  live,  though  it  is  but  our
optical  illusion,  your  doctrine  itself  assumed  a new
perspective  in  my  memory.  In  these  unframed
spaces  every  spirit  shines  by  its  own  light : but
there  an  oblique  external  illumination  casts  every-
thing into  violent  light  and  shadow,  making  a
painted  patchwork  of  the  world,  and  hiding  the
profound  labour  going  on  patiently  beneath.
Why  should  nature  have  endowed  her  creatures
with  senses  so  strangely  caricaturing  and  fore-
shortening the  facts  ? Doubtless  because  there
is  not  time  or  strength  in  the  soul,  while  yet  alive,
to  conceive  all  things  justly,  but  only  to  catch  such
glimpses  of  them  as  may  suffice  to  lend  a name  to
her  pleasures  and  sorrows,  and  help  her  to  sketch
the  outlines  of  her  destiny.  That  which  happens
to  the  eye  in  the  presence  of  bodies,  happens  on
earth  to  the  understanding  in  the  presence  of  alien
thoughts.  These  we  must  distort,  if  wc  do  not
altogether  neglect  them  : yet  this  very  neglect  or

107


io8  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

distortion  is  a speaking  picture  of  our  condition  ;
we  are  militant  souls,  fighting  in  the  stifling
armour  of  the  body,  stunned  and  bleeding  by
many  a wound.  How  should  we  do  more  than
occasionally  spy  an  enemy,  or  whisper  to  a friend  ?
In  you,  Socrates,  I have  always  recognized  the
truest  and  greatest  of  friends,  though  you  knew
nothing  of  it ; but  the  best  physician  is  not  always
able  to  cure,  nor  the  most  merciful  deity  to  save  :
the  disease  is  rooted  in  nature.  So  on  this  occa-
sion you  had  plainly  shown  that  government  was
right  only  when  beneficent,  and  that  good  self-
government  must  rest  on  self-knowledge  ; but  it
seemed  to  me,  looking  at  things  again  in  the  violent
light  of  day,  that  in  discovering  his  own  nature  and
his  opportunities,  a man  was  himself  the  best
explorer,  and  each  nation  the  best  judge  of  its  own
case  : so  that  the  control  of  action  by  personal
impulse  or  by  popular  vote  might  be  the  wisest
after  all.  Any  external  authority  would  be  sure
to  rule  in  some  abstract  interest,  and  to  sail  by  an
obsolete  chart.  All  precepts  inspired  by  past
experience  are,  in  one  sense,  impertinent : they
assume  that  in  the  virgin  rock  of  futurity  there
are  no  veins  unworked  and  no  glint  of  anything
perhaps  more  precious  than  gold.

Socrates.  You  confirm  a story  I once  heard
concerning  the  firmament  of  your  world,  that  it
was  an  egg-shell  within  which  the  soul,  already
quickened,  was  not  yet  hatched  : her  true  life
would  begin  when  that  shell  was  shattered  and
she  found  herself  in  the  open.  That  warm  close


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


109

universe,  with  its  flashes  of  phosphorescence  which
you  call  day,  has  been  the  womb  of  all  of  us  ; let
us  preserve  a grateful  piety  towards  our  uncon-
scious parent.  You  enjoy  the  singular  privilege
of  partly  anticipating  your  birth,  by  putting  your
callow  head  now  and  then  out  of  the  shell  and
taking  a peep  at  eternity  ; but  you  do  well  to
draw  back  again  quickly,  in  order  to  go  on  growing
in  the  dreamful  safety  of  your  nest,  and  blindly
strengthening  your  eyes  and  feathers  : you  are
not  ready  yet  for  the  air.  And  this  last  embryonic
interval  of  yours  seems  to  have  been  particularly
fruitful ; you  come  back  in  a flutter  of  rich  im-
pulses and  divinations,  such  as  embryos  should
have.  But  you  know  the  laws  of  my  Republic  in
regard  to  every  new  birth,  no  matter  how  exalted
its  parentage.  It  must  be  submitted  to  the  magis-
trate for  inspection,  and  unless  found  healthy  and
perfect  it  must  be  unflinchingly  put  out  of  the  way.
It  would  not  be  merciful  to  a monster  to  allow  it
to  live,  or  merciful  to  the  commonwealth  to  suffer
monsters  to  dwell  in  it.  Let  us  then  examine  your
offspring  together  ; and  may  it  stand  the  test.

The  Stranger.  You  need  not  hesitate  on  my
account  to  condemn  it.  I feel  no  great  affection
or  even  pity  for  this  doctrine  of  democracy,  which
came  to  me  not  as  my  own  child,  nor  even  as  a
foundling  left  at  my  door,  but  as  a sort  of  figment
of  words  or  obsession  in  a dream  : and  if  you  blow
on  the  phantom  and  prove  it  a gas-baby,  you  will
leave  me  no  poorer  and  more  at  ease.

Socrates.  Let  us  inspect  it  without  prejudice.


no


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


Sometimes  the  greatest  discoveries  wear  at  first  a
disquieting  or  nebulous  form.  Did  not  people
call  me  a sophist,  and  was  it  not  out  of  sophistry
that  I plucked  the  unshakable  humility  of  my
wisdom  ? You  say,  then,  that  external  authority
is  ill  fitted  to  discern  the  good,  which  is  more
likely  to  be  revealed  by  the  voice  of  personal
impulse,  or  of  the  whole  people  casting  their  votes.
In  respect  to  impulse  you  might  point,  for  instance,
to  the  young  of  man  and  the  other  mammals,  who
instinctively  save  their  lives  by  taking  the  breast
which  the  mother,  in  a smiling  torpor,  is  happy
to  give  them  : whereas  if  a conclave  of  astrologers,
never  having  noticed  such  lowly  things,  had  been
summoned  to  devise  the  right  food  for  infants,  not
one  of  those  learned  men  would  ever  have  suggested
a method  so  strangely  elaborate  and  (as  they  would
have  said)  so  disgusting  as  being  suckled  at  the
breast ; but  if  one  of  them  was  a follower  of
Thales,  he  might  have  urged  that  water,  being  the
substance  of  all  things,  was  undoubtedly  in  its
pure  state  the  most  invigorating  and  the  safest
nourishment  for  a tender  life  ; and  another  might
have  suggested  that  a little  wine,  the  gift  of  the
infant,  Bacchus,  is  the  surest  cause  of  warmth  and
movement  in  the  system,  and  of  inspiration  in  the
mind  ; a third  might  have  argued  that,  life  being
something  divine  and  supernatural,  it  is  best  sus-
tained if  the  wine  is  mixed  with  honey,  because
then  it  is  called  nectar  and  is  the  drink  of  the  gods  ;
another  might  have  prescribed  a diet  of  fresh  grass,
saying  that  grass  is  the  stay  of  every  strong  and


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


III


blameless  animal,  such  as  the  horse  and  the  cow,
and  that  all  other  foods  are  the  mad  contrivance
of  luxury  or  of  ferocity,  and  a sure  cause  of  disease  ;
yet  another,  a logician,  might  have  proved  that
only  solids  can  enlarge  solids,  so  that  for  the  right
growth  of  a child’s  body — ^body  being  a solid  by
definition — all  liquids  were  superfluous  ; while  a
rival  member  of  the  same  school  of  thought,
admitting  that  only  like  can  produce  like,  might
have  declared  it  absurd  to  expect  that  life  should
be  sustained  upon  dead  substances,  and  would
have  commanded  all  infants  to  be  fed  on  nothing
but  gnats,  flies,  worms,  beetles,  and  caterpillars,
to  be  swallowed  alive.  Meantime,  after  all  these
sages,  and  those  who  listened  to  them,  had  died
childless,  the  vulgar  who  had  ignorantly  followed
their  instinct  would  have  preserved  mankind  from
extinction  and  repeopled  the  earth.

The  Stranger.  How  comes  it,  Socrates,  that
you  are  found  to-day  making  merry  at  the  expense
of  knowledge  ?

Socrates.  Is  it  knowledge  not  to  know  that
milk  is  for  babes  ? The  childish  instinct  to  cry
disconsolately  until  given  suck  is  a philosophical
instinct.  It  demands  something  which  is  probably
obtainable,  and  which,  when  obtained,  will  prove
pleasant  and  wholesome.  Philosophy  could  do
no  better.  Now,  may  I presume  that  the  instincts
which  you  regard  as  safe  guides  in  government  are
all  instincts  of  this  wise  kind,  playing  into  the
hands  of  nature,  finding  what  they  seek,  and
thriving  upon  it  ?


II2


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


The  Stranger.  The  natural  sanction  of  instinct
is  seldom  immediate.  What  I mean  is  only  that
an  impulse  at  least  points  to  some  satisfaction,
whether  obtainable  or  not,  so  that  every  impulse
has  an  initial  right  to  be  given  a trial,  and  every
vote  a right  to  be  counted.

Socrates.  Each  of  those  astrologers  in  council,
for  instance,  would  have  a right  to  make  trial  of
his  method,  at  least  on  his  own  children  ?

The  Stranger.  Your  example  is  grotesque,
because  everybody  knows  what  young  children
require  : but  if  the  case  were  novel,  and  experi-
ence had  not  proved  the  point  ad  nauseam,  it  would
be  right  for  every  man  to  try  the  method  which
seemed  to  him  best.

Socrates.  So  long  as  men  are  ignorant,  their
conduct,  according  to  your  principles,  is  always
right,  and  they  must  have  their  way  ? Their
folly  becomes  folly  only  when  they  discover  it  to
be  so  ; and  only  death  or  disaster  can  rightly
prevent  them  from  continuing  in  the  courses
which  up  to  that  fatal  moment  have  been  perfectly
right  ?

The  Stranger.  No  doubt  when  a man  is  dis-
appointed at  the  result  of  his  action  he  may  say
he  has  made  a mistake,  and  may  call  that  action
wrong  ; but  it  hardly  follows  that  it  was  wrong  to
have  made  the  experiment,  or  even  to  make  it
again,  if  the  circumstances  seem  more  favourable  ;
and  in  any  case  he  remains  the  judge  of  his  own
error,  and  the  corrected  course  which  he  should
steer  in  future  is  always  that  which  his  private


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT  113

instinct,  enlightened  by  his  experience,  now
prompts  him  to  choose.

Socrates.  And  meanwhile,  in  those  political
actions  which  men  can  execute  only  in  common,
how  is  the  right  course  determined  ? For  instance,
if  there  was  only  one  child,  the  king’s  son  and
heir,  to  be  nursed  by  all  those  astrologers,  how
would  you  decide  on  which  of  their  scientific  foods
the  young  prince  should  be  fed  ?

The  Stranger.  There  would  be  a ballot,  in
which  each  doctor,  after  recommending  his  own
nostrum,  would  indicate  his  second  choice  ; and
the  voting  would  be  continued  until  every  one
being  exhausted  by  fatigue  and  sleeplessness,  a
majority  was  obtained  in  despair  for  no  matter
what  compromise  ; and  on  that  expert  recipe  the
hope  of  the  nation  would  be  brought  up.

Socrates.  I am  lost  in  admiration  at  the  wisdom
of  your  procedure.  In  Hellas  we  made  trial  of
many  forms  of  government — of  all,  as  we  fondly
thought,  that  human  ingenuity  could  devise  ; but
we  underestimated  the  fertility  of  lime.  How
I regret  that  before  framing  my  ideal  Republic
I could  not  have  seen  your  system  at  work  ! For
there  are  occasions  on  which,  in  my  ignorance,
I cannot  imagine  how  you  would  apply  your
principles.  If,  for  instance,  some  monster — for
time  breeds  monsters  too — should  be  born  among
you,  and  if  one  day  Briareus  should  enter  your
assembly  and  raise  his  hundred  hands  at  once,
or  if  Hydra  should  shriek  a thousand  discordant
opinions  out  of  her  thousand  mouths,  would  he

I


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


114

or  she  count  for  one  citizen  according  to  your
laws,  or  for  a hundred  or  a thousand  ?

The  Stranger.  The  case  is  less  mythical  than
it  sounds,  and  we  actually  have  something  of  the
sort  in  our  press  and  our  political  parties  ; but
no  practical  difficulty  arises,  because  our  monsters
are  not  separate  beings,  but  are  composed  of  men
and  women  packed  closely  together  and  compelled
to  move  in  unison  ; and  each  of  these  Trojan
horses,  as  it  were,  which  fight  all  our  battles  for
us,  counts  for  as  many  votes  as  it  carries  indi-
viduals tucked  under  its  hide.

Socrates.  Ah,  yes  ; your  citizen  is  your  only
sovereign,  and  all  his  thoughts  and  motions  are
dictated  to  him  by  some  impersonal  organism,
to  which  he  is  subject  he  knows  not  why.  But
what  are  the  limits  of  your  citizenship  ? Does
good  husbandry,  according  to  your  traditions,
consider  the  interests  of  all  the  ants  in  the  ant-
hills of  your  country,  lest  your  husbandmen,
certainly  far  fewer  than  the  ants  in  number,
should  unjustly  drive  the  plough  through  those
ant-hills,  trampling  on  the  interests  and  passions
of  the  majority  ? Do  not  reply  too  hastily  ; for
on  second  thoughts  I am  confident  you  would
not  allow  the  small  stature  or  the  black  colour  of
ants  to  prejudice  you  against  their  rights  as  living
creatures  ; and  the  accident  that  they  are  too
busy  at  home  to  come  and  vote  in  the  agora
ought  not  to  count  against  them  ; for  I suppose
the  interests  of  children  and  sick  people  and  old
men,  who  are  not  able  to  jostle  their  way  to  the


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


voting-booths,  are  not  neglected  in  your  just
democracy,  but  your  chief  magistrate  or  high
priest  or  some  vestal  virgin  especially  appointed
doubtless  rises  solemnly  in  your  assembly,  amid
a general  hush,  and  casts  a vote  in  their  name.

The  Stranger.  We  are  not  pious.  Nothing  of
the  sort  ever  enters  our  heads.

Socrates.  That  seems  very  strange  to  me,  when
I consider  the  principle  which  you  say  governs
your  politics.  But  there  is  another  class,  so  very
numerous  and  important,  that  I am  sure  your
legislators  must  have  found  a means  of  counting
their  votes,  although  there  may  be  some  material
difficulty  in  doing  so  : I mean  the  dead.  For
who  can  have  a greater  stake  in  a country  than
its  founders,  whose  whole  soul  and  single  hope
was  devoted  to  establishing  it,  that  it  might  last
and  be  true  to  their  thought  for  ever  ; or  than
the  soldiers  who  in  many  wars  have  successively
given  their  lives  to  preserve  it  ? Surely  at  every
meeting  of  your  assembly  their  votes  are  counted
first,  which  they  once  cast  so  solemnly  and
sincerely,  and  at  so  great  a sacrifice  to  themselves
for  your  sake ; and  their  veto  is  interposed
beforehand  against  any  rash  measure  that  might
undo  their  labours,  stultify  their  hopes,  and
banish  their  spirit  from  the  house  which  they
built  and  loved.

The  Stranger.  No ; the  dead  have  no  vote
among  us.  On  the  contrary,  we  think  they  have
too  much  influence  as  it  is  without  voting,  because
they  have  bequeathed  institutions  to  us  which


ii6  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

encumber  our  playground  and  are  not  to  our
liking  ; and  the  inertia  which  these  institutions
oppose  to  our  fresh  desires  seems  to  us  a hateful
force,  which  we  call  the  dead  hand.

Socrates.  Do  you  mean  that  every  young  rascal,
who  knows  nothing  of  the  origin  and  laws  of  his
country,  and  has  never  done  anything  in  it  but
be  born,  may  cast  a vote,  or  that  foreigners  fleeing
from  famine  or  seeking  by  trade  to  enrich  them-
selves privately,  although  in  their  hearts  they  may
be  sworn  enemies  to  the  land  that  receives  them,
may  cast  a vote  also,  but  that  the  founders  and
defenders  of  it  are  not  suffered  to  make  their
voices  heard,  because  they  happen  to  be  dead  ?
I,  who  am  dead  myself,  see  a great  injustice  in
that.  But  let  us  return  to  the  living.  I suppose
when  the  inhabitants  of  some  town  or  quarter
wish  to  rebuild  their  temple,  or  to  found  a new
one,  they  gather  together  to  draw  up  the  plans  ;
and  when,  in  response  to  their  living  desires,  or
to  those  of  a majority,  they  have  chosen  the  site,
selected  the  materials,  designed  the  structure,  and
estimated  the  cost,  they  depute  one  of  their  own
number,  as  nearly  an  average  man  as  possible,
to  carry  out  the  project.  After  six  months  or  a
year  they  do  not  forget  to  come  together  again,
to  revise  the  plans  and  make  sure  that  the  site
first  chosen  is  still  convenient,  and  the  work  done
so  far  is  still  expressive  of  the  popular  taste  ; and
lest  the  architect  formerly  appointed  may  have
been  too  much  absorbed  in  his  official  function,
and  may  have  acquired  autocratic  habits,  and


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT  117

notions  of  architectural  art  not  drawn  from
popular  feeling,  they  hasten  to  revoke  his  com-
mission and  to  appoint  a new  architect,  more  in
sympathy  with  the  life  of  the  moment,  and  not
tempted  to  execute  any  work  which  the  assembled
people,  by  a divine  inspiration,  have  not  first
conceived  in  idea.

The  Stranger.  If  the  architect  was  not  more
fertile  in  invention  and  resourceful  in  methods
than  is  the  average  citizen,  why  should  he  be
distinguished  by  that  title  at  all  ?

Socrates.  That  is  a question  I meant  to  ask
you,  and  I expected  you  to  reply,  in  the  name  of
your  friends,  that  they  were  all  equally  skilful
architects  and  physicians  and  generals,  and  that
each  took  on  each  of  these  titles  when  he  happened
to  be  exercising  that  particular  art ; moreover,
that  special  masters  in  any  art  were  required  only
in  ill-governed  states,  where  the  people  were  not
perfectly  educated,  but  that  in  a model  state  all
human  undertakings  would  be  executed  as  the
ants  and  the  bees  build  their  cities  ; for  all,  or
nearly  all,  of  them  are  builders,  unanimous  without
control,  and  a common  impulse  joins  them  in
labours  which  prove  providentially  to  be  har-
monious. So  I seem  to  see  the  artists  in  your
happy  society  adding  each  his  niche  to  the  sculp-
tured hive,  and  making  it  rich  by  a divine  and
unconscious  co-operation.  The  spirit  in  them
marshals  them  without  words.  Alas,  we  poor
Athenians  could  practise  the  arts  only  through
rare  and  exceptional  masters,  not  being  inspired,


ii8  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

as  you  all  are  to-day,  to  execute  the  most  diffi-
cult works  spontaneously  and  without  instruction.
But  I am  letting  my  enthusiasm  run  away  with
me,  when  I ought  rather  to  be  asking  you  to
describe  your  principles  in  practice.  If,  for
instance,  some  enemy  attacks  you  and  you  find
yourselves  at  war,  I suppose  you  seize  the  weapons
which  you  have  at  hand,  provided  by  your  private
love  of  contrivances  or  of  the  chase,  and  rush
with  one  accord  upon  that  enemy,  routing  him
easily  at  the  first  onset  by  your  common  ardour
and  instinctive  tactics.

The  Stranger.  No.  That  is  the  method  of
wolves  or  of  savage  tribes.  In  our  states,  which
are  of  enormous  extent  and  population,  the
generals  and  other  officers  are  designated  before-
hand, and  trained  by  long  study  and  exercises  in
time  of  peace  ; and  our  arsenals  are  provided  with
all  kinds  of  engines  of  war,  with  artisans  skilful
in  making  and  managing  them  ; and  even  our
common  soldiers,  if  they  are  not  to  go  like  sheep
to  the  slaughter,  must  undergo  a long  discipline
at  home  before  they  are  ever  sent  into  the  battle,
in  which  they  must  endure  all  sorts  of  dangers
and  hardships  blindly,  not  seeing  the  enemy,  and
trusting  to  the  word  and  art  of  their  superiors  for
every  movement  and  every  hope.

Socrates.  I am  astonished.  How  can  it  be
that,  having  such  excellent  methods  of  govern-
ment, you  do  not  apply  them  to  the  principal
function  of  your  government,  which  is  the  pro-
tection of  your  lives  ? But  perhaps  war  is  too


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


119

rough  a business  for  such  noble  principles  to
work  in  ; they  may  apply  only  to  higher  things.
If,  for  example,  you  are  not  merely  building  a
temple,  but  giving  a name  to  the  god  that  is  to
be  worshipped  there,  I suppose  your  people  gather
in  an  assembly  and  elect  their  god,  and  by  a
common  inspiration  compose  the  fable  that  is  to
be  religiously  associated  with  his  name,  as  well
as  the  rites  with  which,  on  pain  of  disaster,  he
shall  be  honoured,  and  the  form  the  sculptor
shall  give  to  his  image  ; and  when  all  this  has  been
settled  by  vote,  I suppose  you  vote  on  a still  more
important  question,  and  decide  it  by  a majority  :
I mean,  what  benefits  this  god  shall  bestow  on
you,  and  whether  he  shall  protect  you  from
drought  or  from  pestilence,  or  shall  inspire  you
with  martial  ardour  or  with  ravishing  music,  or
shall  make  you  rich,  or  beautiful,  or  immortal,
or  whatever  it  be  that  you,  or  the  majority  of  you,
happen  most  to  desire.

Th£  Stranger.  I suspect  you  are  laughing  at
us  ; but  in  all  seriousness  that  is  very  much  how
we  proceed  in  matters  of  religion.  For  deities  of
the  earth  and  sea,  for  stories  of  wonders,  for  local
shrines  or  images  black  with  age  whose  origin  is
lost  in  antiquity,  we  have  scant  respect ; but  our
prophets  and  philosophers  discuss  angrily  what
ought  to  be  the  nature  of  God,  whom  each  defines
according  to  his  own  preferences  ; and  few  of
them  hesitate  to  demolish  old  temples  and  old
notions  of  the  gods,  or  even  to  deny  their  existence,
and  to  substitute  the  idea  which  most  flatters  the


120


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


mood  of  the  age,  and  call  this  new  idea  the  only
true  God.  And  even  if  we  do  not  vote  openly
for  one  god  or  another  to  preside  over  us,  yet
by  an  insensible  movement  of  public  opinion  we
abandon  the  gods  we  dislike  for  others  that  we
like  better,  and  we  never  rest  until  we  have
adopted  one  that  lays  on  us  no  commandment
not  to  our  own  mind,  and  promises  us  all  we
wish.

Socrates.  And  when  you  have  found  such  an
amiable  god,  and  abolished  all  those  who  were
dangerous,  I suppose  calamities  cease  among  you,
passion  and  madness  no  longer  distract  any  mind,
there  are  no  more  floods,  earthquakes,  pestilences,
or  wars,  and  a serene  happiness  reigns  in  your
hearts  and  in  your  cities.

The  Stranger.  Not  at  all.  Human  destiny
remains  precisely  as  before,  save  that  religion  has
a smaller  part  in  it,  turns  to  private  doubts  or
fancies,  or  vanishes  altogether.

Socrates.  Those  who  worship  the  statues  of
the  gods,  rather  than  the  gods  themselves,  are
called  idolaters,  are  they  not  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes.

Socrates.  And  if  a man  worshipped  an  image
of  some  god  in  his  own  mind,  rather  than  the
power  which  actually  controls  his  destiny,  he
would  be  worshipping  an  idol  ?

The  Stranger.  The  principle  would  be  the
same;  but  usage  among  us  applies  the  word
idol  to  the  products  of  sculpture,  not  to  those  of
poetry.


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT  121

Socrates.  Then,  in  principle,  your  prophets
and  philosophers  are  sheer  idolaters  ?

The  Stranger.  They  would  be,  if  they  took
their  religion  seriously,  as  you  did  yours  in  the
old  days  ; but  their  religion  has  nothing  to  do
with  their  business  or  politics,  or  with  their
practical  estimation  of  good  and  evil  fortune  ; it
is  merely  the  solace  of  their  dreamful  hours.
People  now  are  hardly  aware  that  the  object  of
continual  piety  and  studious  reverence  in  the
most  ancient  religions  was  the  power  that  actually
and  hourly  rules  over  men,  whatever  may  be  its
nature  or  its  contempt  for  human  interests,  the
very  power  that  still  rules  the  world  without
human  suffrage.  This  real  power  we  make  the
object  of  science  and  of  profitable  art,  but  not  of
what  we  now  call  religion.

Socrates.  But  at  least  in  respect  to  that  other
luxurious  religion  of  theirs,  which  you  think  is
in  principle  mere  idolatry,  your  friends  apply
their  fine  theory  of  government  by  the  will  of
the  governed,  deputing  some  chosen  god  to
legislate  for  them  according  to  their  own  wishes.
Do  they  apply  the  same  theory,  I wonder,  in  that
humbler  region  to  which  religion  was  addressed
of  old,  the  region  of  our  daily  and  national
fortunes  ? Do  they  apply  it,  for  instance,  to  the
household  ? Do  your  little  boys  and  girls,  after
playing  in  the  street  together,  vote  to  become
brothers  and  sisters,  and  elect  a father  and
mother  ? You  smile,  as  if  my  question  were
ironical,  but  I assure  you  I am  in  earnest,  and


122


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


think  it  a momentous  question.  For  if  the  father
and  the  mother  do  not  hold  their  office  by  the
consent  of  their  children,  and  have  not  become
their  father  and  mother  in  obedience  to  the
children’s  will,  then  according  to  your  principles
of  government  all  parental  authority  is  usurped,
and  no  parent’s  command  or  control  is  legitimate  ;
and  it  was  an  act  of  selfish  and  outrageous  tyranny
on  the  part  of  the  father  and  mother  to  beget  a
helpless  child,  and  bring  him  up  by  force  in  their
own  family,  when  very  likely,  had  he  been  con-
sulted, he  would  have  chosen  different  parents
and  a finer  home.  I hardly  know  what  to  admire
most,  whether  the  simplicity  of  your  principles,
or  the  excellence  of  the  society  that  would  arise
if  they  could  be  thoroughly  applied.  After  abolish-
ing the  old  gods  (which  can  be  done  with  a
breath)  you  will  doubtless  abolish  the  ridiculous
old  methods  of  animal  generation,  and  establish
something  more  decent ; and  by  a majority  vote
you  will  reform  the  configuration  and  climate  of
the  earth,  and  decide  what  shall  have  been  the
history  of  your  country,  and  what  shall  be  its
future  language  and  arts  ; and  you  will  begin,
I hope,  by  voting  yourselves  a much  greater
intelligence  than  that  with  which  chance  has
endowed  you.

The  Stranger.  I blush,  Socrates,  at  the  foolish-
ness and  impiety  of  the  views  which  I might
almost  have  adopted,  if  your  voice  of  warning
had  not  reached  me  in  time.

Socrates.  There  is  nothing  surprising  to  me


ON  SELF-GOVERNMENT


123

in  the  influence  exercised  over  mankind  by  those
who  flatter  it  with  eloquence.  There  were  sophists
in  my  day  too.  But  I suspect  that  the  funda-
mental order  of  human  life  is  settled  for  you
now,  as  it  was  for  us  then,  independently  of  pert
opinion,  by  nature  and  fortune  and  divine  decrees,
sophistry  itself  being  but  headiness  in  ill-bred
mortals,  when  Apollo  has  withdrawn  to  another
part  of  the  heavens.  I think,  too,  that  right
conscience  in  a natural  creature  can  be  nothing
but  self-knowledge,  by  which  the  man  discovers
his  own  nature  and  the  good  on  which  it  is  set  ;
so  that  the  margin  of  free  choice  and  initiative
for  a man  of  understanding  is  exceedingly  narrow,
and  grows  narrower  as  the  field  of  his  competence
grows  wider  and  his  science  clearer,  all  art  being
but  nature  enlightened  and  directed  upon  its
natural  good.  But  doubtless  your  friends  on
earth  are  masters  of  magic,  and  are  inspired  with
an  infused  wisdom  which  was  always  denied  me.
You  will  do  well  to  return  to  them  with  my
doubts  fresh  in  mind  ; and  after  listening  to  the
weighty  considerations  which  they  will  doubtless
invoke  in  support  of  their  opinions  you  will  be
able  to  form  your  own  at  leisure  ; for  it  would  be
of  little  profit  to  have  been  saved  from  one  error
if,  under  my  blind  guidance,  you  fell  into  another.


VIII


THE  PHILANTHROPIST

Socrates.  According  to  your  reports,  inveterate
Wanderer,  you  come  from  an  unhomely  world  ;
but  you  are  hardened  to  living  without  a home
or  country,  and  perhaps  you  relish  unhomeliness.
I was  never  in  my  own  person  an  emulator  of
Odysseus  or  given  to  travel.  There  are,  I know,
no  end  of  creatures  and  commonwealths,  animal
or  divine,  which  nature  can  produce  in  her  exuber-
ance ; but  they  are  not  models  for  Athens  or
for  me.  I therefore  dismiss  them  with  respect,
and  relinquish  the  study  of  them  to  the  young
Cambyses — ^you  know  the  story — that  son  of  the
Great  King  who  spent  his  youth  observing  the
wild  beasts  kept  in  cages  and  pits  in  his  father’s
park.  Such  study,  the  king  had  said  to  him,
would  prepare  him  for  understanding  and  taming
his  future  subjects,  all  whose  passions  he  might
see  unfeigned  and  pure  in  the  brutes.  This
prince  was  to  rule  over  barbarians,  and  his  educa-
tion was  doubtless  well  fitted  to  his  destiny,  and
the  historians  do  not  inform  us  whether  at  the
same  time  he  learned  to  imitate  the  beasts  himself.
As  for  me,  my  guardian  genius  never  allowed  me
to  study  zoology  except  in  man,  and  condemned

124


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


125


me  to  be  a narrow  philanthropist,  so  enamoured
of  mere  man  that  nothing  not  human  could  hold
my  serious  attention.  Yet  in  the  home  park  of
the  human  soul  I found  a perfect  replica  of  that
king’s  preserves  ; for  it  was  full  of  growling  and
fluttering  passions,  which  I endeavoured  to  trap
in  a net  of  words  and  to  train  to  abandon  their
ferocity  and  live  together  in  peace.  I fondly
hoped  that  the  voice  of  reason  might  have  no  less
magic  in  it  than  the  songs  of  Orpheus,  and  might
render  a man  ashamed  and  unwilling  to  contradict
himself.  Nor  was  I always  disappointed,  and  my
single  love  of  man  was  confirmed  on  finding  him
a tamable  monster.  What  can  be  more  virile  and
noble  than  a pack  of  wild  instincts  halting  to  be
just  ? In  my  day,  to  my  sorrow,  the  passions  of
the  many  were  bursting  from  their  cages  and
returning  to  the  jungle,  as  they  seem  to  be  doing
among  you  now  ; but  a few  tempered  spirits
survived,  especially  among  the  well-born  youths
who  frequented  my  society  ; and  even  the  wildest
of  them,  like  Alcibiades,  paid  to  reason  at  least
the  homage  of  shame,  and  some  pure  image  of
honour  still  shone  in  the  midst  of  their  vices,  like
a patch  of  blue  sky  reflected  in  a well.  That  part
of  them  I still  could  love  ; else  I might  have  been
reduced,  like  Diogenes  (who  had  not  the  art  of
friendship),  to  carrying  a lamp  by  day  and  looking
for  an  honest  man  in  the  gutter  ; and  I might  have
fallen  to  hating  all  men  for  disfiguring  humanity
instead  of  loving  them,  as  I did,  for  that  vestige  of
humanity  which  was  still  in  them.


126  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

The  Stranger.  What  other  standard  of  human
nature,  Socrates,  can  you  propose  except  the
nature  of  actual  man  ? If  you  are  a friend  of
humanity  should  you  not  cultivate  all  mankind,
accept  all  their  types,  share  all  their  pleasures,  and
be  pleased  with  all  their  oddities  ? Else  it  might
seem  that  what  you  loved  was  not  mankind  but
only  your  own  pets  or  your  own  fancies.  I know
that  by  nature  you  are  a true  lover  and  that  the
good  and  the  beautiful  deeply  engage  your  allegi-
ance, wherever  they  are  found  ; but  the  blind
bigots  who  in  my  day  call  themselves  philan-
thropists and  are  always  invoking  humanity  are
the  least  human  of  men,  utterly  intolerant  of  that
natural  freedom  which  sometimes  renders  life
glorious  in  spite  of  its  sadness,  be  it  in  religion,
patriotism,  sport,  or  fancy.  They  are  tender  only
to  the  vermin  in  the  lion’s  skin,  and  their  philan-
thropy is  sheer  hatred  of  everything  that  might
make  men  worth  loving.

Socrates.  You  attack  me  boldly,  well  knowing
that  I am  helpless  against  eloquence  and  invective.
I could  not  defend  myself  before  my  judges  in
Athens,  who  were  plain  men,  when  a false  accusa-
tion was  brought  against  me  ; and  how  shall  I
defend  myself  now  against  you,  who  say  you  are
a philosopher  and  who,  therefore,  are  bringing
charges  which  are  probably  true  However,  you
are  but  one  accuser,  and  I need  not  address  you
in  a set  speech,  as  if  you  were  a crowd  ; and
perhaps,  if  you  will  answer  a few  questions  that
trouble  my  own  mind,  I may  agree  that  I am


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


127


guilty  or  you  that  I am  innocent.  You  say,  do
you  not,  that  I am  no  philanthropist,  because
a philanthropist  should  love  men  as  they  are,
whereas  I,  falsely  calling  myself  a lover  of  men,
love  only  my  notion  of  what  men  should  be  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes,  some  such  feeling  was  in
my  mind.

Socrates.  Now  would  you  say  that  the  love
which  a man  has  for  himself  is  genuine  or  feigned
and  hypocritical  ?

The  Stranger.  Unmistakably  genuine.

Socrates.  And  does  he  love  himself  as  he
actually  is  or  rather  as  he  would  wish  to  be  ?

The  Stranger.  That  is  a hard  question.

Socrates.  Suppose  I have  two  friends,  one  who
knows  and  loves  me  exactly  as  I am,  describing  me
with  gusto  as  an  old,  pot-bellied,  bald,  mechanical
rogue,  useless  and  tiresome,  and  another  friend
(perhaps  you  yourself)  who  knows  and  loves  me
as  I should  like  to  have  been,  calling  me  the
daylight  conscience  of  Athens  or  a discerner  and
companion  of  all  that  is  beautiful : which  of  these
two  friends  do  you  think  I should  regard  as  truly
sympathetic  and  as  sharing  with  me  the  genuine
love  which  I have  for  myself  ?

The  Stranger.  In  this  case  certainly  the  flatterer
would  be  the  better  critic  and  would  describe  the
deeper  truth.

Socrates.  Is  not,  then,  the  true  philanthropist  a
flatterer  of  mankind,  not,  of  course,  like  a politician
for  his  own  advancement,  but  as  the  self-love  of
mankind  is  itself  a flatterer,  seeing  their  better


128  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

side  and  their  missed  possibilities,  and  loving
them  as  they  would  wish  to  be  rather  than  as
they  are  ?

The  Stranger.  I suppose  that  our  wishes  and
ideals  are  a part  of  our  present  selves,  and  that  a
true  lover  of  men  would  not  love  them  apart  from
that  idealism  in  them  which  keeps  them  alive  and
human.

Socrates.  If  a boy  has  been  reading  the  Odyssey
and  wishes  to  be  wrecked  on  a desert  island  and  to
become  king  over  it,  that  day-dream  is  a part  of
the  boy ; and  if  you  truly  love  the  boy,  you  must
love  that  day-dream  in  him.  Is  that  your
meaning  ?

The  Stranger.  I should  not  wish  him,  at  his
age,  to  be  without  something  of  the  sort ; and  I
certainly  should  like  a boy  the  better  for  being
fond  of  the  Odyssey.

Socrates.  And  if  the  boy  attempted  to  set  sail
alone  in  a small  boat,  hoping  to  be  actually
wrecked,  would  you  wish  the  same  thing  for  him
in  consequence  of  your  affection  ?

The  Stranger.  Of  course,  he  must  be  prevented.

Socrates.  How,  then,  does  the  argument  stand  ?
Men,  you  say,  love  themselves  as  they  wish  to  be,
but  the  philanthropist  loves  them  as  they  are  and
is  ready,  in  some  cases,  to  prevent  them  by  force
from  realizing  their  desires  ; and  yet  he  wishes
them,  at  least  if  they  are  boys,  to  cultivate  those
desires  without  realizing  them  ? Is  that  the
position  ?

The  Stranger.  So  it  would  seem.


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


129

Socrates.  Perhaps  our  supposition  was  un-
natural, because  boys,  even  when  fond  of  the
Odyssey  and  of  gloating  over  imaginary  adven-
tures, are  in  fact  little  cowards,  and  would  be
terrified  at  finding  themselves  adrift,  I will  not
say  at  sea,  but  in  a duck-pond.  Let  us  suppose
that  our  young  hero  was  rendered  so  exceptionally
brave  not  simply  by  reading  the  Odyssey,  but  by
falling  into  a fever  after  reading  it,  and  becoming
delirious  ; and  let  us  suppose  that  in  his  lucid
intervals  he  did  not  wish  to  be  wrecked,  but  to
get  well.  Now  if  you  were  a true  friend  to  that
boy  would  you  share  his  wish  in  this  instance,
actually  assisting  him,  to  the  best  of  your  know-
ledge and  power,  to  recover  his  health  as  soon  as
possible,  or  would  you  still,  as  in  the  other  instance,
love  him  and  wish  him  to  remain  just  as  he  was,
intermittently  feverish  and  entertaining  at  intervals
the  warm  ideals  proper  to  a fever,  without,  of
course,  ever  reducing  them  to  act  ?

The  Stranger.  You  are  bringing  ridicule  upon
me,  but  not  conviction.

Socrates.  All  the  ridicule  I may  bring  upon
you  will  not  hurt  you,  if  you  bring  no  ridicule
upon  yourself.  But  let  us  coldly  consider  the
facts.  Suppose  some  one  is  found  so  entirely
devoted  to  your  interests  that  he  never  exercises
his  own  judgement  but  labours  to  carry  out
instantly  your  every  wish  : would  you  think  him
the  best  of  friends  ?

The  Stranger.  I should  think  him  a good
servant.  A friend  may  do  an  occasional  service,

K


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


130

and  a servant,  in  his  feelings,  may  be  sometimes
a friend  ; but  service  is  not  true  friendship.  A
good  servant  follows  my  directions,  a bad  one
studies  my  character  in  order  to  profit  by  my
foibles,  as  a demagogue  studies  public  opinion.
A friend  would  rather  communicate  to  me  his  own
pleasures  and  insights.

Socrates.  Partners  in  vice  are  not  true  friends  ?

The  Stranger.  No,  they  are  accomplices.  All
your  boon-companions,  adulterous  lovers,  fellow-
conspirators,  bandits,  and  partisans  may  imagine
that  they  are  friends  pursuing  a common  interest,
but  in  reality  each  obeys  a private  impulse  and
cares  only  for  his  own  dream.  The  others  are
but  his  chance  instruments  in  debauch.  Presently
they  will  fall  out  over  the  spoils  or  take  to  railing
at  one  another  for  failure  or  treachery.

Socrates.  But  what  of  those  who,  as  the  phrase
is,  are  in  love  ?

The  Stranger.  Each  of  them,  too,  is  moved  by
a private  mysterious  passion.  At  first  they  are  in
a flutter,  or  love-sick  and  full  of  dreams  ; later
they  pursue  each  other  with  sensitive  claims,
exactions , and  j ealousies . Sometimes , for  a while ,
they  are  wildly  happy  ; then  they  begin  to  feel
imprisoned,  and  perhaps  grow  bitter  and  quarrel-
some, even  to  the  point  of  violence  and  murder.

Socrates.  Is  there  not  often  a lifelong  and
tender  affection  between  husband  and  wife,  parents
and  children,  brothers  and  sisters  ?

The  Stranger.  There  is  : sometimes  sugary,
sometimes  seasoned  with  a little  sarcasm.


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


131

Socrates.  At  least  young  children,  red-cheeked
and  vigorous,  running  and  romping  about  with
shrill  cries,  must  be  a perfect  delight  to  you  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes,  for  half  an  hour.

Socrates.  You  find  more  peace,  no  doubt,
among  wrinkled  white-bearded  eiders  sitting  in
the  sun  or  tottering  on  knotted  staves,  well  pleased
with  themselves  and  their  old  saws  ?

The  Stranger.  They,  too,  are  picturesque,  but
at  their  best  in  the  background.  Otherwise  such
old  men  are  a danger  to  philanthropy.

Socrates.  I see  that  your  preference,  like  mine,
is  decidedly  for  the  plastic  and  generous  temper
of  young  men,  who  embody  human  health  and
freedom  to  perfection.

The  Stranger.  Yes,  but  our  preference  in  this
matter  is  three-quarters  illusion.  In  reality,  what
is  a youth  but  a tadpole  ? And  what  can  be
more  odious  than  their  conceit  when  they  have
some  cleverness  and  transgress  their  sphere  ?

Socrates.  What } Are  you  entirely  weaned  from
the  love  of  images  ? Do  you  now  prize  nothing
in  man  save  his  active  virtues,  such  as  can  be
exercised  in  their  fullness  only  in  middle  life  ?

The  Stranger.  Active  virtues  ? Say  rather
active  vices.  Men  in  middle  life  are  for  the  most
part  immersed  in  affairs  to  which  they  give  too
much  importance,  having  sold  their  souls  to  some
sardonic  passion  and  become  dangerous  and
repulsive  beasts.

Socrates.  What,  then,  is  your  conclusion  .!*  That
the  one  great  obstacle  to  philanthropy  is  man  ?


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


132

The  Stranger.  You  forget  woman.

Socrates.  Alas,  shade  of  Xanthippe,  it  is  not
easy  to  forget  her.  Woman  is  the  eternal  im-
pediment.

The  Stranger.  Being  incomplete  she  wishes
man  to  be  so,  and  her  ascendancy  is  a wile  of
nature  that  keeps  the  race  jogging  along  in  spite
of  all  the  philosophers.  Nowadays  the  manly
heart  is  entirely  dominated  by  the  sentiments  she
inspires  or  by  those  she  approves.  Nor  does  he
think  this  woman-worship  degrading  ; integrity
is  out  of  date  ; and  in  woman  he  seems  to  find
concentrated  all  the  beauty  and  fineness,  all  the
ardour  and  religion,  that  still  remain  in  the  world.

Socrates.  Can  it  be  so  bad  as  that  ? You  are
indulging,  I know,  your  spleen  or  your  fancy  ;
yet  after  painting  such  a picture  of  mankind,  can
you  still  maintain  that  true  philanthropy  must
be  love  of  men  and  women  as  they  are  ? If  you
care  for  them  at  all,  must  it  not  be  your  constant
endeavour  entirely  to  transform  them  ?

The  Stranger.  I begin  to  see  your  drift  and
the  refutation  which  you  intend  me  to  supply  to
my  own  opinion.  Let  me  then  expedite  my  fate,
and  confess  at  once  that  the  philanthropist  should
strive  to  secure  the  true  good  of  mankind,  a good
predetermined  for  them  by  their  nature  and
faculties  without  their  knowledge,  and  by  no
means  realized  in  their  actual  condition  nor
expressed  in  their  loose  wishes,  nor  always
furthered  by  their  political  maxims  and  supersti-
tious morality.  This  was  what  I had  in  mind.


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


133


though  I expressed  myself  badly,  when  I said
that  the  true  philanthropist  loves  men  as  they
are : for  their  true  nature  is  not  adequately
manifested  in  their  condition  at  any  moment,  or
in  their  words  and  thoughts  vapidly  flowing,  or
even  in  their  prevalent  habits.  Their  real  nature
is  what  they  would  discover  themselves  to  be  if
they  possessed  self-knowledge  or,  as  the  Indian
scripture  has  it,  if  they  became  what  they  are.
This  admission,  Socrates,  does  not  remove  the
objection  which  I have  to  meddlesome  censors
calling  themselves  philanthropists,  but  abounding
only  in  their  own  conceit,  and  wedded  to  their
nostrums.  Let  them  help  me,  as  you  so  gener-
ously help  me,  to  know  myself  ; but  let  them  not
browbeat  me  in  the  name  of  virtue,  seeking  to
palm  off  their  prejudices  upon  me  as  moral  first
principles,  which  would  turn  my  whole  life,  if  I
followed  them,  into  a slow  and  miserable  suicide.

Socrates.  You  go  faster  and  farther  than  is
safe.  But  let  us  agree  that  the  philanthropist  is
a diviner.  The  scars  and  deformities  of  men  do
not  beguile  him : would  they  be  deformities
or  scars  if  there  were  no  whole  and  beautiful
humanity  beneath  which  they  could  disfigure  ?
The  lover’s  eye  when  most  open  is  most  full  of
dreams  ; it  pierces  through  the  incrustations  of
fortune,  or  does  not  perceive  them,  and  sees  only
the  naked  image  of  the  god  beneath.

The  Stranger.  My  doubts,  as  I listen,  return
upon  me.  If  this  divine  pattern  in  man  became
all  in  all,  would  the  creature  be  still  any  man  in


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


134

particular,  or  a man  at  all  ? Would  he  not  cease
to  exist  and  to  live,  being  sublimated  into  the
mere  idea  of  himself  in  an  unchanging  mind  ?
And  the  so-called  philanthropist  who  loved  him
would  not  be  loving  a man,  but  rather  a picture
and  a detail  in  the  mind  of  God.

Socrates.  Perhaps.  But  let  me  ask  you  a
question,  since  you  are  so  familiar  with  these  high
mysteries.  Would  the  divine  spirit,  as  you  con-
ceive it,  entertain  many  thoughts  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes  : all  possible  thoughts,  or
at  least  all  good  thoughts.

Socrates.  And  when,  in  your  opinion,  is  a
thought  good  ? When  it  sets  before  the  mind
the  round  or  the  square,  the  odd  or  the  even,  the
one  or  the  many  ?

The  Stranger.  No  : when  there  is  some  living
creature  to  whom  that  thought,  if  realized,  would
be  happiness.

Socrates.  Then,  if  I understand  you,  the
thoughts  which,  when  habitually  expressed  in
man’s  life,  would  make  his  happiness  would  also
be  the  idea  of  humanity  in  the  divine  mind  ?

The  Stranger.  Exactly.

Socrates.  But  in  the  divine  mind,  according  to
your  theory,  there  would  be  many  other  ideas  as
well  ?

The  Stranger.  Of  course,

Socrates.  Then  consider  my  case.  The  other
good  thoughts  which,  according  to  you,  fill  the
divine  mind,  I respectfully  leave  out  of  my
investigation  and  concern,  because  they  form  no


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


13s


part  of  a perfect  humanity.  If  nevertheless  you
inform  me  that  in  loving  human  perfection  I love
a divine  idea,  I am  content  to  have  it  so.  Very
likely  all  good  thoughts,  as  you  say,  are  divine
ideas.  But  I am  no  theologian,  and  I prize  this
particular  idea,  and  know  it  to  be  good,  not
because  you  tell  me  that  it  is  one  of  the  ideas  in
the  divine  intellect,  but  because  there  is  a living
creature  familiar  to  me  to  whom  the  realization
of  that  idea  is  happiness  ; so  that  my  exclusive
attachment  to  this  particular  divine  idea  marks
me  out  as  a lover  of  man  rather  than  of  God.

The  Stranger.  Your  demonstration  is  cogent,
and  I gladly  acknowledge  that  you  are  a pure
philanthropist.  You  may  well  prefer  to  suspend
judgement  on  all  questions  concerning  the  cosmos
and  the  gods,  considered  as  alleged  facts,  the
objects  of  science  or  of  fear  ; for  what  are  the
gods,  to  a moralist  or  a true  mystic,  save  that
which  he  prizes  in  his  own  nature,  raised  in  fancy
to  perfection  and  immortality  ? I think,  Socrates,
that  as  usual  you  are  subtly  ironical  when  you
say  that  you  are  a lover  of  man  and  not  of  God  ;
for  at  heart  you  are  a mystic  and  a hermit  whose
wilderness  is  human  society  ; and  it  is  impossible
for  you,  in  spite  of  your  banter,  to  love  man
otherwise  than  religiously,  as  an  idea  in  God.
Yet  what  is  any  idea  but  an  eternal  essence  ?
So  that,  unless  men  had  enacted  it  in  time  and
in  the  world  of  matter,  expressing  it  piece-meal
in  their  blundering  careers,  mankind  never  would
have  existed  ; there  could  have  been  no  trepida-


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


136

tion  in  love,  and  no  fraternal  fondness  of  man
for  man,  such  as  prompts  them  to  assist,  to
embrace,  or  to  forgive  one  another.  I am  far
from  forgetting  that  in  your  admonitions,  too,
there  is  infinite  kindness,  because  you  do  not
prescribe  our  natures  for  us,  but  ask  us,  and
before  we  find  words  to  tell  you,  your  sympathy
anticipates  our  confession,  and  reveals  to  us  our
secret  heart.  But  for  all  that  I am  somehow
dissatisfied.  You  are  the  friend  of  youth,  of  the
soul  flushed  with  brave  hopes,  and  you  teach  us
to  disentangle  and  understand  our  loves,  and  so
to  train  ourselves  in  art  and  government  that
life  in  our  cities  may  be  both  free  and  beautiful.
You  are  the  prophet  of  success.  But  how  much
success  is  there  or  has  there  ever  been  on  earth  ?
Who  shall  be  the  prophet  of  old  age,  of  sorrow,
of  servitude  ? What  god  shall  help  us  where  we
have  failed  ?

Socrates.  Can  even  a god  help  you  there  ?

The  Stranger.  That  is  the  mystery.

Socrates.  Then  let  us  pass  it  by.  The  initiated,
who  alone  understand  mysteries,  have  sworn  not
to  reveal  them.

The  Stranger.  In  the  religion  which  the  Greeks
adopted  after  your  time,  mysteries  are  public;
in  the  midst  of  them  is  sung  a hymn  : “ Publish,
O tongue,  the  mystery,”  and  though  I am  but  a
lame  mystic  and  hardly  initiated,  I should  under-
take to  publish  it,  if  you  did  not  forbid.

Socrates.  Publish  it  by  all  means.

The  Stranger.  The  sum  of  it  is  this  : that  we


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


137

must  leave  glory  to  God  and  be  content  with
failure  for  ourselves.

Socrates.  Is  your  God,  then,  an  enemy  to  man,
that  he  finds  his  glory  in  the  ruin  of  his  creatures  ?

The  Stranger.  Their  ruin  is  a part  of  their
mode  of  existence,  as  the  silence  which  follows
upon  speech  is  part  of  its  eloquence.  The  founder
of  our  spiritual  city  saw  in  God,  whom  he  called
his  Father,  a great  lover  of  life,  as  you,  too,  once
called  him  : but  not  a lover  of  human  life  only,
or  of  any  life  only  in  its  perfection.  His  hand
had  scattered  bountifully  throughout  the  chaos  of
matter  the  seeds  of  all  sorts  of  perfections,  setting
the  love  and  the  need  of  a special  perfection  in
each  creature’s  heart ; but  the  path  of  any  in-
carnate spirit,  buried  as  it  must  be  in  matter  and
beset  by  accidents,  is  necessarily  long  and  perilous;
and  few  there  are  who  ever  reach  the  goal.  Yet
the  perfections  of  all  those  who  fall  by  the  way
and  never  attain  perfection  are  none  the  less
present  for  ever  to  the  mind  of  God,  and  a part
of  his  glory  : and  such  of  us  as  have  no  glory  here
may  be  content  with  our  glory  there.  As  to  our
life  on  earth,  whether  it  ever  touch  perfection,  as
yours  seemed  to  do  for  a moment  in  Greece,  or  be
utterly  distracted,  as  ours  has  been  since,  it  must
in  any  case  presently  perish  : the  torrent  is  too
mighty  for  any  swimmer.  You  may  laugh  at  me,
if  you  will,  and  call  me  a theologian  ; yet  we  must
somehow  speak  of  nature  and  the  gods,  and  how
shall  we  ever  speak  of  them  except  in  parables  ?
Did  you  not  yourself  repeat  a tale  about  the  birth


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


138

of  Love,  that  he  was  the  child  of  Plenty  and  Want  ?
Let  me  then  enlarge  upon  your  apologue  and  say
that  the  satisfaction  which  God  finds  eternally  in
the  idea  of  human  perfection,  and  in  all  other  good
ideas,  is  not  properly  called  love,  because  there  is
no  want  and  no  sorrow  in  it ; it  is  but  a part  of
his  joy  in  the  fullness  of  his  own  being.  The  true
seat  of  love  is  matter,  when  its  inner  yearning  and
absolute  want  are,  by  chance,  directed  towards  the
idea  of  humanity,  or  towards  any  other  divine
idea.  Now  there  have  been  prophets  in  India  and
even  in  Greece  who  have  soared  altogether  above
this  painful  love  and  have  studied  to  become  im-
passible and  utterly  blissful,  even  like  God  ; but
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  who  said  he  was  the  Son
of  God  but  also  the  son  of  man,  taught  and
practised  the  love  of  man  superhumanly,  in  a
spirit  that  has  never  animated  any  other  prophet ;
so  that  his  philanthropy  bears  a special  name  and
is  called  charity.

Socrates.  Anything  you  may  tell  me  about
your  Prophet  will  not  be  without  interest  for  me,
because  I have  already  heard  sundry  comparisons
and  couplings  of  his  name  with  mine,  and  perhaps
if  his  maxims  were  repeated  to  me  by  some
rational  person  (which  was  never  yet  the  case),
they  might  teach  me  to  correct  or  extend  my  own
suppositions.  What,  for  instance,  is  this  charity
of  his,  of  which  you  speak  so  darkly  }

The  Stranger.  Definition  is  not  my  art ; yet
perhaps  if  you  will  define  philanthropy  I may  be
able  to  add  some  qualification  to  mark  the  differ-


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


139

ence  which  I vaguely  feel  to  exist  between  phil-
anthropy and  charity.

Socrates.  Have  we  not  defined  philanthropy
already  ? Is  it  not  love  of  that  beauty  and  good-
ness in  man  which  if  realized  would  make  his
happiness  ? In  what,  pray,  is  your  charity  more
or  less  than  that  ?

The  Stranger.  I will  venture  to  improvise  an
answer,  although  I may  soon  have  cause  to  retract
it.  Charity  is  less  than  philanthropy  in  that  it
expects  the  defeat  of  man’s  natural  desires  and
accepts  that  defeat ; and  it  is  more  than  phil-
anthropy in  that,  in  the  face  of  defeat,  it  brings
consolation.

Socrates.  But  what,  may  I ask,  are  natural
desires  ?

The  Stranger.  I don’t  mean  mere  whims  or
follies,  whether  in  children  or  nations,  which  may
be  naturally  inevitable  but  which  a good  regimen
would  weed  out  or  allow  to  blow  over.  I mean
profound  aspirations,  seated  in  our  unregenerate
nature,  which  fate  nevertheless  forbids  us  to
realize,  such  as  the  desire  to  understand  every-
thing (which  you,  Socrates,  have  wisely  renounced)
or  to  be  beautiful,  or  the  first  or  free  or  immortal.
The  spirit  in  most  of  us  has  but  a poor  prospect.
From  the  beginning  we  are  compelled  to  put  up
with  our  parents,  our  country,  our  times,  and  the
relentless  approach  of  old  age  and  death  ; and
on  the  wa;^  we  are  lucky  if  we  escape  disease,
deformity,  crossed  hopes,  or  desperate  poverty.
You  may  paint  a picture  of  the  Golden  Age  or  of


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


140

an  ideal  republic  in  which  these  evils  are  softened,
or  are  forgotten ; but  meantime  we  must  endure
them,  and  live  and  die  in  a far  exile  from  our
natural  good.  Charity  is  the  friendship  of  one
exile  for  another.

Socrates.  You  must  excuse  my  dull  wits,  but
I have  not  yet  gathered  from  your  eloquence
whether  the  natural  good  from  which  you  are
banished  is  the  happiness  proper  to  man  at  home,
or  is  perhaps  the  life  of  the  gods  in  Olympus,  to
which  you  think  yourself  entitled  and  fitted  by
nature.  Is  a part  of  what  troubles  you,  for
instance,  the  fatality  of  having  hands  instead  of
wings  ? And  might  a bird,  on  the  same  principle,
deeply  suffer  for  the  lack  of  hands,  and  require
the  ministrations  of  charity  to  reconcile  him  to
being  covered  with  feathers  ?

The  Stranger.  I confess  that  the  life  of  birds,
too,  seems  rather  pitiful,  and  that  even  feasting
for  ever  on  nectar  and  ambrosia  might  be  a dull
business  and  cloying.  Must  not  any  incarnate
spirit  renounce  beforehand  almost  everjrthing  that
a free  spirit  might  have  desired  ?

Socrates.  If  there  is  an  immortal  spirit  in  every
creature  which  chafes  at  its  limitations,  does  it  not
also,  at  death,  escape  those  limitations,  and  does
it  not  live  many  another  life  in  many  another
creature  ? Let  us  leave  the  fortunes  of  spirit  to
the  hidden  justice  which  probably  rules  the  world
and  whose  decrees,  at  any  rate,  we  cSnnot  alter.
But  in  so  far  as  spirit  is  incarnate  in  man  and  ad-
dressed to  human  happiness,  it  is  not  hampered  by


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


141

the  conditions  of  this  human  life  but  is  supported
by  them.  Man  presupposes  nature.  Nature
sets  before  him  his  proper  virtue,  as  a child,  as  a
soldier,  as  a father,  as  a cultivator  of  divine  grace  ;
and  he  is  happy  if  that  grace  descends  upon  him
in  all  the  offices  of  his  humanity  and  renders  him
as  nearly  perfect  as,  amid  the  accidents  of  fortune,
it  is  possible  for  a man  to  be.  A man  content  to
fail  in  his  proper  virtue  would  show  himself  a
scorner  of  humanity  and  a misanthrope.  If  your
Prophet,  as  I seem  to  have  heard,  despised  in  men
all  their  proper  virtue,  their  beauty,  valour,  enter-
prise, and  science,  and  loved  them  only  for  being
halt,  blind,  poor,  and  diseased  in  both  mind  and
body,  I do  not  understand  in  what  respect  I can
be  compared  with  him,  or  how  his  charity  has  any
touch  of  philanthropy  in  it.

The  Stranger.  I think  that  our  Prophet,  if  he
had  been  man  only,  would  have  shared  your
philanthropy  to  the  full,  and  that  initially  his
heart  would  have  longed  with  an  even  greater
intensity  than  yours  for  all  the  beauty  and  splen-
dour of  existence.  He  was  no  coward,  he  was  no
eunuch  ; but  he  was  not  sent  (as  he  was  wont  to
say)  to  speak  for  himself,  to  give  voice  to  his  own
nature  ; he  was  sent  to  speak  in  God’s  name,  and
to  teach  mankind  to  judge  themselves  as  God
judged  them.  Now  God,  being  their  creator,
could  not  hale  the  soul  which  he  had  kindled  in
their  dust ; and  a man  filled  with  the  divine  spirit
could  not  bemoan  the  creation,  or  condemn  the
warmth  and  beauty  which,  at  the  word  of  God,


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


142

had  turned  that  dust  into  flesh.  Yet  as  the  Father
was  not  the  creator  of  man  alone,  so  the  Son  could
not  confine  his  sympathy  to  the  human  soul,  but
extended  it  to  every  creature,  and  also  to  that
tragic  economy  by  which  the  fortunes  of  each  are
determined  according  to  the  divine  will.  Thus
in  love  for  created  things,  when  it  is  divinely
inspired,  there  is  perforce  an  element  of  im-
partiality, a conditioned  allegiance,  and  a tender-
ness swallowed  up  in  resignation,  the  love  of  God
always  dominating  the  love  of  man  and  being  at
bottom  the  only  ground  for  it.  For  why  should
a religious  mind  foster  the  human  will  or  share  its
aspirations  at  all,  except  because  God  has  breathed
that  human  will  into  some  parcels  of  matter,  being
pleased  that  they  should  live  after  that  human
fashion  ? Hence  the  celestial  colour  of  charity,
which  has  passed  through  the  presence  and
through  the  love  of  God  as  through  an  infinite  fire,
before  reaching  either  the  beauty  or  the  suffering
of  any  creature.  Our  Prophet  did  not  look  upon
the  world  with  the  eyes  of  a mortal ; he  was
deeply  disenchanted  with  all  the  glories  of  which
human  life  is  capable.  He  ignored,  with  a com-
passionate indulgence,  all  liberal  arts,  sciences  and
ambitions  : not  one  hint  of  comforts  or  sports  or
manly  adventure,  not  one  thought  of  political
institutions  to  be  built  up  laboriously  or  defended
rationally  or  handed  down  as  a heritage.  The  end
of  the  world  was  at  hand,  as,  indeed,  it  is  for  each
of  us  in  turn  ; and  charity,  knowing  that  events
are  in  other  hands,  sees  in  mankind  nothing  but  a


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


143


swarm  of  moths  fluttering  round  the  flame,  each
with  its  separate  sorrow  and  its  dazzled  spirit,
needing  to  be  saved.  His  maxims  were  not  those
of  a combatant,  or  a ranting  moralist,  or  the  founder
of  a prosperous  state.  He  considered  rather  the
lilies  of  the  field,  the  little  children,  the  sparrows  ;
even  the  tares  among  the  wheat,  though  destined
for  the  burning,  and  the  hairs  of  a man’s  head
were  God’s  creatures ; the  harlots  and  the
publicans  were  also  his  children.  Without  ex-
pecting to  extirpate  evil  so  long  as  this  world
lasted,  he  went  about  healing  and  forgiving.  In
the  midst  of  trouble  the  redeemed  soul  might  be
joyful,  and  even  the  body  might  often  be  restored
in  sympathy  with  the  soul.  A dissolving  insight,
a great  renunciation,  might  bring  peace  suddenly
to  all  who  accepted  it.  All  men,  all  creatures,
might  abandon  their  wilfulness,  disclaim  their
possessions,  and  love  one  another.  The  saints
might  form,  even  on  earth,  a new  society  without
war,  greed,  competition,  or  anxiety.  Poverty  or
disgrace  might  be  sweet  to  them  in  its  sharpness,
and  they  might  thank  God  for  their  little  sister,
the  death  of  the  body.  If  smitten  on  one  cheek
they  might  turn  the  other,  and  when  robbed
of  their  cloak  they  might  offer  their  tunic
also.  Leaving  their  nets  upon  the  shore  and
their  plough  in  mid-furrow,  they  might  beg
food  and  lodging  from  strangers ; and  when
these  werS  refused,  they  might  sit  down
starving  by  the  wayside  and  praise  God  with
a loud  voice.


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


144

Socrates.  Were  such  madmen  and  gymnoso-
phists  the  men  whom  your  Prophet  loved  ?

The  Stranger.  No,  as  a matter  of  fact,  his  heart
went  out  rather  to  children,  to  frank  young  men,
to  women  who  themselves  had  loved,  and  to  the
common  folk  in  fishing  hamlets  and  in  the  streets
of  cities.

Socrates.  Then  his  love  of  mankind  might  have
been  strangely  chilled  if  mankind  had  followed  his
precepts  ?

The  Stranger.  Such  is  the  irony  of  reform.  I
can  imagine  the  cold  words  that  our  saints  will
hear  at  the  Last  Day.  And  would  you  yourself,
Socrates,  have  loved  Alcibiades  if  he  had  re-
sembled you,  or  Athens  if  it  had  been  like  Sparta  ?

Socrates.  Athens  and  Alcibiades  were  constant
irritants  to  me,  cruelly  reminding  me  of  what
they  ought  to  have  been.  How  should  I not  have
loved  even  the  worst  vehicle  of  so  great  a revela-
tion ? There  would  be  no  irony  in  reform,  my
friend,  if  reform  were  guided  by  knowledge  of
human  nature,  and  not  by  a captious  imagination.
Man  is  a natural  being  ; if  he  is  ill  at  ease  in  the
world,  it  is  only  because  he  is  ignorant  of  the
world  and  of  his  own  good  ; and  the  discord
between  man  and  nature  would  be  wholly  resolved
if  man  would  practise  the  true  arts  of  medicine
and  politics.  But  your  Prophet  seems  to  have
delivered  precepts  which,  if  ever  his  disciples
had  obeyed  them,  would  have  turnecf  them  into
sanctified  idiots,  contemptible  in  his  own  eyes.
He  set  before  them  as  models  other  creatures,  or


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


HS

the  gods,  or  the  ways  of  the  universe,  thereby
counselling  them  to  destroy  themselves  ; and  I
see  no  benefit  which  he  conferred,  or  even  wished
to  confer,  upon  mankind.

The  Stranger.  Metamorphosis,  I suppose,  is
never  strictly  a benefit,  because  it  changes  the
standard  of  values  and  alienates  the  heart  from
its  old  pursuits.  It  is  such  a metamorphosis  of
the  spirit  that  our  religion  proposes  to  us,  although
of  course  none  occurs  in  most  of  us,  and  our
society  remains  perfectly  animal  and  heathen.
Yet  the  other  note  has  sounded,  and  is  sometimes
heard.  If  you  asked  me  for  my  own  opinion,  I
should  say  that  there  is  one  great  gift  which  our
Prophet  has  bestowed  on  us,  and  that  is  himself.
After  all,  is  not  that  the  best  gift  which  a lover
has  to  bestow,  and  the  only  one  which  a lover
would  much  care  to  receive  ? That  he  should
have  walked  among  us  ; that  he  should  have  spoken
those  golden  words,  composed  those  parables  so
rich  in  simplicity,  tenderness,  and  wisdom ; that
he  should  have  done  those  works  of  mercy  in
which  the  material  miracle  was  but  the  spark
for  the  new  flame  of  charity  which  it  kindled ;
that  he  should  have  dismissed  with  a divine  scorn
and  a perfect  disillusion  all  the  busy  vanities  of
this  world — ^the  Pharisees  with  their  orthodoxy,
the  Sadducees  with  their  liberalism,  the  scribes
with  their  scriptures  ; that  he  should  have  re-
nounced family  and  nation  and  party  and  riches,
and  any  other  hope  or  notion  of  paradise  than  this
very  liberation  and  self-surrender  of  the  soul —

L


146  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

that  is  his  gift  to  mankind.  Alone  among  dream-
ing mortals  he  seemed  to  be  awake,  because  he
knew  that  he  was  dreaming  ; the  images  and
passions  which  bring  illusion  to  others,  although
he  felt  them,  brought  no  illusion  to  him.  He
had  enough  sympathy  with  blind  life  to  under-
stand it,  to  forgive  it,  to  heal  its  wounds,  to  cover
its  shames,  and  even  to  foster  it  when  innocent ;
yet  that  very  understanding  compelled  him  to
renounce  it  all  in  his  heart,  continually  draining
his  chalice  to  the  dregs,  and  foreknowing  the
solitude  of  the  cross.  Thus  the  indwelling  deity
entirely  transfigured  without  shattering  his
humanity,  and  the  flame  of  love  in  him,  though
it  rose  and  fell  humanly  as  the  miseries  or  the
beauties  of  the  world  passed  before  his  eyes,  yet
never  had  the  least  taint  in  it  of  impurity,  moodi-
ness, or  favour.  It  was  divine  love,  free  from
craving  or  decay.  The  saint  and  the  blackguard
alike  were  known  to  him  at  their  true  worth  ;
in  both  he  could  see  something  disfigured  or  un-
attained, perhaps  hidden  from  their  own  eyes,
and  yet  the  sole  reason  and  root  of  their  being,
something  simple  and  worthy  of  love  beneath  all
their  weakness  or  perversity  ; and  the  assurance
of  this  divine  love,  so  surprising  and  inexplicable,
became  to  many  the  only  warrant  of  their  worth,
and  lent  them  courage  not  wholly  to  despise
themselves,  but  to  seek  and  to  cleanse  the  pure
pearl  in  their  dung-hill,  on  which  his  own  eye
rested,  and  not  without  reason  to  call  him  the
saviour  of  their  souls.


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


147


Socrates.  In  all  your  words  you  are  implying,
if  I understand  you,  that  your  Prophet  was  a god
in  the  form  of  man  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes.

Socrates.  That  is  a point  of  difference  between
him  and  me  which  may  justify  the  difference  in
our  maxims.  A god,  even  if  for  a moment  he
condescends  to  play  the  mortal,  holds  his  im-
mortality in  reserve  ; it  is  one  thing  to  live  and
die  in  an  assumed  character,  and  another  thing
to  live  and  die  in  the  only  character  one  has.  We
may  presume,  I suppose,  that  a god  taking  human
shape  is  born  freely,  after  having  considered  what
form  he  should  take  and  chosen  his  parents  and
the  places  he  should  haunt  ? He  would  forecast
and  approve  all  the  circumstances  and  actions
likely  to  make  up  his  earthly  career  ?

The  Stranger.  Of  course ; that  is  precisely
what  we  mean  by  saying  that  he  is  a god  become
man — a form  of  words  to  which  unspeculative
people  might  possibly  take  exception.

Socrates.  But  a mortal  is  born  fatally  and,  as
it  were,  against  his  will ; he  finds  himself,  he  knows
not  why  or  how,  a man  or  a woman,  a Greek  or  a
barbarian,  whole  or  maimed,  happy  or  unhappy.

The  Stranger.  Such  is  the  blind  throw  of
existence.  By  that  token  the  spirit  knows  that
it  was  created  and  is  not  its  own  master.

Socrates.  Nevertheless,  would  you  not  admit
that  during  ^is  mortal  life  a god  in  human  form
might  at  times  forget  the  choice  he  had  freely
made,  and  the  clear  purpose  of  it,  and  might  share


148  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

with  mortals  their  surprise  at  events  or  their  fears
for  the  future  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes,  he  would  then  actually
have  become  a man,  and  not  merely  have  appeared
in  the  semblance  of  man  in  some  walking  vision,
like  a ghost  in  the  sunshine.  In  such  moments
of  obscured  deity,  he  might  taste  anguish  and
death,  and  he  might  need  to  exercise  faith  and
courage  like  any  mortal,  to  whom  his  own  true
nature  and  that  of  the  world  are  profoundly
unknown.

Socrates.  And  yet  would  he  have  ceased  to  be
a god  } Or  would  his  substantial  divinity  be
proved  and  vindicated  if  on  awaking  from  his
mortal  confusion  he  remembered  the  choice  of
such  an  incarnation  which  he  had  freely  made  in
the  beginning,  and  all  his  immortal  reasons  for
making  it  ?

The  Stranger.  The  unity  of  his  divine  person
would  then  be  evident,  because  spirit  is  not
divided  by  the  differences  in  its  objects,  or  by
their  sequence  : on  the  contrary,  in  noting  that
sequence  or  those  differences  it  manifests  its  scope
and  its  intellectual  essence.

Socrates.  And  for  what  reason  can  you  con-
ceive such  a god  to  select  the  sort  of  mortal  life
through  which  he  shall  pass,  or  to  remember  it
with  pleasure  after  he  has  passed  through  it  ?

The  Stranger.  I am  at  a loss  to^  suggest  any
reason.

Socrates.  Yet  you  have  heard  that  the
Egyptians,  who  were  wise  men  and  free  from


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


149

vulgar  prejudice,  believed  that  one  god  affected
the  form  of  a cat,  and  another  that  of  a monkey
or  a bull  or  an  ibis  ; and  on  the  same  principle,
I suppose,  some  gods,  vphom  we  might  call  divine
philanthropists,  may  have  affected  the  form  of
man  : and  these  are  doubtless  the  gods  whom
we  preferred  to  worship  in  Hellas.

The  Stranger.  I sympathize  with  your  taste,
and  with  that  of  your  gods  also.

Socrates.  But  not,  I suppose,  to  the  extent  of
rashly  denying  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  or
the  impartiality  of  the  divine  principle  animating
all  the  gods,  no  matter  of  what  living  function
or  form  they  may  choose  to  be  patrons.  Now,
leaving  for  a moment  the  Egyptians  to  their
wisdom,  I would  ask  you  this  : If  some  god  is
by  temperament  a philanthropist  and  meditates
taking  the  human  form,  would  you  expect  him  to
assimilate  himself  to  all  sorts  of  men  equally,  to
become  both  man  and  woman,  both  white  and
black,  both  good  and  wicked  ?

The  Stranger.  Evidently  the  same  arbitrary
choice,  which  you  have  just  called  temperament,
leading  him  to  choose  a human  life  at  all  must
lead  him  to  choose  some  human  life  in  particular.

Socrates.  Might  he  then,  as  well  as  not,  in
order  to  show  his  friendship  for  man,  be  born
a hunchback  or  an  imbecile,  or  would  he  thirst
to  commit  all  the  crimes  and  to  catch  all  the
infections  of  which  human  nature  is  capable  ?

The  Stranger.  Wc  have  already  dismissed  that
morbid  romanticism.


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


150

Socrates.  Would  you  at  least  expect  him  to
plough  and  fish  and  dig  for  iron  and  quarry
stone  ? Would  he  marry  and  build  himself  a
house  and  supervise  his  domestic  economy  and
the  education  of  his  children  ? Would  lie  go
down  daily  to  bargain  and  argue  and  spit  and  vote
in  the  agora  ?

The  Stranger.  All  that  sort  of  thing  is  certainly
very  human,  and  seems  honourable  enough  in  a
man  or,  at  least,  inevitable  : but  somehow  it  is
absurdly  contrary  to  the  nature  of  a god  even  if
he  was  dwelling  in  disguise  among  men,  and  when
seen  in  that  light,  as  occupation  for  a god,  it  all
becomes  pitiful  and  ridiculous.

Socrates.  Is  it  perhaps  easier  for  you  to  im-
agine a god  in  human  shape  tending  flocks
or  taming  horses  or  dancing  at  a harvest  feast,
or  wrestling  with  the  young  men  in  the
palaestra  and  causing  astonishment  that  one
apparently  so  young  and  slender  should  throw
the  strongest  and  most  skilful  of  them  at  the
first  encounter  ?

The  Stranger.  Yes,  such  theophanies  are  dear
to  the  poets.

Socrates.  And  while  you  refuse  to  admit  that
a god  could  become  a general  and  plan  a battle
and  perhaps  lose  it,  would  you  think  it  credible
that  he  should  swoop  down  into  the  fray  to  rescue
some  hero  whom  he  especially  favoured,  or  should
transfix  some  other  hero  with  an  invisible  arrow  or
with  a glance,  or  should,  by  a word  or  a touch,
bring  a dead  man  to  life  ?


THE  PHILANTHROPIST  151

The  Stranger.  Oh  yes  ; such  actions  seem
more  congruous  with  a god  in  disguise.

Socrates.  And  without  allowing  him  to  become
a husband  and  a householder,  would  you  suffer
him  to  woo  some  nymph,  or  perhaps  to  appear  in
the  midst  of  a wedding  feast  and  to  carry  off  the
bride,  leaving  the  bridegroom  open-mouthed  and
the  whole  company  in  confusion  ? '

The  Stranger.  I am  afraid,  if  we  may  trust
popular  tales,  that  he  might  do  so  without  my
permission.

Socrates.  Is  it  even  conceivable  that  he  might
secretly  substitute  himself  for  a woman’s  husband,
or  carry  her  away  in  a cloud  to  his  own  haunts,
in  order  that  by  that  gentle  rape  she  might  become
the  mother  of  a young  hero  ?

The  Stranger.  That,  too,  is  told  of  Zeus,  and
of  other  fabulous  interlopers  ; but  what  is  the
purpose  of  all  these  examples  ?

Socrates.  To  discover,  if  possible,  what  elements
of  human  life  a spirit  that  freely  chose  to  be  human
would  admit  into  its  experience.  The  poets  who
compose  fables  about  the  gods — and  I suppose  the
same  is  true  of  those  who  report  the  apparitions
of  your  Prophet — were  moralists  in  poetic  guise  ;
they  may  have  been  rustics  and  their  pleasures
rude,  but  they  were  regaling  themselves  and  their
hearers  with  pictures  of  such  lordly  actions  as  they
would  have  performed  gladly,  had  their  souls  been
freed  frora  labour  and  restraint.  It  will  be  easy
to  preserve  the  principle  of  their  morality  while
refining  the  illustration.  You  can  conceive,  for


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


152

instance,  that  Apollo  or  one  of  the  Muses,  if  they
loved  mankind,  might  whisper  perfect  music  or
perfect  truth  into  our  ears  ?

The  Stranger.  That  would  be  true  philanthropy
on  their  part.

Socrates.  Now  pray  tell  me  which  were  the
pleasures  and  arts,  comparable  with  those  we  have
mentioned,  that  seemed  to  your  Prophet  and  to
the  poets  who  composed  his  story  to  be  arts  and
pleasures  so  liberal  and  so  proper  to  human  nature
as  not  to  be  unworthy  of  a god  wearing  the  form
of  man  ? — You  are  silent.  Can  you  possibly  be
asking  yourself  whether  such  sublime  spirits  could
be  haters  of  human  nature  rather  than  lovers
of  it  ?

The  Stranger.  Is  human  nature  one  and  in-
variable } Of  course  in  any  man  at  any  moment
human  nature  will  tend  to  some  specific  attain-
ment, and  according  to  our  way  of  speaking  that
coveted  perfection  will  be  enshrined  eternally  in
a divine  idea.  But  the  expression  of  that  idea  on
earth  will  remain  precarious,  and  human  nature
in  actual  men  is  an  unstable  compound.  The
next  man,  the  next  generation,  the  neighbouring
nation,  will  tend  to  a dijfferent  perfection.  This,
too,  will  be  enshrined  in  a divine  idea  ; but  there
is  no  saying  that  one  divine  idea  is  better  than
another,  or  that  the  humanity  of  to-day  is  less  or
more  human  than  that  of  yesterday.  Each  posture
of  life  has  its  apposite  perfection,  whieh  is  truly
divine  inasmuch  as  labouring  existence  some-
where actually  worships  and  pursues  it.  Why


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


153


call  down  imprecations  on  another  creature  for
not  being  or  not  wishing  to  be  like  ourselves  ?
The  flux  of  matter  brings  now  one  idea  and  now
another  to  the  surface  ; and  it  is  matter  in  us,  and
not  reason  or  spirit,  that  struggles  to  bring  one
form  into  existence  here  and  another  there,  or  to
defend  and  preserve  it.  A mighty  pother  it  all
makes,  with  much  thunder  and  lightning  from
above,  which  Zeus  sends  down  in  sport  or  in
derision.  The  sweetness  and  the  terror  of  it  are
alike  ephemeral.  Meantime  only  two  principles
endure  perpetually  in  the  universe  : the  flux  of
matter  in  which  every  life  is  formed  and  dis-
solved, and  the  pure  spirit  which,  chained  to  the
mast  like  Odysseus  among  the  Sirens,  looks  out
upon  the  strange  scene,  as  it  has  looked  out  from
many  another  vessel  on  many  another  scene,  both
before  and  after.  Now  these  two  principles,  being
present  everywhere  and  everlasting,  are  more  akin
than  any  passing  perfection  to  the  unknown  God
whom  no  man  has  chosen,  the  creator  of  man  as
of  all  other  things  ; and  our  Prophet  who  was  not
one  of  those  pleasant  philanthropists,  the  gods  of
Greece,  but  was  the  Word  of  universal  deity,
spoke  only  for  pure  spirit  in  the  throes  of  destiny,
and  not  at  all  for  human  thrift  or  human  vanity.
You,  Socrates,  having  a civilized  soul,  have  firmly
chosen  to  spend  your  days  in  the  citadel  of
morality  and  to  cultivate  only  those  deities  who
are  patrons*  of  civil  justice  and  the  kindly  arts  ;
but  in  us  ^Darbarians  there  is  still  something  un-
reclaimed and  akin  to  the  elements,  a spirit  as  of


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


154

the  hunter  or  the  hermit  or  the  wild  poet,  who  is
not  happy  in  towns.  The  fields,  the  mountains,
the  sea,  the  life  of  plants  and  animals,  the  marvel
of  the  stars  or  of  intricate  friendly  forests  in  which
to  range  alone,  all  seem  to  liberate  in  us  some-
thing deeper  than  humanity,  something  untamable
which  we  share  with  all  God’s  creatures  and
possibly  with  God  himself.  I confess  that  my
own  spirit  is  not  very  romantic,  and  yet  at  times
it  would  gladly  dehumanize  itself  and  be  merged
now  in  infinitely  fertile  matter,  now  in  clear  and
unruffled  mind  ; and  I am  inclined  to  identify  my
being  even  now  with  these  elements,  in  which  I
shall  soon  be  lost,  rather  than  with  that  odd
creature  which  I call  man,  or  that  odder  one  which
I call  myself.  Nothing  can  reconcile  me  to  my
personality  save  the  knowledge  that  it  is  an  absurd
accident,  that  things  pleasanter  to  think  of  exist
in  plenty,  and  that  I may  always  retire  from  it
into  pure  spirit  with  its  impartial  smile.

Socrates.  Your  pleasures,  then,  are  not  in  man
but  in  some  faculty  which  you  think  you  have  of
escaping  from  humanity  ?

The  Stranger.  Neither  matter  nor  spirit  is
foreign  to  human  nature  ; they  run  through  it
and  pass  beyond  ; but  the  special  human  form
which  they  take  on  for  a moment  is  something  to
be  accepted  and  dismissed  without  any  passionate
attachment.

Socrates.  And  if  matter  and  spirk  elsewhere
should  assume  some  other  shape,  would  that  non-
human life  please  you  better  ?


THE  PHILANTHROPIST  155

The  Stranger.  Why  should  it  please  me  better  ?
It  would  be  subject  to  the  same  contingency,
torment,  and  decay.  I have  no  particular  pre-
judice against  the  nest  in  which  I was  hatched,
as  if  I were  a reformer  ; human  ways  please  me  ;
I can  laugh  and  shudder  with  the  crowd.  But
any  adoration  of  mankind  is  mere  sentimentality,
killed  by  contact  with  actual  men  and  women.
Towards  actual  people  a doting  love  signifies
silliness  in  the  lover  and  injury  to  the  beloved,
until  that  love  is  chastened  into  charity — a sober
and  profound  compassion,  not  counting  alleged
deserts,  but  succouring  distress  everywhere  and
helping  all  to  endure  their  humanity  and  to
renounce  it.

Socrates.  When  a man  gathers  food,  begets
children,  or  defends  himself  and  his  country,  is  his
love  of  life  mere  sentimentality  ?

The  Stranger.  Of  course  not.

Socrates.  Yet  what  is  he  pursuing  in  all  those
struggles  save  the  continued  existence  of  his
humanity  ?

The  Stranger.  I admit  that  the  love  of  an  idea
is  not  sentimental  when  it  inspires  labour  and  art.

Socrates.  Then  have  you  not  solved  your
original  difficulty  ?

The  Stranger.  What  difficulty  ?

Socrates.  Your  disinclination  to  believe  that
philanthropy  is  the  love  of  an  idea,  and  not  of
actual  men*and  women  ?

The  Stranger.  And  have  I overcome  that
disinclination  ?


156  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

Socrates.  Apparently,  since  you  now  admit
that  the  love  of  life  is  itself  love  of  an  idea,  and
that  philanthropy,  in  setting  that  idea  more  clearly
before  men’s  eyes  and  helping  them  to  embody  it
more  perfectly,  is  simply  reinforcing  their  natural
virtue.

The  Stranger.  I think  this  solution,  as  usual,
has  been  found  by  you  and  not  by  me.

Socrates.  You  are  too  curious  : but,  at  any  rate,
you  have  explained  another  matter  which,  as  it
touches  the  special  tenets  of  your  religion,  you
will  not  accuse  me  of  having  interpolated.

The  Stranger.  And  what  is  that  ?

Socrates.  That  a god  cannot  be  a philanthropist,
even  if  he  chooses  to  take  a human  form.  His
divine  mind  can  never  give  an  exclusive  import-
ance to  perfection  in  one  kind  of  animal ; he  may
amiably  foster  humanity  on  occasion,  but  he  will
ultimately  invite  it  to  dissolve  and  to  pass  into
something  different.  Therefore,  a philanthropist,
who  is  wedded  to  a human  love,  if  he  is  inspired
by  a god  at  all,  can  be  inspired  only  by  some  small
whispering  daemon  peculiar  to  himself,  whom
perhaps  he  calls  Reason.  Will  you  wickedly
pretend  that  this,  too,  is  an  invention  of  mine  ?
Never  mind  who  first  said  it.  if  we  both  agree
that  it  is  true.

The  Stranger.  I certainly  agree.

Socrates.  In  that  case  we  may  now  describe
both  my  philanthropy  and  your  charity  by  saying
that  philanthropy  is  a sentiment  proper  to  man  in
view  of  his  desired  perfection,  and  charity  a senti-


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


IS7

ment  proper  to  a god,  or  to  a man  inspired  by  a
god,  in  view  of  the  necessary  imperfection  of  all
living  creatures.

The  Stranger.  Yes,  if  this  god,  or  man  taught
by  a god,  is  not  scornful  of  imperfection,  or  in-
different, or  even  given  to  gloating  over  it,  on  the
ground  that  it  keeps  the  ball  rolling.  He  must  be
a spirit  made  flesh,  who  himself  suffers.  This
suffering  cannot  be  stilled  by  establishing  any
tribe  of  animals,  or  any  one  soul,  in  its  natural
happiness.  Such  animal  perfection  in  one  quarter
would  be  bought  by  mutilation  and  suffering
elsewhere — in  other  animals  hunted  and  devoured,
in  slavery,  in  all  the  rebellious  instincts  necessarily
suppressed  ; and  what  is  even  worse,  something
in  the  human  spirit  (which  is  not  merely  human)
would  be  stifled  by  that  happiness  and  would
hate  that  perfection.  The  only  cure  for  suffering
which  true  wisdom  and  charity  can  seek  is  not
perfect  embodiment  but  complete  emancipation.

Socrates.  I am  not  surprised  to  hear  it  from
your  lips.  In  early  Hellas  men  were  growing
whole  and  naturally  cherished  wholeness  ; but
later,  when  the  bonds  that  bound  our  cities  were
relaxed,  we,  too,  began  to  love  dissolution.  Now
the  discord  in  your  soul  has  become  hopeless,
and  you  yearn  to  be  dissolved  into  your  elements.
Far  be  it  from  me  to  blame  your  preference  if
sincere  : a scotched  worm  when  cut  quite  in  two
may  lead*  its  two  lives  more  conveniently  in
separation.  So  in  you  matter  and  spirit ; but
I ask  myself  whether  you  are  a Christian  because


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


158

you  are  dying,  or  are  longing  to  die  because  you
are  a Christian.

The  Stranger.  I am  not  so  much  a Christian
as  that ; yet  when  change  is  inevitable,  why
should  we  not  live  by  changing  ? They  say  that
there  are  poisons  to  which  an  organism  may
accustom  itself,  so  that  they  may  become  elements
of  defence  within  it  against  other  evils,  perhaps
more  deadly.  Christianity  among  us  is  one  of
these  domesticated  evils  or  tonic  poisons,  like  the
army,  the  government,  the  family,  and  the  school ;
all  of  them  traditional  crutches  with  which,  though
limping,  we  manage  to  walk.  From  despair,  at
certain  crises,  comes  a last  spurt  of  courage  ; and
after  your  day,  when  manly  virtue  had  long  dis-
appeared, before  quite  dying  of  its  sins,  the  world
awoke  to  a fresh  life  by  beginning  to  do  penance.

Socrates.  Better  the  cup  of  hemlock  in  time.
Why  nurse  disease  or  deformity  ? Death  is  not
an  evil,  but  vileness  is  ; and  when  vileness  is
cultivated  for  the  sake  of  life  it  renders  life  vile
also.  I thanked  the  gods  when  I was  alive  for
having  been  born  a Greek  and  not  a barbarian,
and  now  that  I am  dead  I thank  them  that  I died
in  time,  lest  I should  have  become  a Christian.

The  Stranger.  Is  not  even  a Christian  a man,
with  his  transfigured  type  of  perfection  ? In  a
later  age  you  might  have  cultivated  sanctity,  as
in  your  day  you  praised  and  defined  the  perfect
rational  animal.  After  all,  were  you  nbt  yourself
constrained  to  turn  away  from  this  world  and
lay  up  your  treasure  in  heaven  ?


THE  PHILANTHROPIST


159

Socrates.  No,  no  : how  should  a plain  man
like  me,  plodding  and  carnal,  desire  the  life  of  a
god  or  dream  of  ever  enjoying  it  ? Was  I a
Heracles  or  a Ganymede  ? To  heaven  I never
looked  for  a refuge  from  the  earth,  or  a second
native  land  : I saw  there  an  eternal  pattern  to
which  men  always  might  point,  and  after  which
they  might  religiously  fashion  their  earthly  lives
and  their  human  republic.  You  are  mistaken  if
you  think  that  I was  ever  comforted  by  dreams
or  satisfied  with  contemplating  an  idea.  Poor
craftsman  that  I was,  what  was  the  finest  of  ideas
to  me  except  a principle  of  art  ? Of  what  use
could  rule  or  compass  be  to  me  without  a work-
shop, or  the  lodestar  without  a helm  ? Images  in
the  fancy  never  enamoured  me  ; even  in  stone
or  marble  I held  them  cheap,  and  had  no  heart
to  cheat  myself  with  that  semblance,  while  living
beauty  remained  absent  from  the  flesh  and  from
the  soul  of  my  countrymen.  So  little  did  the
idea  unrealized  appease  my  hunger,  that  rather
than  starve  on  it  I was  content  to  love,  or  to
pretend  to  love,  naughty  creatures  like  Athens  or
like  Alcibiades  ; they  were  the  best  I could  find,
little  as  they  satisfied  my  heart.  Ah,  if  you  could
only  guide  me  to  some  fair  country,  no  matter
how  remote,  where  men  actually  live  happy  and
arc  perfect  after  their  kind,  I would  instantly
disown  Athens,  Hellas,  and  even  the  placid
immortalit)^  which  Pluto  has  granted  me  here,  in
order  to  go  and  live  among  those  creatures  and
learn  their  ways.  No  dislike  of  travel  will  stop


i6o  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

me,  if  once  the  good  realized  beckons  me  away.
With  what  joy  should  I find  that  little  city  shining
upon  its  hill,  girt  with  impregnable  walls  that
never  held  a traitor  ; hours  appointed  for  rising
and  exercising  and  feasting  and  singing  ; words
approved  and  words  forbidden;  prescribed  gar-
ments or  prescribed  nakedness  ; sacred  festivals
coming  round  with  the  sun,  and  pleasures  set
apart  for  youth  and  for  age,  for  men  and  for
women  ; for  to  such  musical  paces  the  spirit  of
man  must  move  if  it  would  be  beautiful  and  holy.

The  Stranger.  The  men  of  my  time  would  not
relish  your  regimen.

Socrates.  Nor  did  those  of  my  time  relish  it.
They  loved  anything  and  everything  better  than
a perfect  humanity.  They  had  their  way :
abandoning  their  cities  to  ruin,  neglecting  to  breed
noble  children,  and  to  train  them  nobly,  they
became  troops  of  ranging  animals,  with  a homeless
and  dreaming  mind.  Those  who  now  dwell  on
earth  are  not  men  but  anthropoids  ; and  when
their  race,  too,  is  extinct — ^for  it  will  soon  destroy
itself — ^if  your  friendly  spirit  happily  survives,
pray  bring  me  the  pleasant  tidings  ; for  humanity
is  immortal,  and  although  matter  for  a season
may  lapse  from  that  form,  and  the  race  may  seem
to  be  extinguished,  the  forgotten  pattern  is  still
inviolate  in  heaven,  inviting  and  summoning  that
wayward  substance  to  resume  its  possible  beauty  ;
nor  can  such  divine  magic  be  resist&d  for  ever.
If  then  some  day  the  news  should  reach  me  that
humanity  is  returning  to  the  earth,  I will  humbly


THE  PHILANTHROPIST  i6i

beg  Pluto,  who  is  a kindly  monarch  over  these
Shades,  to  grant  me  leave  for  an  hour  to  revisit
the  sun,  in  case  Theseus  or  the  children  of
Heracles  might  be  coming  down  again  from  the
snows  of  Haemus,  and  I might  hear  the  Dorian
trumpet  resounding  through  the  valleys  and —
incorrigible  philanthropist  that  I am — I might
feast  my  eyes  at  last  upon  the  sight  of  A man.


M


HOMESICKNESS  FOR  THE  WORLD


Avicenna  (soliloquizing).  Great  is  Allah  : even
I,  alas,  could  not  deceive  him.  By  every  promise
of  faith  and  canon  of  the  law,  I should  now  find
myself  in  The  Paradise  of  the  Prophet,  reclining
on  silken  cushions  and  sipping  delicious  sherbets  ;
the  fresh  sweet  sound  of  bubbling  fountains  should
comfort  me ; I should  be  soothed  by  the  scent  of
great  sleeping  flowers,  their  petals  like  amethysts
and  rubies  and  sapphires  and  liquid  opals.  I
should  be  charmed  by  the  sight  of  peacocks
spreading  their  fans  ; and  the  nightingales  in  the
thicket  of  ilex  should  sing  to  me  like  my  own
heart.  Some  tender  young  maid,  wide-eyed  and
nimble  as  a gazelle,  should  be  not  far  from  me  ;
her  hair  should  be  lightly  touching  my  cheek;
my  hand  should  be  wandering  over  her  bosom.
From  the  impregnable  safety  of  my  happiness  I
should  be  looking  abroad  through  all  the  heavens
and  surveying  the  earth  ; the  maxims  of  the  wise
should  be  on  my  lips  and  in  my  soul  the  joy  of
understanding.  Walking  upon  th^"  bastions  of
Paradise,  my  arm  linked  in  that  of  a friend,  of
him  that  my  soul  trusts  utterly,  I should  be


HOMESICKNESS  FOR  THE  WORLD  163

repeating  the  words  of  the  poets,  and  he  in
answer,  without  haste  or  error,  should  be  com-
posing for  me  tenderer  and  more  beautiful  verses
of  his  own  ; and  we  should  be  marvelling  and
sighing  together  at  the  ineffable  greatness  of  God
and  the  teeming  splendour  of  the  earth.  Yes,
legally,  I should  have  been  saved.  Was  I not
exactitude  itself  in  every  religious  duty  ? Did  I
ever  allow  myself  the  least  licence,  on  the  ground
that  I was  a philosopher,  unless  I had  a text  to
justify  me  ? Did  I blasphemously  lay  my  assur-
ance of  salvation  in  my  own  merits  or  in  the
letter  of  the  law,  rather  than  in  the  complacency
of  the  Compassionate  and  the  Merciful  One,  who
having  made  us  can  forgive  and  understand  ?
Ah,  if  ever  Allah  could  be  deceived,  certainly  I
should  have  deceived  him.  But  the  Omniscient
looked  into  my  secret  heart,  and  perceived  that
I was  no  believer,  and  that  whilst  my  lips  invoked
his  name  and  that  of  the  Prophet,  my  trust  was
all  in  Aristotle  and  in  myself.  Sharpening  there-
fore in  silence  the  sword  of  his  wrath,  he  over-
ruled my  legal  rights  by  a higher  exercise  of
equity  and  reduced  me  for  ever  to  the  miserable
condition  of  a pure  spirit.  Here  among  heathen
ghosts  I pine  and  loiter  eternally,  a shadow
reflecting  life  and  no  longer  living,  vainly  revolving
my  thoughts,  because  in  my  thoughts  I trusted,
and  missing  all  the  warm  and  solid  pleasures  of
Paradise,  because  I had  hoped  to  win  them
without  blinding  my  intellect,  or  suffering  old
fables  to  delude  me.


i64  dialogues  IN  LIMBO

The  Stranger  {who  has  approached  unobserved).
Is  it  not  some  consolation  to  consider  that  if  you
were  not  able  to  deceive  Allah,  Allah  was  not  able
to  deceive  you  ?

Avicenna.  Small  consolation.  Pride  of  intellect
is  the  sour  refuge  of  those  who  have  nothing  else
to  be  proud  of.  Strong  as  my  soul  was  in  other
virtues,  and  generous  my  blood,  intellect  prevailed
too  much  in  me,  dashed  my  respect  for  my  vital
powers,  and  killed  the  confidence  they  should  have
bred  ; it  overcame  the  illusions  necessary  to  a
creature,  and  caused  me  to  see  all  things  too  much
as  God  sees  them.

The  Stranger.  A rare  fault  in  a philosopher.

Avicenna.  May  Allah  impute  it  to  me  for
humility  and  not  for  blasphemy,  but  I never
wished  to  resemble  him.  Yes,  I know  what  you
are  about  to  say.  The  divine  part  in  us,  though
small,  is  the  most  precious,  and  we  should  live  as
far  as  we  may  in  the  eternal.  Far  be  it  from  me
to  deny  that,  or  any  other  maxim  of  Aristotle  ;
especially  now,  when  that  exiguous  element  in
myself  is  all  that  is  left  of  me.  But,  frankly,  I
pine  for  the  rest.  Are  not  even  the  souls  of  your
friends  the  Christians,  wretchedly  as  they  are
accustomed  to  live,  waiting  now  in  their  forlorn
heaven  for  the  last  day,  when  they  shall  return  to
their  bodies,  and  feel  again  that  they  are  men  and
not  angels  ? Intellect,  being  divine,  comes  into
our  tents  through  the  door  ; it  is  a "guest  and  a
stranger  to  our  blood.  Its  language  is  foreign  to
us,  and  painfully  as  we  may  try  to  learn  it,  we


HOMESICKNESS  FOR  THE  WORLD  165

always  speak  it  ill.  How  often  have  I laughed
at  Arabs  pluming  themselves  in  Persian,  and  at
Persians  blasphemously  corrupting  the  syllables
of  the  Koran  which  they  thought  to  recite  : for
few,  like  me,  are  perfect  masters  of  both  tongues.
And  do  you  suppose  Allah  does  not  smile  at  our
rustic  accent  when  we  venture  to  think  ? But
there  are  other  tricks  of  ours  which  he  does  not
laugh  at,  because  he  cannot  imitate  them.  May
we  not  pride  ourselves  a little  on  our  illusions,  on
our  sports,  on  our  surprises,  and  on  our  childish
laughter,  so  much  fresher  and  sweeter  than  his
solemnity  ? Rather  than  be  eternal,  who  would
not  choose  to  be  young  ? Do  not  the  Pagans  and
Christians  (who  have  never  understood  the  great-
ness of  Allah)  confess  as  much,  when  in  their  fables
they  relate  how  the  gods  have  become  men  for  a
season,  shepherds,  lovers  of  women,  wanderers,
even  wonder-workers  and  beggars  ; or  how  they
have  prayed,  fasted,  wept,  and  died  ? Of  course,
such  tales  are  impious ; Allah  can  never  be
deceived  or  diminished  ; and  to  live  in  time,  to
dwell  in  a body,  to  thirst,  to  love,  and  to  grieve
are  forms  of  impotence  and  self-deception.  If  we
knew  all,  we  could  not  live.  But  it  is  precisely
this  sweet  cajolery,  this  vivid  and  terrible  blind-
ness of  life,  which  Allah  cannot  share,  in  which
his  creatures  shine.  In  order  to  know  the  truth,
Allah  alone  sufficed  ; he  did  not  create  us  to
supplement  his  intelligence.  He  created  us  rather
that  by  our  incorrigible  ignorance  we  might
diversify  existence  and  surround  his  godhead  with


1 66  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

beings  able  to  die  and  to  kill,  able  to  dream,  able
to  look  for  the  truth  and  to  tell  themselves  lies,
able  above  all  to  love,  to  feel  the  life  quickened
suddenly  within  them  at  the  sight  of  some  other
lovely  and  winsome  creature,  until  they  could
contain  it  no  longer,  and  too  great,  too  mad,  too
sweet  to  be  endured  it  should  leap  from  them  into
that  other  being,  there  to  create  a third.  If  this
madness  was  not  worth  having,  as  well  as  intellect,
why  did  Allah  create  the  world  ? Ah,  he  was
solitary,  he  was  cold,  he  shone  like  the  stars  in
the  wilderness  on  a frosty  night ; and  when  he
bethought  himself  of  his  coldness  and  shuddered
at  his  solitude,  that  pang  of  itself  begat  the  com-
panion with  which  his  Oneness  was  pregnant,  the
Soul  of  the  World  ; in  order  that  the  Intellect
itself  might  grow  warm  in  the  eyes  of  the  Soul
that  loved  it,  and  be  the  star  of  her  dark  voyage,
and  that  his  solitude  might  turn  to  glory,  because
of  the  Life  that  flowed  from  him  into  the  bosom
of  that  loneliness  and  quickened  it  to  all  forms  of
love.  Now  this  divine  Soul  of  the  World  had  in
turn  flowed  into  my  soul  more  copiously  than  into
that  of  other  mortals.  I had  health,  riches,  arts,
rare  adventures,  fame,  and  the  choicest  pleasures
of  both  body  and  mind  ; but  happiness  I never
had.  So  long  as  I still  lived,  sailing  before  the
wind  of  my  prosperity,  I hardly  perceived  the
division  and  misery  of  my  being,  or  fancied  that
with  my  next  triumph  they  would  cea§e  ; but  now
I perceive  them.  I might  have  been  happy,  if  I
had  not  been  a philosopher,  or  if  I had  been


HOMESICKNESS  FOR  THE  WORLD  167

nothing  else.  As  it  was,  too  much  intellect  made
brackish  the  sweet  and  impetuous  current  of  my
days.  Philosophy  in  me  was  not  a harmony  of
my  whole  nature,  but  one  of  its  passions,  and  the
most  inordinate,  because  I craved  and  struggled
to  know  everj^hing  ; and  this  passion  in  me  availed
only  to  mock  and  embitter  the  others,  without
subduing  them.  I renounced  nothing,  I rejected
nothing  ; being  but  a man,  I lived  like  a god,  and
my  pride  blasted  my  human  nature.  All  actions
worked  themselves  out  in  me  without  illusion,  in
the  ghastly  light  of  truth  and  of  foreknowledge.
Horror  was  never  far  from  my  pleasures.  The
fever  of  my  ambitions  must  needs  be  perpetually
accelerated,  lest  the  too  clear  intellect  in  me  should
look  upon  them  and  they  should  die.  I scorned
the  modesty  of  the  sages  who  made  of  intelligence
a second  and  a sundered  life  ; and  as  for  lack  of
faith  I missed  the  Paradise  of  the  Prophet,  even
so,  for  lack  of  measure  and  renunciation,  I missed
the  peace  of  the  philosopher.  I was  wedded  to
existence  as  to  a favourite  wife,  whom  I knew  to
be  faithless,  but  could  not  cease  to  love.  Before
the  flight  of  time,  before  death,  before  Allah,  I
clasped  my  hands  and  wept  and  prayed,  like  a
woman  before  her  dying  child  or  her  estranged
lover.  Master  in  every  cunning  art,  I was  the
slave  of  fate  and  of  nature ; all  I enjoyed  I did  not
enjoy,  because  I craved  to  enjoy  it  for  ever.  I
sighed  fof  constancy  in  mortal  things,  in  which
constancy  is  not.  I strove  to  command  fortune
and  futurity,  which  will  not  be  commanded.


i68  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

I married  a wife,  and  then  another,  and  each  was  a
burden  more  weary  than  the  last.  I became  the
father  of  children,  and  they  died,  or  turned  against
me  in  their  hearts.  I made  myself  lord  over
science  and  over  great  estates,  and  I found  myself
the  slave  and  steward  of  my  possessions,  and  a vain
babbler  before  the  vulgar  whom  I knew  I deceived.
And  yet,  so  long  as  the  soul  of  nature  fed  the
fountain  of  my  being,  it  could  not  give  over  gush-
ing and  spreading  and  filling  every  cleft  and  hollow
of  opportunity.  Even  now,  when  the  fountain  is
cut  off,  I yearn  for  that  existence  which  was  my
torment ; and  my  unhappiness  has  outlived  its
cause,  and  become  eternal.

The  Stranger.  Since  Spirit  is  not  attached  to
one  form  of  life  rather  than  to  another,  may  it  not
consent  to  dismiss  each  in  turn  ? If  we  do  not
renounce  the  world,  we  must  expect  the  world  to
forsake  us.  The  union  of  spirit  with  nature  is  like
the  sporting  friendships  of  youth  which  time  dis-
solves naturally,  without  any  quarrel.  It  was  a
happy  union,  and  in  a life  like  yours,  full  of  great
feats,  there  is  more  satisfaction  in  having  lived
than  regret  that  life  is  over.  But  you  know  all
this  better  than  I ; and  if  you  choose  playfully  to
lament  your  eclipse  on  earth  (while  you  shine
immortally  here)  I suspect  you  do  so  merely  to
rebuke  me  gently  for  playing  the  truant  while  I
am  still  at  school,  and  troubling  you  here  pre-
maturely by  my  illicit  presence,  when  1 ought  to
be  living  lustily,  as  you  did,  while  yet  I may.

Avicenna.  You  ? If  I had  been  condemned  to


HOMESICKNESS  FOR  THE  WORLD  169

live  in  your  skin,  and  in  the  world  as  it  appears  to
be  now,  when  there  is  nothing  but  meanness  in  it,
I should  not  lament  my  present  condition,  because
sad  as  it  is,  at  least  it  is  not  ignoble.  The  only
good  thing  remaining  in  your  world  is  the  memory
of  what  it  was  in  my  day,  and  before  : so  that  I
am  far  from  chiding  you  for  spending  your  life,
as  far  as  possible,  in  our  society,  by  rehearsing  the
memorials  which  remain  of  us,  and  which  enable
you,  even  in  your  day,  to  employ  your  time
humanly,  in  the  study  of  wisdom.  I did  that,
too,  with  intense  zeal  ; but  the  earth  was  then
propitious,  and  my  soul  was  mighty,  and  every
other  art  and  virtue  was  open  to  me,  as  well  as
the  wisdom  of  the  ancients.  You  do  well  to  water
your  little  flower-pot,  as  X ranged  over  my  wide
preserves.  Life  is  not  a book  to  read  twice  : and
you  cannot  exchange  the  volume  fortune  puts  in
your  hand  for  another  on  a nobler  theme  or  by  a
better  poet.  In  reading  it  you  should  not  look
ahead,  or  you  will  skip  too  much.  It  is  not  the
ending  that  matters.  This  story  has  no  moral ;
it  stops  short.  The  ending  is  not  there,  it  is  here  ;
it  is  the  truth  of  that  life  seen  as  a whole.  Brave
men,  like  me,  who  skip  nothing,  are  not  dis-
appointed ; at  every  turn  they  come  upon  some-
thing unforeseen,  and  do  something  bold.  In  the
market  of  fortune  I bought  my  apples  without
weighing  them.  If  one  had  a worm  in  it,  I threw
it  away  latsghing,  ray  eye  already  on  the  next.
Reason  is  like  a dog  that  explores  the  road  and  all
the  by-ways  when  we  walk  abroad  ; but  he  cannot


170  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

choose  a direction  or  supply  a motive  for  the
journey,  and  we  must  whistle  to  him  when  we
take  a new  turn.

The  Stranger.  Ah,  you  lived  in  an  age  of  free-
dom. You  were  not  ashamed  of  human  nature,
and  if  life  was  full  of  dangers,  you  were  full  of
resource.  Had  we  that  strength,  life  would  yield
matter  enough  even  in  our  day  ; but  no  wealth  of
instruments  can  enrich  a mind  that  has  not  eleva-
tion for  commanding  them.  You  prize  the  world
because  you  were  its  master.  Had  you  ever  been
the  slave  of  business  and  love  and  opinion,  as  men
are  in  my  time,  you  would  not  regret  being  rid  of
them.  You  praise  them  because  you  made  sport
of  them  intellectually  ; and  destiny  has  done  no
injustice  to  your  true  nature  in  relegating  you  to
this  land  of  unconquerable  mind.  Mind  in  you
was  always  supreme.  Mere  life  and  mere  love
have  no  memory ; the  present  dazzles  them  with
its  immediate  promise,  which  the  next  moment
denies  or  transforms.  They  roll  on,  and  the  flux
of  nature  sucks  them  up  altogether.  But  when
intellect,  as  in  you,  comes  to  dominate  life  and
love,  these  acquire  a human  splendour.  The
stream  becomes  the  picture  of  a stream,  the  passion
an  ideal.  As  the  privilege  of  matter  is  to  beget
life,  so  the  joy  of  life  is  to  beget  intellect ; if  it
fails  in  that,  it  fails  in  being  anything  but  a vain
torment.

Avicenna.  Certainly  I was  a man<5  and  not  a
beast.  I gloried  in  my  actions,  because  I under-
stood and  controlled  them  ; they  were  my  re-


HOMESICKNESS  FOR  THE  WORLD  171

tainers,  standing  with  swords  drawn  before  my
gates,  my  servants  spreading  the  feast  before  me,
my  damsels  singing  and  dancing  before  my  ravished
eyes.  Now,  alas,  I am  a monarch  without  sub-
jects ; reason  in  me  has  nothing  to  rule,  and  craft
nothing  to  play  with.  Dear  warm  plastic  flesh  of
my  body  and  marrow  of  my  bones,  once  so  swiftly
responsive  to  every  heavenly  ray,  where  are  you
scattered  now  ? To  what  cold  thin  dust  are  you
turned  ? What  wind  whirls  you  about  in  vain
revolutions  amid  the  sands  of  the  desert  ? Never,
alas,  never  (since  Allah  denies  you  the  hope  of
resurrection)  will  you  be  gathered  again  into  a
mirror  without  a flaw,  into  a jewel  of  a thousand
rays,  in  order  that  the  potency  of  life,  which  never
ceases  to  radiate  from  the  Most  High,  might  be
gathered  and  reflected  in  you,  to  your  joy  and  to
his  glory.  Barren  you  shall  ever  be  of  intelli-
gence ; and  barren  my  intelligence  must  remain
in  me  here,  irapotcntly  pining  for  the  flesh  in
which  it  grew.

The  Stranger.  Is  not  sterility  in  ultimate  things
a sign  of  supremacy  ? We  disciples  of  Aristotle
know  that  there  is  something  ultimate  and  supreme
in  the  flux  of  nature,  even  the  concomitant  form
or  trtith  which  it  embodies,  and  the  intellect  which
arrests  that  form  and  that  truth.  This  intellect
ought  to  be  sterile,  because  it  is  an  end  and  not  a
means.  The  lyre  has  performed  its  task  when  it
has  givciiT  forth  the  harmony,  and  the  harmony,
being  divine,  has  no  task  to  perform.  In  sound-
ing and  in  lk)ating  into  eternal  silence,  it  has  lent


172  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

life  and  beauty  to  its  parent  world.  Therefore  1
account  you  happy,  renowned  Avicenna,  in  spite
of  your  humorous  regrets  ; for  what  survives  of
you  here  is  the  very  happiness  of  your  life,  realized
in  the  intellect,  as  alone  happiness  can  be  realized  ;
and  if  this  happiness  is  imperfect,  that  is  not
because  it  is  past,  but  because  its  elements  were
too  impetuous  to  be  reduced  to  harmony.  This
imperfect  happiness  of  yours  is  all  the  more  in-
telligible and  comforting  to  me  on  account  of  its
discords  unresolved  ; they  bring  you  nearer  to
my  day  and  to  its  troubles.  You  have  all  that  we
can  hope  for.  Your  frank  lamentations  trail  the
splendour  of  your  existence  ; they  seem  to  me
pure  music  in  contrast  to  the  optimism  which
simpers  daily  in  a wretched  world.


X


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE

The  Stranger.  To-day  you  smile,  renowned
Avicenna.  Do  you  encourage  me  to  approach  ?
Or  am  I warned  that  I should  be  disturbing  the
sweeter  society  of  your  thoughts  ?

Avicenna.  Neither,  yet  both.  I was  smiling
at  those  old  feats  of  lustiness  and  prowess  which
I was  recounting — and  with  rare  pleasure — ^when
you  were  last  here.'-

The  Stranger.  It  was  a rare  pleasure  to  listen.

Avicenna.  Doubtless  a purer  pleasure  to  listen
to  such  exploits  than  to  remember  them.  I pine
for  my  splendid  past,  and  you  seemed  hardly  to
envy  it.

The  Stranger.  I envy  you  your  intelligence
and  moral  sanity,  because  the  shy  beginnings  of
something  of  the  sort  are  innate  in  me  also.  But
how  should  I envy  you  your  adventures  ? The
flight  of  eagles  and  the  swimming  of  porpoises
are  admirable  to  me  in  the  realm  of  truth  ; I
rejoice  that  there  are  such  things  in  the  world,
but  I am'  not  tempted  to  experiment  in  those
directions.  So  I relish  your  conversation  here,
^ The  allusion  is  to  a conversation  not  reported  in  this  volume.

173


174


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


though  I should  have  made  the  lamest  of  com-
panions for  you  in  the  world.

Avicenna.  You  could  not  relish  my  virtue  even
in  idea,  had  you  no  spurs  to  brandish  in  your
particular  cock-pit.  These  very  escapades  of  yours
among  the  Shades,  in  search  of  pure  understand-
ing, are  but  the  last  gasp  of  a sporting  spirit.
Therefore  I tell  you.  Live  while  you  may.  The
truth  of  your  life  is  Allah’s.  He  will  preserve  it.

The  Stranger.  Undoubtedly.  If  time  bred
nothing,  eternity  would  have  nothing  to  embalm.
Of  all  men  I am  the  last  to  belittle  the  world  of
matter  or  to  condemn  it.  I feel  towards  it  the
most  unfeigned  reverence  and  piety,  as  to  Hestia,
Aphrodite,  Prometheus,  and  all  the  gods  of
generation  and  art ; for  I know  that  matter,  the
oldest  of  beings,  is  the  most  fertile,  the  most  pro-
found, the  most  mysterious  ; it  begets  everything,
and  cannot  be  begotten  ; but  it  is  proper  to  spirit
to  be  begotten  of  all  other  things  by  their  har-
monies, and  to  beget  nothing  in  its  turn.

Avicenna.  What  are  you  saying  ? Who  taught
you  that  ?

The  Stranger.  Aristotle  and  reflection  ; and  I
am  proud  to  think  that  this  conclusion  is  not  very
remote  from  that  which  your  great  intellect  has
drawn  from  the  same  sources.

Avicenna.  But  who  can  have  revealed  to  you
a secret  which  the  Philosopher  intentionally  dis-
guised, and  which  I too,  following  his  example,
never  proclaimed  openly  ?

The  Stranger.  Many  voyages  have  been  made


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  175

since  your  day,  and  naany  discoveries  ; and  the
ruin  of  empires  and  religions  has  repeatedly
admonished  mankind,  if  they  have  any  wit  at  all,
to  distinguish  fact  from  fable.

Avicenna.  That  is  indeed  the  distinction  which
I learned  privately  to  make,  and  to  discover
concealed  in  the  prudent  doctrine  of  the  Philo-
sopher ; but  it  was  not  at  first  blush,  nor  without
a special  revelation,  that  my  great  intellect  dis-
covered the  truth.

The  Stranger.  Perhaps  you  learned  the  doc-
trines of  Aristotle  when  you  were  too  young  to
discount  their  language  and  freely  to  confront
them  with  the  facts  of  nature.  I remember  a
story — probably  there  is  no  truth  in  it — that  you
had  long  found  the  Metaphysics  unintelligible
until  you  came  by  chance  upon  a stray  commentary
which  solved  the  riddle.

Avicenna.  The  tale  is  true  : not,  of  course,
that  having  read  the  fourteen  books  of  the  Meta-
physics no  less  than  forty  times,  and  knowing
them  perfectly  by  heart,  both  forwards  and  back-
wards, I failed  to  understand  anywhere  the
meaning  of  the  words,  or  how  one  part  supported
or  seemed  to  contradict  another,  or  what  was
writteif  first  and  what  added  as  a comment  later,
or  in  fine  all  that  pedants  call  understanding  a
book  ; but  I had  the  soul  of  a philosopher,  and
such  understanding  was  not  understanding  to
me.  Wh^  escaped  me,  and  what  I longed  to
discover,  was  how  the  doctrine  of  the  book  could
be  true.  For  I too  had  eyes  in  my  head,  the


176  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

earth  shone  clear  in  the  sunlight  before  me  ; I
knew  only  too  well  the  hang  of  this  naughty
world  ; and  I marvelled  how  a philosopher  whose
authority  was  unquestionable  could  give  an  account
of  things  which  so  completely  inverted  their  true
order.  The  more  commentaries  I read  and  the
more  learned  men  I consulted,  the  less  satisfaction
I found  ; for  not  one  of  them  had  an  eye  for  the
truth,  or  any  keen  interest  in  real  things,  but  all
were  absorbed  in  considering  how  words  should
be  put  together  ; and  their  philosophy  was  no-
thing but  the  grammar  of  an  artificial  tongue,
a system  of  hieroglyphics  with  which  to  inscribe
the  prison- walls  of  their  blindness  and  ignorance.
Sunk  in  this  conviction,  and  sullenly  reconciled  to
it,  I was  walking  one  day  in  the  souk  of  Bokhara,
saluting  the  merchants,  viewing  and  praising  the
rarities  they  displayed  before  me,  buying  or  ex-
changing some  jewel,  questioning  the  strangers
newly  arrived  concerning  the  disasters  and  the
marvels  they  had  witnessed  in  all  the  islands  of
the  sea  and  in  all  the  cities  beyond  the  desert,
when  I perceived  a venerable  and  courtly  man
who  appeared  to  be  following  me  ; and  turning
to  him  I said  : “ Reverend  Sir,  didst  thou  wish
anything  of  me  ? ” Whereupon  he  plaCed  his
hand  on  his  breast,  and  raised  it  thence  to  his
forehead,  and  replied : “ Young  master,  it  is
known  to  me  that  thou  art  the  hope  of  the  old
and  the  despair  of  the  young  ; and  Pbring  thee
a book  of  commentaries  on  the  Metaphysics  of
Aristotle,  a rarity  hitherto  unknown  and  a morsel


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  177

for  a fine  palate  : name  thy  price  and  it  is  thine.” —
“ Not  for  me,”  I replied  ; “ pray,  offer  thy  book
to  another.  Have  I not  read  the  fourteen  books
of  the  Metaphysics  full  forty  times,  and  do  I not
know  them  by  heart,  forwards  and  backwards,
without  understanding  them } What  can  thy
commentary  avail  ? A truce  to  the  riddles  of
the  learned  ! Away  with  the  gibberish  of  ancient
fools  ! Give  me  a book  of  love,  if  thou  hast  one,
or  a tale  of  some  far  country,  or  the  wild  verse  of
a poet  inspired  by  wine  ! ” But  the  stranger  was
not  discouraged.  He  smiled  a little  in  his  beard
and  spoke  again  : “ Take  it  then  for  the  calli-
graphy of  the  scribe  ; for  it  is  fairly  penned  in
black  and  red,  with  scrolls  in  gold  and  green  and
purple  and  silver.” — “ That  is  nothing,”  I re-
torted ; “I  have  gold  and  silver  and  green  and
purple  in  plenty,  and  many  a book  in  red  and
black  script,  choice  thoughts  of  the  poets,  or
maxims  of  ancient  sages,  wise  men  without
books.” — “ Take  it  then,”  he  persisted,  “ for  the
crimson  damask  it  is  wrapped  in,  and  the  silver
clasp,  with  its  black  opal,  with  which  it  is  clasped.”
And  I said  ; “I  have  richer  tissues  and  more
beautiful  clasps.”  Then  his  face  was  darkened  ;
and  bending  towards  me,  that  no  one  might  over-
hear, he  said  sorrowfully  : “ Take  it  then  for
charity’s  sake  : I am  bereft  and  old,  and  in  need
of  comfort.  It  is  thine  for  a silver  penny.”  Then
I took  a silver  penny  from  my  purse  and  gave  it
him,  saying  : “ Keep  thy  rare  book  for  thy

comfort,  and  take  this  for  thy  need.”  But  he

N


178  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

refused.  “ Accept  it,”  he  said  once  more,  “ for
the  love  of  Allah,  as  for  the  love  of  Allah  I offer
it : it  is  not  worth  a penny  of  silver  nor  a shekel
of  gold,  but  ten  thousand  talents.”  And  he  left
the  book  in  my  hands,  and  with  a quick  step
departed.  Pondering  then  in  myself  how  this
was  perhaps  no  commentary  on  the  Metaphysics,
nor  an  old  scribe’s  treasure,  but  some  message  of
love  or  secret  gift  from  a princess,  I opened  the
clasp,  and  sitting  on  the  doorstep  of  a saddler’s
shop,  I began  to  read  ; and  all  day  I read,  and
when  evening  came  on,  without  raising  my  eyes
from  the  page,  I made  sign  to  the  saddler  to
fetch  me  a lamp  ; and  all  night  I continued,  and
all  the  following  day  ; thrice  I finished,  and  thrice
began  again.  And  the  eyes  of  my  soul  were
opened,  and  the  true  mind  of  the  Philosopher
descended  on  me,  and  I understood  at  last  all
that  he  wrote  and  all  that  he  left  unwritten.

Awaking  at  length  to  the  outer  world,  I
questioned  the  saddler  and  the  merchants  and
the  strangers  and  every  passer-by,  as  to  who  that
old  man  might  be  ; but  none  knew  him,  except
that  in  the  darkest  corner  of  some  mosque  perhaps
I might  find  him  praying.  I sped  accordingly
like  the  wind  from  one  mosque  to  another,  burst-
ing in  here  and  vanishing  there,  my  feet  scarce
touching  the  ground  and  my  garments  flying
behind  me ; so  that  the  faithful  standing  at
intervals  upon  their  carpets  felt  the '=swiftness  of
some  influence  that  had  passed  near  them,  and
said  : “ What  is  this  that  has  flown  by  ? Was


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  179

it  a blast  with  the  scent  of  lilacs  from  the  garden  ?
Was  it  a ray  of  sunlight  between  two  cypresses
severed  by  the  breeze  ? Was  it  an  angel  gathering
up  our  prayers  and  bearing  them  swiftly  before
the  Lord  ? ” At  last  in  the  farthest  and  smallest
mosque  of  the  city,  beside  the  burial-ground  of
the  poor,  I spied  my  lost  benefactor  ; and  embrac-
ing him  with  a tender  and  a long  embrace,  I cried  :
“ O most  venerable  sage  and  my  father  in  God,
what  a blessing  have  I received  at  thy  hands  !
All  I possess  is  as  nothing  to  what  I owe  thee,
and  for  the  gift  of  knowledge  all  the  riches  of  the
earth  would  be  a small  return  ; but  what  I can
I will.  Come  with  me  into  the  presence  of  the
Emir  ; he  shall  know  that  thou  art  the  Solomon
of  the  age — for  it  is  not  hidden  from  me  that  the
author  of  this  divine  commentary  is  none  other
but  thou — and  the  Emir  shall  bestow  on  thee  a
robe  of  honour,  and  thou  shalt  sit  in  the  seat  of
authority  amongst  his  scribes  and  alchemists  and
physicians  and  poets  ; and  all  shall  be  silent  when
thou  openest  thy  lips,  and  deem  it  a signal  favour
from  Allah  to  be  corrected  by  thee  ; and  I shall
be  the  first  to  come  before  thee  in  the  morning
and  the  last  to  depart  from  thee  at  night ; because
the  foiftitains  of  Ararat  are  not  sweeter  to  me
than  the  purity  of  the  truth,  nor  are  the  caresses
of  monarchs  or  the  cozenings  of  princes  of  any
worth  in  my  eyes  compared  with  the  smile  of
wisdom.”  •But  he  gently  disengaged  himself,  and
said  : “ It  is  too  much.  I am  more  than  rewarded.
Long  had  the  secrets  thou  hast  read  in  this  book

N2


i8o  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

lain  upon  my  heart.  They  were  not  for  this  age.
Opinion  amongst  mortals  is  like  the  song  of  a
drunkard,  merry  and  loud  and  exceedingly  foolish
and  ravishing  in  its  hollow  sound  ; and  the  cold
light  of  truth  is  hateful  to  them  as  sunrise  to  the
reveller.  Therefore  I had  resigned  myself  to
silence  and  to  suffering  my  discoveries  to  go
down  with  me  to  the  grave.  The  truth  is  in  no
haste  to  be  known ; it  will  be  published  at  the
last  day.  Thereupon  a report  reached  me  of  thy
free  nature  and  thy  keen  mind,  and  having  myself
seen  and  heard  thee,  I said  in  my  heart : ‘ This
young  man  will  understand,  and  in  him  my  mind
shall  survive  me.’  Diligently  therefore  I com-
mitted my  commentary  to  writing,  inditing  it
scrupulously  with  my  own  hand,  folding  it  in
precious  silks,  and  binding  it  with  a magic  and  a
jewelled  clasp  ; and  the  rest  thou  knowest.  But
since  thy  understanding  has  been  quick  beyond
all  expectation,  and  thy  thanks  generous  beyond
my  desert,  and  since  in  thee  my  soul  has  indeed
come  to  a second  life,  far  from  accepting  any
other  recompense,  let  me  complete  my  gift  as  is
fitting  : for  who  would  bestow  the  precious  stone
and  withhold  the  setting  ? Let  us  then  hasten
together  to  the  cadi,  in  order  that  in  a*  formal
writing  and  before  witnesses  I may  institute  thee
heir  to  all  I possess  ; for  I have  chosen  a life  of
poverty  for  the  love  of  wisdom,  not  from  necessity.
I have  other  fair  books  and  other  jewels,  and  my
camels’  saddle-bags  are  heavy  with  gold.  But
for  the  journey  I shall  soon  make,  gold  and  silver


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  i8i

are  useless,  and  before  many  days  all  shall  be
thine.” — “ May  Allah  lengthen  those  days  into
many  years,”  I replied  ; “ and  be  they  many  or
few  they  shall  be  spent  in  my  house  ; for  if  in
mind  I am  thy  heir,  in  heart  let  me  be  thy  child.”
And  from  that  hour  we  were  as  a father  who  has
chosen  his  son,  and  a son  who  has  chosen  his
father,  until  death,  the  divider  of  loves  and  the
extinguisher  of  delights,  separated  us  for  ever.

The  Stranger.  And  what — if  it  is  not  too  much
to  ask — may  have  been  the  gloss  made  by  this
sage,  which  so  wonderfully  clarified  the  doctrine
of  Aristotle  ?

Avicenna.  You  will  not  find  it  in  my  writings,
because  it  does  some  violence  to  the  conceit  of
mankind,  who  feeling  within  them  some  part  of
the  energy  of  nature  wish  to  attribute  that  energy
to  the  fancies  which  it  breeds  ; and  I have  always
made  it  a law  to  bow  to  custom  in  science  as  in
manners.  To  rebel  against  comfortable  errors
is  to  give  them  too  much  importance.  You  will
never  enlighten  mankind  by  offending  them ;
and  even  if  by  force  or  by  chance  you  caused
them  verbally  to  recognize  the  truth,  you  would
gain  nothing  in  the  end,  for  in  their  heads  your
accurate  dogmas  would  turn  at  once  into  new
fables.  The  better  way  is  to  coax  and  soften
their  imagination  by  a gentle  eloquence,  rendering
it  more  harmonious  with  those  secret  forces  which
rule  their  destiny  ; so  that  as  by  the  tropes  and
hyperboles  of  poets,  they  may  not  be  seriously
deceived  by  your  scientific  shams.  The  very


1 82  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

currency  and  triteness  of  the  lie  will  wear  away
its  venom.  Accordingly  in  my  published  treatises
I made  no  effort  to  pierce  the  illusion  which
custom  has  wedded  with  the  words  of  the  Philo-
sopher ; but  here,  alas,  illusions  have  no  place,
and  if  you  wish  to  hear  the  unmentionable  truth,
in  a few  words  I will  repeat  it.

My  benefactor  had  entitled  his  profound  work
The  Wheel  of  Ignorance  and  the  Lamp  of  Know-
ledge ; because,  he  said,  the  Philosopher  having
distinguished  four  principles  in  the  understanding
of  nature,  the  ignorant  conceive  these  principles
as  if  they  were  the  four  quadrants  of  a wheel,  on
any  one  of  which  in  turn  the  revolving  edifice  of
nature  may  be  supported  ; whereas  wisdom  would
rather  have  likened  those  principles  to  the  four
rays  of  a lamp  suspended  in  the  midst  of  the
universe  from  the  finger  of  Allah,  and  turning  on
its  chain  now  to  the  right  and  now  to  the  left ;
whereby  its  four  rays,  which  are  of  divers  colours,
lend  to  all  things  first  one  hue  and  then  another
without  confusing  or  displacing  anything.  The
ignorant,  on  the  contrary,  pushing  their  wheel
like  the  blind  Samson,  imagine  that  the  four
principles  (which  they  call  causes)  are  all  equally
forces  producing  change,  and  co-operative  sources
of  natural  things.  Thus  if  a chicken  is  hatched,
they  say  the  efficient  cause  is  the  warmth  of  the
brooding  hen ; yet  this  heat  would  not  have
hatched  a chicken  from  a stone  ; so  thfit  a second
condition,  which  they  call  the  formal  cause,  must
be  invoked  as  well,  namely,  the  nature  of  an  egg  ;


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  183

the  essence  of  eggness  being  precisely  a capacity
to  be  hatched  when  warmed  gently — because,  as
they  wisely  observe,  boiling  would  drive  away  all
potentiality  of  hatching.  Yet,  as  they  further
remark,  gentle  heat-in-general  joined  with  the
essence-of-eggness  would  produce  only  hatching-
as-such,  and  not  the  hatching  of  a chicken  ; so
that  a third  influence,  which  they  call  the  final
cause,  or  the  end  in  view,  must  operate  as  well  ;
and  this  guiding  influence  is  the  divine  idea  of  a
perfect  cock  or  of  a perfect  hen,  presiding  over
the  hatching,  and  causing  the  mere  eggness  in
that  egg  to  assume  the  likeness  of  the  animals
from  which  it  came.  Nor,  finally,  do  they  find
these  three  influences  sufficient  to  produce  here
and  now  this  particular  chicken,  but  are  com-
pelled to  add  a fourth,  the  material  cause  ; namely,
a particular  yolk  and  a particular  shell  and  a
particular  farmyard,  on  which  and  in  which  the
other  three  causes  may  work,  and  laboriously
hatch  an  individual  chicken,  probably  lame  and
ridiculous  despite  so  many  sponsors.  Thus  these
learned  babblers  would  put  nature  together  out
of  words,  and  would  regard  the  four  principles
of  interpretation  as  forces  mutually  supple-
mental, combining  to  produce  natural  things  ;
as  if  perfection  could  be  one  of  the  sources  of
imperfection,  or  as  if  the  form  which  things
happen  to  have  could  be  one  of  the  causes  of
their  having  it.

Far  differently  do  these  four  principles  clarify
the  world  when  discretion  conceives  them  as  four


i84  dialogues  IN  LIMBO

rays  shed  by  the  light  of  an  observing  spirit.  One
ray  which,  as  the  lamp  revolves,  sweeps  space  in
a spiral  fan,  like  the  tail  of  a comet,  is  able  to
illuminate  the  receding  past,  and  bears  the  name
of  memory.  Memory  only  can  observe  change  or
disclose  when  and  where  and  under  what  auspices
one  thing  has  been  transformed  into  another,
whether  in  nature  or  in  the  spirit’s  dream  ; and
memory  only,  if  its  ray  could  spread  to  the  depths
of  the  infinite,  would  reveal  the  entire  efficient
principle,  the  only  proper  causey  in  the  world  ;
namely,  the  radical  instability  in  existence  by
which  everything  is  compelled  to  produce  some-
thing else  without  respite.  The  other  three
principles,  made  visible  by  the  three  other  rays,
have  nothing  to  do  with  genesis  or  change,  but
distinguish  various  properties  of  accomplished
being  ; namely,  existence,  essence,  and  harmony.
The  rays  by  which  these  are  revealed  also  have
separate  names.  Thus  the  faculty  that  discerns
existence  is  called  sense,  since  it  is  sense  that  brings
instant  assurance  of  material  things  and  of  our  own
actuality  in  the  midst  of  them.  The  faculty  that
discerns  essence  is  called  logic  or  contemplation,
which  notes  and  defines  the  characters  found  in
existence  and  (in  so  far  as  may  be  opportune  or
possible)  the  innumerable  characters  also  which
are  not  found  there.  The  faculty  which  discerns
harmony  is  called  pleasure  or  desire  or  (when
chastened  by  experience  and  made  "explicit  in
words)  moral  philosophy.  In  themselves  things
are  always  harmonious,  since  they  exist  together,


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  185

and  always  discordant,  since  they  are  always
lapsing  inwardly  and  destroying  one  another ;
but  the  poignant  desire  to  be  and  to  be  happy,
which  burns  in  the  heart  of  every  living  creature,
turns  these  simple  co-existences  and  changes  into
the  travail  of  creation,  in  one  juxtaposition  of
things  finding  life,  happiness,  and  beauty,  and  in
another  juxtaposition,  no  less  unstable,  finding
ugliness,  misery,  and  death.  Thus  as  the  Lamp
of  Knowledge  revolves,  the  red  ray  of  sense  and
the  white  ray  of  contemplation  and  the  blue  ray
of  memory  and  the  green  ray  of  love  (for  green,  as
the  Prophet  teaches,  is  the  colour  of  the  beautiful)
slowly  sweep  the  whole  heaven  ; and  the  wise
heart,  glowing  in  silence,  is  consumed  with  wonder
and  joy  at  the  greatness  of  Allah.

The  Stranger.  Allegory  has  its  charm  when  we
know  the  facts  it  symbolizes,  but  as  a guide  to
unknown  facts  it  is  perplexing ; and  I am  rather
lost  in  your  beautiful  imagery.  Am  I to  under-
stand that  matter  alone  is  substantial,  and  that  the
other  three  principles  are  merely  aspects  which
matter  presents  when  viewed  in  one  light  or
another  ?

Avicenna.  Matter  ? If  by  that  word  you  under-
stand an  essence,  the  essence  of  materiality,  matter
would  be  something  incapable  of  existing  by  itself,
much  less  could  it  be  the  ground  of  its  own  form
or  of  its  own  impulses  or  transformations : like
pure  Beiag  it  would  be  everjTvhere  the  same,  and
could  neither  contain  nor  produce  any  distinctions.
But  the  matter  which  exists  and  works  is  matter


i86  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

formed  and  unequally  distributed,  the  body  of
nature  in  all  its  variety  and  motion.  So  taken,
matter  is  alive,  since  it  has  bred  every  living  thing
and  our  own  spirit ; and  the  soul  which  animates
this  matter  is  spontaneous  there  ; it  is  simply
the  native  plasticity  by  which  matter  continually
changes  its  forms.  This  impulse  in  matter  now
towards  one  form  and  now  towards  another  is
what  common  superstition  calls  the  attraction  or
power  of  the  ideal.  But  why  did  not  a different
ideal  attract  this  matter,  and  turn  this  hen’s  egg
into  a duckling,  save  that  here  and  now  matter
was  predisposed  to  express  the  first  idea  and  not
the  second  ? And  why  was  either  idea  powerful
over  the  fresh-laid  egg,  but  powerless  over  the
same  egg  boiled,  except  that  boiling  had  modified
the  arrangement  of  its  matter  ? Therefore  my
benefactor  boldly  concluded  that  this  habit  in
matter,  which  is  the  soul  of  the  world,  is  the  only
principle  of  genesis  anywhere  and  the  one  true
cause.

The  Stranger.  I see  : ’Tis  love  that  makes  the
world  go  round,  and  not,  as  idolatrous  people
imagine,  the  object  of  love.  The  object  of  love
is  passive  and  perhaps  imaginary  ; it  is  whatever
love  happens  to  choose,  prompted  by  an  «inner
disposition  in  its  organ.  You  are  a believer  in
automatism,  and  not  in  magic.

Avicenna.  Excellent.  If  the  final  cause,  or  the
object  of  love,  bears  by  courtesy  the  tkle  of  the
good,  believe  me  when  I tell  you  that  the  efficient
cause,  the  native  impulse  in  matter,  by  moving


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  187

towards  that  object,  bestows  that  title  upon  it.
Who  that  has  any  self-knowledge  has  not  dis-
covered by  experience  in  his  own  bosom,  as  well
as  by  observation  of  the  heavens,  and  of  animals
and  men,  that  the  native  impulse  in  each  of  us
chooses  its  goal,  and  changes  it  as  we  change,  and
that  nothing  is  pursued  by  us  or  sensible  to  us
save  what  we  have  the  organ  to  discern,  or  the
innate  compulsion  and  the  fatal  will  to  love  ?

The  Stranger.  There  indeed  you  touch  the
heart-strings  of  nature  ; and  I well  conceive  your
enthusiasm  at  finding  at  last  a philosophy  that
vibrates  with  so  much  truth.  But  as  for  Aristotle,
does  not  such  an  interpretation  entirely  reverse
his  doctrine  ? Did  he  not  blame  his  predecessors
for  having  regarded  living  matter  as  the  only
principle  of  the  world  ?

Avicenna.  And  most  justly.  Wisdom  is  not
confined  to  the  knowledge  of  origins  or  of  this
living  body  of  nature — things  important  only  for
the  sake  of  the  good  or  evil  which  they  involve.
The  forms  of  things  are  nobler  than  their  sub-
stance, and  worthier  of  study ; and  the  types  which
discourse  or  estimation  distinguishes  in  things  are
more  important  than  the  things  themselves.  A
philosdpher  is  a man,  and  his  first  and  last  care
should  be  the  ordering  of  his  soul : from  that
centre  only  can  he  survey  the  world.  Naturalists
are  often  betrayed  by  their  understanding  of
origins  into  a sort  of  inhumanity  ; conscious  of
necessity,  they  grow  callous  to  good  and  evil.
Moreover,  those  early  naturalists  were  at  fault  in


1 88  DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO

their  own  science,  because  they  identified  matter
with  some  single  kind  of  matter,  like  water  or  air,
and  made  that  substance  the  sole  principle  of
genesis ; whereas  the  distribution,  movement,
habits,  and  fertility  of  all  sorts  of  matter  must  be
taken  into  account  if  nature  and  the  soul  of  nature
are  to  be  described  rightly.  But  the  Philosopher
never  blamed  the  naturalists  for  being  naturalists
in  season,  and  he  was  the  greatest  of  naturalists
himself.  Doubtless  in  his  popular  works  he
accommodated  himself  to  the  exigences  of  current
piety  and  of  human  conceit,  seeming  to  make
nature  a product  of  morals,  which  is  absurd  ; and
the  converse  is  evidently  the  truth.

The  Stranger.  I agree  that  the  converse  is  the
truth  ; but  is  this  truth  to  be  found  in  Aristotle  ?

Avicenna.  If  it  is  the  truth,  it  must  have  been
his  doctrine.  Do  you  imagine  that  the  wisest  of
men,  living  at  the  place  and  hour  when  human
reason  reached  its  noon,  could  be  blind  to  so  great
a truth,  when  it  is  obvious  to  me  and  even  to  you  ?

The  Stranger.  Admirable  principle  of  exegesis,
which  assigns  all  truth  to  Aristotle  and  absolves
us  from  consulting  his  works  !

Avicenna.  On  the  contrary,  for  that  very  reason,
we  need  to  consult  and  to  ponder  them  unceas-
ingly. Why  else  read  a philosopher  ? To  count
the  places  where  his  pen  has  slipped  ? To  note
his  inconsistencies  ? To  haggle  over  his  words
and  make  his  name  a synonym  for  his  imitations  ?
Even  if  with  some  fleck  or  some  crack,  he  is  a
mirror  reflecting  nature  and  truth,  and  for  their


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  189

sake  only  do  we  look  into  him  ; because  without
this  mirror,  in  the  dungeon  in  which  we  lie,  we
might  be  cut  off  from  all  sight  of  the  heavens.

The  Stranger.  Was  it  a slip  of  the  pen  or  a
limitation  to  assert  that  the  divine  life  has  no
material  principle  ? Must  we  not  be  wrong,  then,
in  asserting  that  matter  is  the  one  principle  of
existence  ?

Avicenna.  Not  at  all.  When  the  plectrum,  in
the  hand  of  an  imperfect  player,  strikes  the  strings
of  the  lute,  the  hard  dull  blow  is  sometimes  heard,
as  well  as  the  pure  music.  In  this  way  the  material
principle,  when  not  fully  vivified  and  harmonized,
can  disturb  and  alloy  the  spirit,  in  a life  that  is
not  divine.  In  the  mind  of  God  no  such  material
accident  intrudes,  and  all  is  pure  music.  But
would  this  music  have  been  purer,  or  could  it  have
sounded  at  all,  if  there  had  been  no  plectrum,  no
player,  no  strings,  and  no  lute  ? You  have  studied
the  Philosopher  to  little  purpose,  if  you  suppose
that  it  is  by  accident  only  that  the  deity  is  the  final
cause  of  the  world,  and  that  without  any  revolution
of  the  spheres  the  divine  intellect  would  con-
template itself  no  less  blissfully  than  it  now  does.
That  is  but  a sickly  fancy,  utterly  divorced  from
science.  The  divine  intellect  is  the  perfect  music
which  the  world  makes,  the  perfect  music  which
it  hears.  Hermes  and  Pan  and  Orpheus  drew
from  reeds  or  conches,  or  from  their  own  throats
such  music  as  these  instruments  were  competent
to  make  ; all  other  sorts  of  harmony,  music-
ally no  less  melodious,  they  suffered  to  remain


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


190

engulfed  in  primeval  silence.  So  the  soul  of  this
world  draws  from  its  vast  body  the  harmonies  it  can
yield,  and  no  others.  For  it  was  not  the  essence
of  the  sounds  which  conches  and  throats  and  reeds
might  produce  that  created  these  reeds  and  throats
and  conches,  but  contrariwise.  These  sources  of
sound,  having  arisen  spontaneously,  the  sounds
they  naturally  make  were  chosen  out  of  all  other
sounds  to  be  the  music  of  that  particular  Arcadia  :
even  so  the  divine  intellect  is  the  music  of  this
particular  world.  It  contemplates  such  forms  as
nature  embodies.  The  Philosopher  would  never
have  so  much  as  mentioned  a divine  intellect — ^the
inevitable  note,  eternally  sustained,  emitted  by  all
nature  and  the  rolling  heavens — if  the  rolling
heavens  and  nature  had  not  existed.

The  Stranger.  I admit  that  such  is  the  heart  of
his  doctrine,  and  if  he  was  never  false  to  it,  he  was
a much  purer  naturalist  than  his  disciples  have
suspected.  The  eternity  he  attributed  to  the
world,  and  its  fixed  constitution,  support  this
interpretation  : nature  was  the  organ  of  deity,
and  deity  was  the  spirit  of  nature.  Yet  this  con-
firmation creates  a difficulty  for  you  in  another
quarter,  since  a Moslem  must  deny  the  eternity
of  the  world.

Avicenna.  Not  if  we  distinguish,  as  we  should,
eternity  from  endless  time.  The  world  is  eternal,
under  the  form  of  truth,  as  the  divine  intellect
apprehends  it ; but,  measured  by  its  own  measure
of  days  and  years,  the  world  had  a beginning  and
will  have  an  end.  So  revelation  teaches,  and  it  is


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  191

not  by  a feigned  conformity  that  I accept  this
dogma.  My  own  time  is  over  ; I have  passed
into  the  eternal  world  ; and  something  within  me
tells  me  that  universal  nature  also  is  growing
weary  of  its  cycles,  and  will  expire  at  last.

The  Stranger.  And  when  nature  is  no  more,
will  God  have  ceased  to  be  ?

Avicenna.  Have  you  read  the  Philosopher  and
do  you  ask  such  a question  ? The  vulgar  imagine
that  when  change  ceases,  empty  time  will  continue
after  ; or,  that  before  change  began  empty  time
had  preceded  ; and  it  is  a marvel  to  them  how  one
moment  of  that  vacant  infinity  could  have  been
chosen  rather  than  another  for  the  dawn  of  creation.
All  this  is  but  childish  fancy  and  the  false  speech
of  poets.  Eternity  is  not  empty  or  tedious,  nor
does  time  occupy  one  part  of  it,  leaving  the  rest
blank.  Eternity  is  but  the  synthesis  of  all  changes,
be  they  few  or  many  ; and  truth,  with  the  divine
intellect  which  beholds  the  truth,  can  neither  arise
nor  lapse.  They  are  immutable,  though  the
flux  they  tell  of  is  fugitive,  and  themselves  not
anchored  in  time,  though  the  first  and  the  last
syllable  of  time  are  graven  on  them  as  on  a
monument.

Th&  Stranger.  Is  eternity  the  tomb  of  time,  and
does  intellect  resemble  those  Egyptian  monarchs
who  went  to  dwell  in  their  sepulchres  before  they
died  ? Ah,  we  Christians  and  artists  have  a secret
hidden  from  the  children  of  this  world,  the  secret
of  a happy  death.  Sometimes  life,  by  a rapturous
suicide,  likes  to  embalm  itself  in  a work  of  art,  or


192


DIALOGUES  IN  LIMBO


in  a silent  sacrifice.  The  breathlessness  of  thought
also  is  a kind  of  death,  the  happiest  death  of  all,
for  spirit  is  never  keener  than  in  the  unflicker-
ing intellect  of  God,  or  in  that  of  a philosopher
like  you  or  even  like  me,  who  can  raise  the  whole
or  a part  of  the  flux  of  nature  into  the  vision  of
truth.

Avicenna.  Tombs,  indeed,  and  visions,  and
death,  and  eternity — ^why  harp  on  them  now,  when
you  are  still  alive  } Leave  us  while  yet  you  may.
We  have  no  need  of  you  here,  or  you  of  us  there.
Soon  enough  you  must  join  us,  whether  you  will
or  no.  Hasten,  before  it  is  too  late,  to  your  thrift-
less brothers  in  the  earth ; or  if  they  will  not  listen,
admonish  your  own  heart,  and  be  not  deceived
by  the  language  which  philosophers  must  needs
borrow  from  the  poets,  since  the  poets  are  the
fathers  of  speech.  When  they  tell  you  that  Allah
made  the  world,  and  that  its  life  and  love  are  an
emanation  from  him,  and  that  quitting  this  life
you  may  still  live  more  joyfully  elsewhere,  they
speak  in  inevitable  parables  ; for  in  truth  it  is  the
pulse  of  nature  that  creates  the  spirit  and  chooses
a few  thoughts  (among  many  thoughts  unchosen)
and  a few  perfections  (among  all  the  perfections
unsought)  to  which  it  shall  aspire  ; and  the  special
harmony  which  this  vast  instrument,  the  revolving
world,  makes  as  it  spins  is  the  joy  and  the  life  of
God.  Dishonour  not  then  the  transitive  virtue
within  you,  be  it  feeble  or  great ; for  it4s  a portion
of  that  yearning  which  fills  the  world  with  thought
and  with  deity,  as  with  a hum  of  bees.  Love


THE  SECRET  OF  ARISTOTLE  193

peoples  even  these  regions  with  us  melancholy
phantoms  ; and  had  my  body  not  moved  and
worked  mightily  on  earth,  you  would  never  have
found  among  the  Shades  even  this  wraith  of  my
wisdom.


THE  END
