The Realm of Essence: Book First of Realms of Being (George Santayana, 1927)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/realmofessencebo0000sant). First book of Realms of Being: Santayana's ontology of essences — the realm of the eternal.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

EX  LIBRIS


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


THE


REALM  OF  ESSENCE

BOOK  FIRST

OF

REALMS  OF  BEING

BY

GEORGE  SANTAYANA


NEW  YORK

CHARLES  SCRIBNER’S  SONS


First  Published  1927


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh,


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING


The  world  is  old,  and  can  have  changed  but  little  since
man  arose  in  it,  else  man  himself  would  have  perished.
Why,  then,  should  he  still  live  without  a  sure  and
sufficient  philosophy?  The  equivalent  of  such  a  philo¬
sophy  is  probably  hereditary  in  sundry  animals  not
much  older  than  man.  They  have  had  time  to  take
the  measure  of  life,  and  have  settled  down  to  a  routine
of  preferences  and  habits  which  keeps  their  heads,  as  a
race,  above  water;  and  they  are  presumably  visited  at
appropriate  seasons  by  magic  images,  which  are  symbols
to  them  for  the  world  or  for  the  cycles  of  their  destiny.
Among  groups  of  men  an  equilibrium  of  this  moral
sort  has  been  sometimes  approached — in  India,  in
China,  under  the  Moslem  or  the  Catholic  regimens;
and  if  socialist  or  other  panaceas  now  exercise  such  a
strange  influence  over  men’s  hearts,  it  is  perhaps
because  they  are  impatient  of  being  so  long  the  sport
of  divers  ignorant  dogmas  and  chance  adventures,  and
aspire  to  live  in  a  stable  harmony  with  nature.

In  fact,  beneath  these  various  complete  systems
which  have  professed  but  failed  to  be  universal,  there
is  actually  a  dumb  human  philosophy,  incomplete  but
solid,  prevalent  among  all  civilised  peoples.  They  all
practise  agriculture,  commerce,  and  mechanical  arts,
with  artificial  instruments  lately  very  much  compli¬
cated;  and  they  necessarily  possess,  with  these  arts,  a
modicum  of  sanity,  morality,  and  science  requisite  for


VI


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

carrying  them  on,  and  tested  by  success  in  doing  so.
Is  not  this  human  competence  philosophy  enough?
Is  it  not  at  least  the  nucleus  of  all  sound  philosophy?
In  spite  of  the  superficial  confusion  reigning  in  the
world,  is  not  the  universal  wisdom  of  the  future  actually
gathering  about  this  human  competence  in  engineering,
in  chemistry,  in  medicine,  in  war?

It  might  seem  so,  since  the  sort  of  knowledge  in¬
volved  in  the  arts,  though  it  may  not  go  very  far,  is
The  realm  compulsory  so  far  as  it  goes,  and  being
of  matter,  sanctioned  by  success,  it  ought  to  be  per¬
manent  and  progressive.  There  is  indeed  a  circle  of
material  events  called  nature,  to  which  all  minds  be¬
longing  to  the  same  society  are  responsive  in  common.
Not  to  be  responsive  to  these  facts  is  simply  to  be
stupid  and  backward  in  the  arts;  those  who  explore
and  master  their  environment  cannot  help  learning
what  it  is.  In  this  direction  competence  involves
enlightenment.  Among  minds  forming  a  moral  society,
and  able  to  compare  their  several  opinions,  this  en¬
lightenment  in  the  expert  is  coercive  over  the  layman
also,  because  the  same  facts  confront  them  both.  Did
not  the  same  facts  confront  them,  communication
would  be  impossible  between  them,  or  if  communica¬
tion  was  reputed  to  exist  by  magic  there  would  be  no
possible  conflict  or  progress  among  their  opinions,
because  they  would  not  refer  to  the  same  events.  Even
if  each  declared  himself  competent  and  prosperous  in
his  own  world,  he  would  know  nothing  of  the  world  of
his  neighbours.  Their  several  minds  would  simply
be  variously  or  similarly  brilliant,  like  jewels,  signifying
nothing  to  one  another.

If  any  mind  hopes  to  address  another  (or  even  it¬
self)  persuasively,  as  I  now  wish  to  address  the  reader
and  my  own  thoughts,  it  must  assume  a  single  system
of  events  to  which  both  minds  are  responsive,  and
which  includes  their  respective  bodies  and  actions.


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING


Vll


Assuming  such  a  common  world,  it  is  easy  to  see  how
animals  may  acquire  knowledge  of  it  and  may  com¬
municate  it.  Material  events  will  arouse  in  them  in¬
tuitions  conformable  to  their  several  stations,  faculties,
and  passions;  and  their  active  nature  (since  they  are
animals,  not  plants)  will  compel  them  to  regard  many
of  the  essences  so  given  in  intuition  as  signs  for  the
environment  in  which  they  move,  modifying  this  en¬
vironment  and  affected  by  it.  This  assumption  justifies
itself  at  every  turn  in  practice,  and  establishes  in  the
habits  of  all  men,  in  proportion  to  their  competence,
an  appropriate  adjustment  to  the  Realm  of  Matter,  and
in  their  imagination  a  suitable  picture  of  the  same.

Nevertheless,  since  the  station,  faculties,  and  pas¬
sions  of  all  men  are  not  identical,  these  pictures  will
not  be  similar.  Different  observers  may  be  The  realm
addressed  to  different  regions  of  nature,  or  of  essence,
sensitive  to  different  elements  in  the  same  region;
thus  dwellers  in  distinct  planets  must  evidently
have  distinct  geographies,  and  the  same  battle  in  the
clouds  will  be  known  to  the  deaf  only  as  lightning  and
to  the  blind  only  as  thunder,  each  responding  to  a
different  constituent  of  the  total  event,  and  not  simul¬
taneously.  So  an  eclipse — itself  but  one  aspect  of  a
constellation  of  events  in  the  heavens — may  be  known
in  various  entirely  different  terms ;  by  calculation
before  it  occurs,  by  sense  when  it  is  occurring,  by
memory  immediately  afterwards,  and  by  reports  to
posterity.  All  these  indications  are  entirely  inade¬
quate  to  the  facts  they  reveal  in  the  realm  of  matter,
and  qualitatively  unlike  those  facts;  they  are  a  set  of
variegated  symbols  by  which  sensitive  animals  can
designate  them.  Of  course,  the  existence  and  use  of
such  languages  is  an  added  fact  in  nature — a  fact  so
important  and  close  to  the  egotism  of  the  animals
themselves  as  perhaps  to  obscure  all  else  in  their  eyes.
Their  instinct,  indeed,  keeps  their  attention  stretched


viii  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

upon  the  material  world  that  actually  surrounds  them;
but  sometimes  sensation  and  language,  instead  of  being
passed  over  like  the  ticking  of  the  telegraph,  may  be¬
come  objects  in  themselves,  in  all  their  absolute  musical
insignificance;  and  then  animals  become  idealists.
The  terms  in  which  they  describe  things,  unlike  the
things  they  meant  to  describe,  are  purely  specious,
arbitrary,  and  ideal;  whether  visual,  tactile,  auditory,
or  conceptual  these  terms  are  essentially  words.  They
possess  intrinsically,  in  their  own  ontological  plane,
only  logical  or  aesthetic  being;  and  this  contains  no
indication  whatever  of  the  material  act  of  speaking,
touching,  or  looking  which  causes  them  to  appear.
All  possible  terms  in  mental  discourse  are  essences
existing  nowhere;  visionary  equally,  whether  the
faculty  that  discovers  them  be  sense  or  thought  or  the
most  fantastic  fancy.

Such  diversity  in  animal  experience  taken  in  itself
exhibits  sundry  qualities  or  forms  of  being,  a  part  of
the  infinite  multitude  of  distinguishable  ideal  terms
which  (whether  ever  revealed  to  anybody  or  not)  I
call  the  Realm  of  Essence.  Pure  intuition,  in  its  poetic
ecstasy,  would  simply  drink  in  such  of  these  essences
as  happened  to  present  themselves;  but  for  a  wakeful
animal  they  are  signals.  They  report  to  his  spirit,  in
very  summary  and  uncertain  images,  the  material
events  which  surround  him  and  which  concern  his
welfare.  They  may  accordingly  become  terms  in
knowledge  if  interpreted  judiciously,  and  if  interpreted
injudiciously  they  may  become  illusions.

The  dumb  philosophy  of  the  human  animal,  by
which  he  rears  his  family  and  practises  the  arts  and
ah  mental  finds  his  way  home,  might  take  definite  shape
discourse^  ancl  establish  a  healthy  routine  in  all  his  deal-
<dgnificantSS  ings  with  matter  (which  includes  society),
poetry.  and  yet  his  imaginative  experience  might
retain  all  its  specious  originality.  The  control  which


IX


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING

the  environment  exercises  over  the  structure  and
conduct  of  animals  is  decidedly  loose.  They  can
live  dragging  a  long  chain  of  idle  tricks,  diseases,  and
obsolete  organs;  and  even  this  loose  control  fails
almost  entirely  in  the  case  of  alternative  senses  or
languages,  one  of  which  may  serve  as  well  as  another.
Many  species  survive  together,  many  rival  endow¬
ments  and  customs  and  religions.  And  the  same  con¬
trol  fails  altogether  in  regard  to  the  immaterial  essences
which  those  senses  or  languages  call  up  before  the
mind’s  eye.  Adaptation  is  physical,  and  it  is  only  the
material  operation  in  sensation  or  speech  that  can
possibly  be  implicated  in  the  clockwork  of  nature.  The
choice  of  those  visionary  essences  which  meantime
visit  the  mind,  though  regular,  is  free;  they  are  the
transcript  of  life  into  discourse,  the  rhetorical  and
emotional  rendering  of  existence,  which  when  deepened
and  purified,  becomes  poetry  or  music.  There  can  be
no  reason  why  differences  in  these  spheres,  even  among
men  of  the  same  race,  should  not  be  perpetual.  It
would  be  mere  sluggishness  and  egotism  to  regret  it.
Such  differences  are  not  merely  added  like  a  vain
luxury  to  a  sane  recognition,  in  other  conscious  terms,
of  the  facts  of  nature.  The  “  sane  ”  response  to  nature
is  by  action  only  and  by  an  economy  which  nature  can
accept  and  weave  into  her  own  material  economy;  but
as  to  the  terms  of  sense  and  discourse,  they  are  all  from
the  very  beginning  equally  arbitrary,  poetical,  and  (if
you  choose)  mad;  yet  all  equally  symptomatic.  They
vary  initially  and  intangibly  from  mind  to  mind,  even
in  expressing  the  same  routine  of  nature.  The  im¬
agination  which  eventually  runs  to  fine  art  or  religion
is  the  same  faculty  which,  under  a  more  direct  control
of  external  events,  yields  vulgar  perception.  The
promptings  and  the  control  exercised  by  matter  are
continuous  in  both  cases ;  the  dream  requires  a  material
dreamer  as  much  as  the  waking  sensation,  and  the  latter

b


X  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

is  a  transcript  of  his  bodily  condition  just  as  directly
as  the  dream.  Poetic,  creative,  original  fancy  is  not  a
secondary  form  of  sensibility,  but  its  first  and  only
form.  The  same  manual  restlessness  and  knack  which
makes  man  a  manufacturer  of  toys  makes  him,  when
by  chance  his  toys  prove  useful,  a  manufacturer  of
implements.  Fine  art  is  thus  older  than  servile  labour,
and  the  poetic  quality  of  experience  is  more  funda¬
mental  than  its  scientific  value.  Existence  may  revert
at  any  moment  to  play,  or  may  run  down  in  idleness;
but  it  is  impossible  that  any  work  or  discovery  should
ever  come  about  without  the  accompaniment  of  pure
contemplation,  if  there  is  consciousness  at  all;  so  that
the  inherent  freedom  of  the  spirit  can  never  be  stamped
out,  so  long  as  spirit  endures.

Nor  is  it  safe  to  imagine  that  inspired  people,
because  they  dream  awake  in  their  philosophy,
The  realm  must  come  to  grief  in  the  real  world.  The
of  spirit.  great  religious  and  political  systems  which
I  mentioned  above  have  had  brilliant  careers.  Their
adepts  have  been  far  from  making  worse  soldiers  than
sceptics  make,  or  worse  workmen  than  materialists;
nor  have  they  committed  suicide  or  been  locked  up  in
the  madhouse  more  often  than  exact  philosophers.
Nature  drives  with  a  loose  rein,  and  vitality  of  any  sort,
even  if  expressed  in  fancy,  can  blunder  through  many
a  predicament  in  which  reason  would  despair.  And
if  the  mythical  systems  decline  at  last,  it  is  not  so  much
by  virtue  of  the  maladjustments  underlying  their  specu¬
lative  errors— for  their  myths  as  a  whole  are  wisely
contrived — as  because  imagination  in  its  freedom
abandons  these  errors  for  others  simply  because  the
prevalent  mood  of  mankind  has  changed,  and  it  begins
dreaming  in  a  different  key.  Spirit  bloweth  where  it
listeth,  and  continually  undoes  its  own  work.  This
world  of  free  expression,  this  drift  of  sensations,  pas¬
sions,  and  ideas,  perpetually  kindled  and  fading  in  the


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING  xi

light  of  consciousness,  I  call  the  Realm  of  Spirit.  It  is
only  for  the  sake  of  this  free  life  that  material  com¬
petence  and  knowledge  of  fact  are  worth  attaining.
Facts  for  a  living  creature  are  only  instruments;  his
play-life  is  his  true  life.  On  his  working  days,  when
he  is  attentive  to  matter,  he  is  only  his  own  servant,
preparing  the  feast.  He  becomes  his  own  master  in
his  holidays  and  in  his  sportive  passions.  Among
these  must  be  counted  literature  and  philosophy,  and
so  much  of  love,  religion,  and  patriotism  as  is  not  an
effort  to  survive  materially.  In  such  enthusiasms  there
is  much  asseveration;  but  what  they  attest  is  really
not  the  character  of  the  external  facts  concerned,  but
only  the  spiritual  uses  to  which  the  spirit  turns  them.

A  philosopher  cannot  wish  to  be  deceived.  His
philosophy  is  a  declaration  of  policy  in  the  presence  of
the  facts ;  and  therefore  his  first  care  must  be  The  ran
to  ascertain  and  heartily  to  acknowledge  all  of  reason-
SUCh  facts  as  are  relevant  to  his  action  or  abl<r  .

.  ,  .  ..  curiosity.

sentiment — not  less,  and  not  necessarily  more.

The  pursuit  of  truth  is  a  form  of  courage,  and  a  philo¬
sopher  may  well  love  truth  for  its  own  sake,  in  that  he
is  disposed  to  confront  destiny,  whatever  it  may  be,
with  zest  when  possible,  with  resignation  when  neces¬
sary,  and  not  seldom  with  amusement.  The  facts  to
which  it  is  prudent  and  noble  in  him  to  bare  his  bosom
are  the  morally  relevant  facts,  such  as  touch  his  fortunes
or  his  heart,  or  such  as  he  can  alter  by  his  efforts;
nor  can  he  really  discover  other  facts.  Intuition,  or
absolute  apprehension  without  media  or  doubt,  is
proper  to  spirit  perusing  essences;  it  is  impossible  to
animals  confronting  facts.  Animals  know  things  by
exploration,  reaction,  and  prophetic  fancy;  they  there¬
fore  can  know  only  such  parts  and  depths  of  nature  as
they  explore  materially  and  respond  to  vitally.  The
brave  impulse  to  search  may,  indeed,  become  eager
and  may  wish  to  recognise  no  limits;  and  there  may


Xll


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


be  spirits  so  utterly  practical  and  serious  that  the
pursuit  of  material  facts  absorbs  them  altogether,  to
the  exclusion  of  all  play  of  mind.  Yet  such  hectic
exactitude  is  an  expression  of  fear,  and  automatic
rather  than  rational.  Curiosity  in  an  animal  always
has  limits  which  it  is  foolish  to  transgress,  because
beyond  them  theory  insensibly  lapses  into  verbal  myths,
and  if  still  taken  for  true  knowledge  defeats  the  honest
curiosity  that  inspired  it.  What  renders  knowledge
true  is  fidelity  to  the  object;  but  in  the  conduct  and
fancy  of  an  animal  this  fidelity  can  be  only  rough,
summary,  dramatic;  too  much  refinement  renders  it
subjective,  as  does  too  much  haste.  This  is  true
of  mathematical  refinements  no  less  than  of  verbal
pedantries.  The  realm  of  matter  can  never  be  dis¬
closed  either  to  hypothesis  or  to  sensation  in  its  pre¬
sumable  inmost  structure  and  ultimate  extent:  the
garment  of  appearance  must  always  fit  it  loosely  and
drape  it  in  alien  folds,  because  appearance  is  essentially
an  adaptation  of  facts  to  the  scale  and  faculty  of  the
observer.

There  are  also  moral  limits  to  seriousness  and  utter
literalness  in  thought.  The  tragic  compulsion  to
honour  the  facts  is  imposed  on  man  by  the  destiny  of
his  body,  to  which  that  of  his  mind  is  attached.  But
his  destiny  is  not  the  only  theme  possible  to  his  thought,
nor  the  most  congenial.  The  best  part  of  this  destiny
is  that  he  may  often  forget  it;  and  existence  would  not
be  worth  preserving  if  it  had  to  be  spent  exclusively  in
anxiety  about  existence.

It  follows  from  all  this  that  knowledge  of  facts
merely  because  they  are  facts  cannot  be  the  ultimate
Relativity  of  object  of  a  philosopher,  although  he  must
knowledge.  wjsh  to  know  the  whole  unvarnished  truth
about  relevant  matters.  A  liberal  mind  must  live
on  its  own  terms,  and  think  in  them;  it  is  not
inferior  to  what  surrounds  it;  fact-worship  on  its  part


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING  xiii


would  accordingly  be  a  fault  in  taste  and  in  morals.
What  is  the  function  of  philosophy?  To  disclose  the
absolute  truth?  But  is  it  credible  that  the  absolute
truth  should  descend  into  the  thoughts  of  a  mortal
creature,  equipped  with  a  few  special  senses  and  with
a  biassed  intellect,  a  man  lost  amidst  millions  of  his
fellows  and  a  prey  to  the  epidemic  delusions  of  the
race?  Possession  of  the  absolute  truth  is  not  merely
by  accident  beyond  the  range  of  particular  minds;  it
is  incompatible  with  being  alive,  because  it  excludes
any  particular  station,  organ,  interest,  or  date  of  survey:
the  absolute  truth  is  undiscoverable  just  because  it  is
not  a  perspective.  Perspectives  are  essential  to  animal
apprehension;  an  observer,  himself  a  part  of  the  world
he  observes,  must  have  a  particular  station  in  it;  he
cannot  be  equally  near  to  everything,  nor  internal  to
anything  but  himself;  of  the  rest  he  can  only  take
views,  abstracted  according  to  his  sensibility  and  fore¬
shortened  according  to  his  interests.  Those  animals
which  I  was  supposing  endowed  with  an  adequate
philosophy  surely  do  not  possess  the  absolute  truth.
They  read  nature  in  their  private  idioms.  Their  im¬
agination,  like  the  human,  is  doubtless  incapable  of
coping  with  all  things  at  once,  or  even  with  the  whole
of  anything  natural.  Mind  was  not  created  for  the
sake  of  discovering  the  absolute  truth.  The  absolute
truth  has  its  own  intangible  reality,  and  scorns  to  be
known.  The  function  of  mind  is  rather  to  increase
the  wealth  of  the  universe  in  the  spiritual  dimension,
by  adding  appearance  to  substance  and  passion  to
necessity,  and  by  creating  all  those  private  perspectives,
and  those  emotions  of  wonder,  adventure,  curiosity,
and  laughter  which  omniscience  would  exclude.  If
omniscience  were  alone  respectable,  creation  would
have  been  a  mistake.  The  single  duty  of  all  creatures
would  then  be  to  repair  that  creative  error,  by  abolishing
their  several  senses  and  desires  and  becoming  indis-


XIV


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

tinguishable  from  one  another  and  from  nothing  at  all;
and  if  all  creation  could  attain  to  this  sort  of  salvation,
the  absolute  substance,  in  whose  honour  all  else  had
been  abandoned,  would  become  unconscious.  The
time  will  doubtless  come  for  each  of  us,  if  not  for  the
universe  at  large,  to  cease  from  care;  but  our  passage
through  life  will  have  added  a  marvellous  episode  to
the  tale  of  things;  and  our  distinction  and  glory,  as
well  as  our  sorrow,  will  have  lain  in  being  something
in  particular,  and  in  knowing  what  it  is.

Thus  if  there  is  a  sense  in  which  all  special  and
separable  existence  is  illusion,  there  is  another  sense
in  which  illusion  is  itself  a  special  and  separable  ex¬
istence;  and  if  this  be  condemned  for  not  being  abso¬
lute  substance  and  for  excluding  knowledge  of  the
absolute  truth,  it  may  also  be  prized  for  these  very
reasons.  Sensation  is  true  enough.  All  experience
yields  some  acquaintance  with  the  realm  of  essence,
and  some  perspective  of  the  material  world;  and  this
would  always  be  a  true  perspective  (since  things  seen
at  that  angle  and  with  that  organ  really  look  like  that)
if  the  appearance  were  not  stretched  to  cover  more  than
it  covers  in  reality.  Of  such  true  perspectives  the
simplest  and  most  violently  foreshortened  may  be  as
good  as  the  most  complicated,  the  most  poetical  or
pictorial  as  good  as  the  most  scientific,  not  only  aesthe¬
tically  but  even  cognitively;  because  it  may  report  the
things  concerned  on  that  human  scale  on  which  we
need  to  measure  them,  and  in  this  relation  may  report
them  correctly.  Nor  is  the  error  which  such  very
partial  knowledge  may  breed,  when  inflated  by  pre¬
cipitate  judgements  and  vanity,  altogether  unavoidable.
The  variety  of  senses  in  man,  the  precarious  rule  of  his
instincts,  and  the  range  of  his  memory  and  fancy,  give
rise  in  him  eventually  to  some  sense  of  error  and  even
of  humour.  He  is  almost  able  to  pierce  the  illusions
of  his  animal  dogmatism,  to  surrender  the  claim  to


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING  xv


inspiration,  and  in  one  sense  to  transcend  the  relativity
of  his  knowledge  and  the  flightiness  of  his  passions  by
acknowledging  them  with  a  good  grace.

This  relativity  does  not  imply  that  there  is  no
absolute  truth.  On  the  contrary,  if  there  were  no
absolute  truth,  all-inclusive  and  eternal,  the  The  reaim
desultory  views  taken  from  time  to  time  by  of  truth-
individuals  would  themselves  be  absolute.  They
would  be  irrelevant  to  one  another,  and  incom¬
parable  in  point  of  truth,  each  being  without  any
object  but  the  essence  which  appeared  in  it.  If  views
can  be  more  or  less  correct,  and  perhaps  complementary
to  one  another,  it  is  because  they  refer  to  the  same
system  of  nature,  the  complete  description  of  which,
covering  the  whole  past  and  the  whole  future,  would
be  the  absolute  truth.  This  absolute  truth  is  no  living
view,  no  actual  judgement,  but  merely  that  segment  of
the  realm  of  essence  which  happens  to  be  illustrated
in  existence.  The  question  whether  a  given  essence
belongs  to  this  segment  or  not — that  is,  whether  a
suggested  idea  is  or  is  not  true — has  a  tragic  importance
for  an  animal  intent  on  discovering  and  describing
what  exists,  or  has  existed,  or  is  destined  to  exist  in  his
world.  He  seldom  has  leisure  to  dwell  on  essences
apart  from  their  presumable  truth;  even  their  beauty
and  dialectical  pattern  seem  to  him  rather  trivial,  unless
they  are  significant  of  facts  in  the  realm  of  matter,  con¬
trolling  human  destiny.  I  therefore  give  a  special
name  to  this  tragic  segment  of  the  realm  of  essence
and  call  it  the  Realm  of  Truth.

The  knowledge  of  relevant  truth,  while  it  has  this
fundamental  moral  importance,  is  far  from  being  our
only  concern  in  the  life  of  reason.  It  comes  Human
in  only  incidentally,  in  so  far  as  a  staunch  values  of
and  comprehensive  knowledge  of  things  makes  now  ®  ge'
a  man  master  of  things,  and  independent  of  them  in  a
great  measure.  The  business  of  a  philosopher  is


XVI


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

rather  to  be  a  good  shepherd  of  his  thoughts.  The
share  of  attention  and  weight  which  he  gives  to  physical
speculation  or  to  history  or  to  psychology  will  express
his  race  and  disposition,  or  the  spirit  of  his  times;
everyone  is  free  to  decide  how  far  material  arts  and
sciences  are  worth  pursuing,  and  with  what  free  crea¬
tions  they  shall  be  surrounded.  Young  and  ardent
minds,  and  races  without  accumulated  possessions,
tend  to  poetry  and  metaphysics;  they  neglect  or  falsify
the  truth  in  the  heat  of  their  imaginative  passion.  Old
men,  and  old  nations,  incline  to  mix  their  wine  with
larger  dilutions  of  reality;  and  they  prefer  history,
biography,  politics,  and  humorous  fictions;  because  in
all  these,  while  the  facts  are  neither  conceived  nor
tested  scientifically,  the  savour  of  earth  and  of  ex¬
perience  remains  dominant.

By  the  philosopher,  however,  both  the  homeliest
brew  and  the  most  meticulous  science  are  only  relished
as  food  for  the  spirit.  Even  if  defeated  in  the  pursuit
of  truth,  the  spirit  may  be  victorious  in  self-expression
and  self-knowledge;  and  if  a  philosopher  could  be
nothing  else,  he  might  still  be  a  moralist  and  a  poet.
He  will  do  well  to  endow  his  vision  of  things  with  all
the  force,  colour,  and  scope  of  which  his  soul  is  capable.
Then  if  he  misses  the  truth  of  nature,  as  in  many  things
is  probable,  he  will  at  least  have  achieved  a  work  of
imagination.  In  such  a  case  the  universe,  without
being  mapped  as  a  whole  in  the  fancy,  will  be  enriched
at  one  point,  by  the  happy  life  enacted  there,  in  one
human  focus  of  art  and  vision.  The  purer  and  more
distinct  the  spirit  which  a  philosopher  can  bring  to
light  in  his  thoughts,  the  greater  the  intellectual  achieve¬
ment;  and  the  greater  the  moral  achievement  also,  if
the  policy  so  set  forth  is  actually  carried  out  in  his
whole  life  and  conversation.

As  for  me,  in  stretching  my  canvas  and  taking  up
my  palette  and  brush,  I  am  not  vexed  that  masters


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING  xvii


should  have  painted  before  me  in  styles  which  I  have
no  power  and  no  occasion  to  imitate;  nor  do  I  expect
future  generations  to  be  satisfied  with  always  Legitimate
repainting  my  pictures.  Agreement  is  sweet,  variety  in
being  a  form  of  friendship;  it  is  also  a  sPe^ation-
stimulus  to  insight,  and  helpful,  as  contradiction  is  not;
and  I  certainly  hope  to  find  agreement  in  some  quarters.
Yet  I  am  not  much  concerned  about  the  number  of
those  who  may  be  my  friends  in  the  spirit,  nor  do  I
care  about  their  chronological  distribution,  being  as
much  pleased  to  discover  one  intellectual  kinsman  in
the  past  as  to  imagine  two  in  the  future.  That  in
the  world  at  large  alien  natures  should  prevail,  in¬
numerable  and  perhaps  infinitely  various,  does  not
disturb  me.  On  the  contrary,  I  hope  fate  may  mani¬
fest  to  them  such  objects  as  they  need  and  can  love;
and  although  my  sympathy  with  them  cannot  be  so
vivid  as  with  men  of  my  own  mind,  and  in  some  cases
may  pass  into  antipathy,  I  do  not  conceive  that  they
are  wrong  or  inferior  for  being  different  from  me,  or
from  one  another.  If  God  and  nature  can  put  up
with  them,  why  should  I  raise  an  objection?  But  let
them  take  care;  for  if  they  have  sinned  against  the
facts  (as  I  suspect  is  often  the  case)  and  are  kicking
against  the  pricks  of  matter,  they  must  expect  to  be
brought  to  confusion  on  the  day  of  doom,  or  earlier.
Not  only  will  their  career  be  brief  and  troubled,  which
is  the  lot  of  all  flesh,  but  their  faith  will  be  stultified  by
events,  which  is  a  needless  and  eternal  ignominy  for  the
spirit.  But  if  somehow,  in  their  chosen  terms,  they
have  balanced  their  accounts  with  nature,  they  are  to
be  heartily  congratulated  on  their  moral  diversity.  It
is  pleasant  to  think  that  the  fertility  of  spirit  is  inex¬
haustible,  if  matter  only  gives  it  a  chance,  and  that  the
worst  and  most  successful  fanaticism  cannot  turn  the
moral  world  permanently  into  a  desert.

The  pity  of  it  is  only  that  contrary  souls  should  often


xviii  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

fight  for  the  same  bodies,  natural  or  political,  as  if
space  and  matter  in  the  universe  were  inadequate  (as
on  earth  indeed  they  are)  for  every  essence  in  its  own
time  to  see  the  sun.  But  existence  is  precipitate  and
blind;  it  cannot  bide  its  time;  and  the  seeds  of  form
are  often  so  wantonly  and  thickly  scattered  that  they
strangle  one  another,  call  one  another  weeds  and  tares,
and  can  live  only  in  the  distracted  effort  to  keep  others
from  living.  Seldom  does  any  soul  live  through  a
single  and  lovely  summer  in  its  native  garden,  suffered
and  content  to  bloom.  Philosophers  and  nations  can¬
not  be  happy  unless  separate;  then  they  may  be  single-
minded  at  home  and  tolerant  abroad.  If  they  have  a
spirit  in  them  which  is  worth  cultivating  (which  is  not
always  the  case)  they  need  to  entrench  it  in  some  con¬
secrated  citadel,  where  it  may  come  to  perfect  expres¬
sion.  Human  beings  allowed  to  run  loose  are  vowed
to  perdition,  since  they  are  too  individual  to  agree  and
too  gregarious  to  stand  alone.  Hence  the  rareness  of
any  polity  founded  on  wisdom,  like  that  of  which
ancient  Greece  affords  some  glimpses,  and  the  equal
rareness  of  a  pure  and  complete  philosophy,  such  as
that  of  Dante  or  of  Spinoza,  conceived  in  some  moment
of  wonderful  unanimity  or  of  fortunate  isolation.

My  own  philosophy,  I  venture  to  think,  is  well-
knit  in  the  same  sense,  in  spite  of  perhaps  seeming
The  temper  eclectic  and  of  leaving  so  many  doors  open
of  this  both  in  physics  and  in  morals.  My  eclec-
system.  ticism  is  not  helplessness  before  sundry  in¬
fluences;  it  is  detachment  and  firmness  in  taking  each
thing  simply  for  what  it  is.  Openness,  too,  is  a  form
of  architecture.  The  doctrine  that  all  moralities  equally
are  but  expressions  of  animal  life  is  a  tremendous
dogma,  at  once  blessing  and  purging  all  mortal  passions;
and  the  conviction  that  there  can  be  no  knowledge  save
animal  faith  positing  external  facts,  and  that  this
natural  science  is  but  a  human  symbol  for  those  facts,


PREFACE  TO  REALMS  OF  BEING  xix


also  has  an  immense  finality:  the  renunciation  and  the
assurance  in  it  are  both  radical  and  both  invincible.

In  confessing  that  I  have  merely  touched  the  hem
of  nature’s  garment,  I  feel  that  virtue  from  her  has
passed  into  me,  and  made  me  whole.  There  is  no
more  bewitching  moment  in  childhood  than  when  the
boy,  to  whom  someone  is  slyly  propounding  some
absurdity,  suddenly  looks  up  and  smiles.  The  brat
has  understood.  A  thin  deception  was  being  practised
on  him,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  not  be  deceived,
but  by  deriding  it  might  prove  he  had  attained  to  a
man’s  stature  and  a  man’s  wit.  It  was  but  banter
prompted  by  love.  So  with  this  thin  deception  prac¬
tised  upon  me  by  nature.  The  great  Sphinx  in  posing
her  riddle  and  looking  so  threatening  and  mysterious
is  secretly  hoping  that  I  may  laugh.  She  is  not  a
riddle  but  a  fact;  the  words  she  whispers  are  not
oracles  but  prattle.  Why  take  her  residual  silence,
which  is  inevitable,  for  a  challenge  or  a  menace?  She
does  not  know  how  to  speak  more  plainly.  Her  secret
is  as  great  a  secret  to  herself  as  to  me.  If  I  perceive  it,
and  laugh,  instantly  she  draws  in  her  claws.  A  tremor
runs  through  her  enigmatical  body;  and  if  she  were
not  of  stone  she  would  embrace  her  boyish  discoverer,
and  yield  herself  to  him  altogether.  It  is  so  simple  to
exist,  to  be  what  one  is  for  no  reason,  to  engulf  all
questions  and  answers  in  the  rush  of  being  that  sus¬
tains  them.  Henceforth  nature  and  spirit  can  play
together  like  mother  and  child,  each  marvellously
pleasant  to  the  other,  yet  deeply  unintelligible;  for  as
she  created  him  she  knew  not  how,  merely  by  smiling
in  her  dreams,  so  in  awaking  and  smiling  back  he  some¬
how  understands  her;  at  least  he  is  all  the  understanding
she  has  of  herself.


*


CONTENTS

PAGE

Preface  to  Realms  of  Being  .  .  .  .  v

The  Realm  of  Essence  ....  xxiii

CHAP.

I.  Various  Approaches  to  Essence  .  .  .  i

kAI.  The  Being  Proper  to  Essences  .  .  .18

III.  Adventitious  Aspects  of  Essence  .  .  .26

IV.  Pure  Being  .  .  .  .  .  *45

V.  Complex  Essences  .  .  .  .  .66

VI.  Implication  .  .  .  .  .  .78

VII.  The  Basis  of  Dialectic  .  .  .  .94

VIII.  Essences  as  Terms  .....  108

IX.  Instances  of  Essences  .  .  .  .119

X.  Essences  all  Primary  .  .  .  .138

XI.  Comparison  with  some  kindred  Doctrines  .  155

Postscript:  Corroborations  in  Current  Opinion  .  168


xxi


”E<ttiv  .  .  .  7rpwrov  Siacpereov  t aSf  Tt  to  ov  del,  -yevecriv  Se  ovk
«X»v  ...  del  Kara  raiJTa.  ov. — The  first  distinction  to  make  is  this:
What  is  that  which  always  is,  having  no  origin,  and  being  always
identical  with  itself? — Plato.

Buddha  teaches  that  all  beings  are  from  eternity  abiding  in
Nirvana. — Dasgupta’s  History  of  Indian  Philosophy.

Per  Deum  intelligo  ens  absolute  infinitum,  hoc  est,  substantiam
constantem  infinitis  attributis,  quorum  unumquodque  aeternam  et
infinitam  essentiam  exprimit.  .  .  .  Quod  autem  absolute  infinitum
est,  ad  ejus  essentiam  pertinet  quidquid  essentiam  exprimit. —
By  God  I  understand  Being  absolutely  infinite,  that  is,  substance
consisting  of  infinitely  numerous  attributes,  each  of  which  expresses
eternal  and  infinite  essence  .  .  .  For  if  a  thing  is  absolutely  infinite,
whatsoever  expresses  any  essence  belongs  to  the  essence  of  that
thing. — Spinoza.

Le  neant  ...  est  infini;  il  est  kernel;  il  a  bien  des  attributs
communs  avec  Dieu;  il  comprend  une  infinite  de  choses,  car  toutes
celles  qui  ne  sont  point  sont  comprises  dans  le  ndant,  et  celles  qui
ne  sont  plus  sont  rentr^es  dans  le  n£ant. — The  Non-existent  .  .  .
is  infinite,  it  is  eternal;  it  possesses  many  attributes  in  common  with
God;  it  includes  an  infinity  of  things  since  all  those  which  never
exist  belong  to  the  Non-existent,  and  those  which  exist  no  longer
have  fallen  back  into  the  Non-existent. — Leibniz.


/


XXII


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


xxiii


CHAPTER  I


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE

The  modern  or  romantic  man  is  an  adventurer;  he
is  less  interested  in  what  there  may  be  to  find  than
in  the  lure  of  the  search  and  in  his  hopes,
guesses,  or  experiences  in  searching.  Essence  Caches
is  perfectly  indifferent  to  being  discovered  are  adven-
and  unaffected  by  the  avenue  through  which  tltlous-
any  discoverer  may  approach  it;  and  for  that  very
reason  the  explorer  ignores  it,  and  asks  what  it  can
possibly  be.  Now  the  subjective  attitude  in  philosophy
is  not  only  prevalent  in  these  times,  but  always  legitimate ;
because  a  mind  capable  of  self-consciousness  is  always
free  to  reduce  all  things  to  its  own  view  of  them.
Before  considering  the  realm  of  essence  in  itself,  there¬
fore,  I  will  indicate  some  paths  by  which  even  the  most
rambling  reflection  may  be  led  to  it.  Essence  is
indeed  everywhere  at  hand;  and  a  scrupulous  scepticism,
falling  back  on  immediate  appearance,  is  itself  a  chief
means  of  discovering  the  pervasive  presence  of  essences.

In  a  volume  on  Scepticism  and  Animal  Approach
Faith ,  to  which  the  present  work  is  a  sequel,  through
I  have  described  in  detail  the  approach  to  Nothing  hi-
essence  through  scepticism.  Knowledge  such  dubitabie
as  animal  life  requires  is  something  transi-  character  of
tive,  a  form  of  belief  in  things  absent  or  some  given
eventual  or  somehow  more  than  the  state  of  essence-
the  animal  knowing  them.  It  needs  to  be  informa-

i  B


2


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


tion.  Otherwise  the  animal  mind  would  be  the
prisoner  of  its  dreams,  and  no  better  informed  than
a  stone  about  its  environment,  its  past,  or  its  destiny.

It  follows  that  such  transitive  knowledge  will
always  be  open  to  doubt.  It  is  a  claim  or  presumption
arising  in  a  responsive  organism;  yet  in  spite  of  this
biological  status,  it  ventures  upon  assertions  concerning
facts  elsewhere.  This  boldness  exposes  it  to  all  sorts
of  errors;  for  opinion  will  vary  with  its  organ  and,  on
that  irrelevant  ground,  will  make  varying  assertions
about  its  outlying  objects.  Nor  is  it  to  be  presumed
that  initially  the  terms  in  which  objects  are  conceived
are  their  intrinsic  qualities;  the  terms  may  be,  in
quality  as  in  existence,  generated  in  the  organ  of  sense,
as  are  words  or  optical  perspectives.  Knowledge  of
nature  or  of  absent  experience  is  accordingly  no  less
questionable  in  its  texture  than  in  its  scope.  Its
validity  is  only  presumptive  and  its  terms  are  merely
symbols.

The  sceptic  once  on  this  scent  will  soon  trace
essence  to  its  lair.  He  will  drop,  as  dubious  and  un¬
warranted,  the  belief  in  a  past,  an  environment,  or  a
destiny.  He  will  dismiss  all  thought  of  any  truth  to  be
discovered  or  any  mind  engaged  in  that  egregious
chase;  and  he  will  honestly  confine  himself  to  nofing
the  features  of  the  passing  apparition.  At  first  he
may  still  assume  that  he  can  survey  the  passage  and
transformation  of  his  dreams;  but  soon,  if  he  is  truly
sceptical  and  candid,  he  will  confess  that  this  alleged
order  of  appearances  and  this  extended  experience  are
themselves  only  dreamt  of,  like  the  future  or  the
remoter  past  or  the  material  environment — those  dis¬
carded  idols  of  his  dogmatic  days.  Nothing  will
remain  but  some  appearance  now;  and  that  which
appears,  when  all  gratuitous  implications  of  a  world
beyond  or  of  a  self  here  are  discarded,  will  be  an
essence.  Nor  will  his  own  spirit,  or  spirit  absolute


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  3

(which  grammar  may  still  seem  to  insert,  under  the
form  of  the  pronoun  I,  as  a  prior  agent  in  this  intuition
of  essence)  be  anything  but  another  name  for  the
absolute  phantom,  the  unmeaning  presence,  into  which
knowledge  will  have  collapsed.

This  approach  to  essence  through  scepticism  is
by  no  means  the  only  one  possible,  even  for  a  critic  of
knowledge.  Scepticism  can  impugn  only
such  knowledge  as  is  a  form  of  faith,  and  trough*
posits  a  removed  object;  but  the  dialectician  dialectic:
ignores  this  sort  of  knowledge  as  much  as  fnt^edor
he  can,  and  by  his  initial  attitude  plants  defined  is

1  •  1  r  •  .  1  1  i*  1*1  sn  essence.

himselt  in  the  realm  01  essence,  and  wishes
to  confine  himself  to  it.  What  is  dialectic?  Pre¬
cisely  an  analysis  or  construction  of  ideal  forms
which  abstracts  from  such  animal  faith  as  might  be
stimulated  by  their  presence,  and  traces  instead  the
inherent  patterns  or  logical  relations  of  these  forms  as
intuition  reveals  them.  To  the  dialectician  animal
faith  seems  wanton  and  superfluous,  and  in  his  overt
reasoning,  if  not  in  his  secret  assumptions,  he  neither
posits  any  objects  of  natural  knowledge  nor  seeks  to
describe  them.  Such  preoccupation  with  dark  external
facts  and  hidden  events  seems  to  him  but  a  grovelling
instinct;  and  the  persuasion  that  one’s  ideas  describe
natural  objects,  though  inevitable  perhaps  in  sniffing
one’s  way  through  this  nether  world,  he  laughs  at  as  a
vain  presumption,  unworthy  of  the  name  of  science.
In  practice,  as  a  man  amongst  men,  the  dialectician  may
have  mixed  views.  If  he  is  an  enthusiast  or  a  naturalist
in  disguise,  using  dialectic  for  some  ulterior  purpose,
he  will  probably  embrace  his  conclusions  not  merely
as  implications  of  his  premisses,  but  as  objects  of  hot
animal  faith;  and  he  may  even  think  he  has  discovered
a  metaphysical  world,  when  in  truth  he  has  merely
elaborated  a  system  of  essences,  altogether  imaginary ,  and
in  no  way  more  deeply  rooted  in  reality  than  any  system


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


of  essences  which  a  poet  or  a  musician  might  compose.
This  eventual  mystification,  however,  by  which  dialectic
is  represented  as  revealing  facts,  does  not  destroy  its
native  competence  to  describe  essences;  in  its  purity
it  will  be  free  from  error,  because  free  from  any
pretence  to  define  ulterior  existences.  Now  this  very
purity,  this  identity  of  the  object  envisaged  with  the
definition  given  to  it  in  thought,  seems  to  the  dialectician
the  perfection  of  science,  because  it  is  the  last  refuge  of
certitude.  But  certitude  and  dialectical  cogency  are
far  removed  from  animal  faith,  and  unnecessary  to  it;
and  animal  faith,  when  it  describes  in  suitable  symbols
(of  which  a  dialectical  system  may  be  one)  the  objects
encountered  in  action,  is  what  I  call  knowledge.  The
question  of  titles  and  preferences  does  not  concern
me  here;  in  any  case  the  dialectician,  whether  his  art  be
called  knowledge  or  not,  has  discovered  the  realm  of
essence  (or  some  province  in  it)  and  has  devoted
himself  to  exploring  it.

This  acquaintance  with  essence  I  call  intuition,
whether  it  be  passive,  aesthetic,  and  mystical,  or  on  the
Distinguish-  contrary  analytical  and  selective,  as  in  reasoned
able  discourse ;  because  at  every  point  demonstra-
sudTafthe  ti°n  or  inference  depends  for  its  force  on
terms  of  intuition  of  the  intrinsic  relation  between
the  most  are  the  given  terms.  So  in  planning  a  series  of
real  of  moves  in  chess,  as  in  originally  inventing
that  game,  the  mind  sees  the  consequences
implied  at  each  stage  by  the  rules  of  procedure :
these  rules  are  mere  essences,  but  their  implications
are  precise  in  any  hypothetical  position  of  the  pieces.
If  chess  were  not  a  well-established  game  and  if
material  chess-boards  and  chess-men  had  never  existed,
a  day-dream  in  which  particular  imaginary  matches
were  traced  out,  could  hardly  be  called  knowledge :
but  every  possibility  and  every  consequence  involved
at  each  juncture  would  be  equally  definite,  and  the


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  5

science  of  chess — even  if  chess  never  had  existed  in  the
world — would  be  an  exact  science.  Evidently  an
exact  science  is  not  without  an  object,  ideal  as  this
object  may  be:  indeed,  the  ideal  definition  of  that
object,  the  absence  of  all  ambiguity  as  to  what  it  is,
renders  exact  science  of  it  possible.  Such  definable
non-existent  objects  of  exact  science  have  being  in  an
eminent  degree ;  their  nature  and  their  eternal  intrinsic
relations  to  other  comparable  natures  are  perfectly
determinate.  They  are  what  they  are;  and  of  all  the
meanings  of  the  word  is — existence,  substance,  equi¬
valence,  definition,  etc.,  the  most  radical  and  proper  is
that  in  which  I  may  say  of  anything  that  it  is  what  it  is.
This  asseveration  does  not  commit  me  to  any  classifi¬
cation  of  the  object  or  to  any  assertion  of  its  existence.
I  merely  note  its  idiosyncrasy,  its  qualitative  identity,
which  enables  me  to  distinguish  it,  study  it,  and  hold
it  fast  in  my  intent,  so  that  I  may  eventually  frame  a
definition  of  it,  and  perhaps  assert  or  deny  its  existence.
If  any  object  had  no  such  specific  character,  there
would  be  no  truth  in  saying  that  it  was  before  me,  or
could  ever  again  be  the  theme  of  memory  or  discourse.
Essences,  by  being  eternally  what  they  are,  enable
existence  to  pass  from  one  phase  to  another,  and
enable  the  mind  to  note  and  describe  the  change.

That  what  I  see,  I  see,  or  what  I  am,  I  am,  may
seem  a  vain  assertion:  practical  minds  are  not
interested  in  anything  except  for  the  sake  of  They  are
something  else.  They  are  camp-followers  t^oniy
or  heralds  of  events,  without  self-possession,  possessions
Yet  if  that  which  is  actual  and  possessed  at  of  the  mind-
the  moment  never  had  a  satisfying  character,  no
satisfaction  would  ever  be  possible;  the  mind  could
never  dip  twice  into  the  same  subject  or  know  its
friends  from  its  enemies,  and  life  would  be  what  a
romantic  philosophy  would  make  it  an  idle  escape
from  one  error  into  another.  Radical  flux  is  indeed


6


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


characteristic  of  existence,  where  it  is  innocent,  since
there  can  be  no  mistake  or  regret  where  there  is  no
purpose:  but  the  mind,  even  if  describing  only  the
series  of  its  own  illusions,  attempts  to  describe  it  with
truth:  and  it  could  not  so  much  as  fail  in  this  attempt
unless  that  series  of  illusions  and  each  of  its  terms  had
a  precise  inexpungible  character.  Then  the  question
whether  in  some  ulterior  sense  those  phases  were
illusions  or  not,  becomes  a  subsidiary  question.  In
any  case,  internally,  they  were  what  they  were;  and  to
a  simple  and  recollected  spirit  the  obvious  often  is
enough.  Its  identity  may  have  a  deep  charm,  like  that
of  a  jewel.  I  may  long  ruminate  upon  it  and  impress
it  upon  myself  by  repetitions,  which  to  a  lover  never
seem  vain.  Even  in  the  midst  of  distractions,  if  I  say
to  myself  “No,  no”,  or  “Business  is  business”,  the
repetition  serves  to  detach  and  to  render  indubitable
the  essence  meant;  it  raises  that  material  accident  to
the  intellectual  level,  where  my  judgement  henceforth
may  recognise  it  to  the  exclusion  of  circumstances,
which  do  not  alter  essences,  but  only  cases.

Sometimes  sense  itself,  without  any  dialectical
analysis,  distinguishes  essences  from  facts,  and  recog-
Approach  nises  them  in  their  ideal  sphere.  This
though  ia  happens  for  a  very  simple  reason.  The
tion:  Every  stimulus  that  calls  animal  attention  to
intelligible  some  external  fact,  in  provoking  an  act  of  the
harmony  is  body,  also  presents  some  image  to  the  mind,
an  essence.  Moreover  this  labour  of  perception  may  be
more  or  less  welcome,  pleasant,  or  life-enhancing,
apart  from  its  ulterior  uses;  and  sometimes  this
incidental  emotion  is  so  strong  that  it  overpowers
the  interest  which  I  may  have  had  originally  in
the  external  facts;  and,  I  may  suspend  my  action
or  continue  it  automatically,  while  my  thought  is
absorbed  in  the  image  and  arrested  there.  As  I  was
jogging  to  market  in  my  village  cart,  beauty  has  burst


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  7

upon  me  and  the  reins  have  dropped  from  my  hands.
I  am  transported,  in  a  certain  measure,  into  a  state  of
trance.  I  see  with  extraordinary  clearness,  yet  what  I
see  seems  strange  and  wonderful,  because  I  no  longer
look  in  order  to  understand,  but  only  in  order  to  see.
I  have  lost  my  preoccupation  with  fact,  and  am  con¬
templating  an  essence.

This  experience,  in  modern  times,  is  called  aesthetic;
but  it  has  no  exclusive  connection  with  the  arts  or  with
the  beautiful.  It  is  really  intellectual,  and  the  high
Platonic  road.  That  the  clearest  and  purest  reality
should  be  formal  or  ideal,  and  something  on  which  no
animal  instinct  could  possibly  be  directed,  may  seem  a
paradox;  it  may  be  denied  by  cynics — often  very  dull
people;  it  may  be  used  by  metaphysicians  as  an
argument  for  the  supernatural  origin  and  destiny  of  the
soul.  It  is  important  at  once  to  discard  any  such
inferences,  not  only  because  they  are  in  themselves
mistaken,  thin,  and  superstitious,  but  particularly,
at  this  point  in  my  argument,  because  they  encumber
the  notion  of  essence  with  a  moral  significance  quite
extraneous  to  it,  and  may  distort  and  discredit  it
altogether.  When  a  thing  is  beautiful,  I  stop  to  look
at  it;  and  in  this  way  its  beauty  helps  me  to  „
drink  in  the  actual  appearance,  and  to  be  beautiful
satisfied  with  that  ethereal  draught.  But  g^uswith
if  the  thing  were  ugly  or  uninteresting,  it  human
would  have  an  absolute  appearance  just  as  faculty-
much,  and  would  present  an  essence  to  intuition;
only  that  in  that  case  I  should  have  no  motive —
no  vital  animal  motive — for  dwelling  upon  that  essence,
or  noticing  it  at  all.  If  the  thing  is  beautiful,
this  is  not  because  it  manifests  an  essence,  but
because  the  essence  which  it  manifests  is  one  to
which  my  nature  is  attuned,  so  that  the  intuition  of  it
is  a  delightful  exercise  to  my  senses  and  to  my  soul.
This  pleasure  and  refreshment  welling  up  in  me,  I


8


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


courteously  thank  the  object  for,  and  call  its  intrinsic
charm :  but  an  intrinsic  charm  is  a  contradiction  in
terms,  and  all  that  the  object  possesses  is  affinity  to  my
life,  and  power  over  it,  without  which  it  would  be
impossible  for  me  to  observe  it  or  to  think  it  beautiful.

The  beautiful  is  itself  an  essence,  an  indefinable
quality  felt  in  many  things  which,  however  disparate
they  may  be  otherwise,  receive  this  name  by
detaches  virtue  of  a  special  emotion,  half  wonder,  half
contem1,  love,  which  is  felt  in  their  presence.  The
tion  from3  essence  of  the  beautiful,  when  made  an  object
nature*^  contemplation  by  itself,  is  rather  mis¬
leading:  like  the  good  and  like  pure  Being,  it
requires  much  dialectical  and  spiritual  training  to
discern  it  in  its  purity  and  in  its  fullness.  At  first
the  impetuous  philosopher,  seeing  the  world  in  so
many  places  flowering  into  beauty,  may  confuse  his
physics  with  a  subjective  or  teleological  reference  to  the
beautiful,  thereby  turning  this  essence,  which  marks
a  spiritual  consummation,  into  a  material  power:  or,
if  he  is  not  an  enthusiast,  he  may  dwell  so  much  on
the  instinctive  and  pleasant  bonds  which  attach  men
to  what  they  call  beautiful,  that  he  may  bury  the
essence  of  the  beautiful  altogether  under  heavy  descrip¬
tions  of  the  occasions  on  which  perhaps  it  appears.  I
will  not  stop  to  discuss  these  complications :  however
apt  to  become  entangled  itself,  the  beautiful  is  a  great
liberator  of  other  essences.  The  most  material  thing,
in  so  far  as  it  is  felt  to  be  beautiful,  is  instantly  im-
materialised,  raised  above  external  personal  relations,
concentrated  and  deepened  in  its  proper  being,  in  a
word,  sublimated  into  an  essence:  while  on  the  other
hand,  many  unnoticed  Platonic  ideas,  relations,  or
unsubstantial  aspects  of  things,  when  the  thrill  of
beauty  runs  through  them,  are  suddenly  revealed,  as
in  poetry  the  secret  harmonies  of  feelings  and  of  words.
In  this  way  innumerable  natural  themes  of  happiness,


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  9

which  no  one  could  possibly  mistake  for  things,  become
members  of  the  human  family,  and  in  turn  restore  the
prodigal  mind,  perhaps  long  wasted  on  facts,  to  its
home  circle  of  essence.

This  native  affinity  of  the  mind  to  essence  rather
than  to  fact  is  mind  itself,  the  very  nature  of  spirit  or
intellectual  light.  The  sort  of  intelligence  There  is
which  adapts  one  natural  being  to  another,  concomitant
and  maybe  found  in  the  conduct  of  animals,  Sin  the*
or  even  in  the  structure  of  their  bodies,  does  midst  of
not  consist  in  thinking;  it  is  an  adaptation  whenever
of  life  to  its  conditions,  a  form  of  behaviour  action  is
in  matter,  which  must  exist  and  flourish masterly'
before  thinking  or  even  feeling  can  arise  at  all.  In¬
tuition  would  be  impossible  without  an  underlying
animal  life,  a  psyche;  for  how  should  the  sheer  light  of
intuition  actualise  itself,  or  choose  the  essence  on  which
it  should  fall?  A  psyche,  the  hereditary  organisation
and  movement  of  life  in  an  animal,  must  first  exist  and
sustain  itself  by  its  “intelligent”  adaptations  to  the
ambient  world :  but  these  adaptations  are  not  conscious
until,  by  virtue  of  their  existence,  intuition  arises;  and
intuition  arises  when  the  inner  life  of  the  animal,  or
its  contact  with  external  things,  is  expressed  in  some
actual  appearance,  in  some  essence  given  in  feeling  or
thought.  The  psyche  and  the  material  circumstances,
by  their  special  character  and  movement,  determine  the
choice  and  succession  of  themes  on  which  intuition
shall  be  employed  in  some  particular  person;  in  so  far
as  spirit  is  kindled  there  at  all,  it  will  have  raised  those
themes  to  the  plane  of  essence ;  the  whole  movement  of
nature  and  of  human  affairs,  which  imposes  those
themes,  becomes  itself  only  another  theme  for  contem¬
plation,  if  present  to  the  mind  at  all.  This  contempla¬
tion  does  not  require  a  man  to  shut  his  eyes  or  to  fix
them  exclusively  on  the  stars ;  it  does  not  require  him  to
stop  living  or  acting.  Often  the  most  contemplative


10


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


minds  are  the  most  worldly-wise,  and  the  most  capable
of  directing  business.  But  though  they  may  survey  or
foresee  action,  they  do  not  live  in  action,  because  they
see  it  in  its  wholeness  and  in  its  results;  as  a  spectator
who  sees  the  plot  of  a  play  understands  the  emotions  of
the  characters;  but  does  not  succumb  to  them;  or
as  a  writer,  very  busy  with  his  pen  and  conveying  much
ink  from  inkstand  to  paper,  may  be  thinking  of  his
subject;  and  the  words  will  probably  come  most  aptly
when,  as  words,  they  come  unconsciously,  and  when
the  truth  which  tlhey  express  absorbs  the  whole  mind.
The  same  thing  happens  in  a  game  of  ball,  or  in  the
game  of  politics,  when  the  player  is  good;  the  quick
adjustment  of  his  faculties  and  organs,  being  automatic,
kindles  in  his  mind  a  graphic  image  and  a  pure
emotion,  to  be  the  signs  of  his  achievement  to  his  inner
man.

The  natural  and  the  spiritual  fruits  of  life  are  not
opposed,  but  they  are  different.  Its  natural  fruits  are
Moral  as  more  life,  persisting  through  readjustments
esthetic  and  an  incessant  generation  of  new  forms,
virtue  is  so  that  youth  may  fill  the  place  of  age  and
theUcon-m  attain  an  equal,  though  not  identical,  perfec-
tempiation  tion.  It  is  in  these  perfections,  or  in  ap-
of  essence.  pr0aches  which  partly  anticipate  them,  that
the  spiritual  fruits  are  found.  As  we  have  seen,
they  may  ripen  early,  and  may  be  gathered  at  all
seasons,  when  any  phase  of  life  is  perfected  in  action;
but  the  spiritual  fruits  are  internal  or  tangential  to  this
action,  not  consequent  upon  it,  like  the  natural  fruits:
they  may  be  omnipresent  in  existence,  but  only  by
everywhere  transmuting  existence  into  essence.  Spirit
is  life  looking  out  of  the  window;  the  work  of  the
household  must  have  been  done  first,  and  is  best  done
by  machinery.  Moral  triumphs  are  not  aesthetic,
because  they  have  other  occasions,  but  they  are  equally
intellectual  when  realised  in  the  spirit;  they  lie  in  the


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  n

joy  of  having  done  this :  they  are  a  passage  into  essence.
Finality,  though  it  is  not  felt  as  beauty,  marks  the  great
moments  of  passion  satisfied  or  purposes  achieved.
Into  some  scene,  into  some  phrase,  into  some  gesture
in  itself  trivial,  the  whole  burden  of  a  long  experience
may  then  be  cast,  and  happiness  may  be  centred  and
realised  in  some  simple  event  or  in  some  silent  moment.

I  should  need  but  to  enlarge  this  canvass  in  order  to
paint  the  whole  happiness  possible  to  man.  In  what
should  it  lie?  In  going  on,  and  simply  not  stopping?
In  passing  to  some  better  experience?  But  in  what
would  it  be  better?  In  being  fuller  or  longer?  I
think  the  longer  and  the  fuller  a  bad  life  is,  the  worse
it  is.  How,  then,  should  it  be  made  better?  Only
surely,  by  bringing  all  its  activities,  as  far  as  possible,  to
intrinsic  perfection  and  mutual  harmony,  so  that  at
each  step,  and  in  every  high  moment  of  synthesis  and
reflection,  intuition  may  fall  on  an  essence  beyond
which  it  need  not  look,  finding  in  it  peace,  liberation,
and  a  sufficient  token  that  fate,  so  far  as  that  expression
of  spirit  is  concerned,  has  lost  its  terrors.  Without
such  vision  realised  at  each  of  its  stages,  life  would
be  a  mere  fatality,  automatism  at  odds  with  itself,  a  pro¬
cession  of  failures.  Spirit  would  have  been  called  into
being  by  a  false  promise ;  its  only  hope  would  be  that  by
sleep  supervening,  or  by  distraction  so  extreme  as  to
destroy  the  organic  harmonies  on  which  intuition
depends,  that  mistake  should  be  corrected  and
forgotten.

This  possible  conflict  between  matter  and  spirit  is  a
family  quarrel;  it  is  not  a  shock  between  inde-  normal
pendent  forces  brought  together  by  accident,  iife^asTn
since  spirit  cannot  exist  except  in  matter,  and  p>y,  intui-
matter  cannot  become  interested  in  its  torma-  innocent
tions  and  fortunes  save  by  creating  a  spirit
that  may  observe  and  celebrate  them.  How
happily  spirit  and  matter  may  lead  their  common


12  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

life  together  appears  in  play  at  the  beginning,  and
in  contemplation  at  the  end.  It  is  only  in  the
middle  when  animal  faculties  are  inwardly  perfect  and
keen  enough  to  be  conscious,  but  are  outwardly  ill-
adjusted  and  ignorant,  that  trouble  arises;  because  the
mind  sees  and  wants  one  thing,  and  circumstances
impose  something  different,  requiring  a  disposition  and
a  form  of  imagination  in  the  animal  to  which  his  play-
life  is  not  adapted.  Spirit — the  voice  of  the  inner
nature  in  so  far  as  it  is  already  formed  and  definite —
accordingly  suffers  continual  defeats,  by  the  defeat  of
those  animal  impulses  which  it  expresses;  and  if  these
impulses  become  confused  or  exhausted,  it  sinks  with
them  into  vice  or  discouragement.  It  would  soon
perish  altogether,  and  annul  the  moral  problem  which
its  existence  creates,  unless  in  some  way  a  harmony
could  be  re-established  between  the  individual  and  the
world.  This  may  be  done  in  society  at  large  by  some
firm  political  ana  moral  regimen;  or  it  may  be  done
religiously  by  the  discipline  of  the  inner  man,  so  that
a  part  of  him  is  weaned  from  the  passions  and  interests
which  distract  the  world  and  is  centred  upon  purely
intellectual  or  spiritual  aspiration.  Religion  is  hard
for  external  events  to  defeat,  since  ill-fortune  stimulates
it  as  much  at  least  as  good  fortune.  Thus  within
strict  limits,  and  in  a  soberer  garb,  the  play-life  of
childhood  is  restored  to  the  soul.

Hence  that  happy  quarrel  of  philosophers — happy
because  both  parties  are  right — as  to  whether  wisdom
Life  is  a  meditation  on  life  or  on  death.  But  in
death,  and  the  midst  of  one  we  are  in  the  other,  not  only
luh^on  *n  t^at  existence  is  transition,  but  far  more
the  relation  remarkably,  in  that  life  triumphant  is  life
to  transmuted  into  something  which  is  not  life —

into  union  with  essence,  with  so  much  of  the
eternal  as  is  then  manifested  in  the  transitory.  This
manifestation,  with  all  the  approaches  to  it,  is  life  itself;


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  13

and  death  is  the  fading  of  that  vision,  the  passing  of  that
essence  back  into  its  native  heaven,  depriving  us  by  its
obscuration  of  a  part  of  ourselves,  so  that  existence  in
us  must  lapse  into  some  different  phase,  or  into  total
darkness.  Life,  if  by  this  word  we  understand  the
process  of  mutation,  is  itself  death;  to  be  fed  is  to
kill,  to  advance  is  to  reject  and  abandon.  The  truly
creative  movement  is  only  upward,  and  life,  in  so  far  as
it  means  light  and  accomplishment,  is  only  some  pre¬
destined  intuition  achieved,  some  wished-for  essence
made  manifest.  Existence  itself  is  a  momentary
victory  of  essence  :  a  victory  over  matter,  in  that  matter,
which  might  have  taken  any  other  form,  takes  this
particular  one  and  keeps  circling  about  it,  as  if  fascin¬
ated;  not  that  there  is  really  any  magic  here,  but  that
matter,  which  has  to  have  some  form  or  other,  is  willing
enough  to  be  true  to  the  one  it  has,  and  (so  indifferent
is  it  to  form)  to  renounce  for  an  indefinite  time  its
native  right  to  inconstancy  :  as  a  hardened  traveller,
not  caring  what  inn  he  stays  at,  may  remain  good-
naturedly  at  the  one  in  which  he  happens  to  be  lodged.
Essence  is  victorious  also  over  spirit,  and  no  less
amiably  victorious;  since  it  is  in  essence  that  spirit
aspires  to  lose  itself  and  to  find  its  quietus,  as  it  was
from  essence  that  matter  managed  to  borrow  some
character  and  some  beauty.  What  Spinoza  meant  by
meditation  on  life  was,  I  take  it,  the  effort  to  wrest  the
truth  of  nature  out  of  empirical  confusion,  so  that  all
the  vicissitudes  of  things  might  appear  under  the  form
of  eternity;  and  what  Socrates  and  Plato  meant  by
meditation  on  death  was  almost  the  same  thing.  Only
the  Greeks,  by  distinguishing  many  gods  and  many
divine  ideas,  could  humanise  and  make  friends  with  at
least  some  of  them;  and  in  sympathy  with  those
beautiful  immortals  they  could  survey  and  dismiss
earthly  existence  with  a  touch  of  disdain;  whereas  the
piety  of  thrifty  and  moralising  nations ,  when  enlightened ,


H


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

issues  only  in  a  scrupulous  natural  philosophy.  Being
overawed  by  the  facts,  and  eager  for  existence  and
prosperity,  they  miss  the  liberal  life;  they  prefer
perpetual  servitude,  if  well  fed,  to  emancipation,  such
as  interest  in  pure  essences  affords;  and  often  (though
not  in  Spinoza)  they  substitute  a  troubled  hope  in  some
fabulous  resurrection  for  the  present  union  with  the
eternal  which  is  natural  to  spirit.

Thus  scepticism,  dialectic,  contemplation,  and
spiritual  discipline,  all  lead  to  the  discrimination  of
Essence,  essence;  and  anyone  who  has  trodden  any  of

to  which  these  paths  to  the  end  will  not  need  to  be  told

addressed,  what  essence  means,  or  that  it  is  a  most  real
is  not  the  and  interesting  realm  of  being.  But  it  is  not
spirit  or  the  whole  or  being  :  on  the  contrary,  were
?4afactexlSt’  t*iere  nothing  but  essence,  not  one  of  these
approaches  to  it  would  be  open  :  there  would
be  no  possible  movement,  no  events,  no  life,  and  no
preference.  Considered  in  itself,  essence  is  certainly
the  deepest,  the  only  inevitable,  form  of  reality;  but  I
am  here  speaking  of  approaches  to  it,  that  is,  of  considera¬
tions  drawn  from  human  experience  that  may  enable  us
to  discern  that  primary  reality  and  to  recognise  it  to  be
such  in  contrast  to  our  own  form  of  being.  We  stand,
then,  on  another  plane,  the  plane  of  scattered  experi¬
ence,  brute  fact,  contingent  existence;  if  we  did  not^
the  discernment  of  essence  would  have  no  novelty  for
us,  it  would  reveal  no  night-firmament  behind  our
day,  it  would  not  liberate  us  from  ourselves  or  from  the
incubus  of  accidental  things.  If  we  were  prompted,
then,  by  our  new  insight  to  cry  that  our  old  life  was  all
illusion,  we  might  be  turning  this  insight  into  a  new
folly.  Enlightenment  itself  would  be  impossible  if
chance  experiences  had  not  preceded,  perfectly  real  in
their  own  way;  indeed  existence  (something  that  has  no
foothold  whatever  in  the  realm  of  essence)  is  pre¬
supposed  and  contained  in  any  assertion  or  denial,  and


Matter
is  the
selective
principle


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  15

in  the  intuition  of  essence  itself.  The  existence  and
distribution  of  enlightenment,  as  of  any  other  fact,
places  us  to  begin  with  in  another  realm,  the  realm  of
matter,  which  must  be  begged  separately :  without  it
there  could  be  no  manifestation  of  essence,  whether  in
nature  or  in  discourse.

The  priority  of  the  realm  of  essence  is  therefore
not  temporal  or  dynamic.  It  is  an  infinite  field  for
selection;  evidently  it  cannot  select  or  em¬
phasise  any  part  of  itself.  When  the  selection
takes  place,  we  accordingly  refer  it  to  a
different  principle,  which  we  may  call  chance,  even  among
fact,  or  matter:  but  this  principle  would  be  essences-
a  mere  word,  a  term  without  indicative  force,  if  it  did
not  select  some  feature  of  the  realm  of  essence  to  be  its
chosen  form:  in  other  words,  if  this  brute  accident
were  not  some  accident  in  particular,  contrasted  with
the  infinity  of  other  forms  which  it  has  not  chosen.  To
appeal  to  fact,  to  thump  existence  with  empirical  con¬
viction,  is  accordingly  but  to  emphasise  some  essence,
like  a  virtuous  bridegroom  renouncing  all  others:  the
exclusion  is  opportune,  but  the  bride  after  all  is  only
one  of  a  million,  and  the  mind  has  simply  wedded  an
essence.  The  principle  of  constancy,  or  perhaps  of
inconstancy — the  selective  principle — is  matter;  yet
whatever  way  it  may  turn,  it  must  embrace  one  essence
or  another.

The  approaches  to  essence  are  therefore  as  various
as  those  predispositions  in  matter  which  deter¬
mine  the  poses  of  life. .  Or  we  may  say  that  for  Jnigh
the  mind  there  is  a  single  avenue  to  essence,
namely,  attention.  Awaken  attention,  intensify
it,  purify  it  into  white  flame,  and  the  actual
and  unsubstantial  object  of  intuition  will
stand  before  you  in  all  its  living  immediacy  and
innocent  nakedness.  But  notice:  this  atten¬
tion,  discovering  nothing  but  essence,  is


passions

and

interests,

matter

directs

attention

upon

essence.


itself


an


i6


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


animal  faculty:  it  is  called  forth  by  material  stress,  or
by  passion.  The  passions,  in  so  far  as  they  are  im¬
pulses  to  action,  entangle  us  materially  in  the  flux  of
substance,  being  intent  on  seizing,  transforming,  or
destroying  something  that  exists:  but  at  the  same  time,
in  so  far  as  they  quicken  the  mind,  they  are  favourable
to  the  discernment  of  essence;  and  it  is  only  a  pas¬
sionate  soul  that  can  be  truly  contemplative.  The
,  reward  of  the  lover,  which  also  chastens  him,  is  to
discover  that  in  thinking  he  loved  anything  of  this
world  he  was  profoundly  mistaken.  Everybody  strives
for  possession;  that  is  the  animal  instinct  on  which
everything  hangs;  but  possession  leaves  the  true  lover
unsatisfied:  his  joy  is  in  the  character  of  the  thing
loved,  in  the  essence  it  reveals,  whether  it  be  here  or
there,  now  or  then,  his  or  another’s.  This  essence,
which  for  action  was  only  a  signal  letting  loose  a  generic
animal  impulse,  to  contemplation  is  the  whole  object
of  love,  and  the  sole  gain  in  loving.  Naturally  essences
seem  thin  abstractions  to  those  absorbed  in  action,
whose  heart  is  set  on  the  eventual,  and  to  whom  the
actual  is  never  anything:  the  actual  in  experience  is
never  more  than  an  echo  or  supplement  to  deeper  facts,
a  shimmer  on  the  surface  of  the  great  sea  labouring
beneath;  yet  the  actual  in  experience  is  never  an
abstraction  from  experience  itself;  it  is  the  whole
fruit  of  that  hidden  labour,  the  entire  reality  for  the
spirit.  It  is  therefore  not  as  a  quality  attributed  to
external  things  that  essence  is  best  distinguished;  for
the  colour  or  the  shape  of  an  apple  may  be  supposed
to  exist  in  it,  and  when  drawn  out  and  imagined  ex¬
isting  alone  they  may  seem  ghostly;  neither  the  round¬
ness  nor  the  redness  of  the  apple  would  be  edible.  To
a  greedy  child  they  would  be  miserable  cheats;  but
not  so  to  the  painter  or  the  geometer.  The  child  might
be  better  initiated  into  the  nature  of  essence  (which
is  not  far  from  the  innocent  mind)  if  he  chose  as  an


VARIOUS  APPROACHES  TO  ESSENCE  17

instance  the  pleasure  of  eating  the  apple,  or  of  snatching
it  from  another  boy’s  hand;  essences  which  he  would
distinguish  easily  from  their  opposites,  and  which  he
would  not  be  tempted  to  incorporate  into  apples.  A
little  experience  would  convince  him  that  these  in¬
tangible  pleasures  gave  importance  to  apples,  and  not
apples  to  them;  and  he  would  join  the  painter  of  still
life,  and  the  geometer,  in  finding  that  things  are  mere
instruments,  and  that  only  essences  are  essential.
Interest,  in  marking  the  differences  and  precise  char¬
acters  of  things,  which  are  all  that  the  mind  can  take
from  them,  is  the  great  revealer  of  essence.  Herein
appears  the  thoroughly  intellectual  or  poetical  virtue
of  spirit.  The  more  intense  and  dominating  it  is,  the
less  it  dwells  on  the  machinery  which  may  control  its
existence,  and  the  more  exclusively  it  addresses  itself
to  the  true  or  the  beautiful,  that  is,  to  the  essences
which  experience  would  manifest  if  it  were  pure  and
perfect.


c


CHAPTER  II


THE  BEING  PROPER  TO  ESSENCES


The  principle  of  essence,  we  have  seen,  is  identity :
the  being  of  each  essence  is  entirely  exhausted  by  its
Each  definition;  I  do  not  mean  its  definition  in
essence  is  words,  but  the  character  which  distinguishes
identica? and  it  from  any  other  essence.  Every  essence  is
individual,  perfectly  individual.  There  can  be  no  question
in  the  realm  of  essence  of  mistaken  identity,  vagueness,
shiftiness,  or  self-contradiction.  These  doubts  arise
in  respect  to  natural  existences  or  the  meanings  or
purposes  of  living  minds  :  but  in  every  doubt  or
equivocation  both  alternatives  are  genuine  essences;
and  in  groping  and  making  up  my  mind  I  merely
hesitate  between  essences,  not  knowing  on  which  to
arrest  my  attention.  There  is  no  possibility  of  flux  or
ambiguity  within  any  of  the  alternatives  which  might
be  chosen  at  each  step.

This  inalienable  individuality  of  each  essence
renders  it  a  universal;  for  being  perfectly  self-contained
Also  and  real  only  by  virtue  of  its  intrinsic  char-

universal.  acter,  it  contains  no  reference  to  any  setting
in  space  or  time,  and  stands  in  no  adventitious  relations
to  anything.  Therefore  without  forfeiting  its  absolute
identity  it  may  be  repeated  or  reviewed  any  number  of
times.  Such  embodiments  or  views  of  it,  like  the
copies  of  a  book  or  the  acts  of  reading  of  it,  will  be
facts  or  events  in  nature  (which  is  a  net  of  external

18


THE  BEING  PROPER  TO  ESSENCES  19

relations);  but  the  copies  would  not  be  copies  of  the
same  book,  nor  the  readings  readings  of  it,  unless  (and
in  so  far  as)  the  same  essence  reappeared  in  them  all.
Physical  obstacles  to  exact  repetitions  or  reproductions
do  not  affect  the  essential  universality  of  every  essence,
even  if  by  chance  it  occurs  only  once,  or  never  occurs
at  all;  because,  in  virtue  of  its  perfect  identity  and
individuality,  it  cannot  fall  out  of  the  catalogue  of
essences,  where  it  fills  its  particular  place.  If  I  try  to
delete  it,  I  reinstate  it,  since  in  deleting  that  I  have
recognised  and  defined  it  anew,  bearing  witness  to  its
possessing  the  whole  being  which  it  can  claim  as  an
essence.  There  accordingly  it  stands,  waiting  to  be
embodied  or  noticed,  if  nature  or  attention  ever  choose
to  halt  at  that  point  or  to  traverse  it.  Every  essence
in  its  own  realm  is  just  as  central,  just  as  normal,  and
just  as  complete  as  any  other  :  it  is  therefore  always
just  as  open  to  exemplification  or  to  thought,  without
the  addition  or  subtraction  of  one  iota  of  its  being.
Time  and  space  may  claim  and  repeat  it  as  often  or  as
seldom  as  they  will :  that  is  their  own  affair.  The  flux
is  free  to  have  such  plasticity  as  it  has,  and  to  miss  all
that  it  misses;  and  it  is  free  to  be  as  monotonous  as  it
likes,  if  it  finds  it  easier  to  fall  again  and  again  into  the
same  form,  rather  than  to  run  away  into  perpetual  and
unreturning  noveltiesX  The  realm  of  essence  is  the  scale
of  measurement,  the  continuum  of  variation,  on  which
these  repetitions  or  these  novelties  may  be  plotted  and
compared.  Re-embodiments  or  re-surveys  of  an
essence  (if  they  occur)  bind  the  parts  of  the  flux
together  ideally,  and  render  it  amenable  to  description.
The  essential  universality  of  these  forms  makes  any
fact,  in  so  far  as  it  exhibits  them,  distinct  and  knowable  :
the  universal  and  the  individual  being  so  far  from
contrary  that  they  are  identical.  I  am  not  myself
unless  I  re-enact  now  the  essence  of  myself,  which  I
may  re-enact  at  all  times  and  places.


20


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


Since  essences  are  universals  not  needing  to  figure
in  any  particular  place  or  time,  but  fit  to  figure  in  any,
^  it  is  not  possible  to  investigate  the  realm  of

infinite  in  essence  by  empirical  exploration.  Y ou  cannot
number.  g0  jn  Gf  that  which  is  nowhere.  Some

essences  will  appear  or  occur  to  you,  since  whatever
intuition  life  may  awaken  in  you  must  light  up  some
essence  or  other;  but  what  further  essences,  if  any,
there  may  be  is  not  discoverable  by  simply  waiting  for
them  to  turn  up.  Nature  is  indeed  very  rich  in  forms,
compared  with  the  inertia  and  monotony  of  experience
in  home-keeping  animals,  revolving  in  their  private
circle  of  habits  and  ideas;  but  nature  too  is  built  on  a
single  plan — all  nuclei  and  planets,  all  life  and  death —
and  as  much  a  slave  of  routine  as  any  of  her  creatures.
The  unexemplified  is  not  exemplified  there,  the
unthought  of  is  not  thought  of  :  not  because  in  itself
it  resists  being  created  or  described,  but  because  nature
and  thought  happen  not  to  bloom  in  any  way  but  that
in  which  they  have  taken  to  blooming.  In  part,  indeed,
this  restriction  may  be  due  to  local  prejudice  and
ignorance  in  the  observer,  who  draws  the  periphery  of
nature  with  his  compass.  Another  man,  a  different
animal,  a  spirit  native  to  another  world  may  even  now
be  greeting  the  essences  which  it  has  not  entered  into
my  heart  to  conceive.  Evidently  my  limitations
cannot  forbid  them  to  rejoice  in  their  different  experi¬
ence;  nor  can  the  limitations  of  any  actual  experience
forbid  the  essences  it  leaves  out  to  be  just  those  which
are  absent.  An  essence  is  an  inert  theme,  something
which  cannot  bring  itself  forward,  but  must  be  chosen,
if  chosen,  by  some  external  agent;  and  evidently  the
choice  made  by  this  agent,  contingent  as  it  is  and
wholly  arbitrary,  cannot  render  unavailable  the  other
inert  themes  which  other  agents,  or  itself  in  a  different
moment  of  its  flux,  might  choose  instead.  The  very
contingency  of  existence,  the  very  blindness  of  life,


THE  BEING  PROPER  TO  ESSENCES  21


throw  the  doors  wide  open  towards  the  infinity  of
being.  Even  if  some  philosopher  or  some  god  thought
himself  omniscient,  surprises  might  be  in  store  for
him,  and  thoughts  new  to  his  thought;  nay,  even
supposing  that  his  whole  experience  and  the  entire
history  of  his  world  lay  synthesised  before  him  under
the  form  of  eternity,  and  that  he  was  not  a  victim  of
sheer  egotism  in  asserting  that  nothing  more  could  ever
exist,  still  the  wanton  idiosyncrasy  of  that  total  fact,
the  enormity  of  that  accident,  could  not  be  blustered
away.  Existence  is  irrational  for  a  deeper  and  more
intrinsic  reason  than  because  one  part  of  it  may  not  be
deducible  from  another :  any  part,  and  all  its  parts
together,  are  irrational  in  merely  existing,  and  in  being
otherwise  than  as  essences  are,  that  is,  identical  with
themselves  and  endowed  with  that  formal  being  which
it  is  impossible  that  anything,  whatever  it  be,  should  not
possess.  Not  that  essence  can  resist  or  resent  this
irrational  selection  which  existence  makes  of  its  riches :
on  the  contrary,  essence  is  a  sort  of  invitation  to  the
dance;  it  tempts  nature  with  openings  in  every  direc¬
tion  ;  and  in  so  doing  it  manifests  its  own  inexhaustible
variety.  Its  very  being  is  to  set  no  limits  to  the  forms
of  being.  The  multitude  of  essences  is  absolutely
infinite.

This  assertion  has  an  audacious  sound,  and  I  should
not  venture  upon  it,  had  it  not  a  counterpart  or  corollary
which  takes  away  all  its  venom,  namely,  that  But  non_
essences  do  not  exist.  If  I  were  in  pursuit  of
substance  (as  I  shall  be  in  the  Second  Book)  an  indelible
I  should  distrust  any  description  of  it  not  |30acaBground
purely  tentative,  empirical,  and  scrupulously  transitory
modest:  but  the  bold  definition  which  Spinoza  facts-
gives  of  what  he  calls  substance  that  it  is  Being
absolutely  infinite,  seems  to  me  a  perfect  and  self-
justifying  definition  of  the  realm  of  essence:  because
in  conceiving  and  defining  such  an  object  we  prove  it


22


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


to  possess  the  only  being  which  we  mean  to  ascribe  to
it.  Denying  it  to  be  infinite,  or  denying  that  any
supposed  element  in  it  existed,  we  should  be  designat¬
ing  these  missing  elements  and  that  absent  infinity:
whereby  we  should  be  instituting  them  ideally,  and
recognising  them  to  be  essences.  The  realm  of  essence
is  comparable  to  an  infinite  Koran — or  the  Logos  that
was  in  the  beginning — written  in  invisible  but  indelible
ink,  prophesying  all  that  Being  could  ever  be  or
contain:  and  the  flux  of  existence  is  the  magical  re¬
agent,  travelling  over  it  in  a  thin  stream,  like  a  reader’s
eye,  and  bringing  here  one  snatch  of  it  and  there
another  to  the  light  for  a  passing  moment.  Each
reader  may  be  satisfied  with  his  own  verse,  and  think
it  the  whole  of  Scripture:  but  the  mere  assertion  of
this  limit,  or  suspicion  that  other  readers  might  find
other  texts,  is  enough  to  show  that  the  non-existent
cannot  be  limited,  since  the  limits  of  the  existent  might
always  be  changed.  To  deny  the  being  of  essence,
because  it  may  happen  to  be  unrealised,  is  self-con¬
tradictory:  for  if  it  is  not  realised,  it  must  have  a  quality,
distinguishing  it  from  realised  forms.  Unrealised
forms  may  not  interest  a  sluggish  mind:  an  arith¬
metician  who  was  happy  in  the  thought  of  whole
numbers,  might  deprecate  all  mention  of  vulgar
fractions  or  repeating  decimals,  and  might  swear  to
die  without  them,  lest  his  safe  and  honest  arithmetic
should  be  complicated  with  unrealities.  But  un¬
realities  of  that  sort  nevertheless  envelop  his  realities
on  every  side;  and  it  is  his  arrest  at  his  realities  that,
if  you  like,  is  unreal;  there  is  no  reason  in  it,  and  no
permanence;  whereas  the  unrealities  are  unchangeable,
inevitable,  and  always  standing  behind  the  door.
Even  if  the  whole  realm  of  essence  (as  Spinoza  assumed)
were  realised  somewhere  at  some  time  in  the  life  of
nature,  essence  would  remain  a  different  and  a  non¬
existent  realm:  because  the  realisation  of  each  part


THE  BEING  PROPER  TO  ESSENCES  23

could  be  only  local  and  temporary,  and  for  all  the  rest
of  time  and  in  all  the  worlds  that  excluded  it,  each  fact
would  fade  into  the  corresponding  essence,  and  would
remain  certain  and  inevitable  as  an  essence  only,  and  as
a  fact  merely  presumptive.

Essence  so  understood  much  more  truly  is  than  any
substance  or  any  experience  or  any  event:  for  a  sub¬
stance,  event,  or  experience  may  change  its  Existence
form  or  may  exist  only  by  changing  it,  so  that  ^r^\hheir
all  sorts  of  things  that  are  proper  to  it  in  one  individuality
phase  will  be  absent  from  it  in  another.  It  from  essence,
will  not  be  a  unit  at  all,  save  by  external  delimitation.
Perhaps  some  abstract  constancy  in  quantity,  energy,
or  continuity  may  be  discovered  to  run  through  it,  but
this  constant  element  will  never  be  the  actual  experi¬
ence,  event,  or  substance  in  its  living  totality  at  any
moment.  Or  perhaps  all  the  phases  of  such  an  exist¬
ence  may  be  viewed  together  and  synthesised  into  one
historical  picture;  but  this  picture  would  again  not  be
the  existent  substance,  experience,  or  event  unrolling
itself  in  act.  It  would  be  only  a  description  of  that
portion  of  the  flux  seen  under  the  form  of  eternity;
'  m  other  words,  it  would  be  an  essence  and  not  an
existence.  Essence  is  just  that  character  which  any
existence  wears  in  so  far  as  it  remains  identical  with
itself  and  so  long  as  it  does  so;  the  very  character  which
it  throws  overboard  by  changing,  and  loses  altogether
when  it  becomes  something  else.  To  be  able  to
become  something  else,  to  suffer  change  and  yet  endure,
is  the  privilege  of  existence,  be  it  in  a  substance,  an
event,  or  an  experience;  whereas  essences  can  be  ex¬
changed,  but  not  changed.  Existence  at  every  step
casts  off  one  essence  and  picks  up  another:  we  call  it
the  same  existence  when  we  are  able  to  trace  its  con¬
tinuity  in  change,  by  virtue  of  its  locus  and  proportions;
but  often  we  are  constrained  to  give  up  the  count,  and
to  speak  of  a  new  event,  a  new  thing,  or  a  new  experi-


24  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

ence.  The  essences  or  forms  traversed  in  mutation
render  this  mutation  possible  and  describable:  with¬
out  their  eternal  distinctness  no  part  of  the  flux  could
differ  in  any  respect  from  any  other  part,  and  the  whole
would  collapse  into  a  lump  without  order  or  quality.
So  much  more  profound  is  the  eternal  being  of  the
essences  traversed  in  change,  than  that  of  the  matter
or  attention  or  discourse  which  plays  with  those
essences  at  touch  and  go.

Nothing,  then,  more  truly  is  than  character.  With¬
out  this  wedding  garment  no  guest  is  admitted  to  the
Notion  of  feast  °f  existence:  whereas  the  unbidden
the  Realm  essences  do  not  require  that  invitation  (with

ssence.  whieh  very  low  characters  are  sometimes
honoured)  in  order  to  preserve  their  proud  identity
out  in  the  cold.  There  those  few  privileged  revellers
will  soon  have  to  rejoin  them,  not  a  whit  fatter  for  their
brief  surfeit  of  being.  After  things  lose  their  existence,
as  before  they  attain  it,  although  it  is  true  of  them  that
they  have  existed  or  will  exist,  they  have  no  internal
being  except  their  essences,  quite  as  if  they  had  never
broached  Existence  at  all:  yet  the  identity  of  each
essence  with  itself  and  difference  from  every  other
essence  suffices  to  distinguish  and  define  them  all  in
eternity,  where  they  form  the  Realm  of  Essence.  True
and  false  assertions  may  be  made  about  any  one  of
them,  such,  for  instance,  as  that  it  does  not  exist;  or
that  it  includes  or  excludes  some  other  essence,  or  is
included  or  excluded  by  it.

Here  is  a  further  character  inseparable  from  essence:
all  essences  are  eternal.  No  hyperbole  or  rhetorical
its  eternity  3-fflatus  is  contained  in  this  assertion,  as  if

counterpart  s?me  ProPhet  pronounced  some  law  or  some
of  its  non-  city  to  be  everlasting.  That  any  existing
existence,  thing  should  be  everlasting,  though  not
impossible,  is  incongruous  with  the  contingency  of
existence.  God  or  matter,  if  they  are  everlasting,  are


THE  BEING  PROPER  TO  ESSENCES  25

so  by  a  sort  of  iterated  contingency  and  perpetual
reproduction;  for  it  is  in  the  nature  of  existence  to  be
here  and  perhaps  not  there,  now  and  perhaps  not  then;
it  must  be  explored  to  discover  how  far  it  may  stretch;
it  must  wait  and  see  how  long  it  shall  last.  The
assumption  that  it  lasts  or  stretches  for  ever  can  be
made  only  impetuously,  by  animal  enthusiasm,  when
the  feeling  of  readiness  and  omnipotence  makes  some
living  creature  defy  all  threats  of  disaster.  Yet  so  long
as  we  live  in  time,  the  ghost  of  the  murdered  past  will
always  fill  the  present  with  a  profound  uneasiness.  If
the  eternity  of  essence  were  conceived  after  that
fashion,  it  would  indeed  be  a  rash  boast;  no  essence
has  an  essential  lien  on  existence  anywhere,  much  less
everywhere  and  always.  Its  eternity  has  nothing  to
do  with  such  mortal  hazards.  It  is  merely  the  self-
identity  proper  to  each  of  the  forms  which  existence
may  put  on  or  off,  illustrate  somewhere  or  perhaps
illustrate  always,  or  very  likely  never  illustrate  at  all.


CHAPTER  III


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE

The  realm  of  essence,  like  the  empyrean,  is  a  clear  and
tranquil  region  when  you  once  reach  it;  but  for  the
_  observer  from  the  earth  clouds  may  inter-

impure  vene,  or  his  eye  may  be  arrested  at  some
temslative  nearer  sphere  which,  just  because  it  has  some
essence  is  opaqueness,  he  may  think  the  true  blue.
existence.h  In.stead  of  conceiving  essences  he  may  con¬
ceive  possible  beings,  problematical  facts,
forms  of  things,  abstractions,  thoughts,  sensations,  or
natural  elements.  Of  course  such  intermediate  objects,
however  they  be  defined,  will  exhibit  some  essence,
since  some  essence  cannot  help  appearing  in  any
chosen  thing  whatsoever;  but  in  the  categories  just
mentioned  there  is  some  ambiguity,  some  reference  to
contingent  existence,  which  limits  their  scope,  and  ren¬
ders  them  altogether  confusing,  if  taken  as  synonyms
for  essential  being.

The  word  “  possible  ”  is  slippery  and  treacherous.
It  is  commonly  applied  to  anything  that  the  speaker

Essence  not  ?an  reac%  imagine,  especially  when  he  is
possible  ignorant  whether  it  is  a  fact  or  not.  In  this
.emg‘  sense  the  whole  future,  and  much  of  the  past,
is  called  possible  when  imaginable.  But  in  another
sense  the  whole  past  and  future,  even  when  unimagin¬
able,  must  have  been  possible  too.  The  materially
possible  threatens  to  coincide  with  the  actual  course

26


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  27

of  nature:  and  then  the  term  possible  begins  to  mean
the  materially  impossible,  provided  it  is  imaginable.
The  imagination,  however,  is  itself  something  existent,
and  extremely  elastic:  a  little  shake,  or  a  new  stimulus,
will  cause  it  to  conceive  many  new  possibilities.  Can
these  have  been  impossibilities  before?  Perhaps  we
may  take  refuge  in  the  notion  that  everything  is  possible
except  what  is  self-contradictory :  in  other  words,
things  are  not  possible  merely  because  they  are  actual,
or  merely  because  they  are  imagined,  but  if  they  are
such  as  not  to  preclude  being  imagined.  But  how
should  anything  preclude  being  imagined,  if  an  im¬
agination  arose  capable  of  imagining  it  ?  The  meaning
can  only  be  that  my  own  imagination,  in  some  par¬
ticular  instance,  has  got  into  a  tangle,  and  that  in
speaking  of  the  round  square  or  of  the  son  of  a  barren
woman  I  have  lost  the  meaning  of  my  terms;  and
what  I  call  an  impossibility  is  only  the  suspense  of
my  thought  between  two  possibilities.  Nothing  con¬
tradicts  itself,  not  even  this  state  of  confusion  in
my  thinking.  It  is  a  perfectly  possible  muddle.  This
process  of  fluctuating  from  one  object  to  another  has  a
character  easily  recognisable;  its  essence,  like  every
essence,  is  individual  and  (since  it  may  reappear)  is
universal.  Contradiction  is  a  vice  into  which  dis¬
course  may  fall  when  it  blurs  the  inherent  distinctness
of  different  essences.  Determination,  individuality,
variety  infinitely  precise  and  indelible  (degrees  of
articulation  being  themselves  all  equally  distinct)  is
the  very  being  of  essence.  Howsoever  monistic
physics  may  choose  to  be,  the  realm  of  essence  is  the
home  of  eternal  and  irreducible  plurality.

The  terms  “  possible  ”  and  “  impossible  ”  have,  then,
no  proper  application  in  the  realm  of  essence,,  even
to  facts  in  nature  they  are  applicable  only  in  view  of
human  ignorance  or  imagination.  Their  true  field
is  that  of  discourse,  where  the  intent  to  consider  one


28


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


essence  binds  the  mind  to  fidelity  and  consistency,
and  excludes  the  substitution  of  another  essence  under
Nothing  t^ie  same  name — excludes  it,  I  mean,  if  the
impossible,  intent  is  maintained  to  express  the  essence
one^essence  originally  chosen.  Hence  the  extension  of
should  be  the  “  possible  ”  and  the  “  impossible  ”  to
natural  facts,  in  so  far  as  their  names  or
relations  are  assumed  to  prejudge  their  character:  in  a
given  world,  describable  by  a  given  essence,  anything
contrary  to  that  essence  is  impossible.  In  the  actual
universe,  its  essence  being  completely  determined  by
the  events  which  compose  it,  all  that  is  actual  is  neces¬
sary  and  all  else  is  impossible.  But  this  of  course
does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  any  different  world ;
and  so  long  as  the  complete  essence  of  the  actual
universe  is  unknown  to  us,  we  may  give  its  name  to
almost  any  extensions  or  transformations  of  the  part
which  we  presume  to  know:  so  that  the  known  world
will  be  free  to  become,  or  to  have  been,  almost  anything.

The  contingency  of  existence,  though  intrinsic  to
it,  and  the  hypothetical  nature  of  all  reasoning  about
Natural  are  a  trial  to  logicians:  they  would  like

necessity  is  their  art  to  rule  a  priori.  Many  of  them,  in
not  ogica .  tjie£r  eagerness  to  make  logic  dominant,  be¬
tray  it,  by  reducing  it  to  a  description  of  what  they
presume  to  be  the  natural  movement  of  thought  or  of
history:  but  there  are  some  too  devoted  and  clear¬
headed  for  such  a  subterfuge,  who  nevertheless  wish
to  chain  existence  to  their  chariot.  How  do  so?  I
know  only  of  one  way:  to  assert  that  the  whole  realm
of  essence  is  realised  in  existence.  The  existence  of  an
infinity  of  worlds  irrelevant  to  ours,  and  utterly  un-
discoverable  by  us,  cannot  be  precluded  by  our  ignor¬
ance  of  them:  the  supposition  is  merely  idle.  But
another  consequence  involved  in  this  hypothesis  is
positively  repugnant  to  common  sense;  and  this  is,
that  an  infinity  of  worlds  almost  identical  with  ours’


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  29

but  differing  from  it  in  some  detail,  must  exist  too.
An  infinite  number  of  solar  systems,  for  instance,  must
have  begun  as  ours  began,  but  each  of  them  must  have
deviated  at  one  point  from  ours  in  its  evolution,  all  the
previous  incidents  being  followed,  in  each  case,  by  a
different  sequel.  The  interest  in  natural  derivation
which  animates  the  observant  and  artful  mind  is  thus
outraged  by  the  demand  for  logical  completeness  in
things :  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  to  which  side  the
sense  for  fact,  which  alone  can  judge  of  facts,  will
incline  the  naturalist.

By  a  somewhat  different  opposition  to  accidental
facts,  essence  might  be  called  “  the  imaginary  ”.  This
designation  is  popular  and  poetically  very  Essences
appropriate,  since  the  realm  of  essence  is  are  not  the
unsubstantial,  remote  from  existence,  and  in-  imagmary-
finitely  more  extensive.  In  broaching  it  we  escape  the
limitations  of  fortune,  as  the  poet  does  in  his  fictions;
and  yet  the  objects  that  greet  us  there  may  be  more
definite,  memorable,  and  beautiful  than  the  sordid
facts,  which  we  live  among  without  feeling  for  them,
perhaps,  any  intellectual  affinity.  But  the  danger  in
calling  essence  imaginary  is  that,  like  poetry,  we  should
identify  it  with  the  imagined.  The  imagined  is  indeed
unsubstantial,  but  it  is  selected,  insecure,  and  de¬
pendent  for  its  specious  actuality  on  the  vapours  of
some  animal  psyche.  The  imagined  is  not,  as  essence
is,  a  field  from  which  all  facts  must  gather  their  tem¬
porary  forms;  it  is  only  a  replica  or  variant  of  some  of
these  facts  —  namely,  of  human  sensations  —  richer
perhaps  in  spots  than  material  reality,  but  on  the  whole
far  thinner  and  less  extensive.  Images  drifting  through
idle  heads  are  in  their  psychological  dimension  a  part
of  the  actual,  since  the  intuition  of  those  imaginary
objects  occurs  at  definite  times  and  places.  The  im¬
aginary,  if  it  is  to  mean  essence,  is  the  infinite  fairy¬
land  of  which  such  dreams  are  glimpses.  The  moral


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


30

connotation  of  the  word  imaginary  is  also  ambiguous.
Actual  images,  being  generated  in  the  living  psyche,
may  be  very  apposite  fulfilments  to  her  previous  ex¬
perience  or  to  her  instinctive  needs,  and  therefore
very  beautiful;  and  actual  dreams,  even  if  for  the  most
part  silly  and  fatiguing,  are  sometimes  pleasant  and
even  prophetic.  Nothing  of  the  sort  can  be  said  of
the  imaginary  as  a  whole,  conceived  as  the  realm  of
essence.  Not  being  selected  or  produced  by  any
living  soul,  but  inert,  infinite,  and  latent,  it  contains
an  appalling  multitude  of  vain  and  ugly  themes,  as
well  as  the  few  which  are  relevant  to  human  interests
and  fit  for  human  contemplation.

If  free  imagination  presents  stray  essences  to  the
mind,  attentive  perception  presents  others,  to  which
Nor  the  studious  people  give  greater  importance,
fonxis  of  The  flux  of  nature  could  not  be  a  flux,  nor
things'  at  all  perceptible,  unless  it  was  a  flux  through
essences,  that  is,  through  forms  of  being  differing  from
one  another.  It  is  as  the  forms  things  wear  to  the
senses  or  to  the  practised  intellect  that  essences  are
first  noticed;  in  this  capacity,  or  as  definitions  of
current  terms,  they  appear  in  the  Socratic  school.
Geometrical  figures,  fixed  by  intent,  are  certainly
essences;  so  too  are  any  types  of  animal  bodies  or
human  institutions  which  may  be  arrested  in  thought  :
but  so  also  are  all  the  qualities  of  sensation  despised  by
Platonism  and  all  the  types  of  change  or  relation
neglected  by  that  philosophy.  This  neglect  was
ominous,  because  if  essences  had  been  studied  for  their
own  sake  they  would  have  been  found  everywhere,  as
they  are  by  the  poet  or  the  mathematician.  To  discern
them  only  in  natural  or  moral  units,  and  to  think  of
them  as  perfections  towards  which  things  aspire,  is  not
merely  to  omit  noticing  them  elsewhere  but  to  regard
them  as  natural  magnets,  as  a  background  of  meta¬
physical  powers,  more  selective  than  nature  itself,  and


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  31

constituting  a  world  of  substances  behind  the  flux  of
appearance.  Physics  and  theology  may  appeal  to  such
patron  substances  if  they  think  fit;  but  in  the  theory  of
essence  they  have  no  place  whatever.  Essences  are
not  substances  containing  a  matter  that  can  assume  a
different  essence  :  they  cannot  be  the  material  source  of
anything.  Nor  have  they  any  relevance  to  particular
places  and  times,  so  that  one  might  be  conceived  to  pre¬
side  over  one  part  of  nature,  and  another  over  another.
The  essence  of  a  bridge  cannot  build  bridges  or  breed
them;  and  when  a  bridge  falls  and  the  matter  of  it
becomes  a  heap  of  stones,  the  essence  of  that  bridge  is
not  a  surviving  ghost  haunting  the  spot,  and  seeking  to
restore  the  structure.  A  material  bridge-builder  must
return  to  the  work:  and  the  resulting  form  will  hardly
repeat  exactly  the  one  that  has  disappeared;  nor  will
that  discarded  essence  fight  against  reform,  or  in  any
way  complain  or  avenge  itself,  if  presently  bridge-
builders  come  no  more  to  the  spot,  and  the  placid
stream  flows  on  unspanned,  reflecting  no  shadow  of  any
human  contrivance.  So  it  is  also,  in  spite  of  super¬
stition,  with  the  essences  of  living  beings,  which  repro¬
duce  themselves  for  generations  with  little  change  of
type.  Their  conservation  is  physical  and  an  elaborate
instance  of  rhythm  and  habit  in  matter.  Here  too  a
material  seed  must  transmit  the  substance  that  is  to
run  through  the  ancestral  cycle  and  embody  that
familiar  essence :  let  the  seed  fail,  or  circumstances
modify  it,  and  at  once  that  prescribed  form  is  forsaken
and  forgotten,  relegated  to  the  realm  of  essence  and
reduced  to  the  same  impotence,  or  left  in  the  same
peace,  as  all  its  sister  essences  that  time  has  never
brought  to  existence.

The  most  stubborn  misunderstanding  of  essence
arises,  however,  from  thinking  and  calling  it  an  abstrac¬
tion.  In  a  popular  sense  the  epithet  is  natural  and
harmless :  it  means  only  that  essence  is  immaterial.


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


32


is  not
abstracted
from  the
material.

primary.


So  mathematics  is  called  an  abstract  science  and  music
an  abstract  art;  they  do  not  describe  particular  parts
_T  ,  of  the  material  world  or  particular  historical
tions.  The  events;  they  may  therefore  seem  unreal  and
“nal  superfluous  to  the  man  in  the  street.  But
the  mathematician  or  the  musician  will  hardly
call  them  abstract ,  since  his  apprehension
of  them  is  direct  and  his  interest  in  them
No  doubt  the  material  world,  especially
in  his  own  person  and  life,  supplies  a  suggestion  and  an
organ  for  those  intuitions;  but  their  object  is  so  far
from  being  drawn  out  of  existing  things  that  it  never
exists  in  them  in  its  ideal  perfection,  and  the  study  of
it  requires  a  special  imaginative  faculty,  a  profound
application,  and  a  great  exactitude.  It  is  the  very
complexity  and  precise  definition  of  this  realm — its
essential  concreteness — that  renders  it  difficult  and
vague  to  the  gross  mind:  and  it  is  called  abstract  not
because  it  is  drawn  from  existence  but  because  it  is  not
found  there.


It  is  an  accident  to  essence  to  be  manifested;  but
not  to  be  manifested  is  also  an  accident;  it  means
simply  that  matter  or  intellect  happen  never  to  have
traversed  that  form.  A  different  plasticity  in  existence
might  make  any  essence  an  appearance;  and  evidently
in  a  given  appearance  there  can  be  nothing  abstract —
nothing  verbal,  unrealisable,  or  cognitively  secondary.
Each  appearance  (and  therefore  every  essence,  since
it  might  well  appear)  is  an  obvious  and  complete  being;
and  if  essences  when  simple  are  indefinable,  that  fact
only  proves  that  they  are  the  original  elements  of  any
description.  Far  from  being  creatures  of  language,
they  suffer  from  not  being  commonly  named,  since
names  are  hurriedly  clapped  on  things  and  persons,
however  ill  perceived,  which  move  as  material  units;
whereas  the  most  evident  features  in  immediate
experience  receive  no  separate  names,  until  perhaps


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  33

some  logician,  poet,  or  madman  grows  conscious  of
their  perpetual  presence,  and  borrows  some  title  for
them  from  the  vocabulary  of  physics;  as  I  have
borrowed  this  term  “essence,”  once  used  by  chemists
for  their  drugs,  in  order  to  designate  every  specious
object  actually  present  to  intuition.  Language  is
responsible,  not  for  these  objects,  but  for  the  prejudice
against  them.  An  essence,  if  un-named,  is  thought  to
be  imperfect  and  but  half  real.  An  unchristened  child
has  to  be  called  So-and-So’s  baby,  and  a  stranger  in  the
street  has  to  be  pointed  at  dumbly;  yet  it  would  be  too
egotistical  even  for  human  nature  to  assert  that  the
waif  or  the  stranger  possessed  no  being  of  his  own,  but
was  essentially  an  abstraction  from  our  social  circle,
because  he  could  be  described  in  our  language  only
relatively  and  peripherally.  It  is  not  otherwise  with
the  immediate,  radical,  nameless  phantoms  of  feeling
and  intuition.  They  are  just  the  appearances  they  are,
exactly  determinate  and  perfect  at  each  moment,  and
different  in  some  precise  way  from  whatever  else  may
be  felt  before  or  after  or  by  other  people;  and  the
necessary  defects,  or  rather  the  proper  summary
function,  of  language  or  reflection,  must  not  be  charged
against  those  primary  appearances  as  a  defect  of  essence.

When  a  term  is  felt  to  be  disparaging,  as  the  term
abstract  has  become  for  some  writers,  it  can  easily  be
passed  on  from  one  bad  thing  to  another.  If  the  parts,
Instead  of  designating  defect  of  form  abstract-  ^^ddferom
ness  may  designate  defect  of  quantity.  .  In  a  whole,
an  etymological  sense  any  part  of  a  thing,  n8_

like  the  skin  of  an  apple  when  peeled  on,  aii  things
might  be  called  an  abstraction  from  the  whole,
especially  when  the  part  abstracted  happens  the  realm
not  to  have  existed  separately  in  the  beginning,  of  essen“-
as  do  the  bricks  of  a  house,  but  to  have  grown  up  together
with  the  whole,  and  been  first  found  there. .  Hence  a
well-known  doctrine  that  only  the  Absolute  is  concrete


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


34

and  that  every  particular  fact  or  observation  is  an
abstraction.  In  this  sense  of  the  word,  every  essence
would  be  an  abstraction  from  the  realm  of  essence,  but
no  essence,  much  less  the  realm  of  essence  in  its
entirety,  would  be  an  abstraction  from  existing  things:
on  the  contrary,  existing  things  would  be  abstractions
from  their  essences,  which  in  the  realm  of  essence
possess  much  richer  essential  relations  than  those  which
in  existing  instances  are  abstracted  and  realised
materially.  The  rind  of  the  apple,  peeled  and  curling
casually  on  a  plate,  would  be  a  miserable  abstraction
from  all  the  spirals  and  all  the  patterns  implied  in  its
geometrical  essence  and  in  its  pictorial  aspect.

Abstraction,  however,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
word,  is  possible  only  for  a  mind:  things  and  essences,
Abstraction  whatever  may  be  their  unions  or  separations,
-nop^-  are  never  in  their  own  being  abstractions
course,  s'  from  anything  else.  A  term  can  be  abstract
SvSdous,  °“'y  relatively :  how  should  anything  be
and  alien  to  abstract  m  itself?  None  of  the  constituents

concerned68  a  or  °/  an  essence  is  an  abstraction

from  it;  each  is  a  thing  or  an  essence  in  its
own  right.  To  find  abstractions  we  must  enter  the
psychological  sphere  and  consider  the  casual  history  of
human  ideas.  A  late  idea,  though  its  object  may  be
perfectly  concrete  and  definite,  like  the  sphere,  may  be
simple  in  comparison  with  some  early  impression — say,
that  of  an  apple — which  may  have  first  suggested  it:
and  if  the  variegated  essence  was  really  distinguished
first  (which  is  not  always  the  case)  and  the  simple  one
— roundness — was  only  noticed  afterwards  as  an  ele¬
ment  included  in  the  other,  then,  for  that  person  the
sphere  will  be  something  abstract,  not  indeed  in  its
essence,  but  in  its  mode  of  reaching  manifestation:  an
act  of  abstraction  happens  first  to  have  revealed  this
essence  to  this  man.  But  such  an  approach  is  acci¬
dental:  a  true  psychologist  would  often  record  that  in


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  35

looking  at  some  roundish  thing  he  first  noticed  and
intuited  nothing  but  roundness,  perfect,  Platonic,  and
unadulterated.  The  clumsiest  spheroid  cannot  convey
to  an  innocent  mind  any  idea  save  that  of  a  simple
sphere;  and  our  first  impression  of  a  world  in  which
everything  is  crooked  is  that  everything  is  straight.
The  enormity  of  our  childish  idealism  would  prove
immediately  fatal  if  we  needed  to  have  a  true  idea  of
things  in  order  to  act  properly  in  their  presence.  But
ideas  which  are  ridiculous  as  descriptions  may  be
adequate  as  signals:  all  animals  eat  and  breed  without
any  notion  of  calorics  or  eugenics:  hunger  and  love
are  moral  overtones  quite  sufficient  to  express  for  them
their  share  in  the  rude  economy  of  nature.  The  mind
is  not  a  fifth  wheel  to  her  coach,  but  her  observations
on  the  journey.  Conventional  psychology  is  misled
by  a  primitive  gnostic  theory  to  the  effect  that  things
ought  normally  to  appear  to  sense  in  their  full  and
exact  nature.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  fact,
or  more  incongruous  with  animal  life  and  sensibility.
That  which  appears  to  sense  is  determined  at  each
moment  by  the  liveliness  and  direction  of  the  psyche
in  her  current  reactions.  Things  are  thereby  “  known  ”
in  the  sense  that  they  are  named,  and  distinguished  by
their  rough  aspect  and  occasions;  they  are  not  known
at  all  in  the  sense  of  being  disclosed  in  their  inner
nature,  either  totally  or  partially.  The  specious  essence
intuited  is  the  name  given  by  the  psyche  to  the  material
force  encountered  or  exerted;  it  is  a  spontaneous
symbol,  not  abstract  even  in  its  origin;  as  the  word  cat
is  not  drawn  out  of  the  domestic  animal,  yet  serves  to
designate  it  in  its  entirety,  and  is  much  simpler.

Repetition  is  impossible  in  the  realm  of  essence;
two  essences,  if  not  different,  will  be  one  essence;  if
different  they  will  be  two  essences,  and  not  repetitions
of  the  same  essence.  Repetition  is  possible  only  among
objects  which  are  particular  but  not  individual;  that


36  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

is,  when  they  exist  and  are  distinguished  by  their  ex¬
ternal  relations,  even  if  internally  they  should  happen
Essences  to  be  Precisety  similar,  and  should  have  but
not  general  one  individuality  or  essence.  An  individual
terms.  may  change  his  relations  and  have  different
moments  and  places  of  existence,  so  that  here  he  may  be
surrounded  by  one  environment  and  there  by  another.
This  possibility  of  iterating  or  repeating  an  essence  is
what,  from  the  point  of  view  of  existence,  makes  essences
seem  abstract  or  general,  when  in  reality  they  are  the
only  individuals.  An  essence  is  not  the  thing  which  it
defines,  and  may  define  many  things  numerically
distinct:  what  is  ordinarily  called  one  thing  or  one
person  has  many  separable  moments  of  existence,
between  any  two  of  which  it  may  perish:  they  will  be
moments  of  one  thing  or  one  person  only  in  so  far  as
one  individual  essence  pervades  those  moments.  As
nothing  can  be  abstract  in  itself,  so  nothing  can  be
general  in  itself.  Every  essence  is  universal  not  because
there  are  repeated  manifestations  of  it  (for  there  need
be  no  manifestations  at  all)  but  because  it  is  indi¬
viduated  internally  by  its  character,  not  externally  by
its  position  in  the  flux  of  nature:  and  no  essence  is
general  for  the  same  reason.  However  it  may  be
related  to  particular  existences,  its  own  nature  is  com¬
plete  and  intrinsic;  whereas  a  term  can  be  said  to  be
general  only  if  it  happens  to  be  predicable  of  a  number
of  scattered  things,  none  of  which,  perhaps,  it  defines
intrinsically.  Yet  everything  that  is  at  all  must  be
something  intrinsically:  had  a  term  no  individual
essence  there  would  be  no  meaning  in  predicating

it,  and  it  could  not  be  predicated  of  two  things  in
the  same  sense,  since  it  would  have  no  sense.  Before
essences  can  be  called — occasionally  and  in  relation
to  natural  things — either  abstract  or  general,  it  is
requisite  that  in  themselves  they  should  be  concrete
and  individual.


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  37

The  organ  of  intuition  is  an  animal  psyche,  governed
by  the  laws  of  material  life,  in  other  words,  by  habit:
so  that  it  is  normal  for  intuitions  to  be  recur-  In  dis_
rent,  in  so  far  as  circumstances  allow.  Dis-  course,

....  ..  .  ...  intent

course,  in  which  intuitions  subserve  intent,  supervenes

requires  intended  essences  to  recur  identically,  on  Passn[e
and  imputes  identity  to  them  even  when  they  tion,  and
are  different,  if  their  difference  is  irrelevant  °sn^n*e
to  the  cogency  of  discourse,  and  incom-  meant  is
patible  with  it.  It  is  these  intended  essences,  considered-
identical  for  intent  on  various  occasions,  but  never
actually  intuited,  that  might  well  be  called  abstractions:
they  are  like  points  of  the  compass,  or  limits  of  un¬
ending  approaches,  ideal  in  the  sense  of  being  never
realised,  although  clearly  indicated  and  definable  by
their  relation  to  other  terms  which  are  actually  given.
The  identity  of  an  essence  with  itself  is  absolute  and
constitutional,  but  the  identity  of  the  essence  given  in
one  intuition  with  that  given  in  another  is  an  identity
assumed  and  always  unverifiable.  It  is  impossible  to
arrest  the  two  intuitions  and  compare  their  objects:  to
do  this  would  be  to  supersede  both  by  a  third  in  which
perhaps  twin  objects  were  presented:  but  it  would
remain  an  assumption  that  one  twin  repeated  the
datum  of  one  intuition,  and  the  other  twin  the  datum
of  the  other.  Yet  the  impetuosity  of  life,  which  dis¬
course  cannot  help  sharing,  brushes  aside  these  scruples:
habit — iteration  of  words,  gestures,  and  sentiments —
sufficiently  identifies  the  essence  meant  at  one  moment
with  that  meant  at  another,  in  contempt  of  the  varying
context  in  which  they  may  appear.  This  essence,  not
the  context,  is  probably  the  only  object  distinctly
noticed,  or  designated  expressly.  Thus  the  essence  of
straightness  is  continually  intuited  afresh,,  and  is
absolutely  identical  at  each  recurrence.  It  is  irrele¬
vant  that  the  material  object  evoking  this  essence  may
be  different  in  each  instance,  and  never  quite  straight:


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


38

that  context,  even  if  vaguely  pressing  on  the  psyche,
remains  unsynthesised,  unnoticed,  and  unintended.
When  on  looking  at  a  palm  tree,  a  Roman  road,  or  the
horizon,  I  say  to  myself,  How  straight!  I  have  exactly
the  same  clear  feeling:  and  this  pure  essence,  not  its
irrelevant  context,  is  what  actually  fills  my  mind,  and
is  the  essence  apprehended.  All  the  concomitant  stuff,
if  it  were  noticed  in  turn,  would  merely  supply  other
essences  of  the  same  universality.  It  is  impossible  that
anything  should  appear  which  is  not  universal :  for  it  is
definite  and  might  evidently  appear  again.  Hence  the
possibility  of  discourse:  its  terms  are  coined  into  fixed
values,  and  can  pass  from  mind  to  mind,  retaining  their
original  meaning.

But  mind  is  not  a  subject  congenial  to  psychologists:
they  would  like  it  either  to  reproduce  material  facts  or
to  take  its  place  among  them,  or  even  to
mind, 8  swallow  them  up  and  be  another  name  for

which  is  them.  Since  the  edges  of  material  things

act,  ignored  are  known  to  be  broken  and  warped  in  fact,
iogySych°'  **  *s  Presumed  that  we  must  actually  see  all
lines  curved  or  broken.  But  mind  is  in¬
trinsically  and  initially  mind :  it  is  poetical  and
Platonic  from  the  beginning;  and  it  is  only  by  a  painful
eventual  reinspection  that  it  can  correct  its  first
impressions  and  allow  that  material  things  have  in  fact
forms  too  complicated  for  the  eye  to  trace,  and  a
substance  too  remote  in  its  pregnant  texture  from  the
scale  of  sense  to  be  easily  imagined,  or  to  be  imaginable
by  man  at  all.  All  this  subterranean  obscurity,  how¬
ever,  is  in  its  place :  a  wise  man  will  not  repine  at  it.
Where  clearness  belongs,  clearness  enough  may  be
found :  the  essences  actually  defined  by  attention  are
plain,  brilliant,  and  homely,  like  the  words  of  the
vernacular.  The  psyche,  a  plodding  beast,  needs  but
to  fall  into  her  old  paces  for  the  old  visions  to  reappear.
It  is  essences,  not  things,  that  are  on  the  human  scale —


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  39

not  all  essences,  of  course,  but  those  which  the  mind
evokes  spontaneously  :  whereas  things,  if  humanised  at
all,  can  be  humanised  only  by  a  long  architectural  labour
— a  labour  which  their  insidious  lapse  very  soon  defeats
and  annuls.

That  essences,  though  universals,  are  individual
and  are  given  bodily  in  intuition,  may  be  better
understood  if  we  consider  those  existing  Things
things  which  are  supposed  to  be  concrete  in  and  facts
contrast  to  essences.  Their  existence,  we  sustained^8
shall  find,  depends  on  their  external  relations,  in  the  flux
on  their  inclusion  in  the  flux  of  nature;  and  0  nature‘
science,  in  proportion  as  it  penetrates  to  their  dynamic
structure  and  movement,  becomes  more  and  more
mathematical,  that  is,  operates  with  categories  and
terms  more  and  more  remote  from  pictorial  physics.
It  is  only  when  some  portion  of  this  inconceivably
rapid  and  complicated  flux  of  matter  becomes  recog¬
nisable  and  traceable  in  some  respect,  that  a  somewhat
concrete  thing  can  be  found  to  exist.  In  other  words,
the  concreteness  of  things  is  borrowed  from  the
presence  in  them  of  some  essence  supposed  to  be
abstract.  Only  when  the  flux,  by  its  concentrations  and
sustained  rhythms,  manifests  for  a  while  locally  some
recognisable  identity  of  form,  can  we  speak  of  a
concretion  in  existence,  that  is,  of  a  thing.  Abandon
that  essence,  and  that  thing  has  dissolved.  Certainly
this  essence,  if  it  is  to  qualify  existence,  must  be  mani¬
fested  or  embodied  in  some  nexus  of  events,  amid
variable  external  relations;  but  the  flux  of  events  itself
would  be  the  most  empty  of  unrealities  if  it  still  pre¬
tended  to  flow  after  having  obliterated  within  itself  all
distinctions  of  quality,  direction,  or  phase  that  is,  all
self-identical  essences.  Essences  are  definite  and
thinkable:  existence  is  indefinite  and  only  endured.
That  is  the  Platonic  experience  which  I  cannot  help
repeating  and  confirming  at  every  turn;  only  that  by


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


40

“thinkable”  we  must  not  understand  definable  in
words,  but  open  to  intuition  in  the  terms  of  any  sense
or  of  any  logic.  The  flux  flows  by  flowing  through
essences;  and  essences  are  manifested  as  the  flux  of
matter  or  of  attention  picks  them  up  and  drops  them.

An  essence,  then,  is  no  abstraction,  no  unrealisable
generality,  but  any  actual  aspect  which  anything  can
wear,  determining  its  nature,  or  revealing  it  to  an
attentive  mind.  The  sweetness  I  may  taste  is  not
dependent  in  the  order  of  knowledge  or  of  being  upon
abstraction  from  anything  else.  In  my  experience  it  is
very  likely  the  first  indication  I  have  of  any  substance
called  sugar  existing  near  me,  to  be  appropriated  or
investigated  further.  When  I  have  gathered  all  I  can
learn  about  sugar,  the  sweetness  originally  tasted  cannot
become  an  abstraction  from  this  much  more  remote  and
hypothetical  object.  It  remains  a  self-sufficient  essence,
perhaps  the  only  one  given  at  the  moment;  but  its
appearance  has  now  become,  for  my  discursive  thinking
and  belief,  a  symptom  of  certain  chemical  facts  in  the
posited  material  world  which  I  believe  myself  to
inhabit.

Objects,  whether  essences  or  facts, may  be  considered
recurrently,  on  separate  occasions  and  by  separate
Essences  minds:  otherwise  discourse  and  experience
?d°easCtjJn-  cou^  have  no  sanity,  and  could  accumulate
sations,  or  knowledge  on  no  subject.  On  each  occasion,
thoughts,  however,  the  intuition,  sensation,  or  thought
turned  upon  that  object  is  a  fresh  event,  not  only
numerically  but  almost  certainly  by  virtue  of  varia¬
tions  in  its  quality,  context,  and  mental  fringe;  so  that
the  living  feeling  or  experience  of  the  moment  is  some¬
thing  in  flux,  unseizable,  not  recoverable,  and  never,
even  when  it  existed,  brought  under  the  unity  of
apperception.  Experience  is  something  that  just
because  it  exists  (without  rising  to  the  actuality  of
spirit)  never  exists  all  at  once  as  a  unit  but  only  by


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  41

virtue  of  its  parts,  its  movement,  and  its  stress.  Its
parts  exist,  as  it  does  itself,  by  occurring  in  a  system
of  changes  and  conjunctions  never  given  in  such  fleeting
intuitions  as  it  may  include,  and  probably  never  given  in
intuition  at  all,  even  in  the  most  accurate  retrospect;
because  these  moving  clouds  of  sensibility  and  intent —
the  waking  dreams  of  the  psyche — are  not  objects  which
human  attention  is  fitted  or  required  to  apprehend ;  they
are  complexes  of  no  stability  or  importance  as  units;
nothing  matters  in  them  save  the  objects  discerned  by
them,  or  discerned  by  us  afterwards  as  the  goals  of  their
movement.  In  discerning  any  of  these  objects,  whether
they  be  essences  or  things,  animal  life  becomes  intuition,
the  synthesis  of  attention  by  which  an  essence  appears ;
but  this  intellectual  act  is  wholly  focussed  on  its  object
and  unified  only  there.  Taken  as  tension  or  potential
perception,  sensibility  is  diffused  through  indefinite
time  and  through  many  vital  functions ;  it  would  never
exist  actually  and  become  a  sensation  unless  it  became
the  sensation  of  something;  the  intuition  of  some
essence,  like  a  pain  or  a  sound.

An  essence  is,  then,  not  at  all  a  mental  state,  a
sensation,  perception,  or  living  thought;  it  is  not  an
“  idea  ”,  as  this  word  is  understood  in  British  philosophy.
It  is  an  “  idea  ”  only  in  the  Platonic  or  graphic  sense  of
being  a  theme  open  to  consideration.  Mental  facts
are  not  units  either  in  nature  or  in  logic;  they  are  sub¬
divisions  made  by  literary  psychologists  in  the  flux  of
experience  considered  romantically,  as  a  biography
abstracted  from  its  organs  and  from  its  natural  setting.
The  dream  of  life  exists:  it  is  going  on  perpetually  in
each  of  us;  but  its  parts,  called  feelings  and  thoughts,
are  individuated  only  by  the  essences  they  discern,
which  are  not  the  essences  of  those  feelings  or  thoughts
taken  existentially,  as  moments  in  a  dream,  but  are  the
essences  of  anything  and  everything  under  heaven  or
over  it.  If  I  think  of  God,  the  essence  before  me,  my


42


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


Mental
events  are
particular
and  inde¬
finable:
essences
are  obvious
and

universal.


passing  notion  of  the  divine  nature,  individuates  that
thought  of  mine,  and  makes  it  possible  for  discourse
afterwards  to  attribute  it  to  me;  but  my  thought  was
not  God  as  it  conceived  God;  it  was  a  wretched
mixture  of  words,  memories,  and  dialectical  gropings
in  my  heated  brain.  So  far  is  an  existing  idea  from
being  the  essence  which  it  conceives.

If  a  romantic  psychologist  ever  succeeded  in  re¬
constructing  a  moment  of  mental  life  exactly  as  it
existed,  he  would  be  reconstructing  (in  the
fresh  setting  of  his  own  thoughts)  an  event
itself  perfectly  particular  and  never  destined
to  recur.  But  evidently,  since  his  recon¬
struction  is  accurate,  the  essence  given  in
that  past  moment  is  given  again  to  him  now;
and  it  must  recur  in  so  far  as  any  historian
afterwards  conceives  that  experience  truly.  The  repe¬
tition  of  events  is  impossible,  the  recovery  of  essences
is  easy.  Many  a  dead  man,  for  instance,  has  con¬
sidered  the  dyad  in  the  form  of  twins,  two  shillings,  or
the  numeral  2;  and  twins,  two  shillings,  and  the
numeral  2  are  still  found  in  the  world.  This  dyad,
though  I  give  it  a  learned  name,  is,  indeed,  the  burden
of  a  primitive  intuition.  The  cat  has  it  when  she
misses  one  of  her  two  kittens,  and  the  foreigner  conveys
it  by  holding  up  two  fingers:  it  is  not  the  fingers  or  the
absent  kitten  that  then  absorb  attention,  but  the
instantly  felt  difference  between  one  and  two.  In  the
midst  of  various  vague  and  unsteady  fields  of  experience
quick  intuition  continually  recovers  this  important
primary  essence.  Hugging  it,  the  mind  can  fly  from
world  to  world,  and  can  make  something  definite  and
concrete  out  of  their  chaos,  in  so  far  as  the  dyad  finds
application  there.

Animals  live  huddled  among  things  and  necessarily
watchful  of  them,  except  in  those  hours  of  stolid  com¬
posure  in  which  they  seem  to  be  contemptuously


ADVENTITIOUS  ASPECTS  OF  ESSENCE  43

availing  themselves  of  the  chance  not  to  think;  when¬
ever  they  think,  however,  whether  in  dreams  or  in  action,
they  can  think  only  in  terms  of  essences :  and  Finally
hence  that  fundamental  illusion,  that  hypo-  essence’s
stasis  of  given  essences,  which  the  philosopher  constituent
should  regard  as  normal  and  amiable,  while  parts  of
avoiding  it  in  his  own  person  as  far  as  thmg8'
possible.  He  will  succeed  in  this  self-discipline  in
proportion  as  his  interests  are  intellectual  and  set
on  essences  rather  than  on  things;  he  will  then
feel  the  sharp  contrast  between  the  clear  hypothetical
pictures  in  his  thoughts  and  the  dark  complexities  of
nature:  he  will  be  constantly  aware  of  being  an  im¬
pressionist  in  physics,  a  dramatist  in  psychology,  a
novelist  in  history,  and  a  pure  dialectician  in  mathe¬
matics.  But  other  philosophers  are  not  lacking  to
defend  the  illusion  which  animal  faith  imposes  on
everybody  until  criticism  comes  to  distinguish  the
sphere  of  action  from  the  language  in  which  imagina¬
tion  expresses  its  adventures  there.  When  intuition
remains  closely  attached  to  urgent  action — in  hunting,
for  instance,  or  in  pain — the  essences  appearing  seem
actually  to  inhabit  the  material  object  or  the  bodily
member  into  which  perception  projects  them.  Given
essences  then  seem  to  be  constituents  of  substances,
even  when  they  are  descriptive  of  perfectly  immaterial
facts,  like  intentions  and  feelings:  such  sentiments,  as
imagined  by  the  observer,  are  boldly  attributed  to
other  people,  and  thought  of  as  agencies  at  work  within
them.  This  dramatic  sort  of  hypostasis  is  after  all  the
most  defensible,  because  if  the  observer  and  the
observed  are  similar  creatures  in  similar  circumstances,
they  will  really  be  having  similar  intuitions;  so  that
our  wild  shot  will  hit  the  bull’s  eye  by  a  pre-established
harmony.  The  transcript  of  nature  in  discourse  will,
of  course,  remain  poetical,  since  a  man’s  sentiments  are
but  unrhymed  poems  which  nature  improvises  within


44  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

him;  but  one  poet  may  truly  understand  and  repeat
another.

It  is  harder  to  conceive  how  the  form  of  a  hollow
sphere  and  the  colour  blue  can  help  to  compose  the
But  appear-  substance  of  aerial  space,  or  where  exactly
ances,  which  they  shall  be  deputed  to  lodge:  nor  is  it  clear
HI  theences’  k°w  these  essences  can  occupy  some  nearer
qualities  of  locus,  such  as  a  nerve  or  a  brain.  It  will  not
experience.  he/P  to  call  these  appearances  qualities  of
things,  rather  than  parts,  if  the  qualities  are
supposed  to  be  intrinsic:  the  intrinsic  qualities  of  a
thing  compose  its  essence,  and  its  essence,  when  caught
in  external  relations,  is  the  thing  itself.  If  on  the
contrary  by  calling  appearances  qualities  rather  than
parts  of  things,  it  be  meant  that  these  qualities  are
adventitious  and  relative,  the  contention  is  valid;
because  any  aspect,  effect,  or  relation  accruing  to  a
thing  justifies  a  new  epithet  being  assigned  to  it,  as  on
my  birth  a  whole  series  of  dead  men,  up  to  Adam,
suddenly  became  my  ancestors.  So  when  a  human  eye
is  turned  skyward,  the  sky  truly  acquires  the  quality  of
looking  blue  and  round:  those  are  its  real  qualities  in
relation  to  such  an  observer,  as  certain  substances  are
truly  poison  for  rats.

These  ulterior  questions,  however,  cannot  arrest
the  impetuous  dogmatic  instinct  which  asserts  things
to  be  what  they  seem  and  to  exist  in  the  very  terms  in
which  they  appear .  The  stones  would  laugh ,  if  they  got
wind  of  this  human  assurance;  but  meantime  it  is  not
useless  in  developing  human  acquaintance  with  essences:
because  this  incongruous  dignity  attributed  to  them,
of  being  material  things,  has  the  merit  of  attaching
practical  minds  to  them;  and  later,  if  these  wise  men
discover  their  error,  they  may  have  acquired  the  habit
of  defining  essences,  and  may  find  them  worth  cleaving
to  for  their  own  sake.


CHAPTER  IV


PURE  BEING

Of  all  essences  the  most  lauded  and  the  most  despised,
the  most  intently  studied  in  some  quarters  and  the
most  misunderstood  in  others,  is  pure  Being.  Confusions
It  has  been  identified  with  nothing,  with  about  pure
matter,  and  with  God;  and  even  among  those  Being-
who  regard  it  in  its  logical  purity,  it  is  sometimes  said
to  be  the  richest  and  most  comprehensive  of  essences
and  sometimes  the  poorest  and  most  abstract.

No  essence,  as  we  have  seen,  is  abstract  essentially,
since  it  defines  itself  and  might  appear  alone  to  an
intellect  strung  to  that  key:  and  in  the  case  of  pure
Being  we  have  high  testimony  (which  there  is  no  reason
to  distrust)  assuring  us  that,  in  fact,  it  appears  alone  to
the  human  intellect  in  its  ultimate  reaches;  and  even
when  not  realised  separately  in  intuition,  it  can  be
discerned  both  analytically  and  intuitively  in  every
essence  whatsoever.  Pure  Being  supplies,  as  it  were,
the  logical  or  aesthetic  matter  which  all  essences  have
.in  common,  and  which  reduces  them  to  comparable
modes  on  one  plane  of  reality.  Pure  Being  is  thus
found  in  all  essences  somewhat  as  light  is  in  all  colours
or  life  in  all  feeling  and  thought;  and  philosophers  like
Parmenides  and  Spinoza  (not  to  speak  here  of  the
Indians)  assure  us  that  we  always  have  an  adequate
intuition  of  this  pure  Being,  usually  buried  under  vain
illusions,  but  when  unearthed  and  isolated  seen  to  be

45


46  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

very  mighty  in  itself  and  easily  recognisable.  Never¬
theless  such  assurances  may  mean  little  to  other  mortals.
Language  at  these  depths  of  attentiveness  is  perforce
the  language  of  solitaries.  When  repeated  it  may  not
carry  with  it  the  intuition  which  it  was  first  meant  to
record.  The  very  logicians  who  distinguish  this
essence,  because  they  call  it  Being,  may  conclude  that
nothing  else  can  be — a  most  perplexing  inference  and,
in  view  of  the  many  meanings  of  the  word  is,  a  most
misleading  one;  while  other  logicians,  because  pure
Being  is  different  from  all  other  essences,  may  hastily
identify  it  with  nothing,  by  a  strange  equivocation
between  nothing  and  nothing  else.

Confusion  in  this  matter  comes  chiefly  from  the
equivocation  between  being  and  existence.  Initially
The  sense  equivocation  is  normal,  innocent,  and

?sfnoiStheCe  CVen  e?Pedienb.like  any  substitution  of  names
intuition  for  things :  it  is  only  when  defended  theo-
Beipngre  retically  that  it  becomes  perverse.  Intelli-
gence  begins  with  it :  animals  are  surrounded
by  things  that  affect  their  condition  and  prompt  their
reactions,  so  that  their  attention  is  necessarily  intent
upon  existing  things;  yet  the  intellectual  transcript  of
their  condition,  in  that  agony  of  attention,  is  only  some
intuited  essence,  some  sensuous  or  logical  term,  which
being  their  sole  description  for  the  object  before  them,
they  take  to  be  that  object  itself  in  its  whole  existing
nature. .  So  individual  forms  of  being  stand  in  discourse
for  particular  things.  But  sometimes,  rather  than  some
specific  thing,  a  certain  equilibrium  of  influences
absorbs  attention:  a  noon  pause  comes  in  our  labour;
and  more  special  sensations  being  fused  and  blurred,
we  endure  dull  strain  and  duration  without  diversity
a  vast,  strange  feeling.  We  return,  then,  as  it  were
to  the  sleep  preceding  life,  to  the  peace  of  the  womb:
there  is  vitality  without  urgency,  pressure  without
light,  potential  movement  without  object  or  express


PURE  BEING  47

direction.  Such,  we  may  fancy,  might  be  the  inner
sense  of  matter:  perhaps  some  forms  of  animal  or
vegetable  life  never  yield  any  other  experience.  A
vague  world  is  posited  as  existing;  for  in  expectation
and  intent,  as  in  memory  and  the  sense  of  movement,
there  is  a  tacit  assumption  of  things  removed,  threaten¬
ing,  eventual,  as  yet  unknown.  There  is  accordingly
nothing  pure  in  this  sense  of  existence,  simple  or  vague
as  its  deliverance  may  seem;  for  this  vagueness  and
simplicity  are  uneasy.  The  peace  of  the  womb  is  pre¬
carious;  it  is  but  a  muffled  and  initial  phase  of  dis¬
traction,  confusion,  hope,  and  fear.  Care  fills  its
heart,  as  it  does  our  dreams;  and  we  might  identify  it
with  the  Universal  Will  of  German  transcendentalism,
vaguely  pregnant  with  worlds  and  worlds.  But  slumber
is  not  contemplation,  and  the  buzz  of  matter  pr0f0und
is  not  the  beatific  vision.  The  pleasure,  if  contrast
pleasure  be  found  in  it,  is  that  of  original  sin:  thHense
the  father  of  lies  is  whispering  in  that  paradise.  of  existence
The  intuition  of  pure  Being  looks  in  the  op-  fntuition  of
posite  direction.  In  order  to  reach  it,  attention  Pure  Beins-
would  need  to  abandon  all  concern  for  transi¬
tions,  events,  ulterior  or  external  facts,  and  to  concen¬
trate  all  its  light  on  the  positive  intrinsic  nature  of  the
present  datum;  nor  would  that  suffice,  but  from  this
special  essence  it  would  need  to  pass  to  the  inner
essence  of  all  those  alien  half-known  things,  all  those
absent  times,  and  eventual  passions,  which  animal  faith
may  posit,  or  fancy  may  conceive;  since  pure  Being
resides  in  them  all  equally,  no  less  than  in  the  here
and  now.  The  force  of  insight  would  thus  have  to
vanquish  all  will  and  transcend  all  animal  limitations,
cancelling  every  fear,  preference,  or  private  perspective
which  a  station  now  and  here  would  involve.  In  other
words,  in  order  to  reach  the  intuition  of  pure  Being,
it  is  requisite  to  rise  altogether  above  the  sense  of
existence.


48


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


The  reason  for  this  lies  in  the  very  nature  of  exist¬
ence,  which  is  flux  and,  as  Plato  would  say,  non-being.
Flux  eludes  The  more  truly  existence  is  felt,  therefore,
intuition,  the  less  possible  it  is  to  concentrate  attention
on  anything,  and  to  say,  Existence  is  this.  He  is
closest  to  existence,  and  most  at  its  heart,  who  lives
on  the  wing,  intent  always  on  the  not-given;  and  even
when  the  present  fact  is  atrociously  absorbing,  as  in
pain,  the  sense  of  existence  remains  empty  essentially
and  indescribable,  by  the  very  force  and  distraction
of  its  presence.  If  we  are  asked  to  describe  it,  we  are
reduced  to  naming  the  circumstances  or  using  some
metaphor;  and  if  in  the  midst  of  it  we  pause  to  con¬
sider  the  internal  character  of  that  which  we  feel,
raising  it  thereby  for  the  first  time  to  distinct  intuition,
the  distraction,  the  belief,  the  assurance  of  existence
which  filled  us  before  have  ipso  facto  disappeared:
some  image,  some  word,  some  finely  shaded  sensible
essence  alone  is  left.  In  other  words,  the  proper
nature  of  existence  is  distraction  itself,  transition  at
least  virtual;  so  that  it  cannot  be  synthesised  in  in¬
tuition  without  being  sublimated  into  a  picture  of  itself,
and  washed  clean  of  its  contradiction  and  urgency.
The  relations  which  were  external  from  the  station  of
each  of  the  parts  as  it  arose  separately,  now  become
internal  to  the  system  of  the  whole;  and  the  intuition
in  which  this  whole  is  synthesised  drops  the  flux  of
existence  in  order  to  retain  only  its  form  and  the  truth
about  it.

If,  then,  being  and  existence  seem  in  common  par¬
lance  almost  interchangeable  terms,  it  is  only  so  long
The  one  is  as  t^ie^r  respective  objects  are  merely  named
or  designated  from  the  outside:  when  they
are  conceived  positively  and  at  close  quarters
they  turn  out  to  be  exact  opposites.  Existence
exists  by  virtue  of  oppositions  in  the  place,  time,  and
exclusive  characters  of  particulars:  being  has  being  by


primitive
the  other
ultimate.


PURE  BEING


49

virtue  of  its  universal  identity.  This  is  true  of  the
being  of  each  individual  essence;  and  it  is  true  pre¬
eminently  of  pure  Being.  Its  identity  is  omnipresent
and  internal  everywhere;  it  equalises  those  centres  of
existence  which  in  their  single  blindness  become  nests
for  external  relations;  it  makes  all  times  simultaneous;
and  by  excluding  change  renders  existence,  from  its
point  of  view,  inconceivable.  Moreover,  in  reducing
all  things  and  all  external  relations  to  their  internal
being,  that  is,  to  their  essences,  it  transports  them
into  a  realm  of  being  which  is  necessarily  infinite,
in  which  their  presence,  therefore,  is  no  temporary
accident,  as  is  their  existence  in  the  world:  so  that
the  existent  becomes  continuous  with  the  non-existent,
and  neither  more  nor  less  real  than  any  other  eternal
essence.

This  contrast  between  being  and  existence  is  in¬
dicated  by  calling  being  pure.  “Pure”  is  an  epithet
proper  to  all  essences.  Objects  become  pure
when  intuition  permeates  them  and  rests  in  essence  is
them  without  the  intervention  of  any  ulterior  pure,  by  its

.  i  r  freedom

intent  or  cross-lights,  as  we  speak  ox  pure  from  ad-
mathematics  or  pure  pleasure.  Purity  of  this  relations8
sort  is  no  thinness  of  form,  but  the  perfection
of  it.  It  admits  any  amount  of  detail,  if  it  is  all  overt
and  clear,  on  the  plane  of  actuality,  and  not  latent.  In
this  acceptation  of  the  word  “pure”,  pure  Being  is  no
purer  than  any  other  essence,  but  all  are  pure  in  so  far
as  they  are  considered  in  their  proper  character,  freed
from  the  irrelevancies  that  may  encumber  them  when
they  figure  for  a  moment  in  some  material  world  or  in
some  labouring  mind.

It  would  therefore  be  useless  and  redundant
habitually  to  speak  of  “pure  Being”  if  nothing  were
meant  save  that  Being  is  an  essence.  What  is  in¬
dicated  is  that  pure  Being  is  related  to  other  essences
very  much  as  any  essence  is  related  to  its  existing

E


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


is  so,  by  its

freedom

from

internal

diversity.


Easy  but
fatal  con¬
fusion  of
pure  Being
with  sub¬
stance.


50

manifestations;  for  whereas  any  special  essence,  such
as  colour  or  sound,  sky-blue  or  B  flat,  is  exclusive  and
Pure  Being  definable  by  contrast,  pure  Being  is  present
in  them  all,  somewhat  as  space  is  in  all  geo¬
metrical  figures,  at  once  permeating  and  tran¬
scending  each  of  them;  for  this  essence,  if
not  fertile  casually  as  facts  are  fertile,  is  in
its  own  way  infinitely  pregnant.  The  nature  of  pure
Being  anywhere  implies  the  whole  realm  of  essence,
since  being  could  not  possess  its  full  extension  if  any
sort  of  being  were  forbidden  to  be.

That  pure  Being,  in  the  sphere  of  essence,  should
have  this  simple,  intense,  and  pervasive  sort  of  reality,
provokes  afresh  in  the  minds  of  dialecticians
that  tendency  to  identify  essence  with  exist¬
ence  which  is  native  to  the  animal  mind.  For
in  the  natural  world  too  there  seems  to  be  an
omnipresent,  simple,  intensely  real  something
which  dwells  in  particular  things,  is  transmitted  from
one  to  another,  and  compels  them  to  arise  in  their
infinite  variety  and  endless  succession.  This  omni¬
present  something  is  called  substance.  Might  not  then
pure  Being,  which  lies  in  all  essences  and  therefore  also
in  all  existing  things,  be  the  substance  of  these  things,
and  the  universal  internal  cause  of  their  existence?
This  is  a  suggestion  which  has  worked  powerfully  in
the  thoughts  of  those  metaphysicians,  like  the  Eleatics,
whose  physics  has  been  dominated  by  dialectic.  Nor
is  the  suggestion  altogether  false.  That  something
exists,  that  there  is  a  world,  is  very  true;  also  that  what¬
ever  else  this  world  may  be,  it  is  substantial — that  is,
exists  in  itself  independently  of  all  report  or  opinion.
The  hypostasis  of  being  into  substance  is  therefore  no
error,  but  a  first  awakening  of  curiosity  and  belief,
which  in  so  far  as  it  posits  the  existence  of  something
errs  only  by  its  extreme  inadequacy.  It  honestly  sets
about  using  the  category  of  substance,  but  without


PURE  BEING


5i

any  notion  of  what,  in  detail,  this  substance  is.  This
inadequacy  itself  is  inevitable:  how  should  animals  in
the  womb,  or  just  out  of  it,  conceive  truly  that  constitu¬
tion  of  the  world  which  is  not  disentangled  even  to-day
by  science  or  philosophy?  Positive  error  only  appears
when  this  natural  inadequacy  of  our  ideas  is  denied,
and  when  mere  being  is  deputed  to  reveal  the  whole
substance  and  complete  reality  of  things.  The  belief
in  substance,  which  should  have  been  the  beginning  of
art  and  science,  then  suddenly  makes  an  end  of  them;
for  if  there  were  truly  nothing  in  nature  or  in  experience
except  mere  being,  all  events  and  appearances  would
be  sheer  illusions,  since  in  reality  they  would  be  all
identical.

I  shall  return  to  this  subject  in  considering  the
properties  requisite  in  any  substance  fit  to  subtend
appearances  and  the  life  of  nature ;  such  Examples  of
a  substance  must  be  unequally  distributed  Parmenides
and  in  motion;  its  proper  name  is  matter.  andSPinoza-
Here  I  will  only  notice  in  passing  how  the  notion  of
pure  Being  is  likely  to  be  contaminated  in  the  effort
to  identify  it  with  substance.  Pure  Being — as  is  indi¬
cated  by  calling  it  infinite  and  eternal,  if  we  ponder
these  epithets  —  is  utterly  absolved  from  all  sub¬
servience  to  contingent  facts  and  to  the  momentary
casual  forms  of  human  experience;  it  is  the  most
immaterial ,  untameable ,  inexhaustible  of  essences .  Y et
Parmenides — no  tyro  in  dialectic — denied  that  it  was
infinite,  because  it  had  to  give  body  to  an  existing
spherical  cosmos;  and  indeed,  apart  from  ancient
astronomy,  existence  always  involves  a  certain  concen¬
tration  and  contrast  with  what  is  not,  and  thereby
excludes  infinity.  Again,  we  find  Spinoza  asserting
that  the  entire  nature  of  being — which  he  actually  calls
substance — must  be  manifested  in  existence,  and  that
all  these  manifestations  must  be  parallel  to  the  forms
of  the  material  world,  of  which  indeed  those  other


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


52

manifestations  can  be  only  complementary  aspects,  by
chance  unknown  to  us.  Here  is  the  cosmic  frog
prodigiously  swollen  in  rivalry  with  the  ontological  ox;
but  the  ox,  lest  that  ambition  should  seem  too  absurd,
is  accommodated  to  the  frog  nature,  and  pure  Being
is  thought  of  as  a  sort  of  matter  or  force  resident  in
natural  things  and  lending  them  their  existence,  while
at  the  same  time  enriching  them  with  an  infinite
number  of  attributes  which  they  hide  from  view.

On  the  one  hand,  then,  if  pure  Being  is  substance,
existence  must  be  illusion;  and  on  the  other  hand

Substance  Pure  -be*n§  must  be,  not  the  infinite  essence
^thereby  which  it  is,  but  a  hard  kernel  for  existence,
deprived  of  Hence  the  sea-saw  in  the  views  of  those  meta-
function,  physicians  who  hypostatise  pure  Being;  some-
aboiished  times  their  substance  annuls  all  particulars,
and  pure’  and  sometimes  it  supports  them.  Pure  Being
obscured,  excludes  particular  determinations  within  its
own  bosom,  but  it  does  not  annul  them  in  the
world,  because  it  is  not  on  the  plane  of  existence  at
all:  it  is  by  no  means  a  matter  within  particulars  which
lends  them  existence.  Substance,  on  the  other  hand,
is  such  a  matter;  and  by  its  movements  and  redistri¬
bution  it  gives  rise  in  turn  to  every  fact  and  relation
in  the  natural  world.  Were  pure  Being  an  existing
substance,  nothing  el'se  could  exist  or  arise,  not  even
the  occasional  intuition  of  pure  Being.  All  that
exists  exists  by  being  other  than  pure  Being,  under
circumstances  which  themselves  are  particular  and
contingent;  and  if  substance  were  not  contingent,  un¬
equally  distributed,  and  in  motion,  it  would  evidently
not  be  the  ground  of  any  event  or  of  any  actual
appearance.

Thus  the  hypostasis  of  pure  Being,  after  being  fatal
to  the  reality  of  all  facts,  is  fatal  to  respect  for  pure
Being  itself;  because,  considered  as  a  substance,  it
would  be  useless,  unknowable,  and  nowhere  to  be


PURE  BEING


53

found.  Pure  Being,  although  a  supreme  degree  of
detachment  and  concentration  be  requisite  to  conceive
it  adequately,  is,  like  any  other  essence,  perfectly  open
to  intuition;  its  sublimity  is  not  obscurity;  and  it  is
excluded  from  “  knowledge  ”  only  in  the  sense  in  which
any  immediate  object,  being  an  object  of  intuition,
need  not  and  should  not  be  posited  as  a  removed
existence,  by  the  transitive  and  precarious  sort  of
knowledge  by  which  facts  may  be  known.  But  pure
Being  hypostatised  into  substance  is  a  metaphysical
spectre:  matter  congealed,  arrested,  emptied,  and
deprived  of  its  cosmic  fertility.

Pure  Being,  conceived  as  a  substance  or  an  exist¬
ence,  might  , indeed  almost  justify  the  well-known  gibe
that  pure  Being  and  pure  nothing  are  iden-  pure  Being
tical.  This  sophism  is  complementary  to  ^£tified
those  misunderstandings ;  the  same  misplaced  nothing:
preoccupation  with  physics  has  ended  in  im-  psychp-

l  x  x  J  locricjil  char-

patience  of  logic  and  of  honest  intent.  Of  acter  of  the
pure  Being,  which  is  not  a  romantic  object,  latter  idea-
the  moderns  have  little  experience:  the  idea  of  nothing
is  easier  and  far  more  familiar  to  them.  We  all  know
the  feeling  of  contrast  and  disappointment  which  comes
over  the  senses  when  they  are  robbed  of  their  habitual
entertainment,  as,  for  instance,  the  sensation  of  dark¬
ness  when  the  lights  suddenly  go  out.  The  psyche,
continuing  to  live  her  incessant  life,  feels  cheated  of  her
food  and  bereft  of  her  employment.  This  is  perhaps
the  origin  of  that  horror  of  non-existence  which  afflicts
so  many  mortals;  a  horror  which  would  be  evidently
objectless  and  impossible  if  really  nothing  existed,  and
the  poor  wights  were  not  there  to  shiver  in  the  cold.
But  the  psyche,  feeling  or  imagining  the  sudden  dis¬
appearance  of  her  supports,  finds  her  own  existence
empty  and  abortive :  she  does  not  know  where  to  turn
or  what  to  expect,  and  this  anguish  is  her  acquaintance
with  nothingness.


54


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

For  experience,  then,  “nothing”  means  a  void
caused  by  the  absence  of  some  expected  thing.  The
Non  exist  fact  such  a  thing  fails  to  exist  is  logically
ence,  partial  dependent  on  the  reality  of  its  form  of  being,
presupposes  *ts  designated  and  recognisable  essence;  and
essence  and  the  sense  that  there  is  nothing  there,  is
standing,  dependent  for  its  existence  on  a  psyche
missing  some  particular  thing,  and  feeling
a  specific  emptiness.  Negation,  no  less  than  doubt,
assertion,  or  faith,  requires  the  prior  individuality  of
ideal  terms;  and  to  predicate  non-existence  is  in  that
measure  to  recognise  essence.  Being  and  the  non¬
existent  here  actually  coincide;  not  because  both  are
nothing,  but  because  both  are  being.  If  all  existence
could  be  abolished,  all  essence  would  resume  its
equable  reign:  and  the  absence  of  rude  emphasis  or
blind  exclusion  would  leave  the  infinite  variety  of  being
subsisting  in  peace:  although  this  fullness,  even  if  an
animal  imagination  could  conceive  it,  might  seem
nothing  to  it,  singly  preoccupied  as  it  must  be  with  the
flux  of  facts.

The  fact  of  non-existence,  then,  is  a  natural  alter¬
native  to  that  of  existence,  in  many  cases  familiar,
and  in  others  feared  or  desired.  Like  every  fact,  it  is
contingent,  coming  and  going  at  will,  and  leaving
the  eternal  manifold  of  being  exactly  as  it  was.  “  The
non-existent  ”  is  accordingly  not  a  bad  name  for  the
realm  of  essence,  seen  from  the  point  of  view  of  exist¬
ence.  But  this  point  of  view  is  adventitious;  no
essence  is  non-existent  intrinsically,  since  for  all  it
contains  or  suggests  it  may  very  well  exist;  that  is,
some  existence  somewhere  may  for  a  time  embody  or
manifest  it;  and  even  if  this  contingent  occurrence
were  by  chance  perpetual— if,  for  instance,  the  essence
of  Euclidean  space  were  frozen  into  an  omnipresent
everlasting  fact  in  nature— this  persistent  accident
would  not  touch  the  status  of  mathematical  space  in  its


PURE  BEING


55

own  realm,  a  status  which  is  simply  irrelevant  to  exist¬
ence  and  not  contrary  to  it.

When  the  word  “nothing”  denotes  non-existence
it  is  fundamentally  exclamatory:  it  expresses  a  feeling
or  an  encounter  rather  than  an  idea.  But  privation  or
the  same  word  may  be  applied  descriptively  not-being

•  i  •  .  *  *  r»  prcbuppubcb

within  the  realm  or  essence,  to  express  non-  essence  and
being  or  privation  of  essence;  “nothing”,  defines  it.
then,  means  “nothing  of  that  sort”.  This  mixture  of
privation  distinguishes  every  essence,  since  in  being
itself  it  is  necessarily  no  other.  This  is  true  even
of  the  most  comprehensive  essences.  A  statue  which
includes  the  head  excludes  the  special  individuality  of
the  same  head  reproduced  in  a  bust:  the  different
limits  individuate  not  only  the  two  material  blocks
but  the  two  compositions.  So  the  realm  of  essence,
which  is  the  full-length  portrait  of  being,  while  it
contains  everything,  drops  in  everything  that  isolation
which  makes  it,  when  taken  singly,  seem  the  whole  of
being:  it  shatters  the  illusion  of  so  many  philosophers
that  they  have  found  “the  only  possible”  this  or  “the
only  possible  ”  that.

Indeed,  the  essential  mixture  of  privation  in  all  being
is  more  uncompromisingly  evident  among  essences  than
among  existences,  because  existence,  in  ad—  change  and
mitting  change,  seems  to  have  found  a  way  of  existence

.  o  .  °  7 ,  ,,  .  .  rp.  , .  J  .  cannot  elude

circumventing  definition.  1  he  expedient  is  essential
not  successful,  save  in  so  defining  an  existence  limitation,
that  it  may  include  successive  phases,  as  a  man’s  life
does:  but  both  the  incidents  and  the  life  still  depend
for  their  being  on  their  essential  exclusions.  The
bachelor  becoming  a  Benedict  does  not  succeed  in
combining  contraries;  his  singleness  is  gone;  any
backward  glances  or  truancies  which  he  may  indulge
in  only  spoil  and  deepen  his  married  state,  in  which
he  then  feels  henpecked  or  adulterous.  Wisdom  lies
in  voluntary  finitude  and  a  timely  change  of  heart:


56  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

until  maturity,  multiplying  the  inclusions,  up  to  the
limit  of  natural  faculty  and  moral  harmony;  after¬
wards,  gladly  relinquishing  zone  after  zone  of  vegeta¬
tion,  and  letting  the  snow-peak  of  integrity  rise  to  what
height  it  may.  Becoming,  therefore,  does  not  unite
being  and  privation  more  closely  than  being  unites
them  in  itself,  even  without  change  or  existence.  The
full  character  of  each  essence  is  inevitably  absent  from
every  other  essence;  but  this  relative  privation  or
absence  of  what  is  alien  is  the  consequence  of  possess¬
ing  a  positive  character.  Had  each  term  no  private,
indefinable,  positive  essence  of  its  own,  it  could  not
justify  those  exclusions  by  which  we  define  it,  nor
could  it  fill  its  appointed  place  and  spread  out  its  eternal
intrinsic  relations  in  the  realm  of  essence.

Pure  Being,  like  any  other  essence,  is  individual
and  distinguished  by  exclusions,  for  it  excludes  those
Privation  is  limitations  which  render  all  other  essences
non-entity,  sPecifici  somewhat  as  light,  which  fills  up
but  absolute  &nd  dynamically  constitutes  all  colours,  never-
isanTm?  theless  excludes  each  particular  tint.  This  is
possible  far  from  being  a  reason  for  calling  pure  Being

a  non-entity:  the  exclusion  of  all  exclusions
renders  it  infinite,  not  vacant.  Vacancy  and  nothing¬
ness  are  terms  applicable  to  existence,  to  which  ex¬
ternal  relations  are  indispensable,  and  which  at  any
moment  may  lapse,  so  that  the  place  thereof  knows  it
no  more;  they  are  meaningless  in  respect  to  essences
each  of  which,  including  pure  Being,  is  grounded  in
itself,  and  like  a  jewel  or  a  star,  shines  all  the  brighter
in  isolation.  Non-entity  figures,  indeed,  in  the  realm
of  essence,  because  it  is  eternally  impossible  that  any¬
thing  there  should  be  anything  else;  there  are  there¬
fore  always  many  things  which  anything  is  not.  This
non-entity  is  purely  relative;  an  absolute  non-entity
would  be  self-contradictory,  a  false  suggestion  of  dis¬
course  like  the  round  square  or  the  son  of  the  barren


PURE  BEING


57

woman.  You  cannot  make  a  void  of  the  realm  of
essence,  as  you  so  easily  might  of  existence,  by  waving
a  magic  wand.  Its  indestructibility  is  not  an  accident,
a  stubborn  matter  of  fact,  like  that  of  matter  or  of  God.
If  you  flatter  yourself  to  abolish  the  realm  of  essence,
you  actually  refer  to  it  and  reinstate  it;  if  you  deny  it,
you  affirm  it.  The  only  negation  of  it  which,  in  one
sense,  might  be  staunch,  would  be  utter  oblivion;  but
oblivion  is  subjective.  It  destroys  nothing  save  the
feeling  or  thought  by  which  something  was  formerly
recognised.

All  essences,  therefore,  partake  of  non-being,  and
pure  Being  does  so  in  an  eminent  degree,  since  it
excludes  the  special  forms  of  being  proper  to  Pure  Being
all  the  others.  Bread  partakes  of  non-being  is  infinitely
by  not  being  meat;  but  food,  or  pure  sue-  P°sltlve-
culence,  partakes  of  it  doubly,  by  not  being  either
bread  or  meat  specifically;  yet  it  is  the  positive  being
in  both,  in  so  far  as  they  can  sustain  life.  This  pure
essence  of  food  is  something  positive,  present  in  both
but  limited  to  neither.  Pure  Being,  like  all  essences,
rejects  alien  attributes  by  virtue  of  its  positive  character.
When  an  infinite  amount  of  entity  has  been  denied  of  it,
an  infinite  amount  remains,  compelling  those  denials.
For  the  relative  non-entity  of  all  essences  comes  to
them  in  so  far  as  they  exclude  one  another’s  characters,
whereas  the  positive  character  of  each  is  its  share  of
being;  and  pure  Being,  far  from  falling  outside,  is  the
absolute  being  in  each.  It  is  also  the  totality  of  all,
when  they  are  regarded  not  in  their  distinction  (in
which  they  form  the  realm  of  essence)  but  in  their
continuity  and  in  their  common  latency  within  the
essence  of  pure  Being  itself;  because  we  may  say
(though  such  language  is  figurative  and  inadequate)
that  pure  Being  contains  all  essences  within  itself
virtually  or  eminently,  since,  though  it  cannot  be  any
of  them,  it  requires  each  of  them  to  be  what  it  is.  The


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


58

essence  of  food  (for  we  are  not  talking  of  accidental
facts)  requires  and  includes  all  substances  that  could  be
turned  into  flesh  and  blood.  The  very  non-exclusive¬
ness  or  intensive  infinity  of  pure  Being  opens  the  way
for  all  essences  equally,  and,  since  each  is  something,
cannot  suffer  any  of  them  not  to  be.  It  denies  each
because  it  remembers  all.

In  some  sense,  evidently,  pure  Being  is  the  supreme
being:  may  it,  then,  be  identified  with  God?  I  think
it  is  not  an  that  a  religion  is  possible  which  should  have
existence  or  pUre  Being  for  its  object,  and  that  it  might
therefore  even  become  a  popular  cult;  Brahmanism,
not  the  God  as  the  initiated  explain  it,  seems  actually  to
or  of  pan-  be  such  a  religion.  In  theory  it  is  entirely
theism.  directed  to  identification  with  Brahma,  that
is,  to  eluding  all  finitude  and  existence;  and  the
Mohammedans  have  a  somewhat  similar  discipline,
in  so  far  as  they  abstain  from  all  petitions,  and  cultivate
absolute  conformity  to  the  will  of  Allah.  But  human
religion  inevitably  has  another  side.  Prudence  and
piety  require  a  wise  man  to  study  the  ways  of  nature,
to  cleave  to  good  and  to  eschew  evil.  Among  Greeks
and  Romans,  Jews  and  Christians,  the  object  of  worship
is  fundamentally  a  fostering  power;  God  is  a  dominant
force  in  nature,  creating,  thundering,  issuing  com¬
mandments  sanctioned  by  rewards  and  punishments,
and  in  his  inner  being  conceived  to  be  a  spirit,  thinking,
willing,  loving,  offended,  and  propitiated.  A  piety  of
this  sort  tends  towards  natural  religion;  its  super¬
stitions,  if  it  remains  superstitious,  are  superstitions
about  fortune;  forces  and  events  are  its  sole  objects  of
reverence,  and  pure  Being  is  nothing  to  it.  The  very
earnestness  of  the  fact-seeker  compels  him  to  reduce
all  myths  as  far  as  possible  to  literal  science.  Salvation
he  will  identify  with  prosperity,  eternity  with  survival,
God  with  nature,  or  with  some  flattering  purpose  seem¬
ing  to  preside  over  human  destinies.  Divine  com-


s


PURE  BEING


59

mandments,  or  the  will  of  God,  will  become  in  his  lips
merely  an  archaic  phrase  for  the  discoverable  con¬
ditions  of  human  well-being;  divine  omniscience  will
become  the  truth  of  things,  and  divine  love  their
friendliness  and  beauty.

This  makes  a  perfect  religion  for  the  irreligious;  it
means  death  to  the  spirit ;  but  the  spirit  is  not  so  easily
killed.  Action,  like  physical  life,  is  free  to  Yet  in
perfect  itself,  if  it  can,  in  its  own  plane,  ad-  natural
justing  itself  absolutely  to  its  conditions  and  spirituality
carrying  out  all  its  impulses  in  harmony;  this  intervenes,
executive  success,  far  from  abolishing  consciousness,  will
clarify  it  and  make  it  musical.  As  the  flux  of  matter,
however  self-contained  and  self-forgetful,  cannot  avoid
casting  an  eternal  shadow  of  its  every  phase  upon  the
page  of  truth,  so  physical  life  cannot,  by  becoming
very  economical,  avoid  kindling  all  the  more  brightly
the  light  of  spirit:  natural  existence  has  these  spiritual
extensions,  whether  it  will  or  no.  And  in  respect  to
the  realization  of  pure  Being,  ultimate  and  supremely
difficult  as  it  is  to  achieve  ascetically,  instinctively  it
lies  curiously  near  to  the  simple  heart.  Wherever  there
is  peace — not  the  peace  of  death,  but  that  which  comes
of  liberation  from  constraint  or  distraction — there  is
a  beginning  of  spirituality.  Consciousness  is  nothing
but  intuition  thwarted  or  achieved.  Even  distrac¬
tion,  until  it  disrupts  consciousness,  is  tossed  between
intuitions;  it  can  therefore  turn  into  contemplation
at  any  favourable  moment,  by  the  mere  suspension
of  animal  will,  anxiety,  and  care.  Certainly  the  dark
peace  of  the  womb  is  far  removed  from  the  peace  of
the  mountain-top,  all  clear  articulation  and  self-con¬
suming  vision;  yet  animal  consciousness,  when  perfect,
is  not  unspiritual.  It  may  rest  on  nothing  more  re¬
condite  than  a  warm  heart  or  a  sound  digestion,  or
the  overwhelming  magic  of  some  absolute  lure:  yet
in  its  contemplative  simplicity,  in  its  disregard  of  all


6o


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


ambushed  alternatives  and  material  threats,  it  brings  a
foretaste  of  superhuman  sympathies,  which  discipline
might  one  day  render  disillusioned  and  habitual.  When
the  object  is  pure,  the  spirit  intent  upon  it  is  pure  also.

Hence  that  strange  solace  which  so  many  millions
find  in  their  religious  devotions;  under  some  disguise
Contempia-  °f  fable  or  image,  pure  Being  is  their  sanc¬
tion  of  pure  tuary  from  the  world  and  their  liberation
kstphasehe  from  themselves.  Natural  religion  itself,
of  spiritual  when  reflected  upon,  drives  them  in  this
progress.  direction.  Force  and  fact  are  reverenced  by
the  humanist  because  in  them  he  finds  the  sources  of
his  happiness;  but  as  he  watches  and  studies  them  his
reverence  changes  its  hue;  it  becomes  disinterested,
sacrificial,  liberating.  Contemplation,  even  of  destiny,
neutralises  the  will.  The  exuberance  of  nature,  the
disproportion  between  her  wantonness  and  the  clean
interests  of  man,  must  give  the  humanist  pause;  he  will
find  the  world  cruel,  and  he  may  react  on  its  cruelty  by
asking  himself  what  thoughtless  pledge  he  has  given
to  it,  that  he  should  be  subject  to  these  vain  torments.
His  piety  will  still  forbid  him  to  rebel  against  fate;
rebellion  would  be  a  fresh  form  of  vanity.  There  is
no  reason  why  man,  or  the  transitory  world  in  which
he  finds  himself  living,  should  have  any  prerogative
amongst  the  realms  of  being.  Traditional  religion,
for  all  its  motherly  coddling  of  human  conceit,  is  not
without  a  door  towards  the  infinite.  Theology  must
somehow  reconcile  the  special  mercies  and  graces
coming  to  men  from  God,  with  the  immutability  and
eternity  attributed  to  him.  Nor  is  this  an  idle  theo¬
retical  question;  for  of  what  ultimate  use  would
the  graces  and  mercies  be,  if  they  did  not  lead  men
to  share  that  immutability  and  eternity?  In  order  to
keep  well  and  live  long  hygiene  is  better  than  religion.
If  the  fear  of  power — that  is,  of  matter — was  the  be¬
ginning  of  wisdom  for  the  natural  man,  the  possession


PURE  BEING


61


of  power  cannot  be  the  end  of  wisdom  for  the  spirit;
and  the  spirit  will  not  permanently  worship  in  God  a
life  inferior  to  that  which  it  enjoys  in  itself.  Power  is
a  relation  between  existences;  but  where  did  existence
and  power  come  from,  and  how  long  will  they  last?
There  can  be  no  safety  in  existence  even  for  the  gods.
Safety  in  a  living  world  means  only  forgetfulness  of
danger,  because  perhaps,  on  the  scale  and  in  the  habitat
of  that  particular  being,  danger  may  not  be  imminent.
True  safety,  spiritual  peace,  profound  reconciliation
with  fate,  lie  in  another  dimension:  they  spring  from
a  new  and  superhuman  direction  of  the  affections.
Piecemeal,  amid  the  accidents  of  existence,  ultimate
good  is  attained  whenever  the  senses  and  the  heart  are
suddenly  flooded  by  the  intuition  of  those  essences  to
which  they  were  secretly  addressed:  synthetically,  for
perfect  recollection,  it  is  realised  by  the  contemplative
intellect  absorbed  in  pure  Being.

This  absorption,  the  union  or  ecstasy  of  which
mystics  speak,  has  always  been  the  goal  of  religious
discipline  in  India,  and  wherever  else  the  The  perfect
spiritual  life  has  been  seriously  cultivated,  realisation  of
This  union  is  sacrificial,  like  that  of  the  pVtibi^whh
insect  in  its  bridal  flight.  In  it  the  spirit  continued
loses  its  self-consciousness,  the  sense  of  existence-
its  own  or  any  other  separable  existence:  and  it
loses  this  existence  actually,  because  it  cannot  attain
that  ecstasy  without  dropping  all  connection  with
its  body — that  is,  without  dying.  The  body  may
subsist  afterwards  automatically,  or  perhaps  generate
new  sensations  and  dreams ;  but  these  will  not
belong  to  the  liberated  spirit,  which  will  have  fled
for  good,  fled  out  of  existence  altogether.  It  would
seem,  then,  to  unspiritual  apprehension,  that  the  end
of  spiritual  life  is  an  end  indeed:  it  is  annihilation.
This  is  the  plain  truth  of  the  matter,  when  spirit
is  regarded  from  the  outside,  psychologically  and


62


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

historically.  Intuitions  are  placed  and  dated  in  the
natural  world  by  their  occasions  and  their  organs  :
an  actual  intuition  of  pure  Being — something  absolutely
infinite — is  evidently  irrelevant  to  any  place  or  time,
and  disproportionate  to  any  natural  organ.  We  may
safely  say,  therefore,  that  it  cannot  exist.  Yet  if  we
transfer  our  point  of  view  to  that  of  the  spirit  itself,
and  energise  with  it  and  by  it,  we  shall  see  that  intel¬
lectually  and  morally  the  spirit  is  fulfilled  by  the  being
of  its  object,  not  by  its  own  existence.  The  soul,  says
Aristotle,  is  everything  that  it  knows:  but  then,  we
may  add  with  equal  truth,  the  soul  is  no  longer  itself,
nor  a  soul  at  all.  There  lies  the  selfless  nature  of
intellect,  that  existence  is  indifferent  and  imperceptible
to  it,  either  in  other  things  or  in  itself:  so  that  in  losing
its  existence — if  it  has  died  victorious — it  has  lost  what
was  no  part  of  its  prize,  and  in  attaining  its  prize  it  has
saved  itself  entire.  Certainly  a  song  that  ends  full  in
the  quieting  of  all  its  impulses  and  the  synthesis  of  all
its  notes  comes  to  an  end  just  as  truly  as  if  it  had
broken  down  in  the  middle;  both  the  soul  saved  and
the  soul  lost  cease  living  in  time;  yet  what  a  strange
blindness  there  would  be  in  giving  to  both  the  same  evil
name,  and  making  no  difference  between  dying  defeated
and  being  perfected  in  death!  If  in  the  act  of  union
with  pure  Being  the  spirit  drops  the  separate  existence
which  it  had  before,  it  drops  only  what  it  wished  to
drop ;  its  separation  consisted  in  not  having  yet
attained  perfect  intuition,  which  must  be  without  a
natural  centre  or  personal  perspectives.  On  attaining
that  intuition  the  spirit  abolishes  itself  by  passing  into
that  which  it  wished  to  find.  Whether  saved  or  lost,
liberated  or  dissolved,  the  soul  ceases  to  exist  equally;
but  this  fact  does  not  touch  the  interests  of  the
spirit  seeking  liberation,  whose  office,  even  from  the
beginning,  was  worship,  not  thrift  or  self-assertion.

It  is  only  when  we  have  thoroughly  renounced  self-


PURE  BEING  63

assertion  and  thrift  that  we  can  begin  to  understand
the  spiritual  view,  which  otherwise  might  seem  to
contradict  what  the  psychologist  knows  about  spirit.
But  there  is  no  real  contradiction:  there  is  only  a
transference  of  exclusive  attention  from  one  plane  of
reality  to  another.  Wherever  spirit  exists,  it  exists  at
some  particular  place  and  time,  by  the  operation  of
its  natural  organs;  but  wherever  it  thinks,  it  regards
only  some  essence,  eternal  and  non-existent,  a  more  or
less  ample  manifestation  of  pure  Being.  It  is  perfectly
possible  for  any  one  who  will  consider  the  realms  of
being  together,  to  honour  each  in  its  place  and  to  dis¬
regard  the  scorn  which  those  who  have  eyes  for  one
only  must  needs  pour  upon  the  others.

If,  then,  contemplation  of  pure  Being  ever  becomes
the  last  secret  of  a  religious  life,  it  does  so  only  when
religion  is  transformed  into  a  purely  intel-  Itimplies
lectual  and  sacrificial  discipline.  Positively  no  precepts
religious  or  moral  feelings  then  drop  into  vaiuef^nd
their  very  small,  very  human  places.  Where  does  not
otherwise  would  be  the  transforming  force,  SewShip
the  sublimity  and  sure  finality,  of  this  insight  ?  which  it
No  fond  eulogistic  words  such  as  “high”,  mayreceive-
“deep”,  “living”,  “spiritual”,  “true”,  patter  any
longer  about  it;  they  have  lost  their  afflatus  and  their
contraries  have  lost  their  sting.  It  is  not  because  the
sage  finds  more  in  pure  Being  than  pure  Being  itself
that  he  aspires  to  union  with  it,  but  exactly  because  he
does  not  find  more.  The  fervent  estimation  in  which
he  held  it  before  he  possessed  it  would  render  possession
of  it  impossible  if  it  continued  afterwards.  Like  every
other  object,  pure  Being  appears  under  the  form  of  the
good  only  to  those  who  are  moving  towards  it,  or  are
carried  away  from  it  against  their  will.  Both  creation
and  contemplation  are  vital  processes  which  lend  a
relative  value  to  their  chosen  ends;  and  when  in  a
religious  life  the  end  happens  to  be  union  with


64


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


pure  Being,  this  union  becomes  as  precious  and  as
legitimate  as  any  other  natural  end  could  be  to
any  spirit,  but  in  no  way  more  legitimate  or  more
precious.  Pure  Being  itself  is  neither  ruffled  nor
flattered  by  these  opposite  currents  in  the  flux  of
existence.  Its  authority — if  we  figuratively  assign
authority  to  it — cannot  be  invoked  by  either  party,
but  both  parties,  like  everything  actual  or  conceivable,
have  its  connivance  and  silent  toleration.  The  artist
and  the  moralist  may  shudder  at  pure  and  infinite
Being,  and  may  diversify  and  limit  it  in  their  own
spheres  to  their  heart’s  content;  but  understanding  also
has  licence  to  be;  it,  too,  is  free  to  choose  a  good
and  perhaps  to  realise  it;  and  it  may  weave  again  all
those  diversities  and  contrasts  into  the  seamless  but
many-coloured  garment  which  wraps  Brahma  in  his
slumber.  There  no  praise  or  dispraise  can  intrude;
all  this  flutter  of  spirits  escapes  from  it  unheeded  and
returns  to  it  uncalled.

Here,  before  leaving  this  subject,  I  beg  the  reader
to  allow  me  a  personal  confession,  lest  he  should  mis¬
understand  the  temper  in  which  I  approach  these
speculations.  Every  pursuit  has  a  certain  warmth  about
it  and  sees  its  object  in  a  golden  light  which,  from  that
point  of  view,  is  a  part  of  the  thing  discerned;  and  he
who  so  sees  it  can  hardly  avoid  using  disparaging  terms
in  regard  to  those  who  miss  that  revelation  or  are  indif¬
ferent  to  it.  So  any  artist  in  regard  to  his  art,  or  any
patriot  in  regard  to  his  country.  For  the  same
tionintima"  reason  the  intellectual  or  spiritual  life,  espe-
which  pure  cially  when  cultivated  in  unison  with  some
long-established  religious  tradition,  sets  up
its  precise  standards  and  prizes  them  abso¬
lutely:  whatsoever  satisfies  other  ambitious
seems  to  it  either  a  stepping-stone  in  its
own  path  or  else  sheer  vanity  and  illusion.
Nevertheless  it  would  be  senseless  to  demand  insight


Being  is
held  is
optional
and  relative
to  some
finite
nature.


PURE  BEING  65

of  a  stone;  in  the  spiritual  life  there  is  nothing  obliga¬
tory-  Those  who  have  spirit  in  them  will  live  in  the
spirit,  or  will  suffer  horribly  in  the  flesh;  but  this  very
insight  into  pure  Being  and  into  the  realm  of  essence
shows  that  both  are  absolutely  infinite,  the  one  im¬
plicitly,  the  other  explicitly;  they  therefore  release  the
mind  from  any  exclusive  allegiance  to  this  or  that  good.
It  is  only  by  the  most  groundless  and  unstable  of
accidents  that  any  such  good  has  been  set  up,  or  any
such  world  as  that  to  which  this  good  is  relevant;  and
only  to  the  merest  blindness  does  this  world  or  this
good  seem  absolute  or  exclusive.  Now  it  would  be
stupid  in  a  blind  man,  because  he  was  blind,  to  deny
the  greatness  of  a  painter  who  was  admittedly  supreme
in  his  art,  or  the  sanctity  of  a  saint,  or  the  insight  of
some  thoroughly  trained,  purged,  and  disinterested
intellect ;  yet  that  blind  man  would  by  no  means  be
bound  in  his  own  person  to  begin  for  that  reason  to
paint,  to  pray,  or  to  go  into  the  Indian  wilderness  and
contemplate  pure  Being.  Humility  in  these  respects
is  not  incompatible  with  freedom.  Let  those  excel
who  can  in  their  rare  vocations  and  leave  me  in  peace
to  cultivate  my  own  garden.  Much  as  I  may  admire
and  in  a  measure  emulate  spiritual  minds,  I  am  aware
of  following  them  non  passibus  aequis ;  and  I  think  their
ambition,  though  in  some  sense  the  most  sublime  open
to  man,  is  a  very  special  one,  beyond  the  powers  and
contrary  to  the  virtues  possible  to  most  men.  As  for
me,  I  frankly  cleave  to  the  Greeks  and  not  to  the
Indians,  and  I  aspire  to  be  a  rational  animal  rather  than
a  pure  spirit.  Preferences  are  matters  of  morals,  and
morals  are  a  part  of  politics.  It  is  for  the  statesman
or  the  humanist  to  compare  the  functions  of  various
classes  in  the  state  and  the  importance  or  timeliness  of
various  arts.  He  must  honour  the  poets  as  poets  and
the  saints  as  saints,  but  on  occasion  he  is  not  forbidden
to  banish  them.


F


CHAPTER  V


COMPLEX  ESSENCES

By  one  of  the  uses  or  abuses  of  the  word  is,  one  thing
is  often  said  to  be  another.  This  absurdity  (as  a
Essences  Pure  logician  might  think  it)  flows  out  of  the
are  seif-  natural  relation  of  essences  with  things  and
defining.  serves  clumsily  to  express  it.  A  thing
naturally  has  many  appearances — lights,  sounds,  tem¬
peratures,  perspectives;  and  it  may  conventionally  have
many  names.  Each  of  these  essences,  as  it  crosses
the  field  of  intuition,  is  verbally  identified  with  that
thing ;  but  good  sense,  unless  a  sophistical  attempt
at  accuracy  trips  up  its  honest  intentions,  will  easily
perceive  that  none  of  these  names  or  appearances  is
the  existing  thing;  nor  are  they  the  existing  thing
when  added  together,  but  still  only  a  collection,  in¬
definitely  variable  and  extensible,  of  its  names  and
appearances.  The  thing  is  a  strand  in  the  flux  of
matter  which,  apart  from  all  appearances  and  names,
passes  at  its  own  rate  through  a  continuous  series  of
states,  until  that  strand  merges  into  others  and  the
substance  of  it  goes  to  form  other  things.  So  a  man,
or  other  natural  being,  has  a  material  continuity,  from
birth  to  death,  apart  from  the  sensations  which  he  may
desultorily  cause  in  others,  or  in  himself,  and  apart
from  the  names  which  he  may  receive.

Loose  logic,  incident  to  such  naming  and  recog¬
nition  of  things,  runs  over  into  human  thinking  even

66


COMPLEX  ESSENCES  67

about  essences,  because  these  first  attract  attention  as
signs  for  things,  or  as  sensuous  names;  and  it  takes
time  and  speculative  faculty  to  discern  their  intrinsic
nature.  If  five  potatoes  go  to  the  pound,  those  five
potatoes  are  said  to  be  one  pound  of  potatoes  ;  and  it  is
quite  true  that  “  five  ”  and  “  one  ”  are  in  this  case  alter¬
nate  descriptions,  in  different  conventional  terms,  for
the  same  parcel  of  matter.  Yet  conceived  apart  from
that  material  signification,  “  one”  is  evidently  not  “  five”,
nor  is  number  weight ;  and  when  essences  are  en¬
visaged  directly,  in  abstraction  (as  people  say)  from  all
that  is  irrelevant  to  them,  nobody  would  be  tempted
to  identify  one  essence  with  another,  or  any  essence
with  any  changeable  thing.  Why  confuse  obvious
objects  by  trying  to  interpret  or  transform  them  at  all,
as  if  their  entire  and  individual  nature  were  not  given
in  each  instance  from  the  beginning?  If  the  obvious
defies  description,  it  does  not  require  it.  Only  it
happens  that  language,  and  the  other  laborious  instru¬
ments  of  life,  being  addressed  to  the  medley  of  things,
distract  us  from  the  obvious  and  render  it  ambiguous.
We  form  the  habit  of  asking  what  a  thing  is,  a  habit
absurd  if  extended  to  essences.  Essences  do  not  need
description,  since  they  are  descriptions  already.

Nevertheless  the  attempt  to  describe  certain  essences
instead  of  simply  inspecting  them  has  some  justifica¬
tion  and  meets  with  some  success.  There  ^
are  memorable  ideas  which  we  may  wish  to  not  given
revive;  incidental  means  of  reviving  them  ^mtuhion
may  be  at  hand,  since  intuition  has  a  Sported
physical  basis  determining  the  essence  that  circup-

r,  .  °  stantially.

shall  appear,  bo  written  music  is  a  means
of  reviving  melodies;  the  phonograph  is  another;
and  even  verbal  descriptions  and  similes  may  not
be  useless  in  suggesting  musical  essences  and  dis¬
tinguishing  them  clearly  in  their  own  category.
Intuition  is  thought,  and  anything  that  clarifies


68


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


thought  enriches  intuition.  Less  artificially,  by  the
innate  phonography  of  the  psyche,  much  that  is  not
given  at  the  moment  may  be  adumbrated  and  felt
to  lie  in  a  certain  direction  within  predeterminate
limits  of  character.  The  intuitions  with  which  the
psyche  is  pregnant  would  actually  arise  if  the  living
process  that  would  generate  them  could  be  carried  a
little  further:  so  our  convictions  are  big  with  eloquence
and  our  passions  with  predestined  objects,  which  even
if  never  realised  are  a  sure  unconscious  criterion  for
accepting  or  rejecting  anything  that  may  be  proffered
in  their  name.  The  most  interesting  essences,  like
the  thoughts  of  ancient  philosophers,  may  be  at  some
remove ;  how  should  they  be  known  in  their  absence
except  by  description?  The  imaginative  inquirer  is
reduced  to  retailing  the  circumstances  or  to  specifying
sundry  qualities  in  which  the  intended  object  pre¬
sumably  differs  from  those  within  his  ken,  until  he
catches  or  thinks  he  catches  a  glimpse  of  the  essence
sought.

An  ulterior  essence  may  thus  be  approached  as  a
thing  is  approached,  by  laying  siege  to  it  and  attempt-
ing  to  conquer  it  bit  by  bit ;  and  the  same
o/removed  uncertainty  always  hangs  about  the  most
probiees  is  confident  success  in  such  an  endeavour;
matical  like  because  although  the  mind  possesses  at  the
of  factsdse  end  the  essence  it  possesses,  it  cannot  know
that  this  essence  is  the  one  intended,  pos¬
sessed  elsewhere  by  an  intuition  numerically  different
and  historically  remote.  The  entire  historical  study
of  ideas,  of  which  romantic  idealism  is  so  fond,  is
irrelevant  to  ideas.  Interesting  as  may  be  an  im¬
provised  reconstruction  of  things  past,  and  fascinating
the  learned  illusion  of  living  again  the  life  of  the  dead,
it  distracts  the  mind  from  mastering  whatever  the  past
may  have  mastered;  it  inhibits  pure  intelligence,  and
substitutes  for  it  the  pleasures  of  sympathetic  fiction.


COMPLEX  ESSENCES  69

Those  ultimate  visions  are  missed  on  which  pure
thought  would  rest,  and  which  lend  its  only  interest
to  rambling  experience  ;  and  even  experience  itself  is
surveyed  in  a  false  perspective,  created  by  the  special
frame  which  the  present  provides  for  it,  a  present
always  casual  and  new;  so  that  ancient  history  needs  to
be  rewritten  from  the  beginning  by  each  generation  of
romanticists.  Indeed,  the  object  of  interest  in  such
reconstructions  is  not  a  moral  revelation,  not  the  re¬
discovery  of  an  essence  formerly  discerned  or  prized,
but  only  the  fact  that  people  once  entertained  some
such  idea  ;  and  naturally  the  dates  and  the  names  of
dead  men  become  more  important,  and  are  easier  to
determine,  than  the  truths  or  beauties  which  they  may
have  known.  Essences  here,  as  in  physics,  serve  only
to  supply  names  for  divisions  in  the  flux  of  matter;  for
after  all  this  flux  could  not  be  distinguished  into  phases
at  all  unless  some  essences  were  discerned  in  it.  It  is
for  this  reason  that  minds  fundamentally  without  loyal¬
ties,  and  incapable  or  fearful  of  knowing  themselves,
pursue  subjects  like  the  history  of  art  or  of  culture.  The
illusion  that  they  are  interested  in  things  beautiful  or
noble  accompanies  their  purely  material  investigations,
and  they  trace  the  genesis  of  every  school  of  life  without
understanding  the  life  of  any,  like  eunuchs  studying  the
physiology  of  love.

The  first  precaution,  therefore,  which  the  descrip¬
tion  of  a  removed  essence  imposes  is  to  discount  the
method  of  approach,  the  position  and  habit  of  A  complex
the  observer.  He  must  beware  of  repeating  essence
here  the  error  common  and  excusable  in  the  Seated
perception  of  things,  that  of  hypostatising  simply,  and
symbols  and  hastily  identifying  views  with  viceversa-
the  objects  viewed.  He  must  not  project,  for  instance,
on  a  complex  essence  like  Euclidean  space,  the  emo¬
tional  simplicity  of  a  blue  sky  or  a  dark  room,  nor  upon
a  simple  essence  like  pure  Being  the  miscellany  of  those


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


70

natural  facts  or  human  ideas  by  which  pure  Being  may
be  manifested  to  him.  The  most  complex  approach
will  not  complicate  that  which  itself  is  simple,  the
setting  will  not  carve  the  jewel;  nor  will  the  blank
wonder  of  an  eye  seeing  only  simple  bulks  remove
complexity  from  the  intrinsically  complex.

In  what  sense  can  any  essence  be  intrinsically  com¬
plex,  seeing  that  every  essence  has  its  eternal  and
Three  kinds  indivisible  unity?  This  question  will  answer
of  unity:  itself  if  we  ask  another,  namely,  What  is
quantitative,  unity?  because  if  there  is  a  unity  incompatible
and  formal.  with  complexity,  there  is  another  essential  to
it.  Pure  unity  is  qualitative,  like  that  of  a  scent  or  a
note,  or  like  that  of  pure  Being.  Such  unity  is  indi¬
visible  and  defies  analysis.  But  a  pure  quality  may
pervade  a  continuum:  the  scent  may  be  diffused,  the
note  prolonged,  and  pure  Being  may  be  contemplated.
The  unity  of  this  continuum  is  quantitative  and
merely  specious  or  imputed;  it  subsists  because  by
chance  the  component  parts  of  it  are  not  discriminated.
A  continuum  offers  an  opportunity  for  variation  and
the  interweaving  of  qualities  —  something  impossible
without  a  common  medium  or  field;  quantity  will  then
become  order,  it  will  display  a  form  or  system.  The
imputed  or  specious  unity  of  the  continuum  will  not
be  in  the  least  jeopardised  by  this  internal  complexity;
on  the  contrary,  the  complexity  presupposes  the  unity,
otherwise  the  elements  would  not  figure  in  the  same
context  or  fall  into  those  relations  which  knead  them
together  into  a  particular  compound.  These  elements
would  then  remain  separate  simples,  like  colours  in
tubes ;  before  they  can  form  any  picture  a  canvas  or  an
eye  must  compose  them  into  a  complex  essence,  itself,
like  every  essence,  perfectly  single  and  individual.
Thus  a  third  sort  of  unity,  that  of  order,  system,  or
form,  is  presupposed  in  any  actual  complexity  of
being;  and  the  doubt  whether  an  indivisible  and


COMPLEX  ESSENCES


71

eternal  essence  can  be  complex  dissolves  in  the  fuller
insight  into  what  essence  means.  This  complexity  is
not  material ;  it  is  not  the  factual  coexistence  A  particular
of  elements  themselves  self-centred  and  self-  complexity
existent.  It  is  the  essential  complexity  of  a  eSss0efnceeof
form,  in  which  the  relations  of  the  parts  are  most
internal  relations  in  the  whole  ;  so  that  both  essences-
the  total  unity  and  the  contrasting  parts  are  pure
essences.  Every  landscape  seen,  as  actually  seen  (not
as  confusedly  supposed  to  exist  semi-materially  like
a  natural  stage-setting)  is  an  eternal  and  indivisible
unit ;  the  least  derogation  from  its  complete  essence
substitutes  a  different  essence  for  it.  That  spread  of
light,  that  precise  emphasis  of  line,  that  mixture  of
suggestions,  are  no  material  facts  collected  into  an
existing  object;  they  form  the  very  individuality  of  the
composition  momentarily  intuited,  which  any  one  who
would  ever  behold  the  same  landscape  (“  the  same  ”,
spiritually  speaking)  must  evoke  anew  in  its  perfect
identity.

In  most  essences  complexity  is  obvious:  a  line  is
drawn-out-ness,  progression  leaving  a  trail;  a  direction
is  a  goal  of  progression  chosen  among  others  Complexity
avoided.  Every  articulated  image  offers  some  may  be
spatial  or  temporal  pattern  which  is  essential  infirute-
to  that  essence.  There  is  no  limit  to  this  complexity
in  unity:  the  system  of  any  world  is  one  essence;  the
whole  realm  of  essence  is  one  essence.  There  is
therefore  one  essence  which  is  absolutely  infinite  in
complexity;  but  doubtless  many  others  are  infinitely
complex  in  particular  respects  or  categories,  as  number
is ;  they  would  seem  no  less  hostile  and  exorbitant  to
human  imagination.

The  reader  must  forgive  me  if  I  repeat  a  warning;
a  certain  lofty  and  idealistic  sound  in  the  word  inhumanity
essence  should  not  tempt  his  tender  mind  to  of  essence-
regard  essence  as  somehow  more  human  than  matter.


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


72

Let  him  be  disabused ;  the  friendliness  of  essence  is
not  intrinsic  to  that  eternal  sort  of  being,  but  hangs  on
two  circumstances  :  one,  that  being  non-existent,  all
essence  is  innocent  and  incapable  of  injuring  or  threaten¬
ing  him  materially;  the  other,  that  when  actually  given
in  intuition,  every  essence  is  luminous  and  not  estranged
from  him  by  any  doubt  or  veil.  Matter  is  neither
luminous  nor  innocent;  it  is  therefore  no  object  for
contemplation;  but  nevertheless  there  lie  all  his  hopes;
hence  he  sprang,  on  that  he  feeds,  and  there  he  must
leave  his  mark  if  he  would  render  existence  more
friendly  to  the  spirit.  It  is  by  the  shifts  of  matter,  in
the  world  or  in  the  brain,  that  essences  are  revealed;
very  few  can  appear  to  human  intuition  at  all,  and  still
fewer  to  a  sane  human  mind;  happy  the  man  who,  in
bringing  to  light  those  which  to  him  can  be  enlighten¬
ing  and  congenial,  leaves  all  the  others  to  loom  for  ever
in  the  distance,  like  ancient  gods  respected  but  not  wor¬
shipped:  monstrous,  tedious,  occult,  and  inhumanly
complicated.

In  essences  actually  given  the  complexity  possible
is  limited  by  the  intellectual  scope  of  the  thinker ;  and
Poverty  this  is  n°t  great.  Man,  harassed  as  he  is  by
of  human  pricks  of  fortune  and  irrelevant  calls,  has  to
intuition.  rejy  on  tjie  organisation  of  his  thoughts  to

make  up  for  their  poverty  ;  if  he  does  not  misread  his
signals  he  seems  intelligent,  though  his  spirit  may  be
a  blank  or  stream  of  ticking  trivialities,  like  the  sound
of  the  telegraph.  The  greatest  men  hardly  have  one
great  moment ;  their  minds  seem  great  only  when  the
historian  reviews  their  various  actions  or  accomplish¬
ments,  and  pieces  together  a  mythical  source  for  them
which  he  calls  a  great  mind.  There  was  never  an
actual  greatness,  a  living  thought  mastering  and  direct¬
ing  the  whole ;  and  the  historian  himself  is  as  incapable
as  his  hero  of  gathering  up  that  desultory  competence
into  an  actual  intuition  of  the  whole  achievement.


COMPLEX  ESSENCES


73

Eloquence,  or  the  spell  of  some  rite,  serves  at  best  to
hint  at  such  an  unrealised  greatness ;  and  man  must
commit  to  monuments,  to  books,  to  institutions,  the
suggestion  of  those  visions  which  he  never  had.  So
seeds  carry  over  from  generation  to  generation  a
labouring  something  which  we  call  life;  it  has  an
inward  determinate  potentiality,  there  is  something
which  it  would  be;  but  when  and  where,  in  what
joyful  bridal  or  victorious  cry,  is  that  potentiality
realised?  The  best  seems  still  more  than  half  hope
and  a  strange  uncertainty;  and  when  we  look  at  our
clearest  thought,  at  our  most  comprehensive  intuition,
we  find  in  it  almost  nothing:  we  are  always  at  cross¬
roads  in  a  narrow  valley,  the  whole  world  but  a  vague
object  of  faith,  only  this  poor  halting-place  actually
ours.

So  much  is  nature  the  mother  of  spirit,  a  child  at  the
breast ;  it  must  be  fed  at  every  turn  by  things,  resigning
to  their  ministry  that  authority  which  it  can-  spirit  is
not  exercise  over  itself.  These  things,  when  great  only
great  originally  or  made  great  by  material  by  virtue  of
labour,  first  suggest  to  the  spirit  what  ought  lts  objects-
to  be  its  stature,  if  it  aspires  to  comprehend  them.  It
is  they  that  keep  it  plodding  in  the  path  of  progress,
and  compel  its  lantern  -  light  to  creep  wonderingly
over  their  vast  breadth.  Thinking  is  like  telling  one’s
beads  ;  the  poor  repeated  mutterings  of  the  mind
compose,  beyond  themselves,  a  single  litany,  a  path
leading  humbly  step  by  step,  past  every  mystery,  up
the  mountain  of  knowledge.  It  makes  no  difference
to  posterity  how  violent  or  prolonged  may  have  been
those  effervescing  thoughts  which  left  this  sediment
of  habits  and  institutions;  what  still  matters  is  the
seed-like  power  in  this  sediment,  when  stirred  afresh,
to  generate  in  other  spirits  intuitions  purer,  juster,
more  classical  than  those  into  which  nature  might  have
budded  untaught.  The  syntheses  of  art  are  far  greater


74  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

and  more  comprehensive  than  those  of  life.  If  many
poets  had  collaborated  to  produce  the  works  of  Homer
or  of  Shakespeare,  these  works  would  still  be  what
they  are:  in  any  case,  each  poet  is  many  poets  in  act,
as  many  as  he  has  moments  of  poetic  inspiration;  and
the  psychic  continuity  of  his  animal  person,  crammed
full  of  idiocies  and  vain  prose,  is  far  less  rigidly  per¬
tinent  to  his  message  than  is  the  material  collection  of
his  works.  Material  works,  customs,  and  ceremonies
are  the  stay  of  the  mind;  in  them  it  grows  sober,  mad¬
cap  that  it  is  in  its  dreams;  without  them  its  fine
thoughts  would  go  out  like  sparks,  accruing  to  nothing
and  transmissible  to  nobody.  Even  such  familiar  unities
as  we  all  profess  to  survey  clearly — a  landscape,  a
political  event,  a  system  of  philosophy — are  commonly
unrealised  mythical  objects:  we  observe  some  casual
feature  and  implicitly  assume  a  system  of  other  features
which  we  might  observe  seriatim,  had  we  the  time  and
the  patience  ;  and  the  prophetic  heat  with  which  we
hail  this  reality  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  our  actual
understanding.  We  are  satisfied  if  we  can  go  on  be¬
lieving  that  the  hidden  truth  would  justify  our  senti¬
ments,  could  we  survey  it  synthetically;  and  what  we
call  our  knowledge  is  really  only  a  string  of  miserable
phrases  and  small  points,  supported  by  the  rash  con¬
viction  that  behind  them  lies  a  great  truth,  a  familiar
friendly  reality  from  which  we  are  never  far  and  about
which  we  are  never  wrong.

There  has  been  much  play  of  dialectic  (for  instance,
in  the  Parmenides  of  Plato)  about  the  One  and  the  Many,
The  One  or  without  ostensible  result.  Unity  and  plural-
the  Many,  if  ity  are  essences;  they  find  an  obvious  and,
makeSMfsed’ UP  to  a  certain  point,  a  sure  application  in
impossible  things:  to  which  circumstance  they  doubtless
physics.  Qwe  tjie  ciearness  and  confidence  with  which
we  conceive  them.  But  they  cannot  be  expected  to
be  the  intrinsic  essences  of  anything  existent ;  the  ex-


COMPLEX  ESSENCES


75

istent  will  be  many  and  one  in  a  thousand  ways  with¬
out  being  one  or  many  absolutely.  Pure  unity  cannot
exist,  because  existence  by  definition  involves  external
relations,  which  will  render  many  variable  assertions
true  of  that  unit;  and  it  would  be  by  virtue  of  these
relations,  not  of  its  inner  unity,  that  such  a  unit  would
exist.  If  the  One  exists,  then,  as  Plato  says,  it  is  Many.
But  if  the  Many  exist,  they  are  also  One,  since  they
could  not  exist  without  mutual  relations  which  would
bind  them  into  one  system.  There  are  other  reasons
or  relations  which  justify  the  same  dialectical  para¬
doxes:  for  instance,  in  so  far  as  the  Many  are  many,
they  are  each  one,  as  well  as  being  One  in  their  totality.
There  is  no  natural  end  to  this  shuffling  of  aspects;  in
the  realm  of  existence,  as  Heraclitus  and  Hegel  have
urged,  unity  is  manifold.  Things  are  without  other
individuality  than  that  which  they  acquire  by  proxy
when  some  essence  is  embodied  in  them;  and  as  sub¬
stance  is  indefinitely  plastic  and  forms  are  infinitely
various,  this  world  is  much  more  emphatically  a
medley  than  a  unit;  and  yet  it  is  one  in  some  respects,
as  in  its  dynamic  continuity  and  in  its  speculative
totality  or  system.  An  extreme  violence  is  done  to
nature  when  such  simple  ethereal  essences  as  unity
and  multiplicity  are  hypostatised.  The  result  is  a
metaphysics  which  excludes  the  possibility  of  any
physics — that  is,  of  the  only  element  in  metaphysics
which  describes  matters  of  fact;  and  the  more  intense
the  realisation  of  these  essences  is  in  intuition,  the
farther  the  contemplative  mind  flies  from  nature,  and
from  any  understanding  of  existence  or  any  belief  in  it.

When,  however,  an  essence  with  some  precise
articulation  actually  appears  in  thought,  the  Ingiven
alleged  conflict  between  unity  and  plurality  essences,
is  perfectly  solved,  or  rather  is  proved
never  to  have  existed.  Suppose  that  in
an  architectural  mood  I  stop  really  to  consider  and


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


76

survey  a  facade ;  could  it,  in  an  aesthetic  sense,  be  a
facade  if  it  was  not  one  composition?  Could  it  be
a  composition  if  it  had  no  parts?  Could  it  be  this
individual  composition  if  not  composed  of  precisely
these  elements  in  precisely  these  relations?  Of  course
I  am  not  speaking  of  the  stones  and  mortar  and
their  chemical  constituents  ;  from  them,  as  from  the
instruments  of  an  orchestra,  are  wafted  to  me  certain
material  influences  which  kindle  my  intuition  and,  at
this  juncture,  evoke  this  vision.  I  am  speaking  of  this
revelation  of  a  moment,  of  something  homeless  in  the
world  though  visiting  me  there  under  the  gracious
influence  of  this  place  and  hour;  I  am  speaking  of  an
essence.  I  am  satisfied  if  in  respect  to  any  and  every
essence  all  cavil  ceases,  and  it  is  heartily  acknowledged
to  be  just  as  much  one  and  just  as  complicated  as
it  happens  to  be,  the  complexity  being  complex
because  synthesised  in  a  single  medium,  and  the  unity
specific  because  composed  of  just  these  elements,
merged  or  contrasting  in  just  this  manner.

This  perfect  and  eternal  individuality  of  every  com¬
plex  essence  is  a  point  worth  meditating  upon ;  it  helps
to  make  evident  the  infinity  and,  so  to  speak,  the
democracy  intrinsic  to  the  realm  of  essence,  and  the
admirable  absence  from  it  of  such  things  as  scale,  tran¬
sition,  genesis,  or  contiguity  between  its  members.  I
say,  between  its  members,  because  of  course  within  one
essence  or  another  these  relations,  like  all  other  forms  of
being,  are  bound  to  be  contained.  Duration,  specious
time,  change,  repetition,  etc.,  are  all  essences  perfectly
open  to  inspection,  if  not  to  description;  the  idiosyn¬
crasy  of  each  is  absolute ;  and  when  they  appear,  the
peculiar  relation  between  their  parts  (which  is  their
very  essence)  appears  within  them.  But  this  very
idiosyncrasy  renders  it  impossible  that  one  should
become  the  other,  or  be  composed  otherwise  than  as,
in  act,  it  already  is ;  in  such  suppositions  we  are  shifting


COMPLEX  ESSENCES


77

our  attention  from  the  complex  essence  to  be  inspected
and  substituting  some  view  of  our  previous  experience
or  of  the  material  conditions  which  we  presume  have
brought  that  essence  to  our  notice.  These  historical
vistas  may  be  true  ;  but  they  could  not  be  so  if  the
synthesis  which  composes  the  vista  did  not  faithfully
render,  here  and  now,  the  method  by  which  events  have
unrolled  themselves  then  and  there.  The  question
of  the  truth  or  descriptive  propriety  of  an  essence  is
therefore  a  second  question,  entirely  subsequent  to  the
question,  or  fact,  of  what  this  essence  is.  That  change
occurs  continually  in  nature  is  true;  but  only  because
in  the  essence  of  change  we  have  given  together,  in  a
single  image,  the  successive  phases  of  an  event  which,
when  change  is  enacted,  are  necessarily  alternative.
This  power  of  projecting  given  essences  and  assigning
them  to  things  as  their  characters  or  as  their  relations,
enables  discourse  to  thread  the  labyrinth  of  nature
dialectically.  Far  from  removing  from  the  complex
essences  so  projected  and  used  their  perfect  individu¬
ality,  it  presupposes  this  individuality,  to  which  it  assimi¬
lates  the  untraceable  flux  of  material  events.  Whatever,
then,  may  be  the  history  of  nature,  or  the  genesis  of
intuition  in  us,  all  the  forms  which  nature  may  assume
are  ontologically  equally  primary,  and  all  the  essences
that  may  appear  in  intuition  are  equally  fresh  and
original.


CHAPTER  VI


IMPLICATION

Since  any  essence  is  an  eternal  form  of  being,  each
is  grounded  in  itself  without  reference  to  any  other.
Ail  essences  Thus  the  realm  of  essence  is  an  infinite
vidjaidi"  plenum  or  continuum,  in  which  every  essence
and1  self-  is  surrounded  by  others  differing  infini-
sufficient.  tesimally  from  it  in  character.  This  realm
is  an  absolute  democracy  by  virtue  of  the  indefeasible
right  of  every  member  to  its  self-made  place  in  it;  and
whereas  in  earthly  democracies  it  suffices  to  be  born
in  order  to  acquire  every  civic  right,  in  this  celestial
republic  even  those  who  have  not  taken  that  risk
and  trouble  possess  full  citizenship.  Nor  is  any  one
threatened  here  by  the  pressure  of  the  hard-hearted
majority,  or  by  any  rude  government.  Here  is  perfect
anarchy  in  perfect  peace.  The  population  is  infinite,
no  legislation  is  possible,  and  everybody  is  safe.

In  one  sense,  indeed,  the  being  of  any  essence
implies  that  of  every  other;  for  if  any  one  essence  is
assured  of  its  being  because  it  is  a  distinguishable
something,  obviously  every  other  distinguishable  some¬
thing  is  assured  of  its  being  on  the  same  ground;  so
that  an  infinite  multitude  of  essences  is  implied,  if  you
will,  in  the  being  of  any  essence.  Certainly  no  essence
can  create  any  other  or  remove  it  or  pre-empt  its  place,
that  ontological  place  being  all  that  an  essence  is.  To
play  the  dog  in  the  manger  is  proper  to  things;  essences

78


IMPLICATION


79

are  always  in  their  respective  kennels.  The  principle  of
identity  (when  the  accident  of  existence  is  disregarded)
renders  the  number  of  individuals  spontaneously
infinite;  but  this  principle  is  no  force  exercised  some¬
how  extraneously  on  individuals,  or  which  they  could
pass  on  to  one  another.  Nor  will  so  liberal  an  implica¬
tion  ever  help  thought  to  pass  from  a  given  essence  to
any  other  essence  in  particular.  The  intuition  of  the
essence  to  be  thought  of  next,  even  in  the  most  obvious
inference  or  deduction,  must  be  generated  by  the
movement  of  living  discourse,  and  by  the  circumstances
of  some  animal  life.  Essences  are  unsubstantial:  the
psyche,  or  matter  elsewhere,  is  the  substance  at  work.
The  essence  last  thought  of  was  an  essence  only;  it
can  trail  no  consequences  and  involve  no  sequel.  To
attribute  consequences  to  essences  is  superstition.

Such  developments,  then,  as  take  place  in  nature  or
in  discourse  are  all  generated  materially.  As  they
were  first  initiated  contingently,  because  some  Their
parcel  of  matter  happened  to  exist  at  some  emei;genc<;
place  and  time,  so  the  phases  they  traverse
afterwards  are  generated,  if  not  by  chance,  by  some
impulse  which  happens  to  be  native  to  that  structure
or  to  the  material  circumstances  that  feed  and  transform
it.  At  every  stage  such  a  development  picks  up  one
essence  and  drops  another;  each  essence,  like  Michael-
angelo’s  statues  lying  unhewn  in  the  block,  is  intrinsic¬
ally  no  better  fitted  for  existence  than  any  other,  and
cries  for  it  no  more  loudly.  The  choice,  as  in  the  case
of  the  statue,  must  be  made  by  the  genial  fertility  of
things  already  existing — the  artist,  his  habits,  his  sur¬
roundings.  The  artist  is  alive;  his  surroundings  are
full  of  fashions  and  movements;  all  these  existing
motions  have  directions ;  they  leap  and  mingle  and
disappear  like  rills  down  a  mountain-side.  The  forms
they  create,  they  create  spontaneously.  The  aspect
they  assume  may  be  unprecedented ;  and  even  if


8o


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


familiar,  it  is  but  a  haunting  essence,  without  power  to
reproduce  itself  or  to  exclude  any  particular  sequel.

Hence  the  earnestness  and  honesty  with  which  the
defenders  of  free-will  assert  at  once  two  incompatible
Aside-light  things:  indetermination  and  power.  They
on  free-will.  are  expressing  the  life  of  matter,  which  is
indeed  not  determined  exactly  to  reproduce  its  pre¬
vious  forms,  but  tumbles  forward  to  fresh  collocations;
and  the  power  in  it  is  truly  internal — not  a  compelling
magic  exercised  by  any  fixed  form,  energising  either
out  of  the  past  or  out  of  the  future,  but  indeed  a  potenti¬
ality  or  propensity  within  the  substance  concerned,  a
part  of  that  blind  impulse  and  need  to  shift  which  is
native  to  existence;  and  as  this  universal  dance  was
groundless  in  the  beginning,  so  it  remains  groundless
at  every  stage  and  in  every  factor,  whether  the  figures
of  it  be  novel  or  habitual.  This  groundless  pervasive
power,  with  its  tireless  inner  monotony  and  its  occa¬
sional  outward  novelties,  is  matter  thumping  in  the
hearts  of  the  free-willists  much  more  loudly  than  in
those  of  their  opponents.  Believers  in  necessity  have
caught  sight  of  some  essence — a  law  or  habit  or  rule
of  some  kind — which  they  make  haste  to  clap  upon
nature,  as  if  nature  had  no  further  depth,  and  they  had
touched  bottom  with  their  proverbs;  as  knowing  people
are  always  incredulous  of  things  not  within  their  ex¬
perience  or  their  books.  At  some  depth,  and  in  terms
not  at  all  on  the  human  scale,  nature  may  very  well  be
mechanical — I  shall  return  to  this  question  in  its  place;
but  each  factor  in  that  mechanism  would  remain  per¬
fectly  spontaneous;  for  it  is  not  the  essence  illustrated
here  that  can  produce  the  essence  illustrated  there.
One  configuration  cannot  even  suggest  another,  save
to  an  idle  mind  playing  with  the  rhymes  of  appearance;
but  substance  throughout  continues  groundlessly  to
shift  its  groundless  arrangement.  One  inert  essence
after  another  is  thereby  embodied  in  things — essences


IMPLICATION  81

inwardly  irrelevant,  and  associated  even  in  thought
only  when  thought  has  been  tamed  and  canalised  by
custom.  The  method  of  this  transformation  may  con¬
tain  repetitions,  and  to  that  extent  it  will  be  mechanical;
but  it  will  never  become  anything  but  a  perpetual
genesis  of  the  unwarrantable  out  of  the  contingent,
mediated  by  a  material  continuity  impartial  towards
those  complications.  So  the  common  man  feels  that
he  is  the  source  of  his  actions  and  words,  though  they
spring  up  in  him  unbidden;  and  he  weaves  a  sophisti¬
cated  moral  personage,  all  excuses,  fictions,  and  verbal
motives,  to  cover  the  unknown  currents  of  his  material
life.  Philosophers  are  not  wanting  to  do  the  same  for
mankind  at  large,  or  even  for  the  universe.

Any  essence  is  a  model  of  explicitness;  it  is  all
surface  without  substance.  When  it  appears,  it  appears
entire.  How,  then,  should  any  essence  have  Nq
implications?  Implication  is  something  in  essencTcan
which  obscurity  and  fate  seem  to  be  lurking;  h?.ve  !m-

•  r  •  r_  ,  .  .  .  i  °  plications.

it  so,  it  must  be  something  imposed  on
essences  by  human  discourse,  leaning,  not  on  logic,  but
on  the  accidents  of  existence.  And  yet  in  dialectic  we
are  supposed  to  be  elucidating  the  meaning  of  pure
ideas  without  any  reference  to  their  truth,  as  if  the
realm  of  essence  were  a  second  cosmos,  or  rather  a
first  cosmos,  the  eternal  intellect  or  Logos  of  God,
pre-existing  by  a  fatality  deeper  than  any  creation,  and
imposing  itself  on  every  possible  world.

By  insisting  on  the  infinity  of  essence  I  have,  in  one
sense,  already  discarded  any  metaphysical  rationalism
which  should  attribute  this  sort  of  prior  ex¬
istence  and  authority  to  any  system  of  logic  ^heessree^
or  grammar.  Essences  are  prior  to  existence,  i?  no  par-
but  being  infinitely  various  they  cannot  deter-  Logos,
mine  existence  to  take  one  form  rather  than  lc,gic> or
another.  Moreover,  if  there  be  a  divine  grammar-
Logos  composed  of  particular  essences  or  ideas  forming

G


82  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

a  closed  system,  it  is  evident  that  other  systems,  differ¬
ently  compacted  or  anarchical,  would  appear  in  the
background,  since  the  Logos  would  explicitly  exclude
them  from  its  own  panorama:  the  pre-eminence  of  this
Logos  would  therefore  not  be  essential,  but  due  to  a
quasi-existence,  to  a  fact  or  an  accident.  This  is
perhaps  the  reason  why  Plotinus  and  the  Christian
theologians  have  posited  the  One  or  the  Father  to  be
the  source  of  the  Divine  Intellect;  as  this  Intellect  is
presumed  to  be  specific,  and  not  the  infinite  realm
of  essence,  it  expresses,  by  that  limitation,  a  factual
principle,  a  primary  accident,  existence,  or  power.
Much  in  the  same  way  the  transcendental  logic
of  the  Germans,  supposed  to  control  existence,  has
to  be  referred  mythically  to  a  Will  or  a  Deed
itself  an  absolute  accident.  In  contrast  to  such  a
Logos,  the  realm  of  essence  forms  rather  a  chaos  than
a  cosmos.  Any  special  system  has  alternatives,  and
must  tremble  for  its  frontiers;  whereas  the  realm
of  essence,  in  its  perfect  catholicity,  is  placid  and
safe  and  the  same  whatever  may  happen  in  earth  or
heaven.

No  essence,  accordingly,  can  imply  any  other  in
the  sense  of  excluding  from  the  realm  of  essence  the
opposite  of  the  essence  implied,  or  any
amFimpossi-  different  complement.  From  itself  an  essence
biiity  hang  may  exclude  anything;  in  fact,  it  excludes
accepted  everything  not  itself;  but  when  a  thing  or
order  in  a  thought  is  said  to  preclude  another,  this
happens  only  by  virtue  of  adventitious  laws
of  nature.  A  man  cannot  be  in  two  places  at  once,  not
because  the  two  places  are  not  equally  habitable  or
perhaps  present  to  his  spirit,  but  because  they  are
assumed  to  lie  apart  farther  than  the  span  of  his  body.
In  what  passes  for  logical  exclusion  or  implication  such
a  reference  to  existence  is  sometimes  covert,  but  often
it  is  quite  direct  and  undisguised.  All  hangs  on  the


IMPLICATION


83

usual  connotations  of  language,  on  presumptions  about
the  course  of  nature,  and  on  the  argumentum  ad  homi-
num  addressed  to  the  mental  habits  of  mankind.

Implication  in  the  first  instance  is  indeed  a  physical
relation,  like  that  of  surface  to  volume;  such  a  bottle
implies  such  a  quantity  of  wine.  Implication  .
is  the  tacit  commitment  by  which  all  the  nSy  denote:
material  detail  and  destiny  of  an  object  be-  (0  physical

t  „  „  .  ,  ,  J  ,  J  .  inclusion.

comes  relevant  to  intent  when  we  point  to
that  object  or  name  it.  So  when  a  witness  is  called
up  in  court  all  his  past,  which  may  presently  be  un¬
earthed  in  cross-examination,  is  implied  and  is  set
vibrating,  as  it  were,  by  that  summons;  and  this  even
if  most  of  those  details  are  then  absent  from  his  thoughts
or  perhaps  unknown  to  him;  he  may  be  astonished  to
find,  by  the  implications  of  the  evidence,  that  like
Oedipus  he  is  a  parricide.  At  bottom  the  same  con¬
cretions  in  existence  govern  the  deductions  of  logic.
If  in  looking  at  an  object  I  notice  that  it  has  three
corners,  this  specious  essence,  three-corneredness,
which  is  called  up  in  intuition,  becomes  itself  as  it  were
a  summons  to  all  the  other  essences  which  might  be
found  in  the  same  object  upon  further  scrutiny.  I  note
next,  perhaps,  that  there  are  also  three  sides,  of  a  length
not  irrelevant  to  the  breadth  of  the  opposite  angles;
and  all  my  supervening  geometry  will  be  developed,
not  by  deductions  from  the  original  specious  triangle,
but  by  continued  inspection  and  comparison  of  the
forms  of  things.  I  may  afterwards  arrange  my  obser¬
vations  dialectically,  re-defining  my  terms  so  as  to
include  in  them  the  material  implications  discovered
in  nature,  as  Spinoza  arranged  his  psychology;  the
whole  system  will  tend  to  become  a  single  essence,  in
which  all  the  parts  are  contained  by  definition;  but
my  guide  to  the  choice  and  discrimination  of  that
particular  system  will  be,  and  will  remain,  observation
of  nature.  The  truth  of  each  term,  and  that  of  their


84  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

arrangement,  will  be  still  empirical.  This  is  necessarily
the  case  in  regard  to  the  truth  of  dialectic,  at  any  level
and  in  any  degree  of  internal  elaboration;  because
truth  is  subsequent  to  existence,  being  truth  about  it.
Euclid  or  Plotinus  or  Hegel  might  be  dialectical  jewels
without  a  flaw,  and  yet  the  whole  truth  of  their  systems
would  lie  in  the  existence  of  a  world  which  happened
to  exhibit  the  very  special  form  of  those  systems  with
a  miraculous  fidelity.

Truth,  however,  is  one  thing  and  implication
another.  May  not  one  part  somehow  involve  another

(a)  Descrip-  in  a  Purely  idea!  system!  Yes;  because;
tive  equiva-  apart  from  material  truth,  an  essence  nxed
lence.  jn  discourse  at  one  moment  may  become
an  object  of  inquiry  and  intent  at  another  moment.
When  these  moments  are  continuous,  or  deputed  to
be  continuous,  the  specious  essence  first  given  may
remain  sensibly  the  same,  and  yet  may  be  re-surveyed
and  described  in  a  new  order,  enriched  by  fresh
analogies,  measurements,  or  internal  discriminations;
and  since  all  this  subsequent  analysis  is  but  more
inspection  of  the  original  essence,  the  new  essences
coming  to  light  in  the  analysis  (for  they  are  new)  are
said  to  be  implied  in  the  essence  analysed.  This  is  not
strictly  the  case;  the  intuition  of  three-corneredness
is  innocent  of  the  Pythagorean  proposition  and  might
be  prolonged  for  all  time  without  revealing  it.
But  when  geometry,  the  measurement  of  fields  or  of
building-plots,  has  reached  such  a  proposition,  the
mind  does  not  lose  its  old  object  in  the  new,  but  super¬
poses  this  upon  that,  and  feels  their  identity  for  intent;
the  second  is  but  an  elaboration  of  the  first,  describes
without  falsifying  it,  and  transforms  it  only  by  seeing
it  better.  In  other  words,  a  substitution  occurs  which
is  felt  to  be  materially  valid,  especially  when  it  may  be
reversed,  and  the  two  essences  may  alternate  without
inconvenience  in  the  description  of  the  same  facts;


IMPLICATION


85

as  sense  and  calculation  continually  relieve  each  other
in  the  practical  arts.  This  reversible  equivalence  in
terms  is  something  steadying  to  the  mind;  it  is  atten¬
tive  science;  altogether  different  from  the  stray
fertility  of  some  fact  or  of  some  fancy,  materially
dissipated  in  unreturning  ways.  In  natural  evolution
the  original  is  destroyed,  or  if  reproduced,  as  by  a  seed,
it  is  reproduced  in  a  new  instance,  in  a  new  setting,
with  a  destiny  and  a  face  never  identical;  but  in  dia¬
lectic  the  original  theme  subsists  entire;  it  remains  the
perpetual  point  of  reference  and  criterion  in  implication;
its  children  surround  it  only  to  honour  it.  The  most
mathematical  triangle  still  has  three  corners;  and  all
the  descriptions  and  analyses  by  which  an  essence  may
be  elaborated  dialectically  leave  it  as  limpid  as  the  sky
after  navigators  have  crossed  it  with  their  parallels  and
meridians,  or  painters  have  mixed  their  viscous  pig¬
ments  to  match  its  lights.

Implication,  then,  cannot  enter  into  the  realm  of
essence  or  become  truly  native  to  an  idea  unless  it  is
turned  into  explicitness;  that  is,  unless  it  (3)  Logical
means  the  actual  inclusion  of  a  part  in  a  whole,  ^dusion
The  triangle,  in  so  far  as  its  three  lines  are  partsTnthia
included  in  the  intuition  which  defines  it,  whole-
involves  the  lines  so  enumerated  and  synthesised;  and
each  of  these  lines,  as  found  in  that  concretion  and  as
parts  of  that  essence,  implies  the  rest,  as  every  stroke
in  a  picture,  if  taken  as  part  of  that  picture,  implies  the
remainder.  In  other  words,  pure  logical  implication
is  but  analysis  reversed,  and  subsists  only  so  long  as  the
whole  subsists  and  supplies  the  lines  of  tension  and  the
specific  termini  of  those  implications.  But  the  moment
the  given  concretion  is  dispersed,  the  elements  which
were  parts  of  it  stand  alone,  and  no  one  of  them  implies
that  whole  any  longer,  or  implies  any  of  the  other  parts.
Neither  the  three  angles  separately,  nor  one  or  the  other
of  the  sides,  implies  any  triangle;  each  element  is  now


86


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

a  complete  essence,  open  to  separate  intuition,  and  not
manifesting  any  need  or  proclivity  to  be  united  with  any
other  essences  into  a  whole  centred  elsewhere.  Nor
does  it  ask  to  be  elaborated  inwardly  into  any  one
of  those  patterns  which  might  be  introduced  into  it
without  destroying  its  outline  and  its  present  definition.
Any  such  elaboration,  if  by  chance  it  grows  manifest,
sets  a  new  total  essence  before  intuition,  and  abolishes
the  former  object  in  its  specious  simplicity;  for  the
outline  preserved  in  the  more  complex  essence,  being
but  an  outline  there,  is  not  the  same  actual  object  as
the  similar  outline  given  pure  and  apart,  though  dis¬
course  may  substitute  the  one  for  the  other  at  its  own
convenience.  Thus  logical  implication  is  unilateral;
every  essence  involves  its  parts,  considered  as  the
elements  which  integrate  it;  but  these  elements,  con¬
sidered  as  separate  essences  and  individual  units
(which  all  essences  are)  do  not  in  turn  imply  any  whole
into  which  they  may  enter  elsewhere;  for  they  may
enter  into  all  sorts  of  concretions,  and  their  only
essential  being  is  their  own  and  what  is  intrinsic  to
their  individuality.

Logical  implication  interests  the  contemplative
mind  because  it  enriches  intuition;  but  the  only  impli¬
cations  that  concern  discourse  are  transitive
givesTpiay  and  therefore  borrowed  from  the  flux  of
to  logic  nature.  Wherever  there  is  growth  towards
continuity^  maturity  or  through  some  biological  cycle,  an
rePfet|fifnS’  eye  familiar  with  that  round  may  see  in  the
ments  are  earlier  phases  a  promise  of  the  later.  The
in  he/°und  grub>f°r  naturalist,  prophesies  the  butter¬
fly,  although  presumably  the  essence  of  the
butterfly  is  totally  absent  from  the  aspect  of  the  grub
and  from  its  mind.  There  is  only,  I  suppose,  a
mechanism  which  eventually  brings  about  that  com¬
plete  transformation;  but  without  needing  to  trace
this  substantial  continuity,  the  naturalist  may  observe


IMPLICATION


87

the  gross  phases  and  outer  habits  of  nature,  as  if  forms
bred  one  another  directly;  and  this  regularity  in
phenomena  may  become  for  him  a  sort  of  implication,
as  the  flight  of  birds  became  an  omen  to  the  attentive
augurs.  In  an  empirical  system  causation  is  reduced
to  superstition,  skipping  from  fact  to  observed  fact
without  attempting  to  penetrate  any  of  them  or  to
examine  the  medium  which  connects  them  substantially .
It  attributes  to  a  juxtaposition  of  appearances  a
mysterious  power  to  reproduce  itself.  Unfortunately
in  immediate  experience  there  are,  strictly  speaking,  no
repetitions.  The  word  and  occurs  often;  but  never,
for  actual  feeling,  in  exactly  the  same  context,  or  with
exactly  the  same  emphasis  and  colour.  Empirical
philosophy,  if  sincere,  ought  to  become  mystical  and
to  deny  that  the  flux  of  events  has  any  articulation  or
method  in  it.  The  fertility  of  being  would  then  be
devoid  of  all  implication;  no  involution  would  justify
evolution  or  give  it  direction.

Even  a  pictorial  physics,  however,  may  discover  in
the  flux  of  things  something  besides  continuity:  there
is  inheritance.  A  son  may  not  only  appear  as  if  by
chance  in  his  father’s  family,  but  he  may  have  his
father’s  nose.  So  in  any  moral  heritage  there  is  a
survival  of  early  features  in  the  midst  of  accretion
and  change.  The  Old  Testament  is  not  merely  bound
among  us  in  the  same  volume  with  the  New,  but  the
New  quotes  the  Old,  and  the  Old  is  said  to  prophesy
the  New.  In  asking  any  question  we  demand  a
relevant  answer:  the  missing  feature  must  not  only
come  into  a  given  field  but  must  somehow  fit  into  it
essentially.  A  satisfying  answer,  while  certainly  not
implied  in  the  question,  responds  to  the  essence  of  that
question  in  a  way  predetermined  within  logical  limits;
it  is  pertinent.  Pertinence  is  a  loose  or  partial  implica¬
tion,  as  inheritance  is  a  loose  and  partial  repetition;
when  these  are  added  to  continuity  we  have  perhaps  as


88


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


much  logical  coherence  before  us  as  can  be  demanded
of  phenomena.

I  have  said  that  logical  implication  is  explicit
inclusion  of  a  part  in  a  whole ;  but  what  is  inclusion  ?
The  When  one  essence  is  said  to  include  another,

essential  an  identification  has  taken  place  in  discourse
an  essence  between  an  element  in  the  inclusive  essence

aWe^ from  it  anc*  ^  wb°le  of  the  included  one;  but  no
a  e  rom  1 .  essence  can  jje  anotherj  so  that  in  this  identi¬
fication  (which  is  the  first  principle  and  condition  of
reasoning)  there  is  something  non-logical,  not  to  say
absurd.1  We  may  say,  and  must  say,  if  we  discourse  on
the  subject  at  all,  that  pure  Being  includes  unity  and
that  unity  includes  pure  Being;  yet  if  pure  Being  were  a
part  of  unity,  unity  would  not  be  one;  and  if  unity  were
a  part  of  pure  Being,  pure  Being  would  not  be  pure.
It  is  language  and  thought  that  create  this  confusion
by  giving  the  same  names,  “being”  or  “unity”,  to
essences  not  in  themselves  identical;  because  the
being  included  in  unity  is  not  the  individual  essence  of
pure  Being:  the  nature  of  essence  is  pluralistic  and
excludes  pantheism.  So  the  unity  included  in  pure
Being  is  not  the  individual  essence  of  unity,  but  an
inseparable  pervasive  and  unique  something  found  in
pure  Being  by  human  intuition  and  identified  abusively,
but  inevitably,  with  the  essence  of  unity  when  inspected
apart.  Identification  is  approximate  only,  and  there¬
fore  inclusion  is  fictitious.  Not  that  identification
need  be  erroneous,  as  if,  for  instance,  the  unity  in  pure
Being  were  not  truly  unity  but  plurality.  Unity  is  the
right  name  for  it;  the  essence  of  unity  as  contemplated
separately  is  the  right  one  to  assimilate  to  pure  Being,
since  in  discourse  assimilations  are  inevitable;  but  the
point  is  that  the  most  proper  identification  is  still  the
act  of  calling  one  essences  which  are  individually  two:
a  trick  of  discourse  and  language.

1  Compare  Scepticism  and  Animal  Faith,  pp.  m-115.


IMPLICATION


89

Thus  pure  Being  is  truly  included  in  light,  as  in  all
essences,  and  may  be  discerned  by  intense  attention
in  the  given  essence  of  light;  but  light  is  Abstraction,
nevertheless  not  compounded  of  pure  Being,  analysis,  and
present  also  to  mere  wakefulness  in  the  dark,  substitute11
and  a  second  factor,  light  without  being. fresh
The  second  factor,  whatever  else  it  was, essencesfor
would  include  pure  Being  as  much  as  the the  events
supposed  compound  includes  it.  Predication  ^essence
is  therefore  not  a  discovery  of  composition. considered-
As  a  thing  is  not  a  compound  of  its  appearances,  so  an
essence  is  not  a  compound  of  the  terms  into  which  it
may  be  analysed.  Analysis  yields  something  specific¬
ally  different  from  the  object  that  justifies  the  analysis:
an  essence  never  is  any  description  of  it.  Essences
have  no  origin,  and  in  that  sense  no  constituents;  their
elements  are  only  their  essential  features,  which  define
them  and  are  defined  by  them.  A  straight  line  may
be  intuited  alone,  say  by  an  organic  motor  impulse
felt  in  a  dream:  you  traverse  it,  you  have  an  im¬
mediate  acquaintance  with  its  absolute  nature.  You
may  think  that  you  find  it  again  by  inspecting  the
edges  of  a  triangle;  but  here  the  object,  “straight
line”,  has  become  the  object  of  a  different  sense,
sight,  and  appears  in  a  context,  the  visible  triangle,
absent  before,  and  strictly  excluded  by  the  original
intuition  expressing  only  a  motor  impulse  within
the  organism.  The  identification  of  the  straight  line
there  with  the  straight  lines  here  is  therefore  intentional
only,  not  actual.  It  expresses  an  affinity  between  the
two  intuitions,  their  partial  equivalence  in  discourse;
and  perhaps  the  separate  occurrence  of  the  first  may
have  contributed,  through  the  preparation  and  enrich¬
ment  of  the  psyche,  to  the  present  complexity  of  the
second.

Such  conventional  dialectic,  in  which  intuition  is
submerged  in  the  rush  of  animal  discourse,  is  facilitated


go  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

by  words  and  other  rude  symbols.  Human  intelligence
is  strangely  materialistic,  not  in  respect  of  matter,  where
materialism  would  be  in  place,  but  in  logic;
patfi 'traced  it  begs  of  signs,  which  it  assumes  to  remain
by  habitual  materially  identical,  to  assure  it  of  the  identity
a  field  of  m  of  the  essences  signified.  Whenever  we  use
relevant  the  same  word  we  suppose  ourselves  to
have  the  same  idea;  and  m  any  long  or
accurate  argument  direct  intuition  must  give  place  to
guidance  by  a  conventional  notation:  discourse  be¬
comes  a  sort  of  calculating  machine,  by  which  material
counters  are  shuffled  materially  and  intuition  is  only
required,  if  at  all,  to  read  off  the  result  attained  mecha¬
nically.  Demonstration  at  best  is  something  verbal
and  technical;  logic  is  a  kind  of  rhetoric.  It  marshals
intuitions  in  ways  which  are  irrelevant  to  them:  in
time,  in  the  order  of  complexity,  by  analysis,  or  by
synthesis;  so  it  considers  terms  only  from  the  outside,
as  if  in  the  end  everything  did  not  hang  on  what  they
are  intrinsically.  Colour,  for  instance,  being  revealed
by  the  same  sense  that  simultaneously  reveals  extension,
is  felt  to  be  inseparable  from  it,  or  even  from  the
material  object  believed  to  exist  in  three  dimensions.
Yet  colour  in  itself  is  a  most  pungent  and  positive
essence,  which  can  come  and  go  while  extension  re¬
mains  the  same;  and  it  is  only  an  accident  of  human
sensibility  that  no  organ  yields  something  which  might
be  called  colour  without  extension,  as  the  ear  yields
high  notes  comparable  to  violet  and  low  notes  com¬
parable  to  deep  red.  If  this  analogy  were  felt  a  little
more  strongly,  every  one  might  indulge  in  the  licence
of  symbolistic  poets  who  tell  us  that  treble  is  azure  and
bass  is  crimson :  they  are  only  letting  the  cat  out  of  the
bag  and  betraying  the  secret  that  all  identifications  are
matters  of  discursive  impulse,  intentional  and  poetical.
Nothing  is  anything  else;  all  essences,  however  com¬
plex,  are  individuals,  and  they  are  individuals,  however


IMPLICATION


9i

simple.  Their  parts  are  parts  only  of  that  whole,  as
the  right  half  of  a  picture  is  to  the  right  and  is  a  half
only  when  the  whole  is  given  with  it;  otherwise  it
makes  a  whole  picture  by  itself,  and  its  centre  is  in  the
middle  of  it,  not  at  the  left-hand  edge.  But  the  sim¬
plicity  of  intuition  makes  the  knowing  mind  impatient:
it  must  get  on,  even  if  it  gets  into  trouble.  It  loves
generalities;  but  generality  is  a  property  No  essence
only  of  animal  attitudes,  or  of  names  in  is  general:
respect  to  the  range  of  their  application.  faction18
Many  persons  may  be  called  John;  many  of  term? in
essences  may  be  called  triangles,  including  relations,
the  various  definitions  of  the  triangle  itself;  jyn^nmaic
for  this  is  not  a  generality  but  an  individual  physical
essence  which  is,  or  might  be,  discovered  context-
separately.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  same  essence
should  ever  appear  twice  in  human  experience:  of
course,  any  essence  may  reappear,  since  it  is  a  universal;
but  the  complexity  and  fluidity  of  life  make  exact
repetitions  unlikely  in  actual  intuition.  The  essences
about  which  discourse  hovers  and  to  which  it  repeatedly
refers  are  objects  of  intent,  just  as  things  are;  they  are
common  goals  for  miscellaneous  vital  approaches;  and
if  an  intuition  of  them  were  ever  attained,  intent  and
animal  faith  would  still  be  requisite  in  order  to  identify
the  object  present  at  the  end  with  the  object  intended
at  the  beginning.

The  realm  of  essence,  then,  while  it  is  infinite,
continuous,  and  compact,  nevertheless  leaves  The
each  of  its  elements  entirely  alone  and  self-  absence  of
centred;  it  is  the  home  01  indelible  multi-  implications
plicity  and  eternal  individuality.  No  essence,  ^’®sceevery
not  even  pure  Being,  has  any  moral  preroga-  equally
tive  or  any  cosmic  influence  by  virtue  of  its  £££*£•
essential  being :  those  functions  belong  to  and  pro-’
contingent  existences,  by  virtue  of  their  found-
dynamic  relations  with  one  another,  which  traverse  and


92  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

underlie  the  varying  forms  which  they  wear.  Poetry
and  music  lie  as  deep  in  the  realm  of  essence  as  any
logic;  the  thread  of  humour  runs  through  it  as  essen¬
tially  as  that  of  fate.  Pure  sense  has  no  object  but
essence ;  every  contravention  of  human  logic  or  natural
law,  as  by  chance  established,  is  as  firmly  rooted  in
that  laughing  firmament  as  are  Euclid  and  the  Ten
Commandments.  A  mock  solemnity  has  too  long
made  humanity  pose  as  absolute;  its  virtues  would
be  safer  and  more  amiable  if  they  recognised  their
relativity,  and  the  spirit  would  be  freer  to  recognise
its  superhuman  affinities — because  there  is  no  reason
why  spirit  should  be  merely  human  in  its  interests.
Even  nature  likes  to  slip  the  gossamer  bonds  of  human
propriety  and  expectation,  which  entangle  the  fancy
only  of  special  individuals  or  nations;  for  matter  re¬
sembles  a  lady  often  divorced,  though  never  without
a  husband.  The  realm  of  essence  is  the  playground  of
an  even  greater  freedom,  in  a  far  more  real  singleness
and  integrity  of  being:  because  it  justifies  and  exem¬
plifies  constancy  no  less  than  variety.  Variability  is
hardly  freedom,  since  it  undermines  the  soul  which
aspired  to  be  free.  The  desire  to  break  away  from  an
established  system  of  life  is  after  all  a  sign  of  weakness :
the  man  has  failed  to  become  willingly  and  perfectly
what  he  was  attempting  to  become  blindly.  The  truly
radical  liberty  which  the  realm  of  essence  opens  before
us  is  liberty  to  be  something  positive :  as  positive,
precise,  elaborate,  and  organic  as  it  is  in  us  to  make  it.
Essence  is  an  eternal  invitation  to  take  form.  And
the  virtue  of  this  invitation  is  not  exhausted  by  being
once  accepted.  All  the  possibilities  remain  always
open  ideally;  and  when  the  earth  of  a  particular  world
quakes  under  it,  and  it  fears  to  be  lost  for  ever,  its
own  essence,  among  the  essences  of  all  the  other
worlds,  stands  by  in  an  ironical  eternity,  waiting  for
it  to  dissolve,  and  perhaps  to  be  born  again.


IMPLICATION


93


NOTE

In  this  discussion  I  have  endeavoured  to  keep  my  eye  on  the
living  subject-matter,  and  to  make  my  language  as  plastic  as  possible
in  the  description  of  it.  But  there  are  learned  men  whose  notion  of
clearness  is  always  to  use  words  as  they  have  been  used  before;
they  may  find  my  view  confused,  and  may  ask  indignantly  whether
I  am  a  realist,  a  conceptualist,  or  a  nominalist.  Let  me  observe  in
the  first  place  that  even  among  the  Scholastics  these  positions  were
held  exclusively  only  by  partisans  and  heretics ;  the  orthodox
doctrine  included  and  required  the  three  views  in  their  respective
places.  Universals  lay  in  the  mind  of  God  before  the  creation,
and  guided  it.  They  therefore  were  ante  rem.  But  according  to
classical  natural  history  and  morals,  all  created  beings  were  inwardly
addressed  to  determinate  types,  so  that  perfection  and  depravity
were  possible,  and  souls  could  be  saved  or  lost.  Universals  lay
therefore  in  re,  and  were  the  souls  of  things.  Finally,  human
observation  might  gradually  discover  and  define  these  universals,
by  giving  a  common  name  to  their  various  instances  as  they  appeared,
for  example,  in  disease  or  in  beauty.  Universals,  for  human
experience,  were  therefore  post  rem.

Remove,  now,  the  Platonic  Ideas  in  their  moral  exclusiveness,
and  substitute  an  infinite  realm  of  essence.  All  universals  will  still
be  prior  to  existence;  all  possible  natural  types,  classes,  or  ideals
will  be  found  among  them,  as  well  as  repeated  in  the  pattern  of
nature;  and  every  concept  of  thought,  as  well  as  every  image  in
sense,  will  be  found  there  also,  and  will  be  a  universal.  Universals
are  individual,  not  general:  terms  can  be  general  only  in  use,  never
intrinsically;  but  the  individual  is  an  essence,  not  an  existing
particular.  The  latter  is  not  a  possible  object  of  intuition  and  has
no  place  in  logic:  it  is  some  fragment  of  the  flux  of  nature,  posited
in  action,  and  by  virtue  of  that  status  for  ever  external  to  thought.
My  position,  then,  is  simply  the  orthodox  Scholastic  one  in  respect
to  pure  logic,  but  freed  from  Platonic  cosmology  and  from  any
tendency  to  psychologism.


CHAPTER  VII


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC

If  essences  have  no  external  relations,  and  therefore
no  implications,  what  can  be  the  source  of  dialectic?

When  a  man  is  inconsistent,  we  seem  to  dis-
Sddfrec-  tinguish  that  which  should  follow  logically  in
tion  of  his  thought  or  action  from  that  which  ensues
cannot* be  actually.  Whence  this  distinction?  And
native  to  whence  that  systematic  extension  of  concepts,

essence.  .  J  y  i  •  i  ai

so  vast  in  scope  and  so  specific,  which  the
mathematician  pursues,  and  which  leads  him  sometimes
to  revolutionary  discoveries?  Whence  that  pregnancy
in  ideas,  political  or  theological,  which  often  renders
them  ominous,  secretly  absurd,  and  as  it  were  hypo¬
critical,  having  at  heart  implications  which  on  the
surface  they  disown?

The  very  notion  of  pregnancy  gives,  I  think,  a  hint
of  the  answer.  Pregnancy  belongs  to  matter,  not  to
essence.  The  difference  between  what  follows  logic¬
ally  and  what  follows  actually  cannot  be  due  to  the
conflict  of  two  different  orders  of  existence,  one  logical
and  the  other  natural.  An  existing  logical  order  would
be  something  metaphysical,  a  monster  half  essence  and
half  force.  The  difference  must  be  due  rather  to  two
levels  of  natural  organisation,  one  cosmic  and  inani¬
mate,  the  other  animate  and  proper  to  the  innate
involution  of  the  psyche  in  man,  which  opens  to  his
imagination  and  reason  paths  other  than  those  actually

94


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC


95

traced  by  outer  nature  even  in  his  own  action  or
explicit  discourse.

In  the  realm  of  essence,  if  ever  we  shake  ourselves
loose  from  our  animal  distractions  and  presumptions,
everything  that  appears  at  all,  appears  patently;  but  in
reasoning  there  is  initially  a  hidden  affinity  or  tendency
in  the  terms,  which  does  not  become  patent  until  the
conclusion  is  reached.  Then  indeed  the  implication
of  those  terms  in  this  conclusion  becomes  clear,  because
they  now  simply  define  a  new  essence  to  which  they  are
intrinsic.  This  new  essence  I  know  by  intuition:  no
dialectic  is  involved  in  seeing  or  defining  it  to  be  thus.
When  the  number  two  is  given  in  intuition,  the  number
one ,  repeated,  is  involved  in  it:  this  repetition  of  one
is  the  very  essence  in  view.  But  when  the  number  one
is  given  first,  it  is  an  accident  whether  I  begin  to  count,
and  whether  I  go  on  living  until  I  reach  the  notion  of
two.  Therefore  it  is  possible  for  me  to  define  or  deduce
the  number  one  by  analysis  when  I  have  the  number
two,  but  not  possible  to  define  two  when  I  have  only
one.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  possible,  by  living,
to  climb  to  the  notion  of  two  from  that  of  one,  but
impossible  to  climb  to  one  from  two,  because  one  is
then  already  in  my  possession  and  under  my  foot.

I  may  observe  in  passing  (confirming  what  I  have
said  above  about  pure  Being)  that  dialecticians  who  find
in  one  the  root  of  all  numbers,  or  in  the  One  The  pre-
the  fountain  of  the  universe,  seem  to  be  at  “‘““of
heart  less  lovers  of  essence  than  of  substance ;  one  no™  er
they  are  not  intent  on  form,  but  are  searching  essential,
for  ultimate  elements  in  the  depths  of  time  or  of
evolution,  for  something  materially  radical  and  inde¬
structible  in  this  existing  world.  High  numbers  do  not
satisfy  them,  and  seem  to  them  secondary,  as  they  seem
unreal  or  even  humorous  to  idle  human  fancy:  yet  in
the  realm  of  essence  all  numbers  are  equally  primitive
and  equally  in  the  foreground.  The  parity  and


96  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

eternity  of  all  essences  has  hardly  dawned  on  the  minds
of  philosophers — at  least  not  in  the  West.

Dialectic  evidently  involves  transition;  it  is  pro¬
gressive;  but  any  actual  transition  transcends  the
rp  . .  realm  of  essence  (where  every  term  traversed
repetition,  must  always  retain  its  intrinsic  character)  and
proves  that  an  existential  and  moving  factor
external  to  is  at  work,  namely,  attention  and  whatever
essences.  may  basis  or  organ  of  attention  and  of

its  movement.  In  a  word,  a  psyche  is  involved,  which
herself  involves  (as  we  shall  see)  an  existing  material
world.  But  dialectic  contains  more  than  transition,
since  this  transition  is  often  assumed  to  be  a  reversion;
in  reasoning,  intent  continually  harks  back  to  the
object  of  a  previous  intuition  and  compares  it  with  that
of  the  present  one.  This  feat  is  materially  impossible;
but  it  suffices  if  we  perform  it  presumptively,  by
assuming  that  our  successive  objects  are  identical  and
that  we  should  find  them  to  be  so  if  it  were  possible
for  us  to  observe  them  simultaneously.  To  transition,
then,  reasoning  professes  to  add  repetition  and  the
assurance  of  repetition;  so  that  besides  a  series  of
intuitions  we  must  admit  a  power  in  thought  which  is
not  intuition  but  intent,  since  its  object  is  something
not  given,  but  posited  at  a  distance  and  identified  in
character  only,  not  in  position,  with  the  given  term.
Intent  is  a  sort  of  projection  through  faith,  positing  a
relation  of  which  only  one  term  is  given,  the  terminus  or
point  of  origin  here,  together  with  a  gesture,  word,  or
sense  of  direction  indicating  what  and  where  the  other
term  ought  to  be.  This  assumption — logically  entirely
in  the  air — is  necessary  to  establish  any  instance  of
cogency,  contradiction,  or  fallacy  in  reasoning;  for  the
obvious  disparity  of  two  terms  given  simultaneously
(whence  comes  all  the  emotional  and  essential  assurance
that  the  square  is  not  round)  does  not  prove  any  contra¬
diction  in  discourse,  until  we  assume  that  these  very


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC


97

essences  were  present  to  some  mind  professing  to
identify  them;  and  this  assumption  is  very  likely  to  be
false,  and  is  always  hazardous.  It  is  the  great  source  of
futility  in  argument.  The  first  postulates  of  dialectic,
therefore,  the  constant  meaning  of  terms  and  the
principle  of  contradiction,  are  rooted  in  animal  faith.
The  light  of  intuition  cannot  avail  to  establish  that  use
of  them  which  alone  renders  them  potent  in  discourse,
or  applicable  to  any  subject  of  ulterior  interest.  The
obvious  is  obvious,  but  terminates  in  itself;  that  which
we  say  must  be  so,  need  not  be  so  unless  our  habits  of
inference  are  independently  justified  by  the  course  of
nature.

Now  that  part  of  nature  which  is  the  organ  of  mind,
the  psyche,  is  a  relatively  closed  system  of  movements,
and  hereditary;  the  living  seed,  as  it  matures,
puts  forth  predeterminate  organs  and  imposes  naturfof
specific  actions  and  feelings  on  the  young  the  generic

i  o  ^  j  o  qj1  Cfcncrsl

creature:  he  must  eat,  fall  in  love,  build  a
nest,  resent  interference  or  injury.  But  this  pre¬
determination  is  not  exact,  only  generic;  the  seed
develops  as  it  can,  under  fire  of  the  environment;  the
psyche  in  each  individual  grows  into  a  somewhat
different  system  of  organs  and  habits,  and  these  vary
with  time,  not  merely  according  to  the  predetermined
sequence  of  phases  in  the  race,  but  according  to  the
fortunes  of  the  individual.  This  partial  predetermina¬
tion  of  life — which  in  man  is  especially  imperfect,  and
dependent  on  the  chances  of  education  and  experience—
is  the  source  of  the  generic;  the  general,  absent  from
the  realm  of  essence,  is  omnipresent  in  impulse  and
action.  Every  living  creature  aims  at  and  needs  some¬
thing  generic,  not  anything  in  particular:  some  food,
some  shelter,  some  mate,  some  offspring,  some  country,
some  religion.  The  impetuous  soul,  half-baked  and
addressed  only  to  the  generic,  pounces  on  what  it
happens  to  find;  it  receives  it  into  the  stomach,  or

H


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


98

into  the  mind,  and  digests  it  if  it  can;  but  there  remains
almost  always  a  distinct  disparity  between  hereditary
capacities  and  demands,  in  their  potent  vagueness,  and
the  satisfaction  provided  for  them.  Not  this,  not  all
this,  not  merely  this,  says  the  psyche  at  every  turn;  and
her  sustenance  leaves  her  half-disgusted  and  half-
hungry.  Experience  at  the  same  time  clarifies  the
instincts  which  it  disappoints;  and  it  is  in  terms  of
actual  perceptions,  expurgated  or  transformed,  that
secret  ideals  can  first  come  to  expression.

Dialectic  is  fledged  in  this  nest,  and  obeys  the  same
conjoined  forces  of  innate  impulse  and  casual  experi-
The  ener  c  ence*  Each  thought,  in  its  existence,  is  due
prejudices  of  equally  to  the  predisposition  of  the  psyche
the  PsyShe  j  and  to  the  course  of  nature  outside ;  but
and  made  the  presumptions  inherent  in  the  thought,
habit6c  by  or  accompanying  and  flowing  out  of  it,  are
determined  by  the  psyche  alone,  by  the
momentum  and  direction  of  her  life  at  that  moment.
Hence  the  whole  moral  conflict  and  tragedy  between
reason  and  fact,  desire  and  event,  the  ideal  and  the
actual,  nature  according  to  philosophers  and  nature
according  to  nature.  In  pure  reasoning  this  conflict
takes  the  form  of  opposing  relevance,  consistency,  and
implication  to  wandering  thoughts  or  chance  percep¬
tions;  but  the  force  of  logic,  as  we  have  amply  seen,
does  not  reside  in  the  essences  actually  inspected,
which  have  no  transitive  relations,  but  expresses  the
habit  and  range  of  the  psyche  in  the  thinking  animal.
A  mind  not  buffeted  by  change,  in  a  world  in  which
rain  and  shine  were  not  alternate,  would  never  think
of  any  complements  to  a  present  object;  it  might  even
passionately  deny  their  essential  reality,  and  might  call
China  impossible,  life  in  the  water  unthinkable,  and
any  morality  but  the  familiar  one  self-destructive.  In
minds,  as  in  insects,  the  vehemence  of  littleness  is  re¬
markable,  Man  although  born  plastic  and  immature,


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC  99

soon  borrows  fixed  prejudices  from  casual  experience;
he  is  teachable,  and  achieves  littleness,  or  has  it  thrust
upon  him  by  custom  and  dogma.  Acquaintance  with
facts — and  with  how  many  facts  is  any  man  acquainted?
— narrows  his  generic  native  demands  into  specific
requirements;  he  must  now  have  only  this  food,  this
shelter,  this  mate,  these  children,  this  country,  this
religion.  In  the  same  way  the  mind,  when  indoc¬
trinated,  will  suffer  only  this  physics,  and  only  this  logic.
Nevertheless,  any  given  world  or  any  given  flow  of
imagination  is  an  accident;  its  very  character  would
be  inexpressible  were  it  not  surrounded  in  the  realm
of  essence  with  an  infinitude  of  variations  any  one  of
which,  had  it  been  realised  instead,  would  have  been
equally  accidental.  Even  the  true  sage,  who  passes
through  the  school  of  experience  and  learning  only  to
recover  his  spiritual  freedom,  cannot  range  impartially
over  the  realm  of  essence;  the  paths  he  traces  in  that
labyrinth  are  imposed  on  him  by  accident,  because  a
psyche  is  at  work  within  him  obeying  special  instincts
and  biassed  by  a  special  experience.  Even  in  him  the
transitions  of  dialectic  and  the  course  of  contemplation
are  not  determined  by  the  structure  of  the  realm  of
essence,  since  the  realm  of  essence,  by  definition,  is  the
home  of  all  possible  structures.

Dialectic,  then,  while  ostensibly  following  ideal
implications  absolved  from  any  allegiance  to  facts  or
to  actual  instances  of  reasoning,  secretly  expresses  a
material  life,  and  this  in  two  stages.  The  psyche  is
predetermined  at  birth  to  certain  generic  conceptions
and  transitions;  and  these  are  rendered  precise  and
irrevocable  by  habits  formed  under  the  pressure  of
circumstances.

Everything  in  dialectic  hangs  upon  strength  of  soul;
it  is  an  effort  to  carry  over  intuition  from  one  moment
to  another,  to  be  true  to  oneself,  and  to  wander
into  no  vision  not  congruous  with  one’s  first  insight,


100


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


and  complementary  to  it,  so  that  at  the  end  the  mind
may  believe  that  it  has  gathered  in  and  preserved  all
Moral  its  riches,  and  unearthed  the  secret  of  all  its
function  of  objects.  This  is  something  which  no  living
dialectic.  mind  does  or  can  do;  and  in  so  far  as  the
ambition  to  do  it  is  successful,  the  success  is  balanced
by  a  great  illusion,  almost  inevitable  to  the  complete
logician;  the  unity  which  his  discourse  has  achieved
he  imposes  on  the  realm  of  essence  and  on  the  existing
world  as  if  it  drew  their  circumference  and  repeated
their  intrinsic  order.  This  illusion  does  not  destroy
the  dialectical  coherence  of  the  system  which  occasions
it;  but  the  philosopher  probably  aspires  to  describe
the  truth;  and  in  that  he  fails,  in  proportion  to  the
vehemence  with  which  he  posits  his  system,  with  its
dialectical  structure,  in  lieu  of  essence  in  its  infinity
and  nature  in  her  unknown  depths.  Dialectic  is  the
conscience  of  discourse  and  has  the  same  function  as
morality  elsewhere,  namely,  to  endow  the  soul  with
integrity  and  to  perfect  it  into  a  monument  to  its  own
radical  impulse.  But  as  virtue  is  a  wider  thing  than
morality,  because  it  includes  natural  gifts  and  genial
sympathies,  or  even  heroic  sacrifices,  so  wisdom  is  a
wider  thing  than  logic.  To  coherence  in  thought  it
adds  docility  to  facts,  and  humility  even  of  intellect,
so  that  the  integrity  of  its  system  becomes  a  human
virtue,  like  the  perfect  use  of  a  single  language,  with¬
out  being  an  insult  to  the  nature  of  things  or  a  learned
madness.

Being  a  priori ,  that  is,  being  the  assertion  in  the
face  of  things  of  a  pre-formation  in  the  soul,  dialectic
is  fundamentally  romantic;  but  its  roman¬
ticism  may  become  austere  and  ascetic,  in
so  far  as  it  desists  from  professing  to  drag
the  world  with  it  in  its  speculative  flight.
How  far  the  a  priori  rules  in  a  mind  is  a  bio¬
logical  accident;  we  may  imagine  some  insect  or  some


A  priori
logic
expresses
physio¬
logical  pre¬
formations.


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC


IOI


angel,  created  full-fledged,  in  whom  it  should  rule
exclusively;  and  we  might  perhaps  find  fanatics  in
whom  it  rules  exclusively  in  speculative  matters,  once
they  have  been  thoroughly  indoctrinated.  For  we
must  not  suppose  that  anything  is  a  priori  in  origin;
every  instinct  and  organ  has  its  history,  just  as  every
custom  has;  but  once  the  organ  formed,  it  imposes
a  priori  certain  responses  on  the  body  and  certain  ideas
on  the  mind.  The  a  priori  is  such  only  in  function.
So  when  an  intuition  has  become  dominant,  and  has
established  its  settled  affinities  in  a  well-organised
mind,  the  further  march  of  mundane  experience  be¬
comes  useless  to  the  logician,  or  even  distracting.  As
young  poets  on  a  slender  experience  sometimes  reach
the  greatest  heights  and  the  greatest  depths,  finding
nothing  to  intercept  the  impetuous  flight  of  their
spirits,  so  the  dialectician  who  most  resolutely  hedges-
in  his  thought  in  one  lane  of  logic,  may  go  farthest  in
that  direction,  and  most  unerringly.  He  unveils  some
integral  pattern,  perhaps  never  copied  by  things,  in
the  realm  of  essence;  the  integrity  of  his  pure  intent
and  undivided  attention  have  enabled  him  to  unveil
it.  He  has  laid  on  himself  the  difficult  task  of  being
consistent,  of  being  loyal,  not  to  the  realm  of  essence,
which  cannot  be  betrayed,  but  to  his  own  commit¬
ments  ;  he  is  determined  to  find  and  clarify  the  meaning
of  his  spoken  thoughts.  Dangers  lie  to  right  and  left
of  his  path:  he  may  slip  into  a  change  in  his  premises
or  into  forgetfulness  of  his  goal.  Fulfilment  is  moral,
even  in  logic.  The  mind  bears  burdens  no  less  than
the  body,  from  which  indeed  the  mind  borrows  them;
and  the  pregnancy  and  implication  of  ideas  are  signs
of  that  vital  bias.

Intuitions  are  themselves  incidental  to  animal  life;
in  revealing  the  purest  essence,  like  a  colour  or  a
number,  they  remain  rooted  in  the  soil,  and  render
every  image  symbolic  of  the  conditions  under  which


102


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


it  arises,
position,

Intuitions
have  a
natural
context


Thus  colour  brings  with  it  extension,  form,
and  an  aerial  emotional  redolence  drawn
from  the  vital  influence  of  light  and  room
upon  the  psyche;  number  suggests  a  certain
particularity  in  its  units,  as  if  it  were  a  mere
with  which  aggregate,  yet  this  particularity  is  proper  only
revededare  to  the  moments  or  parts  of  existence  and  is
associated  in  absent  from  the  constituents  of  number  in
discourse.  purjty.  for  jn  a  number  the  logical  units

numbered  are  merely  fractions  of  that  number,  not
particulars  in  themselves.  Yet  these  physical  roots  of
intuition  are  far  from  jeopardising  the  essential  purity
of  the  flower  to  which  they  lend  these  human  affinities.
Horticulture  simply  becomes  more  varied  and  expres¬
sion  richer.  Intuition  lyrically  marks  the  chief  crises
in  material  life,  when  some  organ  composes  and
accelerates  its  movement,  turning  it  into  a  musical
note.  Dialectic  is  merely  a  change  of  scope  in  this
organic  synthesis  by  which  a  new  essence  is  substituted
for  the  one  first  given,  that  is,  for  the  theme  and  terms
of  the  analysis  or  deduction;  a  change  by  which  the
original  essence,  in  disappearing,  is  identified  with  a
part  of  the  new  one,  or  with  a  whole  of  which  the  new
one  is  a  part.  The  transitions  are  discursive,  their
necessity  is  merely  psychical;  but  they  lead  to  intui¬
tions  in  which  essences  appear  having  intrinsically  a
logical  complexity  corresponding  more  or  less  perfectly
to  the  stages  of  discourse  which  preceded;  this  corre¬
spondence,  so  far  as  it  goes,  makes  the  validity  of
dialectic,  a  validity  which  cannot  be  intrinsic  to  the
essence  reached  in  the  conclusion,  since  it  is  the
validity  of  a  process,  of  a  series  of  substitutions  and
identifications.

Essences  are  related  to  dialectic  somewhat  as  things
are  related  to  experience.  A  stock  or  stone,  dead  in
itself,  may  exercise  a  living  influence  on  the  imagina¬
tion.  If  I  strike  it,  or  if  it  falls  upon  me,  or  if  I  take


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC


103

shelter  beside  it,  I  encounter  a  reality  unfathomable  in
its  complexity  and  pre-established  in  its  station;  but
in  my  romantic  experience  it  has  become  an
enemy  or  a  friend.  So  the  terms  of  dis¬
course,  taken  in  themselves,  are  passive  and  discourse  is

flux,  con¬
trolled
physically.


The  pro¬
gression  of


complete,  implying  no  development;  but  I
have  arrived  at  them  by  the  quick  exercise  of
my  senses  or  by  a  concretion  of  elements  in
my  thought ;  there  is  a  history  and  a  momentum  in  my
apprehension  of  them,  and  it  is  by  no  means  indifferent
to  me,  as  it  is  to  them,  how  they  shall  be  superseded  or
transformed.  Most  sequels  open  in  the  realm  of
essence  (and  these  sequels  are  infinite),  or  even  most
sequels  likely  in  a  dream,  would  prove  irrelevant  to
the  interest  dominating  waking  discourse,  which  is  not
these  pure  appearances  but  some  problem  in  the
material  or  moral  world.

Discourse  is  not  contemplation;  dialectic  is  more
laboriously  intertwined  with  the  accidents  of  existence
than  is  intuition.  It  is  selective,  responsible,  perilous;
like  everything  in  flux  it  moves  forward  by  a  kind  of
treachery  to  its  parent  world,  and  subtly  pretends  to
fulfil  that  which  it  is  destroying.  The  continuity  is
physical,  not  logical.  The  navigators  who  in  the  age
of  discovery  followed  in  one  another’s  traces  or  sought
to  outdo  one  another’s  exploits,  had  a  common  back¬
ground  and  a  common  field;  otherwise  their  new
worlds,  however  marvellous,  would  have  added  nothing
to  the  old  world,  and  would  not  have  discovered  one
another ;  America,  China,  and  India  would  have
retained  their  ancient  self-sufficiency;  while  Castile  and
Aragon,  England  and  Holland,  would  have  grown  no
richer  and  no  wiser.  So  with  every  problem,  however
ethereal.  A  problem  is  a  natural  predicament,  a
living  perplexity,  limiting  the  relevance  of  the  solution
sought  and  creating  its  value.  Discourse  would  not
be  cumulative,  it  would  set  and  solve  no  problems,  if  it


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


104

did  not  share  and  express  the  adventures  of  a  psyche
in  a  material  world ;  for  the  controlling  force  in  reason¬
ing  is  not  reason,  but  instinct  and  circumstance,  open¬
ing  up  some  path  for  the  mind,  and  pledging  it  to  some
limited  issue.

Dialectic,  like  investigation,  is  a  path  to  an  end;  it  is
instrumental.  When  successful  and  finished,  it  yields
The  end  of  to  intuition,  for  which  the  facts  and  rela-
discourse,  tions  discovered  become  an  ordered  system,  a
h  itself”’  single  complex  essence.  Then  the  p-edica-
function  of  ment  and  the  problem  lose  their  malignitv;

they  survive  only  in  the  interest  or  beauty
which,  in  dying,  they  bequeath  to  the  new  object
spread  before  the  mind.  Contemplation  becomes
disinterested,  but  remains  pleasant;  for  it  is  not  the
contemplation  of  any  essences  at  random,  but  of  those
precisely  to  which  a  vital  affinity  drew  the  current  of
my  blood,  the  hidden  essences  to  which  my  nature  was
directed,  partly  from  birth,  partly  by  ingrained  habit
and  arts  learned  by  experience.  It  is  the  consecutive
sanity  and  moral  integrity  of  a  mind  that  hold  it  down
to  dialectical  consistency.  There  are  goals  in  animal
thought,  as  in  animal  action  and  passion,  of  which
thought,  in  its  material  basis,  is  indeed  an  integral  part.
These  goals  are  set  by  the  nature  of  the  organs  at
work,  a  nature  in  its  turn  more  or  less  adapted  to  its
external  opportunities;  so  that  the  goals  of  a  healthy
intellect — for  instance,  geographical  knowledge — like
those  of  hunger  or  love,  are  not  unattainable,  except  by
misadventure.  When  a  geometer  analyses  the  triangle
or  a  lawyer  points  out  the  implications  of  an  alleged  fact,
he  is  appealing  to  a  fund  of  principles  domesticated  in
the  minds  of  his  hearers,  principles  which  he  may  call
axioms  or  simply  common  sense.  His  dialectic  will  be
cogent  if  it  leads  in  the  end  to  an  intuition  in  which  all
the  details  gathered  during  the  argument  may  find
their  places:  that  is,  although  the  successive  intuitions


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC


105

and  the  essences  they  revealed  will  have  disappeared,
the  stimulus  and  momentum  which  created  them  will
proceed  synthetically  to  a  fresh  intuition,  as  it  were
their  joint  heir,  combining  them  without  loss  or
friction.  This  total  intuition  will  perfect  the  operation
of  its  organ,  raising  rational  life  at  that  point  to  its
natural  entelechy.  The  many  by-paths  of  fancy  or
logic  either  not  traced  or  explicitly  excluded  will  be
called  false  or  irrelevant;  and  so  they  will  be  in  this
final  system  to  which  they  are  logically  repugnant;  but
they  cannot  be  false  or  irrelevant  in  themselves,  nor
in  such  other  systems  as  they  might  help  to  build  up.
These  other  systems  are  rejected,  not  by  logic  but  by
the  structure  of  the  psyche  and  of  her  environment.
Thus  Euclid  clarifies  the  intuition  of  space  which  the
Egyptian  builders,  and  earlier  perhaps  their  arboreal
ancestors,  had  gathered  in  the  prosperous  course  of
their  sports;  Euclid  brings  to  light  the  real  implica¬
tions  of  such  building  and  such  swinging.  His  science
guides  those  early  arts  to  their  ultimate  self-knowledge.
That  those  first  terms  of  animal  observation  and  this
ultimate  geometry  are  alike  well  chosen  is  a  truth  of
physics  and  morals;  their  application  is  perfect  in  the
fields  from  which  they  were  drawn;  they  give  the  true
rationale  of  human  building  and  swinging.  But  the
realm  of  essence  cannot  suffer  violence,  and  the  con¬
structions  favoured  by  man  or  by  nature  do  not  prevent
the  same  elements  from  entering,  if  occasion  arises,
into  other  designs.

The  purely  logical  cogency  of  a  system  lies  accord¬
ingly  in  the  internal  relations  of  that  system  when
completed.  The  included  elements  have  no  Absolute
intrinsic  obligation  to  belong  to  such  a  evidence

o  #  t  o  ^  ^  t  jg  intuitive

system;  but  if  they  fall  within  the  intuition  and  internal
of  a  living  mind,  which  if  well  knit  can  have  to  essence.
only  one  such  ulterior  system  for  its  natural  goal,  they
should  be,  and  probably  will  be,  addressed  by  that


106  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

mind  to  that  system.  Were  the  elements  left  detached,
or  combined  into  other  wholes,  the  dialectic  proper  to
that  mind  would  be  lost  in  the  sands  of  a  vain  experi¬
ence,  and  its  congenial  system  would  never  take  shape.
If,  for  instance,  any  other  man  had  undertaken  to
compose  this  book,  it  is  certain  that  at  every  cross-road
in  the  argument  he  would  have  taken  a  turn  somewhat
different  from  mine,  without  necessarily  doing  more
violence  to  the  elements  combined.  Our  systems
might  have  been  equally  coherent,  if  in  each  case  the
elements  became  parts  of  a  single  essence,  clearly
intuited;  but  each  system  would  have  been  a  monu¬
ment  to  a  different  spirit  and  a  different  life.

The  value  of  two  such  logical  systems  for  the
description  of  nature  would  be  a  second  and  distinct
Validity  in  question.  The  more  cogent  system  might
can'b^ni  eas*ty  t>e  the  more  extravagant  or  childish
symbolic1  ^  one,  if  the  elements  combined  were  few  or
and  moral,  fantastic,  or  the  harmony  sought  merely
poetical.  On  each  animal  species,  on  each  man  and
nation,  nature  imposes  a  special  way  of  thinking,  and
they  would  be  foolish  to  quarrel  with  their  endowment ;
they  will  not  attain  truth,  or  anything  else,  by  eluding  it.
Their  thought  will  issue  in  a  coherent  system  if  their
original  intuitions  were  sharp,  the  synthesis  of  them
broad,  and  the  interpretation  honest.  Then  all  random
trains  of  thought  inconsistent  with  that  system  will  be
instinctively  discarded;  and  through  many  a  council
and  controversy,  as  in  the  formation  of  Christian
dogma,  heresies  will  be  excluded  as  they  suggest  them¬
selves,  and  the  scattered  original  revelations  will  be
interpreted  in  such  a  sense  that  the  spirit  which  origin¬
ally  received  them  may  honour  them  together.  Every
science  and  language  and  religion  is  big  with  unsus¬
pected  harmonies;  it  is  for  the  genuine  poet  or  philo¬
sopher  to  feel  and  to  express  them.  Only  an  orthodoxy
can  possibly  be  right,  as  against  the  bevy  of  its  heresies,


THE  BASIS  OF  DIALECTIC  107

which  represent  wayward  exclusions,  or  a  fundamental
disloyalty.  But  no  orthodoxy  is  right  as  against
another  orthodoxy,  if  this  expresses  an  equal  sensitive¬
ness  to  the  facts  within  its  purview  and  an  equal
intellectual  power.  All  values  are  moral,  and  con¬
sistency  is  but  a  form  of  honour  and  courage.  It  marks
singleness  of  purpose,  and  the  pressure  of  the  tptal
reality  upon  an  earnest  mind,  capable  of  recollection.
The  spirit  of  system,  though  it  so  often  renders  the
mind  fanatical  and  obdurately  blind  to  some  facts,  is
essentially  an  effort  to  give  all  facts  their  due,  not  to
forget  things  once  discovered  and  understood,  and  not
to  leave  illusions  and  vices  comfortably  unchallenged.
Certainly  the  total  reality  will  elude  any  human
system;  but  that  is  no  reason  why  human  nature,
which  is  itself  a  system,  should  not  exist  and  assert
itself;  and  it  cannot  exist  congenially  without  intel¬
lectual  clearness  or  without  translating  its  natural
economy  into  a  system  of  ideas.  In  the  realm  of
essence  no  such  system  can  have  any  pre-eminence  over
any  other;  each  is  the  pattern  of  only  one  possible
world;  but  it  may  be  the  full  revelation  which  the
existing  world  brings  to  one  particular  creature,  and  it
may  render  valid,  for  his  description  of  things,  those
dialectic  bonds  which  are  internal  to  it.


CHAPTER  VIII


ESSENCES  AS  TERMS

Names  are  normally  given  to  things  rather  than  to
essences,  and  are  then  proper  names;  that  is,  they  are
Words  ma  indications  like  a  gesture,  designating  a
be  signs  for  natural  object  without  describing  it.  Although

Sencesr  for  words  like  “  table  ”  and  “John”  may  be
names  common  to  many  natural  objects,  each
of  these  objects  is  an  existence  containing  much  more
than  the  fact  that  it  is  a  table  or  is  called  John;  there¬
fore  in  giving  the  name  “  table  ”  or  “  John  ”  to  that
object  when  encountered,  I  do  not  mean  to  distinguish
an  essence,  either  intuited  or  intended,  but  to  indicate
a  thing  distinguished  by  its  position  relatively  to  me
in  the  natural  world,  and  by  its  general  potentialities
and  connections  there.  I  do  not  profess,  in  so  naming
this  object,  to  exhaust  its  nature,  but  merely  to  point
to  an  existence  in  a  certain  quarter,  with  a  casual,
relative,  and  summary  characterisation  of  it.  I  should
indeed  not  call  this  object  “  table  ”,  unless  it  were  a
piece  of  furniture  of  a  certain  height  with  a  flat  top;  and
I  should  not  call  the  other  object  “  John  ”  unless  it
were  a  male  inhabiting  an  English-speaking  country;
but  these  conditions  for  applying  those  names  are  far
from  being  the  objects;  the  objects  named  are  par¬
ticular,  natural,  fluid,  and  indefinable.

It  is  possible,  however,  to  apply  names  to  essences
also,  as,  for  instance,  to  the  triangle  or  to  beauty;  and

108


ESSENCES  AS  TERMS


109

then  these  names  are  inaptly  called  general.  I  say
inaptly,  because  they  do  not  designate  classes  of  things,
but  in  designating  an  essence  they  leave  open  the
question  whether  any  or  many  things  exist  describable
by  that  term.  Names  then  designate  not  particulars
but  universals.

The  application  of  names  (or  other  signs)  to  essences
has  an  important  consequence:  it  permits  reasoning.
Things  have  no  dialectical  relations,  their
very  existence  and  fluidity  being  a  defiance  biing8in
to  dialectic.  The  unity  of  a  thing  is  not  elude
perfect  and  definable,  as  if  a  thing  were  an  iaecic-
essence  hypostatised.  It  is  a  partial,  dynamic,  historical
unity,  in  that  a  thing  remains  traceable  for  a  time  in  the
flux  of  the  world;  until  according  to  the  conventional
use  of  language  that  particular  thing  is  said  to  perish.
Everything  would  be  continually  perishing,  and  nothing
would  endure  for  two  moments,  if  a  thing  were  the
essence  which  for  one  moment  it  exemplifies;  and
everything  might  be  everlasting  were  a  thing  the  sub¬
stance  which  is  transmitted,  within  the  conventional
boundaries  of  that  thing,  from  each  of  its  moments  to
the  next.  A  thing  is  a  part  of  nature,  a  mode  of
substance,  a  parcel  of  matter  that  plays  a  certain  part
and  wears  a  certain  mask  in  the  comedy  of  change,  and
only  so  long  as  it  does  so;  when  the  same  matter  puts
on  a  new  mask  and  begins  to  speak  in  another  voice,  it
has  become  another  thing.  Socrates  is  a  part  of  the
flux  of  nature,  between  limits  fixed  by  the  birth  and
death  of  one  animal.  Neither  his  aspect  nor  his
thoughts  at  any  one  moment  are  Socrates;  and  the
essence  which  his  life  embodies  when  taken  as  a  whole
is  also  not  Socrates,  but  is  only  the  truth  of  his  life,
seen  under  the  form  of  eternity.  His  opinions  may
have  dialectical  relations,  but  he  and  his  actual  faith  in
them  cannot  have  them.  Existence  itself  is  a  surd,
external  to  the  essence  which  it  may  illustrate  and


no


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


irrelevant  to  it ;  for  it  drags  that  essence  into  some  here
and  now,  or  some  then  and  there;  and  the  things  so
created,  far  from  being  identical  with  their  essence
at  any  moment,  exist  by  eluding  it,  encrusting  it  in
changing  relations,  and  continually  adopting  a  different
essence;  so  that  nothing  accurate  can  be  said  of  a
thing  supposed  to  bridge  two  moments  of  time.  Yet  to
bridge  two  moments,  in  some  sense,  is  indispensable  to
existence.

The  essence  of  a  process,  if  we  turn  to  that,  is  also
not  that  process  in  act.  The  actual  process  is  an
existence  inwardly  unstable,  and  all  I  have  just  said
of  momentary  being  applies  to  any  stretch  of  existence ;
the  span  of  any  event  is  just  as  truly  a  moment  as  the
minimum  duration  which  human  wit  can  conceive.
Sense,  history,  science,  and  poetry  are  all  in  the  same
case:  they  arrest  essences,  exclamatory  visions,  and
apply  them  as  names  to  the  flux  of  nature,  which  they
can  neither  fathom  nor  arrest.

Dialectic,  then,  though  itself  a  movement  in  thought,
can  weave  together  only  eternal  essences;  and  the
Fancy,  in  pattern  it  thus  designs  is  an  eternal  essence
flowers  wfn  *n  *ts  turn-  reasoning,  attention  passes
never  breed  and  re-passes  between  these  fixed  terms,  and
the  same  jp  by  chance  any  of  the  terms  were  exchanged
for  another,  the  reasoning  would  be  fallacious,  be¬
coming  to  that  extent  an  irresponsible  dream.  Now
there  is  a  psychological  difficulty  in  reverting  in  in¬
tuition  to  exactly  the  same  essence.  In  a  mind  so
volatile  as  the  human,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the
entire  complex  essence  present  at  one  moment  should
ever  be  present  again.  The  organ  of  thought  being
in  flux,  the  terms  of  thought  can  hardly  be  repeated.
The  purposes  of  communication  and  reasoning  would
therefore  not  have  been  served  by  attempting  to  name
and  recall  the  entire  actual  burden  of  any  moment.
Only  in  dramatic  and  lyric  poetry  do  we  approach  any


ESSENCES  AS  TERMS


hi


such  effort  at  complete  personal  expression.  Even
here,  of  course,  success  in  reviving  or  communicating
a  moment  of  actual  life  is  never  more  than  approximate.
Readers  of  poetry  feel  that  the  poet  has  been  well  in¬
spired,  and  that  they  have  rekindled  his  very  soul,  if
any  full,  new,  and  vivid  moment  of  intuition  is  begotten
by  his  words  in  their  own  bosoms;  and  the  more  the
inspiration  is  the  reader’s,  and  not  the  poet’s,  the  greater
the  poet  is  thought  to  be.  The  irony  of  fate  in  this
may  wound  a  man’s  vanity,  who  hopes  to  be  immortal
in  his  own  person,  and  to  impose  his  opinions  or  his
loves  on  mankind  for  ever;  but  humility  and  elevation
of  mind  (which  go  together)  will  not  take  offence.  The
poets  have  had  their  own  visions,  the  truth  and  beauty
of  which  are  hidden  in  God;  and  their  works  have  been
so  closely  knit  into  the  instruments  and  traditions  of
human  expression  as  to  be  fertile  there  in  many  a  new
pleasure  and  fresh  thought.  Reasonable  minds  will
not  ask  for  more.  Whether  the  exact  intuitions  which
they  have  reached  can  ever  come  to  any  other  mortal,
is  a  question  not  even  to  be  broached ;  for  the  function
of  poetry  is  not  to  convey  information,  not  even  to
transmit  the  attitude  of  one  mind  to  another,  but  rather
to  arouse  in  each  a  clearer  and  more  poignant  view
of  its  own  experience,  longings,  and  destiny.  To  this
end  the  elastic  connotation  of  words,  with  the  intrinsic
dignity  of  phrases  (as  in  the  English  Bible),  is  a  positive
advantage  in  poetry.  It  enables  the  same  symbol  to
quicken  images  in  various  minds,  according  to  their
several  capacities,  stirring  them  to  a  true  sincerity.
Hence  the  musical,  inspired,  and  untranslatable  nature
of  poetry,  which  lies  more  in  the  assault,  relief,  and
cadence  of  the  utterance,  carrying  with  it  a  certain
sensuous  thrill  and  moral  perspective,  than  in  the
definable  meaning  of  the  poet’s  words.

In  prose,  on  the  contrary,  words  are  primarily  signs
for  some  fact  which  they  serve  to  record  or  announce.


1 12


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


The  sounds  themselves,  and  the  other  essences,
emotional  or  pictorial,  which  in  intuition  convey  such

in  s  ecif  in  inf°rmati°n>  are  Passed  over.  They  are  mere
facts^lnJm8  instruments  —  the  claw  with  which  intent
is  controlled  dutches  the  potent  fact.  Nor  is  the  intrinsic
y  action.  essence  0f  this  fact  that  which,  in  prose,  words
profess  to  describe.  It  would  be  a  vain  speculation,
akin  to  poetry,  to  consider  what  a  stone,  or  a  sheep,  or
an  enemy  may  be  in  themselves:  such  a  question
would  invite  not  to  action  but  to  self-forgetfulness  and
sympathy  —  a  dissolving  sympathy  with  dramatised
things  which  is  idle  or  even  dangerous.  I  might  soon
find  myself  refusing  to  eat  mutton,  or  going  over  to  the
enemy,  or  disproving  the  existence  of  stones.  The
tight  mainspring  of  action  and  thought  keeps  me
ticking  without  such  scruples,  or  if  they  intervene,
condemns  them  to  futility.  Prose,  like  perception,
designates  things  only  externally,  things  which,  since
they  act  and  are  acted  upon,  are  substances.  I  have
found  that  substances  posited  by  animal  faith  are
identified,  not  by  specifying  their  essence,  but  by  in¬
dicating  their  place  and  function  in  that  field  of  receding
events  called  nature,  of  which  any  act  is  the  centre.
The  existence  of  nature  is  involved  in  the  execution
of  any  act,  since  this  act  is  a  link  in  a  flux  of  events
extending  beyond  it.  At  the  same  time  belief  in
nature  is  involved  in  the  intent  and  eagerness  which  in
consciousness  express  action,  or  readiness  for  action.

Thus  the  profit  of  bestowing  names  on  things  and
of  speaking  in  prose,  like  the  profit  of  being  sensible
at  all  to  external  objects,  does  not  lie  in  revealing
the  essence  of  these  objects,  but  in  expediting  action
amongst  them.  The  whole  network  of  appearance  and
language  may  accordingly  remain  a  miracle  of  aesthetic
and  grammatical  design  spun  in  its  own  colours  and
suspended  in  the  air  without  inconvenience  or  anomaly,
if  the  connections  meantime  established  between  action.


ESSENCES  AS  TERMS  113

and  action  are  still  quick  and  nicely  adjusted.  The
whole  rumble  of  the  discoursing  mind  is  music  on
the  march,  and  no  sane  man  expects  it  to  join  in  battle
or  to  describe  the  enemy  fairly.

As  music,  however,  may  occasionally  become  an
object  of  thought  in  itself,  and  may  be  elaborately
described  by  the  musician,  so  many  anInspecify_
essence  which  in  the  apprehension  of  things  ing  essences,
was  only  a  symbol  or  an  emotion  may  be  controlled
arrested  in  reflection,  and  receive  a  name.  by  language.
The  name,  with  its  valence,  so  to  speak,  or  its  atmo¬
sphere  of  suggestion,  now  becomes  the  datum  in  actual
intuition;  and  the  essence  which  formerly  occupied
that  place  and  was  a  symbol  for  some  material  fact,
now  recedes  into  an  object  of  intent  and  a  theme  for
consecutive  description.

Speech  and  writing  are  a  complication  in  nature;
as  they  exist  substantially  they  are  subtle  secondary
figures  and  rhythms  impressed  on  matter,  which  serve
mankind  to  record  or  forecast  those  larger  rhythms  and
figures,  called  real  things  and  true  events,  in  which
human  existence  is  itself  implicated.  Thus  language,
like  sensation,  becomes  significant  by  virtue  of  the
animal  faith  which  vivifies  it;  and  this  significance  is
its  moral  being.  The  same  framework  of  spontaneous
belief,  readiness,  memory,  and  expectation  on  which
understanding  of  nature  is  stretched,  stretches  and
projects  also  the  force  of  words,  making  them  indicative
of  absent  and  eventual  objects.  If  the  object  is  an
essence,  it  nevertheless  is  identified  only  by  being
placed  in  some  natural  perspective,  borrowed  by
language  from  the  material  world.  An  absent  essence
can  be  indicated  only  as  the  essence  meant  by  a
sign,  which  is  commonly  a  word,  and  the  sense  of
this  word  can  be  revived  and  realised  only  by  reverting
in  fancy  to  the  natural  environment  in  which  it  was
first  uttered.


1


H4


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


Symbols
have  their
own  essences


Thus  description  in  words  or  other  signs  is  indis¬
pensable  for  making  an  essence  an  object  of  intent  when
it  is  no  longer,  or  not  yet,  an  object  of  intui¬
tion.  The  torments  suffered  by  the  souls
in  Dante’s  Inferno,  for  instance,  are  not
which  done  intuited  by  the  poet  or  the  reader  in  their

mediate  in  intended  essence,  for  then  he  would  be
discourse.  enduring  those  torments  actually:  yet  he

knows  what  he  means  by  them;  the  words  or  images
that  suggest  them  are  significant,  and  in  proportion
as  they  are  well  chosen,  they  converge  upon  the  object,
the  unrealised  essence  of  those  torments,  as  they  would
be  if  actually  felt.  Such  convergence,  while  it  might
render  the  description  perfect  in  the  language  used,
would  not  at  all  tend  to  reproduce  the  pains,  by
bringing  their  essences  into  living  intuition.  On  the
contrary,  it  would  be  the  essence  of  poetry  that
would  actually  fill  the  mind  with  verbal  harmonies  and
sensuous  vistas  continually  opening  and  closing;  if
there  was  any  touch  of  repulsion  or  actual  distress,  it
would  be  by  a  lapse  from  pure  discourse,  as  when
Dante  becomes  political,  or  a  childish  reader  takes  alarm,
fearing  that  the  material  world  may  contain  the  bodies
and  places  where  such  torments  occur,  and  that  there  is
danger  of  deserving  them.  In  meaning  an  essence  we
accordingly  by  no  means  tend  or  wish  to  intuit  it;  but
just  as  in  the  case  of  material  objects  of  intent,  we  indi¬
cate  its  locus  in  the  realm  to  which  it  intrinsically
belongs,  here  the  realm  of  essence  as  there  the  realm  of
matter,  without  at  all  requiring  to  create,  in  the  realm
of  spirit,  an  intuition  of  that  object  as  it  is  in  itself.

It  appears,  then,  that  just  as  the  whole  world
ces  of  common  sense,  history,  and  physics  is
signified  posited,  not  experienced,  so  the  whole  world
need  not  0f  dialectic — the  labyrinth  of  essences  studied

be  intuited.  .  ,  •  ,  . J  i  i

in  mathematics,  logic,  grammar,  and  morals —
is  meant  and  not  intuited.  Of  course  to  posit  any-


ESSENCES  AS  TERMS


ii5

thing  is  itself  an  experience,  and  in  meaning  something
I  must  have  some  intuition  of  my  terms  and  some  feel¬
ing  of  intent;  but  the  actual  experience  of  knowing  is
not  the  object  known,  and  the  essence  intuited  in
reasoning  about  essences  is  not  those  essences;  for
either  the  essence  meant  is  a  part  only  of  the  given
field  of  intuition,  or  it  is  not  given  at  all,  but  indicated
by  converging  symbols  as  the  object  of  an  eventual,
perhaps  unattainable,  intuition.  Thus  7 r  is  an  essence
meant,  which  can  enter  unequivocally  into  an  equation;
but  it  is  not  expressible  in  arithmetical  figures,  nor
in  any  sensuous  experience;  its  nature  is  known  by
circumstantial  definition;  it  is  a  goal  of  thought,  the
exact  proportion  between  the  circumference  of  a  circle
and  its  diameter.  When  I  think  of  ?r  this  exact  pro¬
portion  is  signified  but  not  intuited:  what  is  actually
before  my  mind  is  the  Greek  letter,  its  sound,  and  a
shooting  vista  into  a  world  of  words,  human  mathe¬
matics,  breaking  here  and  there  into  images  of  specious
circles,  visual  or  given  by  gesture;  a  psychic  sea
through  which  intent  can  nevertheless  easily  steer
towards  the  fixed  but  unattainable  object  defined  as  7 r.

Even  when  an  essence  is  present,  like  the  colour  of
the  sky,  I  must  retreat  a  little  and  revert  to  it  from  a
different  intuition  in  order  to  identify  or  to  mean  it;  and
this  different  intuition  is  commonly  that  of  the  word
“  blue  ”,  the  name  of  that  colour.  It  need  not  be  this
particular  word :  the  Spanish  word  azul  in  my  case
would  do  just  as  well;  a  fact  which  shows  how  separate
the  intuition  is  in  intending  from  the  intuition  in  seeing,
and  how  disparate.  Or  possibly,  in  taking  in  or  apper-
ceiving  the  evident  blue  and  describing  it,  I  may  use  as
a  point  of  vantage  the  visual  memory  of  some  material
object,  say  the  background  of  Titian’s  “  Bacchus  and
Ariadne”,  thinking  to  myself,  This  blue  is  that  blue!
A  wafted  image,  referred  to  some  natural  object,  and
to  the  occasion  and  place  where  I  encountered  it  (for


n6  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

London  and  youth  hang  for  me  about  that  picture),
may  thus  take  the  place  of  verbal  predicates  to  define  an
intended  essence  and  keep  it  as  an  object  of  perpetual
reference.  Merely  to  prolong  a  present  intuition  will
never  turn  the  essence  presented  into  a  goal  of  intent
or  a  term  useful  in  discourse ;  such  a  term  must  be  kept
constant  in  its  absence,  and  must  be  often  absent  if  it
is  to  be  always  the  same.

Intended  essences  thus  acquire,  through  the
machinery  of  identification,  projection,  and  intent,  a
certain  remoteness  and  mystery;  they  become
nothIngSe  concepts  or  ideals.  Not  that  when  they
thereby  in  swim  into  intuition,  if  they  ever  do  so,  they
reahty.  are  nQt  perfectiy  individual  and  concrete;

this  blue  which  now  floods  the  sky  and  my  own  being
is  the  most  obvious  of  realities,  and  the  nearest  at  hand.
So,  in  its  essence,  is  that  blue  which  is  now  not  here,
but  which  I  evoke  sentimentally  out  of  a  remote  con¬
text  in  the  world  of  hearsay  and  of  memory,  and  which
I  identify  with  this  blue,  because  this  blue  has  awakened
in  me  a  state  of  feeling  and  a  train  of  associations,  end¬
ing  in  a  revival  of  the  circumstances  of  that  lost  intuition
and  (as  I  fondly  assume)  in  a  recovery  of  that  lost
essence.  This  blue  is  still  the  only  essence  before  me:
that  this  blue  was  also  there  is  an  assertion  not  founded
on  a  simultaneous  inspection  of  the  two  objects,  which
is  impossible,  but  on  enveloping  the  given  essence  in  the
old  atmosphere  and  calling  it  by  an  old  name.  This
identification  is  hazarded:  thought  and  belief  (even  if
to  be  verified)  are  shots  in  the  air  when  they  are  actual;
but  the  irresponsible  movement  by  which  intent  posits
its  object  takes  nothing  away  from  the  intrinsic  reality
of  this  object,  be  it  a  thing  or  an  essence.  I  may,  if
I  have  the  necessary  indications,  intend  and  refer  to
things  in  their  absence,  without  compromising  them
or  reducing  them  to  abstractions  from  my  present
beggarly  self.


«


ESSENCES  AS  TERMS


117

Homer  was  better  inspired  in  speaking  of  winged

words  than  those  philosophers  who  call  words  sounds

or  movements  of  the  larynx.  Material  organs  The

and  material  occasions  are  no  doubt  indis-  intrinsic

tO  itS  fljght of
discourse.

arrow

requires  a  bow  and  a  target,  and  the  material  reed  and
feathers  that  are  its  substance.  But  discourse  is  flight,
it  is  signification;  and  the  more  we  scrutinise  its  actual
being,  the  more  unsubstantial,  fugitive,  and  transitive  its
essence  appears .  N ot  only  can  it  never  alight  or  become
anything  but  a  flying  intent,  but  even  the  hits  it  makes
(not  to  count  the  misses)  are  achievements  only  con¬
ventionally;  it  dies  on  arrival,  and  can  never  know
whether  it  has  killed  its  bird.  It  is  for  the  gamekeepers
that  follow  in  its  wake  to  collect  the  bag;  and  how
different  is  this  dead  booty  of  mundane  routine  and
prosperity  and  plodding  art  from  the  gleaming  flight,
the  intent  aim,  the  miraculous  shot  of  actual  thinking!

If  any  one  in  his  speculative  ambition  is  bent  on
seizing  the  veritable  essence  of  substance,  I  hardly
know  what  comfort  can  await  him;  but  if  his  satis¬
faction  was  rather  in  the  patterns  and  harmonies  of
essence,  which  he  hoped  to  disentangle  dialectically,
he  need  not  be  disappointed ;  because  even  if  the  terms
of  his  demonstrative  science  are  remote  terms,  always
objects  of  intent  and  never  of  intuition,  yet  at  this
remove  and  in  that  shadowy  precision  they  form  an
actual  perspective,  a  present  theme  for  the  mind.
Essences  are  omnipresent;  and  while  attention  remains
awake,  you  cannot  shut  off  one  without  presenting
another.  If  the  objects  of  intent  remain  remote,
as  the  persons  of  a  novel  and  their  career  remain
imaginary,  the  discourse  which  is  the  seat  of  those  in¬
tentions  must  always  be  actual,  like  the  crowding  words,
images,  and  excitements  loved  by  the  authors  and
readers  of  novels.  The  medium  is  always  immediate.


pensable  to  the  birth  of  language,
evolution,  and  to  its  utility.  So  a  flying


n8


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


The  life  of  language,  of  poetry,  of  dialectic,  is  a  keen
and  an  innocent  life.  It  has,  by  virtue  of  its  roots  in
It  circles  the  body  and  the  control  of  its  development
with  enough  foy  circumstances,  a  quite  sufficient  relevance
?heefl?xaofOUt  to  material  facts,  a  quite  respectable  value
nature.  ^s  a  record  and  forecast  of  human  destiny.
Intrinsically  it  has  its  own  vital,  expressive,  aesthetic
intensities.  It  is  not  an  illusion,  unless  it  is  turned
into  illusion  by  inexperience  or  equivocation.  Love,
for  instance,  arising  irrepressibly  in  each  successive
generation,  is  a  genuine  revelation,  not  rebuked  at  all
by  the  knowledge  that  it  has  often  existed  before
towards  other  objects;  if  it  involves  illusions,  they
regard  only  ulterior  facts,  less  important  than  itself.  So
the  literary  or  mathematical  or  grammatical  medium  of
discourse,  with  all  the  logical  and  moral  zeal  which
it  involves,  is  genuine  life,  full  of  intent  and  intuition.
Why  rebel  against  spirit,  and  ask  it  to  be  something
other  than  it  is?  The  flight  of  the  arrow,  in  spite  of
Zeno,  is  as  true  a  fact  as  the  ulterior  positions  between
which  it  flies  or  the  rest  which  it  dreams  of  but  ex¬
cludes  by  flying.  So  the  intrinsic  essence  of  discourse
is  signification,  a  flight  in  which  the  wings  are  words  or
other  signs,  alone  actually  present,  and  the  goal,  alone
valued  or  considered,  is  descried  simply  as  the  point
of  the  compass,  perhaps  receding  and  unattainable,
towards  which  those  wings  are  straining .  It  is  in  the  act
of  traversing  data  in  such  a  specific  direction  (to  which
a  living  animal  holds  much  more  unswervingly  than
to  the  intuition  of  any  datum)  that  names,  which  are
cries,  come  to  the  lips;  and  as  these  cries  are  habitual
and  very  limited  in  number  compared  with  the  cloud¬
like  drift  of  intuitions,  they  serve  to  mark  the  goals  of
thought  far  more  clearly  and  unambiguously  than  its
actual  being.  So  things  are  better  defined  in  discourse
than  sensations,  and  intended  essences  better  than
essences  given.


CHAPTER  IX


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES

Since  pure  Being  is  infinite  and  contains  all  essences,
how  can  anything  else  be?  In  other  words,  what  is
there  in  existing  things  besides  their  essences?

That  this  question  can  be  asked  is  a  proof  that  it  is
a  legitimate  question  and  admits  of  an  answer;  for  if
there  were  nothing  but  essences,  and  if  pure  Any  instance
Being,  because  infinite,  exhausted  all  possible  of  an  essence
modes  of  being,  there  would  be  no  discourse,  Proves  t*13*
no  ignorance,  no  knowledge,  and  conse-  not  the  only
quently  no  questions.  In  the  realm  of
essence  all  equally  is  open,  safe,  and  per¬
spicuous:  one  essence  cannot  slily  entrench  itself  on  a
sort  of  egotistical  eminence,  from  which  to  survey,
attack,  or  deny  any  other  essence.  Since  this,  neverthe¬
less,  is  done  in  what  we  call  life  or  existence,  and  since
I  am  doing  it  at  this  moment  in  this  inquiry,  it  is
certain  that  pure  Being  is  not  all  being,  and  that  in
existence  Being  is  impure,  having  in  it  something
more  or  something  less  than  any  .essence.  This  is
but  another  way  of  asserting  that  there  is  a  world,  that
there  are  facts,  and  that  there  is  a  difference  between
truth  and  error.  Such  a  thickening  and  self-contra¬
diction  by  which  essences  become  things  may  irritate
the  dialectician  and  may  disturb  the  contemplative
mind;  but  any  attempt  to  deny  the  fact  would  be
idle;  the  denial  itself  would  reintroduce  the  very


120


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


categories  of  existence,  flux,  self-transcendence,  and
truth  which  it  professed  to  dismiss.  Could  a  man
really  be  sublimated  into  his  essence,  he  would  be
silent,  as  pure  Being  is  silent.  Let  him  who  will  by
all  means  ascend  into  that  blessedness,  if  he  can;  but
he  must  leave  philosophy  to  poor  living  mortals  whose
minds  are  crepuscular  and  in  whose  impure  world
much  is  past,  much  is  distant,  and  all  is  obscure.

To  pursue  this  subject  would  be  to  broach  at  once
those  realms  of  being  which  are  not  that  of  essence;
Exempiifica-  here  I  must  leave  the  question  of  their
tion  trans-  precise  nature  in  suspense.  But  I  can
essences  hardly  avoid  some  examination  of  the  effect
from  their  which  they  have  on  the  manifestation  of
proper  soi .  essence  t0  the  human  mind ;  for  in  making

this  manifestation  possible,  they  intervene  in  it,
mingling  with  it  an  urgency  and  obscurity  which  no
essence  can  have  of  itself.  Manifestation  is  an  event,
and  although  that  which  is  manifested  there  can  be
only  an  essence,  the  occasion  and  the  setting  transpose
it  into  a  new  plane  of  being,  the  plane  of  phenomena  or
of  descriptions,  and  render  it,  as  the  Platonists  said,
other  than  itself.  It  is  intrinsically  and  inalienably
eternal,  yet  here  are  temporal  instances  of  it;  it  is  a
universal,  but  it  appears  in  particulars,  lending  them
such  positive  characters  as  they  may  have ;  it  is  perfectly
unambiguous,  and  nevertheless  it  is  merged  and  con¬
fused  with  other  essences  in  the  flux  of  things  and  of
language.

Realisation  of  essence,  by  an  ironical  fate,  is  accord¬
ingly  a  sort  of  alienation  from  essence.  We  call  it
“  realisation  ”,  when  from  being  perfectly  real  in  its
own  fashion,  it  becomes  an  illusion  in  some  mind,
or  the  momentary  form  of  some  treacherous  matter.
Or  perhaps  we  call  it  “manifestation,”  when  that  which
manifests  it,  some  existing  thing  or  phase  of  discourse,
distracts  us  from  it,  and  scarcely  suffers  us  to  observe  it


121


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES

for  its  own  sake.1  Instances  are  indeed  occasions  for
deviation:  they  are  cross-roads  at  which  two  worlds
meet.  One  set  of  relations  exhibits  the  instance  as
an  essence;  another  set  exhibits  it  as  a  fact.  The  idio¬
syncrasy  of  the  essence  there  realised  alone  enables  the
fact  to  be  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  the  natural
medium  in  which  it  exists ;  if  we  were  interested  in  true
being,  in  the  actual  and  moral  quality  of  things,  it  is
accordingly  that  essence,  and  its  essential  relations,
that  would  absorb  all  our  attention.  But  we  are
animals  swimming  for  dear  life  in  the  same  flux  in
which  this  instance  of  essence  has  appeared:  it  is  the
movement  of  that  medium,  what  will  happen  to  us
next,  that  preoccupies  us;  and  therefore,  probably,  we
neglect  the  intrinsic  being  of  that  occasion,  and  of  all

1  There  are  various  phrases  capable  of  expressing  the  relation  between
an  essence  and  the  instances  of  it;  each  phrase  represents  some  perspective
view  of  the  same  actual  relation.  We  may  call  it  participation,  in  that
every  instance  shares  with  the  other  instances  the  whole  nature  of  the
essence;  but  this  term  may  lead  to  misunderstandings,  if  we  infer  that  an
essence  has  parts,  one  of  which  may  fall  to  each  instance,  or  that  an  essence
is  a  class  or  collection  of  particulars.  If  we  express  the  matter  in  a  religious
myth,  as  the  story  of  the  fallen  soul,  instances  may  be  said  to  remind  us  of  a
divine  original,  that  essence  in  its  purity;  and  then,  in  a  cosmological  myth,
this  original  may  be  conceived  as  a  magnet  attracting  matter  (when  matter
is  sensitive  to  that  particular  attraction)  into  a  likeness  of  that  essence;  so
that  any  existing  instance  of  an  essence  might  be  called  an  imitation  or  copy
of  it.  Such  copies,  if  subsisting  only  in  the  mind,  would  be  recollections .
A  less  picturesque  name  for  instances  is  phenomena,  that  is,  manifestations
of  an  essence;  but  these  terms,  for  a  modern,  suggest  a  subjective  seat  for
the  instance,  whereas  of  course  many  phenomena  are  manifestations  of
essences  in  matter:  in  other  words,  temporal  things.  A  safer  word  for
instances  in  general  is  accordingly  exemplification.  This  covers  both
embodiment  of  essences  in  matter  or  in  events,  and  revelation  of  essences  in
intuition.  A  synonym  for  exemplification  might  be  realisation ;  but  it  has
the  disadvantage  of  suggesting  that  essences  when  not  exemplified  are  not
real,  and  that  reality  means  existence;  whereas  unexemplified  essences  are
perfectly  real  in  their  own  sphere,  and  many  of  those  exemplified,  being
only  imagined,  do  not  exist  in  the  sense  of  being  the  forms  of  any  substance.
The  term  realisation  is  convenient  to  express  the  passage  from  an  incipient
to  a  clear  thought,  or  from  an  unfulfilled  to  a  fulfilled  perfection  in  things;
in  the  former  case  we  may  also  say  that  the  essence  has  been  defined,  and  in
the  latter  that  it  has  been  materialised.  The  great  difference  in  all  cases  is
that  instances  can  occur  only  once,  while  essence  may  recur  any  number  of
times ;  that  which  is  local  in  the  occurrence  is  the  instance,  that  which  might
be  identical  in  various  occurrences  is  the  essence.  If  I  write  the  same  word
twice,  the  word  which  is  the  same  is  the  essence  and  the  words  which  are
two  are  its  instances.


122


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

occasions,  in  our  haste  to  trace  one  occasion  out  of
another.  The  net  of  existence  in  which  the  instances
of  essence  are  caught  even  seems,  perhaps,  to  our  rude
philosophy  to  create  the  fish  which  it  catches:  we
deny  their  prior  reality,  their  intrinsic  being;  they  are
to  us  only  the  contents  of  our  net;  and  we  shut  our
eyes  as  we  swallow  them.  The  matter  of  them  may
still  nourish  us;  but  our  attention,  to  that  extent,  has
deviated  from  the  intuition  of  essence,  which  is  its  only
spiritual  function,  into  tracing  the  labyrinth  of  fact;
we  have  chosen  the  endless  path  leading  from  existence
to  existence — as  indeed  any  instance  of  essence,  since
it  must  come  before  us  on  some  natural  occasion,
invites  us  to  do.  As  in  translating  a  language  we  must
abandon  it,  so  in  recognising  an  essence  we  must  half
materialise  it;  in  existence,  in  sense,  and  in  thought  it
has  become  impure;  its  essential  character  now  figures
in  a  substance,  a  medium,  or  a  context  which  are  alien
to  it.

This  incarnation  of  essences  in  particulars  must  not
be  supposed  either  to  alter  the  essences  (which  are
instances  all  incorruptible)  or  to  be  an  imperfect
perfectly  incarnation,  so  that  a  part  of  the  divinity,  so
thei? actual  to  speak,  descends  into  the  world  and  another
essences.  part  remains  in  heaven.  Certainly  in  any
assignable  world  or  portion  of  a  world  only  an  indi¬
vidual  essence  can  be  realised;  but  of  that  essence  the
realisation  there  will  be  perfect.  The  infinity  of  pure
Being  renders  it  inevitable  that  whatsoever  form  an
existence  may  happen  to  assume,  that  form  will  be
some  precise  essence  eternally  self-defined;  for  how¬
ever  fast  the  world  may  change  or  however  confused
chaos  may  become,  events  can  never  overtake  or  cover
the  infinite  advance  which  pure  Being  has  had  on
existence  from  all  eternity.  And  whichever  of  those
prefigured  forms  a  thing  may  choose  to  realise,  that
form  it  must  realise  perfectly;  as  an  aerolith,  if  it  falls


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES


123

to  the  earth  at  all,  must  strike  some  pre-existing  spot  on
its  surface.

So,  too,  in  the  history  of  existence,  as  it  picks  up  and
drops  these  multitudinous  characters,  there  is  also  no
ambiguity.  Substance,  in  the  act  of  taking  The  birth
on  and  shuffling  these  forms,  merely  connects
them  in  a  voluminous  flux  alien  to  their  the  exempli-
several  qualities.  The  dance  falls  into  figures  ficsae'™of
and  generates  relations,  which  each  essence  without
taken  individually  did  not  contain  or  imply.  confusin§ xt-
And  if  further  facts  arise  out  of  this  movement,  as
spirit  arises  in  animals,  the  characters  and  complexion
of  these  hyperphysical  existences  are  also  just  what  they
are;  feelings  and  discourse  take  on  such  colour  or
intent  as  they  have  without  dislocating  in  the  least  the
order  of  nature  which  they  enrich.  The  pearls  may  be
inwardly  more  precious  and  opalescent  than  the  thread
on  which  they  are  strung;  or  they  may  seem  superfluous
and  negligible  to  a  science  or  action  so  economical  as
to  trace  the  thread  only;  but  whether  prized  or  ignored,
the  pearls  shine  by  their  own  light  in  their  assigned
places  quite  unequivocally.  In  a  word,  there  is  no
ambiguity  in  the  truth;  it  enshrines  all  the  facts,  no
matter  how  complex,  with  their  exact  configuration.
Inexactitude,  approximation,  imperfection,  are  not
possible  in  the  relations  of  things  to  their  essences;  each
thing  at  each  moment  is  just  what  it  is;  it  is  trans¬
formed  as  it  is  transformed,  related  as  it  is  related;  and
the  sum  of  these  changes  and  of  these  infinite  cross-
lights  is  just  what  it  is  under  the  eye  of  eternity.

Nevertheless,  from  the  moral  point  of  view,  im¬
perfect  realisation  is  not  a  meaningless  phrase.  Ima¬
gination,  language,  and  interest  are  finite;  the  categories
of  human  discourse,  though  somewhat  variable,  are
constitutional  and  limited;  they  need  to  be  so  in  order
to  fulfil  their  cognitive  and  imaginative  function,  since
knowledge  is  an  adaptation  of  fancy  to  practice,  a


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


Confusion
arises  only
when  dis¬
course
assigns  to
things
essences
which  are
not  theirs.


124

rational  eloquence,  not  a  reduplication  of  things  as
they  were  before  life  or  imagination  arose  among  them.

Every  name  and  every  desire  accordingly
suggests  an  essence  to  the  psyche  which
may  fail  to  be  realised  in  the  world,  or  may
be  realised  there  only  approximately ;  the  fact
that  another  somewhat  different  essence  is
realised  there  leaves  human  attention  cold;
it  asked  for  bread  and  receives  a  stone,  and
to  point  out  that  the  stone  was  a  perfect  stone  would
seem  sheer  mockery.  The  disharmony  between  the
psyche  and  the  rest  of  nature  runs  even  deeper;  for  the
essence  actually  realised  in  the  facts  may  be  not  merely
unwelcome  or  uninteresting ;  it  may  be  nameless
altogether  and  inconceivable.  Every  name  and  every
concept  which  bewildered  man  will  impose  on  those
facts  will  then  fit  them  imperfectly;  and  being  without
intuition  of  their  true  essence,  he  will  call  them  vague
facts,  formless,  elusive,  or  defective.  For  his  senses
have  their  stock  responses,  like  birds  of  one  note,  or  of
very  few; .  so  too  the  passions  and  the  theories  of  which
his  imagination  is  capable.  His  discourse  moves
within  a  private  museum  of  ideal  and  general  natures,
the  few  essences  distinguished  by  language;  and  it  is
only  in  his  finer  or  his  idler  moments  (if  he  has  them)
that  he  looks  between  the  meshes  of  that  logical  net,
and  catches  unauthorised  glimpses  of  the  flux  of  things
with  all  its  irrelevant  marvels.  Essences,  then,  may  be
said  to  be  manifested  imperfectly,  when  they  are  not  the
essences  of  things,  but  are  prescribed  for  them  by  the
senses  and  passions  of  some  egotistical  animal  whose
mind  is  like  a  stomach  limited  in  its  powers  of  digestion
and  obliged  to  treat  all  foreign  substances  as  approxima¬
tions— how  questionable  and  half-baked  L— 1 to  its  ideal
victuals.

If,  then,  it  is  possible  to  assign  to  anything  an  essence
which  is  not  its  essence,  this  possibility  arises  because


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES  125

the  essences  first  and  normally  manifested  in  feeling
and  thought  are  not  the  essences  that  have  been
embodied  multitudinously  and  successively  .
in  things  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  inideas  i?
and  that  now  define  their  dynamic  nature.  £  beauty

'r  r  .  1  . 1  •  1  •  .  «  J  .  1  ,  but  becomes

Yet  merely  this  disparity  between  ideas  and  a  snare
things  would  be  no  anomaly,  because
ideas  are  not  things  but  ideas;  and  ideas,  predicates
like  words,  may  be  excellent  signs  forforthmgs-
events  in  the  field  of  action,  without  in  the  least  re¬
sembling  them,  if  only  the  mechanism  which  controls
these  ideas  does  not  precipitate  any  assertion,  expec¬
tation,  or  attitude  which  events  within  or  without  the
psyche  do  not  justify.  The  justification  required  is
not  that  the  essence  given  in  discourse  should  repeat
the  essence  embodied  in  material  events — a  repetition
which  is  unlikely,  superfluous,  and  incongruous  with
the  summary  function  of  sensation,  as  well  as  of  sig¬
nificant  or  poetic  thought;  for  in  naming,  reporting,  or
prefiguring  events,  discourse  will  necessarily  add  an
intellectual  syntax,  a  moral  perspective,  and  a  mocking
humour  which  are  not  in  them.  What  is  required  is
such  a  vital  harmony  between  the  life  of  thought  and
that  of  things  as  may  render  discourse  appropriate
and  adorning.  But  often  —  and  here’s  the  rub  —
maladaptation  exists  in  their  respective  movement  and
rates  of  change  between  a  psyche  and  her  environment,
so  that  the  essences  revealed  imaginatively  to  that
psyche  are  late  or  early  or  out  of  key  with  the  march
of  events,  not  only  outside,  but  in  the  residual  parts
of  her  own  life.  Then,  in  her  assertiveness  (since  she
is  engaged  in  action)  she  will  impose  on  things  that
which  she  adds,  and  deny  that  which  she  leaves  out;
and  this  hypostasis  of  her  fancies  or  of  her  ignorance
will  become  unfathomable  error  about  the  facts  en¬
countered  by  her  in  action  and  prompting  her  to  this
fond  discourse.  Thus  discourse,  while  manifesting


126  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

perfectly  at  each  moment  certain  specious  essences  to
the  spirit,  and  embodying  perfectly  the  essence  of
spirit  itself,  may  involve  confusion  regarding  the  objects
which  it  intends  to  describe,  as  well  as  ignorance  of  its
own  basis,  nature,  and  history.

In  the  study  of  nature  philosophers  are  much  in¬
fluenced  by  the  love  of  economy.  They  wish,  on  this
f  subject,  to  have  as  few  ideas  as  possible;
intellectual  they  may  even  hope  to  be  monists  and  to
parsimony.  have  only  one  This  ideal  of  simplicity  is

imposed  on  nature  by  the  mind  in  its  desire  to  be
clear,  comprehensive,  and  curt;  it  is  an  extension  of
the  dogmatic  impulse  involved  in  action  by  which  the
most  conspicuous  essence  given  in  sense  is  taken  for
the  essence  of  the  object  encountered.  The  philo¬
sopher  merely  repeats  this  form  of  judgement  when
he  assumes  that  the  simplest  theory  which  his  wit  can
frame  must  be  the  essence  of  the  universe.  In  the
study  of  essence,  the  ruling  interest  being  more  con¬
templative,  we  may  perhaps  avoid  this  haste.  Illusions
are  no  less  truly  essences  than  truths  are;  and  no  con¬
fusion  will  arise  from  complications  or  diversities  in
essences  if  only  we  abstain  from  asserting  them  of  the
same  substances.  Now  I  believe  that  more  essences,
and  of  more  kinds,  are  exemplified  in  nature  than  the
student  of  nature  is  inclined  to  notice:  they  are  not
realised  only  in  single  file  or  on  one  plane  of  being;
and  they  are  not  all  predicable  of  the  same  substance
nor  all  predicable  of  anything.  There  are  many  open
to  our  inspection  which  are  not  descriptive  of  material
things  even  indirectly;  and  on  the  other  hand,  there
are  presumably  embodied  in  matter  many  essences,
of  many  kinds,  which  it  has  not  entered  into  the  heart
of  man  to  conceive.  Such  considerations  are  not  use¬
less  in  stating,  if  not  in  solving,  the  problems  of  natural
philosophy;  but  for  the  moment  I  must  be  satisfied
with  a  word  about  the  essences  which  must  be  exem-


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES


127

plified,  some  in  one  way,  others  in  another,  in  order  that
discourse  may  move  at  all,  and  ideas  may  describe,  or
fail  to  describe,  their  intended  objects.

The  character  of  the  particular  world  in  which  we
find  ourselves  has  been  richly  and  ignorantly  reported
in  the  poetry  and  science  of  all  ages;  it  is  Theessence
not  for  me,  in  passing,  to  revise  those  reports,  of  this
There  is  avowedly  a  great  inorganic  cosmos,  world-
astronomical,  geographical,  chemical;  and  on  earth  at
least  there  are  living  organisms  capable  of  adjusting
themselves  progressively  to  their  environment,  and
of  modifying  that  environment  for  their  future  con¬
venience.  The  essence  of  human  life  thus  runs  over
and  engages  parts  of  the  outer  world  in  its  rhythms,  in
what  we  call  the  arts;  and  this  seems  a  miraculous
subjugation  of  matter  by  mind.  But  if  we  look  closer,
the  rhythm  of  mind  seems  itself  to  be  but  an  extension
of  that  of  matter.  Organisms,  in  their  reproduction,
pass  through  the  most  curious  seminal  and  embryonic
phases,  in  which  nothing  human  appears;  essences
seem  to  descend  on  things  like  doves  out  of  the  blue.
But  they  have  their  periods,  conditions,  and  fatal  exits:
they  compose  the  forms  of  organic  behaviour,  or
enacted  intelligence,  observable  in  the  world.  Enacted
intelligence,  observable  sensibility,  discoverable  lan¬
guages  and  works  of  art,  though  they  are  under¬
stood  to  express  feeling,  contain  no  feeling  in  their
recognisable  structure:  all  the  essences  which  they
can  possibly  embody,  however  subtle,  prolonged,  or
interwoven,  are  essences  embodied  in  matter;  they
are  complexities  in  the  one  flux  of  events  in  space  and
time  which  is  called  nature.  They  are  all  open  to
scientific  discovery  and  measure,  being  intrinsically
dated,  localised,  and  traceable  in  their  genesis  and
effects  within  the  material  sphere.

I  have  mentioned  feeling,  supposed  to  be  expressed
in  some  of  these  observable  facts;  and  although  I


128  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

have  not  mentioned  it,  there  is  implied  throughout  a
transcendental  observer,  a  spirit  to  whom  these  essences
Life  besides  are  evident  and  who  takes  note  of  their  em-
being  a  form  bodiment,  position,  and  physical  inter-relation,
kindeies^nUr’  The  natural  philosopher  may  well  protest  that
inner  light  no  feeling  and  no  spirit  is  discernible  in  the
called  spirit,  0f  ]^s  observation;  and  how  should  they

be  discernible  there,  when  that  is  not  their  place  nor
their  mode  of  being?  Nevertheless,  he  is  reckoning
without  his  host  and  forgetting  his  own  existence,  in
so  far  as  all  that  he  recognises,  including  his  own  body,
is  from  time  to  time  focussed  and  actually  present  to
him  in  the  light  of  spirit;  a  fact  patent  to  reflection
and  recorded  perpetually  in  any  honest  confession  or
bit  of  autobiography,  such  as  human  discourse  and
conversation  are  chiefly  composed  of.  Remove  this
pedestal  and  the  whole  conception  of  nature  has
nothing  to  stand  on,  no  means  of  entering  into  the
moral  world,  no  claim  upon  the  living  philosopher.
He  is  a  discoursing  spirit  by  nature  and  a  discoverer
of  this  world  only  by  accident,  in  that  this  world  forces
itself  at  present  on  his  attention  and  belief.  Until,
therefore,  he  finds  a  means  of  integrating  somehow  his
spiritual  being  with  the  realm  of  matter,  there  can  be
no  solidity  in  his  doctrine;  for  all  knowledge  of  the
world,  when  he  is  collected  and  self-conscious,  will
seem  to  him  mere  babble;  and  at  the  same  time  he
will  marvel,  and  even  tremble,  at  the  incredible  tenuity
of  his  actual  being.  He  has  but  to  shut  his  eyes  for
all  that  painted  world  to  vanish;  he  has  but  to  arrest
the  inner  rumble  of  words  for  his  memory  and  life  to
become  a  forgotten  story;  he  has  but  to  fall  asleep  for
the  lever  of  reason  to  lose  its  fulcrum  altogether,  and
the  whole  argument  to  lapse.  We  may  insist  that  his
extinction  makes  no  difference  to  the  realm  of  essence
and  little  difference  to  the  universe;  but  this  very  fact,
since  this  extinction  makes  all  the  difference  to  him,


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES  129

establishes  the  ineradicable  diversity  between  his  spirit
on  the  one  hand  and  the  universe  with  the  realm  of
essence  on  the  other.

There  is  in  fact  another  way  altogether,  besides
embodiment  in  matter,  by  which  essences  may  be
exemplified:  they  may  be  imagined.  EvenTT  ,  ,

,1  11*1  .  1  r  Unembodied

those  which  are  embodied  passively  or  for- essences
mally  in  things,  if  any  one  is  ever  to  see
to  attribute  them,  must  also  (perhaps  at  quite to  spmt'
a  different  time)  be  imagined,  felt,  conceived,  contem¬
plated,  or  somehow  directly  revealed  to  spirit.  This
presence  of  essences  occasionally  to  imagination  was
very  accurately  called  by  the  Scholastics  their  objective
being,  contrasted  with  the  intrinsic  or  logical  being
which  they  had  in  themselves,  and  with  the  formal
embodiment  which  they  might  have  in  things;  but  in
the  utter  confusion  of  modern  philosophy,  substances
being  denied  in  one  breath  and  imagination  in  the
next,  “  the  objective  ”  has  come  to  mean  that  which
is  independent  of  intent  or  attention  fixed  upon  it;
which  is  precisely  what  the  objective  can  never  be.  It
is  indeed  the  intuition  of  essences  in  their  own  category,
when  the  things  that  may  embody  them  are  absent  or
non-existent,  that  makes  up  the  essence  of  spirit,  in  its
various  forms  of  feeling,  sense,  thought,  memory,  or
knowledge.  Spirit  is  the  actuality  of  the  unsubstantial.

It  belongs  to  the  nature  of  spirit  to  be  cognitive;
for  even  when  intuition  is  pure  and  unmixed  with
intent,  so  that  there  is  no  claim  to  transitive  Essence  of
knowledge,  no  positing  of  facts,  intuition  sPirit-
must  reveal  an  object  other  than  its  own  spiritual  being
and  activity.  The  intrinsic  action  of  spirit,  like  that  of
existence  (of  which  spirit  is  a  special  instance),  cannot  be
itself  an  object  of  intuition:  it  can  be  exemplified  only
by  being  enacted  and  realised  by  a  transition  in  neither
term  of  which  it  could  be  realised  separately.  If
spirit  were  ever  suspended,  if  it  ceased  to  live,  to  drink


I30  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

in  and  to  peruse  its  object,  it  would  have  literally
lost  itself  in  that  object;  there  would  be  no  spirit,  no
intuition,  any  longer,  but  only  some  essence;  and
this  essence  for  its  part  would  no  longer  have  any
adventitious  prominence  in  the  realm  of  essence;
no  emphasis  or  actuality  would  fall  upon  it;  and  no
instance  of  it  would  have  occurred.  It  is  the  act  of
attention,  synthesis,  and  apprehension,  performed  by
the  psyche  animating  some  animal,  that  lends  to  any
essence  its  objective  actuality,  or  ideal  presence;  and  in
so  doing,  and  inseparably,  the  same  act  embodies  and
exemplifies  the  essence  of  spirit  in  a  particular  instance.

There  are  accordingly  two  disparate  essences
exemplified  in  every  instance  of  spirit;  one  is  the
essence  of  spirit,  exemplified  formally  and  embodied
in  the  event  or  fact  that  at  such  a  moment  such  an
animal  has  such  a  feeling;  the  other  is  the  essence  then
revealed  to  that  animal,  and  realised  objectively  or
imaginatively  in  his  intuition.  The  character  of  this
given  essence  serves  to  distinguish  morally  this  phase
of  spirit  from  other  possible  phases.  Any  essence  what¬
ever,  if  the  psyche  at  work  has  the  requisite  energy  and
scope,  may  appear  in  intuition;  even  the  essences  of
existence  and  of  spirit  may  be  defined  in  reflection,  as
I  have  been  endeavouring  to  define  them  here;  but
nothing  follows  as  to  the  truth  or  relevance  to  existence
of  any  such  visionary  term;  if  these  essences  are
embodied  in  nature,  it  is  because  nature  of  her  own  will
embodies  them  in  their  natural  places,  not  because  I
here,  and  at  this  remove,  define  them  in  my  thought.
They  are  by  no  means  embodied  formally  in  the
thought  that  conceives  them,  so  as  to  be  predicable  of
this  thought:  my  idea  of  God  is  not  God,  and  does  not
bring  God  into  existence  on  its  precise  model;  nor  does
my  idea  of  matter  perform  a  corresponding  miracle.
My  ideas  merely  take  their  places  among  ideas,  as
being  images  or  hypotheses  of  a  certain  quality,  which


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES  131

any  one  else,  if  he  can  and  will,  is  at  liberty  to  con¬
ceive  also;  it  is  the  occasions  on  which  they  arise,  their
several  organs  in  nature,  that  will  distinguish  their
instances  historically,  as  well  as  bring  them  into
existence.  Thus  my  thoughts  in  this  book  are  dis¬
tinguished  physically,  as  events  in  the  world,  by  belong¬
ing  to  my  person  and  buzzing  in  my  brain  at  the  dates
and  places  where  I  rehearse  them;  but  the  same
thoughts,  as  essences  then  conceived  by  me,  are  dis¬
tinguished  morally  by  their  scope  and  subject-matter;
eternal  essences  having  eternal  relations  of  contrast
or  affinity  with  the  other  essences  which  employ  my
thoughts  or  those  of  other  philosophers,  and  beyond
that  to  all  other  essences  that  might  be  instead  the
theme  of  any  discourse.

This  diversity  of  status  between  an  essence  embodied
and  the  same  essence  conceived  remains  complete  even
when  in  its  two  disparate  instances  the  Moral
essence  is  identical;  but  this  is  not  normally  essences
the  case.  The  essences  embodied  even  in  raised  only
the  human  body  and  total  human  career in  sPirit-
are  not  such  as  human  imagination  can  easily  conceive ;
and  the  essences  embodied  in  the  depths  and  un¬
attainable  dimensions  of  nature  escape  us  altogether.
On  the  other  hand,  the  aesthetic  and  sentimental
essences  which  fill  human  discourse  are  often,  by  their
very  nature,  incapable  of  passive  embodiment:  they
cannot  be  true,  save  in  the  historical  sense  that  it  may
be  true  that  some  one  has  entertained  them.  So,  for
instance,  any  quality  or  intensity  of  pain;  such  an
essence  can  be  exemplified  only  spiritually,  never
materially;  its  instances  must  be  feelings.  No  cata¬
clysm  of  nature,  however  disruptive,  can  ever  embody
evil.  Evil  can  be  realised  there  only  if,  in  virtue  of  a
previous  organic  harmony,  a  spirit  was  there  incarnate,
in  which  the  disruption  could  generate  the  intuition  of
a  hated  change.


1 32  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

The  same  originality  of  spirit  appears  in  the  normal
perspectives  of  memory  and  history,  even  when,  con-
So  t00  ventionally  speaking,  they  are  true  enough,
ail  human  MV  knowledge  of  Julius  Caesar  obviously
ofenaPteureVeS  differs  in  date  from  its  object;  but  it  differs
and  history.  from  it  avowedly  also  in  essence,  since  I
cannot  pretend  to  know  the  whole  truth  of  Julius
Caesar,  nor  any  part  of  it  with  complete  accuracy.  The
most  scrupulous  and  exhaustive  historian  would  be
satisfied  with  recovering  a  few  salient  particulars,
revivifying  these  in  his  own  fancy  that  of  a  modern
and  surrounding  them  with  comparisons,  judgements,
and  emotions  adventitious  to  the  inner  being  of  Julius
Caesar  and  of  his  age .  History  is  a  poetic  art ;  the  Muse ,
Clio,  must  inspire  it;  and  the  existing  correlate  or
controlling  cause  of  the  historian  s  thoughts,  even  when
they  are  true,  is  not  the  object  described,  Caesar,  but  the
historian’s  person,  his  documents,  studies,  passions,  and
abilities.

Mind  accordingly  comes  to  enrich  the  essence  of  the
world,  not  to  reproduce  it.  Condensation,  expression,
s  iritis  comparison,  are  also  enrichments;  it  is  not
nature’s  so  much  by  repeating  some  literal  aspect
commentf  Qf  something  remote  that  this  remote  thing
concise  and  can  be  called  to  mind,  as  rather  by  modifying
emotional.  ^  present  in  deference  and  with  reference  to

it;  for  instance,  by  giving  it  a  new  name  or  a  new
tragic  or  pictorial  embodiment.  The  living  poet  and
his  contemporary  world,  in  evoking  this  new  essence,
grow  sensitive  to  that  remote  object,  and  truly  intend,
salute,  and  describe  it.  This  they  may  do,  because
description,  no  less  than  intent  or  homage,  are  relative:
the  attitude  and  contribution  of  the  observer  are
integral  to  it.  Material,  even  if  subtle,  influences,
descending  from  that  object  have  stimulated  him  to
this  fresh  conception;  and  the  conception  will  be  just
and  true  in  so  far  as,  in  the  language  native  to  this


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES  133

later  and  living  world,  it  expresses  that  influence
adequately  in  its  present  ramifications;  for  new  state¬
ments  about  a  thing  may  be  perfectly  true,  if  they  are
made  from  new  points  of  comparison.  Thought  is
normally  relative,  expressing  relations  that  accrue  with
time;  it  may  occasionally  include  a  rapt  imaginative
reproduction  of  something  distant,  though  hardly  to  a
great  extent  or  to  much  purpose.

Reproduction,  again,  is  not  the  normal  relation
between  essences  embodied  in  matter  and  those
revealed  to  spirit.  Where  this  relation  seems  to  obtain,
as  between  an  architect’s  first  idea  and  the  build¬
ing  that  afterwards  realises  it,  the  echo  or  fulfilment
really  belongs  to  the  same  realm — imagination — as
the  original  conception.  That  which  resembles  the
visionary  project,  and  repeats  it,  is  not  the  material
house — which  is  a  mass  of  whirling  atoms,  or  invisible
energy,  or  something  no  less  recondite — but  simply  the
aspect  which  this  house  presents  to  the  architect’s  own
eye,  or  to  that  of  a  man  like  him.  In  registering  such
similarities  between  images  he  has  not  issued  from  the
realm  of  spirit.  So  the  reputed  likeness  of  images
discoverable  in  the  retina,  or  in  a  photographic  plate,
to  segments  of  the  originals  in  nature,  is  a  likeness
between  the  essence  revealed  to  a  living  spirit  on  one
occasion  and  that  revealed  to  it  on  another.  There
is  no  probable  or  discoverable  likeness  between  the
material  composition  of  an  eye,  of  a  country  side,
and  of  a  sensitized  plate.  A  living  psyche  must
react  upon  these  divers  substances  before  the  actual
vision  arises  in  any  of  the  three  cases;  that  three
so  dissimilar  substances  should  be  able  to  occasion
a  similar  image,  only  proves  that  relatively  to  the
organ  of  sense  affected  they  serve  the  same  purpose
and  offer  an  equivalent  stimulus;  as  a  gramophone,
although  materially  so  unlike  a  band  of  rapturous
and  sweating  musicians,  may  serve  the  same  purpose


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


134

to  the  ear  and  may  offer,  up  to  a  certain  point,  an
equivalent  stimulus.

Shall  we  say  that  the  exemplifications  of  essence  in
nature  and  in  thought,  although  composed  of  very
itisocca-  unlike  forms,  yet  flow  in  parallel  streams?
sionai,  sym-  If  by  parallel  we  understand  simply  not  inter-
madefnd  mingled  I  should  answer,  Yes;  but  if  by
view  of  parallel  we  understand  running  side  by  side
all  the  way  and  corresponding  throughout,
I  should  say,  No.  For  it  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of
spirit  to  arise  in  dead  or  inorganic  things;  and  where
it  arises,  its  vistas  radiate  from  that  point,  according
to  the  material  tensions  present  in  it,  forward  and  back
along  the  stream  of  material  events,  and  tangentially
into  all  sorts  of  supervening  images  and  rhymes.
Spirit  is  what  is  called  epi-phenomenal,  although  this
word  is  very  ill-chosen,  since  neither  substance  nor
spirit  is  phenomenal;  but  the  essences  embodied  in
matter  and  those  revealed  to  intuition  are  indeed
deployed  in  two  different  media:  the  spiritual  per¬
spective  being  at  each  point  dependent  for  its  existence
and  its  character  upon  the  balance  and  movement  of
the  vital  process  beneath.  But  these  spiritual  per¬
spectives  are  called  forth  only  occasionally,  as  matter
rolls  on;  and  they  open  out  at  right  angles,  to  any
distance,  into  the  realms  of  truth  and  of  essence.  There
are  not,  then,  two  parallel  streams,  but  rather  one
stream  which,  in  slipping  over  certain  rocks  or  dropping
into  certain  pools,  begins  to  babble  a  wanton  music;
not  thereby  losing  any  part  of  its  substance  or  changing
its  course,  but  unawares  enriching  the  world  with  a
new  beauty.  Feeling,  intuition,  prophetic  and  syn¬
thetic  intelligence,  are  spiritual  facts  utterly  alien  to
the  pedestrian  flux  of  the  materially  successive.  They,
too,  are  transitory,  subsisting  only  so  long  as  the
material  foci  in  which  they  are  collected  remain  in
being;  but  spirit,  though  the  occasions  on  which  it


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES


135

arises  are  material,  is  itself  an  imponderable  and  in¬
visible  fact;  and  although  its  interests  are  borrowed
from  the  impulses  and  contacts  of  animal  life,  the
terms  in  which  it  expresses  those  interests  are  original
and  poetic;  and  by  translating  nature  into  those  terms
it  paints,  as  it  were,  her  immortal  portrait.

Which  of  the  essences  conceived  by  the  human  mind,
if  any,  may  be  credited  with  being  the  absolute  and
intrinsic  essences  of  the  natural  world,  is  a  Conception
question  to  be  left  to  the  judgement  and  ?f
modesty  of  natural  philosophers;  I  may  say  literal  or
something  about  it  on  another  occasion,  in  adequate,
so  far  as  the  matter  interests  a  moralist  or  can  fall
within  his  competence .  Here  I  will  only  note  that  while
such  coincidence  is  possible,  all  essences  whatsoever
being  open  to  potential  intuition,  every  presumption
is  against  it.  Nature,  if  nature  exists  at  all,  is  not  a
hypostasis  of  essences  defined  in  human  discourse;
she  is  the  matrix,  incalculably  ancient  and  vast,  of
human  nature  and  human  ideas,  ideas  which  by  their
origin  and  their  function  express  the  sensibility  and
reactions  of  the  human  organism,  and  nothing  else.
To  suppose  that  these  ideas  reproduce  and  literally
define  the  intrinsic  essence  of  nature  is  accordingly  an
illusion:  excusable  because  inevitable  in  an  animal
at  once  active  and  ignorant;  yet  such,  when  main¬
tained  doggedly,  as  to  excite  inextinguishable  laughter
in  the  immortal  gods.

But  let  us  suppose  that,  by  a  singular  miracle,
human  experience  were  clairvoyant,  and  assigned  to
all  parts  of  nature,  in  so  far  as  they  were  en-  Alleged
countered  materially,  their  intrinsic  essences.

It  would  follow  that  whenever  the  mind  tion  con-
conceived  them,  the  essences  of  things  would
be  exemplified  twice  over:  once  formally  in  jection  of
the  flux  of  matter  and  again  imaginatively  in  appearances,
that  of  mind.  The  stream  of  existence  would  “  bifur-


136  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

cate  ”,  and  the  two  currents,  strangely  diverse  in  sub¬
stance  but  strangely  similar  in  form,  would  flow  side
by  side  mirroring  one  another.  Or  if  it  were  found
impossible,  as  it  would  be,  to  regard  all  given  essences
as  embodied  in  natural  things,  first  illusions,  then
secondary  qualities,  and  finally  primary  qualities,  would
have  to  be  “  introjected”  and  sucked  in  into  the  mental
sphere;  the  natural  world  would  have  become  a
nonentity,  and  the  result  would  be  idealism.  All  this
confusion  comes  of  originally  supposing  that  things
are  graphically  copied  in  sense,  and  nature  in  science;
a  belief  founded  on  the  projection  of  the  essences  given
to  spirit,  as  if  the  world  had  been  created  and  were
now  deployed  on  the  model  of  human  ideas.  But  the
essences  given  to  spirit  are  forms  of  imagination  and
thought :  they  never  were  and  never  will  be  the  essences
of  things ;  and  it  is  only  by  poetic  licence  and  conven¬
tional  symbolism  that  we  are  compelled  to  clothe  things
in  the  garb  of  our  sensations  and  rhetoric.  Introjection
is  therefore  only  the  counterpart  of  a  false  earlier
projection,  and  bifurcation  the  inevitable  consequence
of  a  pictorial  physics.  Nature,  let  me  repeat,  is  not
a  visual  image  hypostatised :  she  has  embodied,  from
indefinite  past  time,  whatever  essences  she  has  em¬
bodied  without  asking  our  leave  or  conforming  before¬
hand  (as  philosophers  seem  to  expect)  to  the  economy
and  logic  of  our  thoughts.  These  thoughts  and
images  of  ours,  with  their  economy,  are  not  irrelevant
to  nature,  since  she  produces  them  at  stated  junctures;
our  imagination  and  logic,  as  far  as  they  go,  are  her
own  logic  and  imagination,  by  which  here,  at  least,
she  finds  it  possible  to  possess  and  to  celebrate  herself
spiritually;  they  are  therefore  true  enough,  and  a
different  logic  or  a  different  imagination  would  prob¬
ably  be  no  truer.  They  have  the  value  of  signs  and
are  felt  to  have  it;  because  the  spirit  which  evokes
them  is  incarnate,  with  transitive  and  not  contem-


INSTANCES  OF  ESSENCES  137

plative  interests  predominant  in  it,  so  that  it  takes  all
its  visions,  when  it  can,  for  omens  of  collateral  powers.

By  the  birth  of  spirit  nature  is  certainly  complicated
and  rendered  heteroclite,  as  animal  life  is  later  by
the  birth  of  language;  but  spirit  can  never  sdence.no
contain  any  portion,  not  to  say  the  whole,  of  less  than
the  material  flux  that  generates  it.  This  new  Sf
form  of  existence  is  immaterial,  synthetic,  discourse,
cognitive,  emotional;  and  any  of  the  feelings  or  in¬
tuitions  which  compose  it,  when  they  contain  a  vista,
contain  it  spiritually  only,  focussed  and  seen,  not  enacted
piecemeal  and  irrevocably  self  -  substitutive,  as  an
actual  flux  must  be.  For  the  fountain  of  conception
is  internal,  it  is  the  heart;  and  its  deliverances,  being
fundamentally  exclamatory,  pictorial,  and  intellec¬
tually  creative,  can  be  brought  round  only  poetically
to  describe  the  profound  dynamic  structure  and  order
of  things.


CHAPTER  X


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY

Complex  essences,  as  we  have  seen,  are  not  com¬
pounded:  this  is  one  of  the  most  fruitful  reflections
which  speculation  about  essence  can  suggest.  It  can
cure  us  of  the  most  stubborn  prejudices  in  physics;
it  can  show  us  the  vanity  of  any  psychologism,  mental
chemistry,  or  attempt  to  generate  ideas  out  of  ideas;
and  it  can  help  us  to  place  the  realm  of  essence  where  it
belongs  at  an  infinite  remove  from  the  accidents  of  any
evolving  world  or  any  intellectual  or  moral  scale.

In  the  material  sphere  it  is  common  for  complex
things,  such  as  plants,  to  be  formed  out  of  others,  such
In  material  as  seeds,  earth,  sunshine,  and  water,  which
compounds  to  human  apprehension  are  more  simple.
ofethewhCoeie  The  arts  visibly  continue  this  process  of  con-
is  not  com-  struction;  an  architect,  for  instance,  deliber-
the'ess^nces  ately  causes  various  materials  to  be  collected
of  the  parts.  anci  built  into  his  edifice;  and  the  finished
building  is  evidently  an  assemblage  of  substances  and
patterns,  each  of  which  was  known  first  in  isolation,
and  now  contributes,  mechanically  or  aesthetically,  to
a  result  which,  since  the  architect  half-intended,  half-
desired,  and  half-directed  it,  seems  to  him  an  achieve¬
ment.  At  the  same  time  the  very  certainty  that  he  has
selected  these  elements  and  combined  them,  and  that
they  undoubtedly  conspire  more  or  less  obviously  to

138


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY  139

produce  the  result,  may  cause  him  some  disappoint¬
ment  and,  if  he  is  metaphysically  inclined,  some
perplexity;  for  many  of  those  elements,  aesthetically
considered,  have  disappeared  or  have  changed  their
character;  and  even  the  total  effect,  or  actual  uses,  of
the  structure,  in  carrying  out  approximately  his  material
specifications,  are  unprecedented,  and  fall  together
otherwise  than  he  expected.  Indeed,  the  poverty  of
the  result,  artistic  and  moral,  may  be  out  of  all  pro¬
portion  to  the  richness  of  detail  and  the  careful  inten¬
tions  which  occupied  him  in  making  the  plans.  The
angels  that  watched  his  labour  will  not  revisit  the
finished  work;  the  essence  of  the  whole  is  not  com¬
pounded  of  the  essences  of  the  parts,  but  is  a  new
essence,  a  summary  unity,  perhaps  simpler,  and  at  any
rate  original.

A  thorough  appreciation  of  this  point  would  save
philosophers  from  many  a  false  assumption  and  in¬
soluble  problem.  Things  are  never  compounded  of
their  qualities ,  but  of  their  substances .  If  the  composite
thing  retains  vestiges  of  the  original  qualities  of  the
parts,  this  is  due  to  an  imperfect  fusion  of  the  materials,
such  that  each  part  remains  a  separate  fact,  still
separately  observable ;  this  happens  in  discursive
painting  or  description  of  mere  aggregates,  never  in
living  intuition  or  in  theoretic  insight.  Again,  even
when  the  compound  is  single  and  new,  the  effect  of  it
on  some  organ  blunt  to  this  new  order  of  essences  may
be  very  like  the  effect  of  one  or  other  of  the  original
objects;  as  when  we  complain  how  monotonous  and
equivalent  things  or  persons  are  in  this  world,  in  spite
of  their  newness.  It  follows  that  any  degree  of
composition  in  a  thing  may  go  with  a  perfect  simplicity
in  its  total  essence,  be  this  essence  formal  or  specious;
nor  can  this  resulting  essence  have  been  native  to  any
of  the  components.  It  has  been  embodied,  or  has
appeared  (as  the  case  may  be)  by  a  formal  necessity  or


140


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


specious
essence
evoked  in
sense  is
single  and
novel.


by  a  natural  mutation,  upon  the  juxtaposition  of  those
elements.  So  a  spark  may  result  from  the  friction  of
two  bodies,  who  knows  how  complex;  a  pure  pain  may
result  from  an  elaborate  disorder;  a  rounded  blue  sky
may  result  from  a  flat  sea  of  refracting  atoms  caught
in  an  earthly  eye.  The  living  transcript  of  facts  into
When  the  sensations,  without  ceasing  to  be  a  mystery
material  (as  all  existence  must  be)  thus  ceases  to  seem
amanimai*  an  anomaly;  for  if  anything  new  was  ever
reaction,  the  arise  or  to  be  revealed  to  sense,  it  had  to
assume  an  essence  not  the  essence  of  its
compound  conditions;  and  it  simply  remains
for  observation  to  specify,  when  it  can,  what
the  normal  transformations  are  for  the  time
being  in  our  parts  of  the  universe.

There  is  a  stock  objection  to  materialism  that  looks
very  foolish  when  seen  in  the  light  of  these  essential
.  •  necessities.  Matter,  it  is  said,  cannot  explain

objection  to  the  origin  of  life,  or  consciousness,  or  ol
materialism.  morajS-  Matter  here  means  the  essence  which

some  philosopher  attributes,  or  is  alleged  to  attribute,
to  matter;  this  essence  has  probably  suggested  itself
to  the  philosopher’s  imagination  after  much  considera¬
tion  of  the  ways  of  nature;  it  is  a  simple,  perhaps  a
merely  mathematical  term.  Now  no  essence  can  be  the
origin  of  anything:  not  even  of  another  essence,  much
less  of  any  fact.  But  the  forms  which  nature  wears
could  not  be  successive,  or  be  embodied  anywhere,  if
matter  did  not  assume,  connect,  and  exchange  them.  Of
course  this  real  matter,  coming  down  through  the  ages,
and  falling  into  all  these  forms,  is  not  anybody’s  idea  of
matter:  its  intrinsic  essence  is  unknown,  and  if  we
prefer  for  that  reason  to  call  it  by  another  name,  we  are
at  liberty  to  do  so,  provided  we  honestly  attribute  to  it,
under  that  sweeter  name,  all  the  relations  and  functions
by  which  the  existence  of  matter  has  become  certain  to
common  sense,  and  has  been  assumed  by  science  and


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY


141

the  arts,  since  the  beginning  of  history.  The  essence
which  any  man  attributes  to  matter  expresses  his  own
experience  much  better  than  it  does  the  nature  of
matter  itself;  but  it  will  be  a  true  idea,  as  a  sensation  or
a  maxim  may  be  true,  if  it  exactly  reports  some  circum¬
stance  or  relation  or  specious  quality  which  it  interests
us  to'  discover  in  that  province  of  nature.  The  point
that  interests  us  in  practical  science  and  art  is  the
method  of  genesis  in  things,  which  determines  the
successive  embodiment  of  essences  in  them,  their
quantity  and  distribution.  The  essences  distinguish
the  occasions,  but  the  movement  of  matter  pro¬
duces  them  in  their  places,  and  makes  those  essences
relevant  to  existence  at  all.  The  incapacity  of  the
materialist  to  deduce  logically  from  the  terms  of  his
theory — such  as  extension,  atoms,  electric  charges,
energy,  or  what  not — the  other  variegated  terms  in
which  our  senses  or  imagination  may  picture  the  world,
is  therefore  a  matter  of  course;  far  from  being  a  defect,
this  is  a  sign  that  his  theory  is  not  merely  verbal  but
may  have  penetrated  beneath  the  confused  surface  of
events  and  partly  traced  their  dynamic  thread ;  whereas
a  pictorial  physics  that  should  literally  reproduce  every¬
thing  just  as  it  appears  would  be  entirely  unintelligent
and  perfectly  useless.

There  is  a  more  speculative  prejudice  which  should
also  vanish  before  the  equal  primacy  of  all  essences:  it
is  the  feeling  that  complexity,  beyond  a  In  the  realm
certain  point,  is  something  difficult,  unlikely,  of  essence
and  incredible.  This  feeling  is  human,  too  Apriority*
human ;  it  expresses  our  scepticism  or  over  the^
amusement  or  despair  before  any  object  that  the  natural
stretches  too  much  our  powers  of  intuition.  °^ra*®al
It  is  relative  to  the  human  scale,  and  has  no  un
meaning  in  the  field  of  being  as  a  whole.  The  measure
of  complexity  or  of  unity  that  best  suits  the  human
mind  is  itself  variable;  but  wherever  it  may  be  fixed,  it


i42  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

will  mark  one  degree  in  an  infinite  series  of  proportions,
each  neither  more  nor  less  central  or  proper  than  any
other  degree.  Even  nature  seems  to  be  full  of  a  vast¬
ness  and  a  minuteness  that  baffle  us,  yet  are  her  homeliest
accidents;  and  disproportionate  as  her  scale  may  be  to
our  fancy,  she  after  all  contains  us  and  this  fancy  of
ours ;  and  at  bottom  she  may  be  composed  in  a  fashion
relatively  sympathetic  to  our  categories  of  thought,
for  instance,  atomically,  monotonously,  or  subject  to
calculation;  so  that  to  speak  of  composition,  elabora¬
tion,  and  a  precarious  evolved  complexity,  may  not  be
meaningless  in  respect  to  natural  things.  Even  size,
childish  as  the  notion  seems,  might  have  a  natural
measure:  for  instance,  if  the  more  atoms  a  thing  con¬
tained  the  larger  it  should  be  said  to  be,  or  if  the
organising  forces  emanating  from  one  nucleus  had  a
greater  scope  than  those  emanating  from  another,  so
that  the  smaller  organism  might  be  enveloped  in  the
larger  and  be  a  part  of  it.  If  a  thing  is  finite  either
inwards  or  outwards,  forward  or  back,  a  scale  may  be
fixed  by  which  it  may  be  internally  measured.  But  in
the  realm  of  essence  all  such  foothold  fails  for  human
prerogative.  Here  every  degree  of  complexity  is  as
calmly  enthroned  as  every  other:  none  is  more  primi¬
tive  or  natural  or  safe  than  the  rest,  since  all  are
necessary  and  all  eternal.  The  most  agitated  Paradiso
ever  painted  by  Tintoretto,  the  most  insane  Walpurgis-
nachtstraum ,  is  as  elementary  and  fundamental  an
essence  as  the  number  one  or  the  straight  line.  The
realm  of  essence  never  was  formed;  there  are  no  seeds
or  accretions  in  it;  and  we  may  as  legitimately  imagine
the  simple,  the  monotonous,  or  the  chaotic  to  be
derogations  from  some  organic  form,  as  this  organic
form  to  be  a  composition  out  of  those  elements.
Existence,  that  everlasting  Penelope,  may  sometimes
embroider  and  sometimes  undo;  but  all  the  mornings
and  all  the  evenings  are  one  eternity,  in  which  the


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY  143

finished  work  and  the  ultimate  elements  are  equally
present.

Nor  is  this  parity  of  all  essences  confined  to  those
which  may  figure  in  the  evolution  of  a  single  world,
from  its  atoms  to  the  idea  of  its  total  system,  Nor
seen  under  the  form  of  eternity:  the  parity  existent  over
extends  to  the  unused  essences  as  well. th? non'
Existence,  infinite  as  it  may  be  in  some  direc-  exls  en  '
tions  and  by  a  perpetual  budding,  is  narrowly  hedged  in
at  every  step;  it  is  all  bias  and  exclusions.  Not  so
the  depths  of  pure  Being:  there  all  is  simultaneous,
nothing  forbidden,  nothing  pre-eminent.  The  home¬
lessness  or  even  terror  which  sometimes  assaults  the
mind  at  the  thought  of  so  many  stars  and  planets,  so
many  animals  and  cross-purposes  even  on  earth,  is
redoubled  when  we  consider  the  truly  remorseless
infinity  of  essence.  It  contains  with  perfect  placidity,
and  without  begging  leave  either  of  God  or  man,
everything  whatsoever.  The  selections  which  nature
may  make  out  of  that  manifold  store,  whether  she  picks
a  simple  thing  out  first  or  a  complex  thing  first  (and
who  shall  say  which  she  picks  out  first,  if  she  has  been
picking  them  out  alternately  for  ever?),  establish  no
essential  priority  among  them.  It  is  as  easy  for  Being
to  be  great  as  to  be  little:  no  effort  is  concerned,  no
probability;  all  great  things  and  all  little  things  are
equally  integral  to  the  infinite.

It  follows  that  all  psychologisms,  all  attempts  to
analyse  given  essences  into  original  elements  or  to
assign  to  them  a  history  or  a  meaning,  are  Essences
so  many  materialisms  in  disguise.  Those  have  no
elements  are  not  elements  of  the  given  essence,  family  tree-
but  are  other  whole  essences  which  might  have  been
given  when  the  material  situation  was  different.  Such
history  is  not  the  history  of  these  ideas  (which  have  no
history)  but  of  the  natural  course  of  events  which  led
up  to  the  moment  which  begat  these  ideas;  a  course  of


*44


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


events  which,  at  various  points,  may  have  begotten  other
ideas  introducing  those  now  alive,  and  having  (for  the
best  of  reasons)  a  family  likeness  to  them.  Finally
those  meanings  are  not  proper  to  those  essences  (which
are  what  they  are  and  have  no  further  meaning)  but
express  the  residual  pregnancy  of  the  mind,  tempted
to  wander  dramatically,  and  to  trace  the  material
agencies,  past  or  future,  which  may  have  flowed  into
or  may  flow  out  of  the  present  event,  in  which  now,
like  bursting  rockets,  these  essences  shine  forth.  Such
past  and  future  events  will  bear  names,  and  will  be
indicated  by  imaginary  terms  which  are  themselves
essences;  but  the  whole  force  of  the  felt  derivation
will  come,  not  from  these  terms  or  names,  but  from
an  impulse  sweeping  through  them,  rehearsed  in  dis¬
course,  and  covering  the  unspecified  flux  of  material
forces  actually  carrying  events  forward  from  phase  to
phase.  If  the  reader  will  recall  the  method  of  Hegel
or  that  of  Taine,  he  will  understand  what  I  mean:  a  set
of  brilliant  dramatic  sketches  or  notes  of  moral  attitudes,
strung  together  so  as  to  suggest  a  voluminous  current
of  evolution  carrying  these  various  spiritual  moments
on  the  crest  of  its  waves.  It  is  a  material  movement
sketched  by  romantic  suggestion  and  wrapped  in
moralistic  eloquence  or  even  in  prophecy.

The  only  veritable  idealism  is  Platonic:  it  sees  in
essences  the  essences  themselves,  self-enclosed  and
Their  oni  insulated,  ultimate  and  eternal.  The  occasions
geneaiog/is  on  which  they  are  manifested  may  be  traced
that  of  their  according  to  the  physics  or  theology  in  vogue :

occasions.  ^  j.  j  ^  o

that  temporal  underpinning  cannot  change
their  intrinsic  nature.  And  as  the  means  of  purifying
and  coming  truly  to  possess  an  essence  is  simply  to
contemplate  it,  so  the  means  of  conceiving  the  essences
given  elsewhere,  for  instance  in  the  feelings  and  thoughts
of  other  men,  is  poetic  imagination,  dramatic  sympathy.
Shakespeare  is  your  only  psychologist:  the  others  are


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY  145

physiologists  or  external  observers  who  entangle  their
poetic  science  in  a  net  of  scholastic  fictions.  The
mechanism  of  life  being  very  obscure  and  remote  from
gross  observation,  it  is  inevitable  that  it  should  be
adumbrated  at  first  in  fables  and  metaphors.  When
the  notion  of  matter  is  crude  and  pictorial,  there  is  need
of  piecing  it  out  with  crude  and  pictorial  notions  of
souls,  psychic  mechanisms,  laws  of  association,  moral
dialectic,  and  blasts  of  supernatural  influence.  These
are  only  other  names  for  veritable  matter  and  its  secret
work;  but  they  point  to  facts  which  science  may  over¬
look,  if  it  has  grown  up  in  the  practice  of  mechanical
arts.  Maturity,  in  the  rhetorical  school  of  physics,
will  render  these  myths  more  and  more  harmless  and
transparent,  as  it  will  all  other  forms  of  rhetoric;  while
maturity  in  the  scientific  school,  if  it  is  ever  attained,
will  reduce  those  pictorial  models  more  frankly  to
symbols,  and  the  field  of  science  to  the  field  of  action.
But  it  is  not  the  reform  of  science  that  interests  me
here;  I  am  concerned  to  rescue  from  oblivion  one  of
those  preliminary  facts  which  the  science  of  things
external  ignores,  although  it  is  the  breath  of  its  nostrils:
I  mean  intuition,  with  the  inevitable  unity  and  origin¬
ality  of  the  essence  which  that  intuition  defines  from
moment  to  moment.

There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  nature  began  by
being  simpler  than  she  is;  we  may  rather  suppose  that
she  has  cycles,  perhaps  local  cycles,  of  relative  Essences
complication  with  intervals  of  dissolution  or  given  on
chaos.  And  the  beginnings  of  intuition  can  occasions
be  reasonably  looked  for  only  at  the  height,  ™y  beand
or  near  the  height,  of  this  complication;  mus^be11
intuition  presupposes  reactive  adjustment,  unitary-
psychic  inertia  or  propulsion,  and  therefore  an  ela¬
borate  hereditary  life  such  as  only  a  most  delicately-
balanced  cosmos  could  contain.  Yet  though  begotten
and  nurtured  in  the  lap  of  complexity,  intuition  opens


146  the  realm  of  essence

its  childish  eyes  upon  blank  light;  experience  does
begin  with  the  simple,  although  nature  does  not.  The
intuition  of  a  simple  essence  is  called  a  feeling;  and  the
essence  given  in  a  primitive  feeling  is  likely  to  be  some
truly  simple,  quite  stupid,  essence,  such  as  sheer  inten¬
sity.  This  intensity,  when  there  is  some  concomitant
motion  excited  in  the  animal,  may  seem  vaguely  to  have
a  seat  and  to  lie  in  some  quarter ;  and  it  may  be  coloured
with  an  incipient  tint  of  uneasiness  or  of  contentment.
Above  all,  this  intensity  will  be  felt  to  wax  and  wane;
it  comes  as  a  waxing,  an  interruption  to  repose;  and
the  interruption  over  or  gulped  down,  repose  comes
slowly  back.  So  at  least  I  conceive  it:  nature  may
have  many  different  ways  of  calling  forth  intuition,
here  stealthily,  there  perhaps  suddenly  with  a  flare  of
trumpets,  and  with  a  consciousness  of  having  always
existed  and  of  being  omniscient.  Suffice  it  that  this
first  revelation,  whether  to  worm  or  god,  is  a  specious
thing,  having  a  specious  unity,  and  a  precise  specious
character;  the  vagueness  or  abstractness  imputed  to  it,
when  compared  with  the  supposed  material  circum¬
stances,  are  its  very  definition  and  familiar  aspect
taken  in  itself.  It  may  be  a  whiff  of  emotion;  it  may
be  a  perception;  it  may  be  a  moral  sentiment  redolent
of  a  thousand  high  thoughts  and  profound  tragedies:
in  each  case  it  will  be  a  complete  apparition,  born  at
that  moment  and  dying  with  it.  The  onlooker,  if
informed  of  its  existence,  may  understand  its  origin,
its  truth  or  falsity,  its  promise  for  the  future;  these  are
relations  external  to  it,  physical  or  historical.  They
can  be  disclosed  only  when  all  the  postulates  of  physics,
which  are  those  of  action,  have  been  made  by  the
discursive  intellect  in  the  service  of  animal  faith.  In
itself  the  given  essence  signifies  only  that  which  it  is;
its  inner  perspectives,  if  any,  are  of  its  essence;  such
reports  or  imaginations  of  things  beyond  as  may  trouble
it  are  elements  in  its  being.  It  is  the  deliverance  of  a


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY


T47

dream:  the  remote  exists  in  it  only  as  a  part  of  the
immediate.  There  is  no  complexity  and  no  length  of
evolution  which  the  immediate  may  not  synthesise  in
one  picture  and  possess  in  its  essence.  If  experience
in  the  child  begins  with  the  simple,  in  the  wise  man
it  begins  with  the  complex;  and  his  wisdom  need  not
trouble  to  banish  that  complexity  and  revert  to  the
simple,  if  it  can  learn  to  envisage  the  complex  as  a
pure  essence,  in  its  harmless  immediacy.  Whether  his
spirit  rests  on  a  simple  or  a  complex  essence  will  make
no  difference  to  the  purity  of  his  contemplation,  but
will  turn  on  his  mood  or  the  accidents  of  his  life  and
education — things  irrelevant  to  spiritual  insight.

When  I  say  that  in  a  given  essence  all  its  parts
are  given,  is  not  this  an  enormous  exaggeration?  It
would  be,  if  I  meant  the  material  or  natural  parts  of  an
existing  object;  these  would  not  only  be  impossible  to
assemble  into  any  human  view,  but  would  be  impossible
to  define  or  distinguish  individually;  for  the  structure
of  things  is  fluid,  their  composition  perhaps  infinite
inwards,  and  their  relations  outwards  certainly  inex¬
haustible.  But  I  am  speaking  of  the  features  actually
composing  a  given  essence,  and  these  by  definition  are
all  there.  They  are  not,  and  can  never  be,  anywhere
else ;  for  they  are  merely  the  features  found  as  they  are
found,  and  where  they  are  found,  possessing  the  precise
degree  of  definition,  separation,  and  connection  which
they  have  in  that  living  moment.  As  to  be  a  living  act
of  spirit  is  the  nature  of  intuition,  so  to  be  an  individual
unity  is  the  nature  of  essence.

Let  me  give  three  familiar  illustrations  of  this:  one
drawn  from  emotion,  one  from  perception,  and  one
from  imagination.

Suppose  that  in  a  Spanish  town  I  come  upon  an
apparently  blind  old  beggar  sitting  against  a  wall,
thrumming  his  feeble  guitar,  and  uttering  an  occasional
hoarse  wail  by  way  of  singing.  It  is  a  sight  which  I


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


148

have  passed  a  hundred  times  unnoticed;  but  now
suddenly  I  am  arrested  and  seized  with  a  voluminous
T11  .  unreasoning  sentiment — call  it  pity,  for  want

Illustrations:  r  i  a

First,  the  of  a  better  name.  An  analytic  psychologist
ofpity11  (I  myself,  perhaps,  in  that  capacity)  might
regard  my  absurd  feeling  as  a  compound  of
the  sordid  aspect  of  this  beggar  and  of  some  obscure
bodily  sensation  in  myself,  due  to  lassitude  or  bile,  to
a  disturbing  letter  received  in  the  morning,  or  to  the
general  habit  of  expecting  too  little  and  remembering
too  much;  or  if  the  psychologist  was  a  Freudian,  he
might  invoke  some  suppressed  impression  received  at
the  most  important  period  of  life,  before  the  age  of
two.  But  since  that  supposed  impression  is  forgotten
and  those  alleged  causes  are  hypothetical,  they  are  no
part  of  what  I  feel  now.  What  I  feel  is  simply,  as
Othello  says,  “  the  pity  of  it  ”.  And  if  I  stop  to
decipher  what  this  it  contains,  I  may  no  doubt  be  led,
beyond  my  first  feeling,  to  various  images  and  romantic
perspectives.  My  fancy  might  soon  be  ranging  over
my  whole  universe  of  discourse,  over  antiquity,  over
recent  wars,  over  so  many  things  ending  in  smoke;  and
my  discursive  imagery  would  terminate  in  dreary  cold
facts,  the  prose  of  history,  from  which  my  emotion
would  have  wholly  faded.  The  pity  is  not  for  them:
it  is  not  for  the  old  man,  perhaps  a  fraud  and  a  dirty
miser;  it  is  pity  simply,  the  pity  of  existence,  suffusing,
arresting,  rendering  visionary  the  spectacle  of  the
moment  and  spreading  blindly  outwards,  like  a  light
in  the  dark,  towards  objects  which  it  does  not  avail  to
render  distinguishable.  There  is,  then,  in  this  emo¬
tion,  no  composition.  There  is  pregnancy,  a  quality
having  affinity  with  certain  ulterior  things  rather  than
with  others;  but  these  things  are  not  given;  they  are
not  needed  in  the  emotion,  which  arises  absolutely  in
its  full  quality  and  in  its  strong  simplicity.  My  life
might  have  begun  and  ended  there.  Nothing  is  too


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY


149

complex  to  be  primitive;  nothing  is  too  simple  to  stand
alone.

Suppose  now  that  I  turn  through  the  town  gates  and
suddenly  see  a  broad  valley  spread  out  before  me  with
the  purple  sierra  in  the  distance  beyond.  Second  the
This  expanse,  this  vastness,  fills  my  intuition;  perception
also,  perhaps,  some  sense  of  the  deeper  breath  of  dlstance-
which  I  draw  as  if  my  breast  expanded  in  sympathy
with  the  rounded  heavens.  Here  the  psychologist
intervening  may  demur,  and  say  that  I  cannot  see
depth,  because  depth  is  a  straight  line  terminating  in
the  eye,  along  which  it  is  impossible  for  the  eye  to
travel.  Distance,  he  will  assert,  must  be  conveyed  to
me  through  a  muscular  sense  and  the  suggestion  of
motion;  and  my  perception  of  the  landscape  must  be
compounded  of  a  flat  picture  in  the  retina  plus  sensa¬
tions  in  the  muscles  of  the  eye  or  (as  I  was  innocently
confessing)  elsewhere  in  the  body,  conveying  to  me
the  suggestion  of  a  great  opportunity  to  move.

It  is  very  true  that  pictorial  space,  or  the  specious
essence  of  extension,  appears  in  intuition  to  animals
capable  of  locomotion,  whose  attention  has  a  forward
direction — that  of  action — so  that  they  are  capable  of
feeling  the  difference  between  right  and  left,  up  and
down,  forward  and  back,  here  and  there.  All  the
internal  and  external  organs  of  their  bodies  are  engaged
in  these  movements,  and  it  is  fair  to  suppose  that  they
all  contribute  something  to  the  picture  of  space  which,
in  living,  dominates  their  spirits.  But  this  picture  is
not,  in  itself,  laid  out  in  three  dimensions.  Sensible
These  are  first  discriminated  by  the  geometry  space  is
of  builders  in  their  material  blocks  and  stones,
and  are  specified  in  their  working  drawings
and  calculations .  To  attempt  to  piece  together  pictorial
space  out  of  imaginary  earlier  intuitions  of  dismembered
geometrical  elements  would  be  the  height  of  artifice.
The  third  dimension  does  not  need  to  be  added  to  the


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


150

other  two,  because  the  other  two  never  appear  without
it.  Breathing,  stifling,  writhing,  and  running  are  not
felt,  or  seen,  to  occur  in  flatland  before  they  are  felt
and  seen  to  occur  in  space.  Perhaps,  since  the  possi¬
bilities  of  pure  intuition  are  infinite,  some  paralytic
geometer  might  see  a  plane  in  two  dimensions  at  no
distance  and  in  no  direction  from  himself — the  pure
essence  of  flatness  lying  nowhere  or  lying  just  there,
in  its  own  flat  world;  and  nothing  militates  against
the  possibility  of  conceiving  a  mathematical  plane,  if
circumstances  lead  some  rapt  spirit  to  lose  itself  in  that
essence.  But  such  an  essence  would  be  no  part  of  the
specious  essence  of  extension  as  given  to  ordinary
mortals:  it  would  not  even  be,  in  any  literal  sense,  an
abstraction  from  the  latter,  but  an  essence  of  a  different
kind  (as  algebraic  essences  are  different  from  geo¬
metrical,  or  writing  from  speech) ;  and  nevertheless
it  might  serve  to  describe  in  part  the  same  material
objects.  A  plane  actually  imagined  is  a  feature  in
pictorial  space,  not  an  antecedent  to  it;  the  plane  is
viewed  from  a  point  outside  and  in  front  of  it;  its
length  and  breadth  are  relative  to  the  distance  at  which
it  lies.  Animals  surely  begin  by  seeing  moving  objects
in  a  particular  quarter  beyond  themselves,  away  from
the  occupied  centre  of  their  own  bodies;  else  seeing
would  not  be  looking,  as  it  is  in  the  play  of  action.

Even  if  we  suppose  that  originally  the  intuition  of
extension  was  not  a  perception  but  only  a  diffuse
ah  genetic  feeling  without  indicative  force,  this  felt
psychology  extension  would  be  spread  in  all  directions,

IS  3  cus-  (  i  7

guised  spherical  and  roomy,  and  by  no  means  a
materialism.  surface  without  space  before  and  behind  it.
For  the  analysis  of  such  essences  given  in  intuition,
which  is  a  literary  task,  all  physiological  or  metaphysical
hypotheses  are  worse  than  useless;  they  are  sophistical
and  blinding,  and  tend  only  to  falsify  the  honest  face  of
experience.  The  question  whether  I  see  distance  is  a


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY  15 1

question  not  for  science  but  for  me.  If  I  see  distance
I  see  it;  if  I  infer  it — as  when  I  ask  myself  how  far  a
distant  object  may  be — I  infer  it;  but  the  contention
that  when  I  see  it  I  must  nevertheless  be  inferring  it,  is
impertinent.  From  what  should  I  infer  it,  when  the
result  of  the  supposed  inference  is  the  only  essence
before  me?  Nothing  is  present  to  the  spirit  at  any
time  but  what  is  then  present  to  it;  this  cannot  be  in
the  least  altered  by  the  fact  that  other  things  may  have
been  present  to  it,  or  to  other  spirits,  at  other  times.
These  other  moments  will  have,  no  doubt,  an  equal
importance  to  themselves;  and  memory  or  theory,
surveying  them  in  their  imagined  order,  may  see  a
plot  or  development  in  them,  which  may  seem  more
interesting  than  any  of  them  in  isolation;  but  this
history  or  plot  exists  for  the  spirit  only  in  that  contem¬
plative  or  retrospective  moment  in  which,  as  at  the  end
of  a  Greek  tragedy,  it  is  summed  up  and  proclaimed.
Such  a  plot  is  a  perspective  in  the  imagination,  a  poetic
or  philosophic  idea,  itself  a  surface  view  of  surfaces;
the  causes  of  all  these  incidents,  of  their  existence  as
well  as  their  sequence,  lie  far  beneath.  Ideas  are  not
material  things,  or  tribes  of  animals,  though  idealists
might  seem  to  think  so;  in  tracing  their  genesis  or
evolution  through  the  world,  it  is  the  movement  of  the
world,  of  the  conditions  and  causes  of  those  ideas,  that
we  are  tracing  under  their  name.  An  intuition  is  like
a  flame;  if  the  substance  that  fed  it  can  continue  to  feed
it,  or  can  kindle  it  again,  it  may  endure  or  revive,  in  the
midst  of  such  other  intuitions  as  the  flux  of  life  may
involve.  Discourse  thus  proceeds  in  a  connected  but
spasmodic  manner,  expressing  at  each  moment  the
cumulative  energies,  habits,  and  impulses  of  the
psyche,  herself  a  mode  or  cycle  of  physical  events;  but
the  phases  of  spirit,  the  actual  intuitions  and  emotions
which  diversify  experience,  are  as  little  capable  of
adding  themselves  up  as  the  kisses  of  yesterday  are


152


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


of  building  nests  in  the  air  and  hatching  the  kisses  of
to-morrow.

Suppose,  finally,  a  Chinaman  at  the  Louvre  invited
to  admire  the  Venus  of  Milo.  The  admiration  expected
Third,  the  him  is  to  be  a  spiritual  emotion,  an  actual
sense  of  flight  or  transport  into  a  fresh  region  of
eauty'  the  beautiful.  It  will  not  do  if  intellectually
he  is  able  to  recognise  the  master-lines  of  the  statue,
although  broken  or  because  broken;  nor  if  he  can
recall  the  place  which  our  historians  of  art  may  assign
to  such  a  theme  in  the  development  of  sculpture.  I
will  assume  that  he  is  a  man  of  cultivated  taste,  accus¬
tomed  to  the  arts  of  his  own  country,  so  full  of  delicate
ministrations  to  the  senses  and  so  flattering  to  the
ironies,  perhaps  to  the  cruelties,  of  the  mind.  He  will
relegate  to  their  place  the  keys  to  universal  history
offered  by  philosophers,  and  the  technical  devices  that
may  seem  for  the  moment  the  whole  of  art  to  the  snobs
of  the  studio;  and  after  listening  to  both  he  may  con¬
tinue  to  feel  in  his  heart  that  this  leaning  block  of
marble  is  blank  and  heavy;  that  a  Greek  goddess  is
but  a  stalwart  washer-woman;  and  that  such  monu¬
mental  designs  are  thick,  vacant,  chalky,  clumsy,  and
rude.  .  He  will  remain  cold,  because  he  will  miss  here
the  things  which  in  his  case  can  work  the  miracle  and
entrance  the  mind:  things  minute,  ornate,  suave,  parti¬
coloured,  fragrant,  incidental.

The  sense  of  beauty  is  not  a  feeling  separable  from
some  intuition  of  form;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  feeling,

The  sources  no}  a  verbal  or  intellectual  judgement.  It
and  their  arises  by  the  convergence  in  the  psyche  of

beSng  tolon  many  assanlts  and  many  reactions,  from  far
the  material  and  near .  Some  of  these  influences  may
psyche*6  come  from  the  region  which  the  aesthetes  of
the  last  generation  denounced  as  morality,
or  from  that  which  the  aesthetes  of  to-day  denounce  as
literature;  some  may  come  from  erotic  sensibility,


ESSENCES  ALL  PRIMARY


iS3

from  familiarity,  from  lucidity,  from  harmony  with
other  esteemed  things.  The  Venus  of  Milo  will  not
seem  beautiful,  in  any  deep  sense,  to  any  one  incapable
of  feeling  the  luminous  scorn,  the  victorious  perfection,
of  the  Greek  immortals.  But  all  this  composition,
though  we  may  give  moral  names  to  its  elements,
occurs  underground :  it  is  physical  and  merely  pre¬
liminary  to  the  beauty  realised  in  intuition.  This
realised  beauty  is  not  compounded  of  those  miscel¬
laneous  extinct  impressions:  it  could  certainly  not  be
bred  in  a  soil  which  these  impressions  had  The  bgau
not  raked  and  watered,  but  it  is  a  fresh  flower,  feius  un^
with  its  own  form,  its  own  scent,  and  its  own  precedented,

«  .  7  t  .  .  single,  and

naughtiness,  ror  this  reason  too  it  cannot  revealed
be  preserved  mummified  in  any  external  onb to.

.  .  r  .  ,  ,  .  .  ,  .  ,  .  enthusiasm.

object;  it  can  belong  to  things  only  by  being
attributed  to  them  by  some  living  soul.  Those  who
insist  that  the  marble  Venus  must  be  either  beautiful
or  ugly  in  itself,  apart  from  all  Greeks  and  Chinamen,
are  allowing  a  grammatical  form  of  judgement  to  mis¬
lead  them  about  the  subtler  ways  in  which  essences
may  be  manifested  in  the  world.  Not  the  marble
which  a  man  without  any  sense  of  beauty  might  see,
is  the  seat  of  beauty;  the  contrary  quality  may  be
as  truly  attributed  to  it.  The  only  Venus  which  is
inalienably  beautiful  is  the  divine  essence  revealed  to
the  lover  as  he  gazes,  perhaps  never  to  be  revealed  to
another  man,  nor  revealed  to  himself  again.  In  this
manifest  goddess  (for  so  the  gods  were  originally
revealed)  her  beauty  is  indeed  intrinsic  and  eternal;
and  it  is  as  impossible  that  its  particular  quality  should
be  elsewhere,  as  that  she  should  be  without  it.

The  nature  of  essence  appears  in  nothing  better
than  in  the  beautiful,  when  this  is  a  positive  presence
to  the  spirit  and  not  a  vague  title  conventionally  be¬
stowed.  In  a  form  felt  to  be  beautiful  an  obvious
complexity  composes  an  obvious  unity:  a  marked


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


154

intensity  and  individuality  are  seen  to  belong  to  a
reality  utterly  immaterial  and  incapable  of  existing
otherwise  than  speciously.  This  divine  beauty  is
evident,  fugitive,  impalpable,  and  homeless  in  the
world  of  material  fact ;  yet  it  is  unmistakably  individual
and  sufficient  unto  itself,  and  although  perhaps  soon
eclipsed  is  never  really  extinguished:  for  it  visits  time,
but  belongs  to  eternity.


CHAPTER  XI

COMPARISON  WITH  SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES

The  type  of  being  which  I  call  essence  has  long  been
familiar  to  philosophers,  and  it  is  unfamiliar  to  the
man  in  the  street,  not  because  it  is  too  remote  Pure  essence
from  him  but  because  it  is  too  near.  I  might  discerned  by
almost  say  that  my  theory  is  a  variant  of  materialised
Platonism,  designed  to  render  Platonic  logic  by  him.
and  morals  consistent  with  the  facts  of  nature.  I  am
afraid,  however,  that  this  readjustment  unhinges
Platonism  so  completely  that  I  have  no  right  to  call
my  doctrine  Platonic.  In  the  realm  of  essence  as  I
conceive  it,  the  sphere  of  Socratic  Ideas  is  infinitely
extended  and  freed  from  all  confusion  with  natural
forces.  I  am  no  pupil  of  Plato’s  in  all  that  phase  of
his  thought  in  which  he  seems  to  supply  the  lack  of  a
cosmology  by  turning  moral  and  ideal  terms  into  super¬
natural  powers.  The  supernatural  is  nothing  but  an
extension  of  the  natural  into  the  unknown,  and  there
is  infinite  room  for  it;  but  when  these  deeper  or
remoter  parts  of  nature  are  described  in  myths  evidently
designed  for  the  edification  or  easier  government  of
human  society,  I  distrust  the  fiction.  I  distrust  it,
I  mean,  as  a  piece  of  physics,  or  information  about
matters  of  fact;  but  it  may  be  a  genuine  and  beautiful
expression  of  the  moral  experience  and  the  moral
interests  which  have  prompted  it.  In  this  capacity
even  the  myths  and  the  cosmology  of  Plato  are  memor-

155


156  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

able;  they  become  again  pure  essences  for  poetic
contemplation,  like  the  Ideas;  and  their  moral  signi¬
ficance  helps  to  render  them  warm  and  interesting
to  a  man  of  feeling  without  deceiving  him  about  the
conditions  of  his  natural  life.

In  calling  his  Ideas  ideas  and  his  myths  myths,
Plato  seems  to  acknowledge  that  they  are,  after  all,
This  nothing  but  essences;  the  power  which  they
materiaiisa-  were  represented  as  exercising  over  nature
incidental.  was  not  their  chief  claim  to  respect.  Nature
was  a  phenomenon  to  be  superseded;  the
material  image  once  shattered,  the  god  which  it  repre¬
sented  so  imperfectly  would  appear  in  his  proper  glory.
His  power  was  an  accidental  effect  due  to  the  prox¬
imity  of  a  matter  capable  of  reflecting  his  likeness,  and
of  preserving  it  for  a  time;  his  intrinsic  and  eternal
being  was  that  of  an  essence.  Such,  I  think,  was  the
fundamental  conviction  of  Plato,  in  his  free  moments;
at  least  such  was  afterwards  the  experience  of  many  a
Platonising  soul,  in  ages  more  religious  than  that  of
Plato.

Without  any  pretence  to  be  religious  or  mystical  I
find  myself  daily  in  that  case.  I  cannot  read  a  book  or
Essence  think  of  a  friend  or  grieve  or  rejoice  at  any
purlin  fresh  event,  without  some  essence  rising
poetic  sensibly  before  me,  the  sole  actual  harvest
indndfs1-acy  t0  me  of  that  labour.  At  every  moment  the
interested-  rattle  of  the  machine  of  nature,  and  of  my
ness-  own  engine,  unless  I  lose  the  sense  of  it
altogether,  is  at  once  revealed  and  hidden  by  some
immediate  essence,  which  it  wears  like  a  shining
garment,  or  more  often,  perhaps,  merely  suggests  to
me  as  its  meaning,  its  beauty,  or  its  secret.  How  should
spirit  ever  come  upon  anything  else?  Yet  this  trick  of
arresting  the  immediate  is  in  one  sense  an  interruption
to  life ;  it  is  proper  only  to  poets,  mystics,  or  epicureans ;
it  was  incompatible  with  the  political,  censorious


SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES


157

temper  of  a  traditional  Greek  philosopher.  Socrates
and  Plato  on  the  whole  were  conservative.  They  were
absolutely  serious  only  in  their  patriotism,  in  their
legislative  convictions,  in  their  zeal  for  a  well-ordered
life.  The  rest  of  their  philosophy  was  designed  to  be  a
safeguard  or  an  ornament  for  the  perfect  citizen.  They
were  content  that  his  mind  should  dwell  in  a  castle  of
words,  in  a  mythical  world  no  matter  how  fantastic,  if
only  his  hand  was  strengthened  thereby  and  his  will
concentrated  on  maintaining  intact  the  stone  walls  and
the  iron  laws  of  his  city.  The  same  sentiment  is
perennial  with  conservatives,  and  would  be  reasonable
if  any  city  or  any  morality  could  really  be  conserved;
but  substance  is  in  flux,  in  spite  of  the  cries  of  all  tragic
heroes.  Myths,  maintained  artificially,  cannot  restore
morality;  but  a  new  harmony  in  life,  defining  a  new
morality,  will  clothe  itself  spontaneously  in  some  new
myth.  Socrates  and  Plato  could  not  revive  the  Greek
city  which  they  loved,  but  they  facilitated  the  triumph
of  Christianity,  which  would  have  filled  them  with
horror.  The  stone  walls  crumbled  and  the  air-castle
remained.  Essence  thus  came  to  its  own  again,  but
abusively,  pretending  to  be  more  than  essence;  and
mankind  has  been  divided  ever  since  between  the
impulse  to  admire  the  vision  and  the  impulse  to
denounce  the  lie.

If  a  philosophy  like  Platonism,  founded  on  the
intuition  of  essences,  so  soon  materialised  them  into
existences,  spirits,  and  powers  (objects  of  Itis
belief  not  amenable  to  intuition),  no  wonder  normally
that  other  systems,  initially  interested  only  °n  science
in  alleged  facts,  physical,  psychological,  or  and  experi-
theological,  should  have  overlooked  essences  ence'
altogether.  Not  that  the  most  distracted  or  dogmatic
mind  ever  ceases  in  fact  to  contemplate  mere  essences,
namely,  the  terms  in  which  it  frames  its  views,  and  the
emotions  with  which  it  views  them;  but  the  object  it  is


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


158

intent  upon  is  always  an  ulterior  object,  an  existing  world,
where  the  things  and  events  it  believes  in  shall  stand  or
move  in  a  framework  of  external  relations.  When  it
calls  these  existences  sensations,  atoms,  space,  time,  or
persons,  and  wonders  which  of  these  names  describes
them  best,  the  test  does  not  lie  in  any  comparison  of  the
essences  evoked  by  those  names  and  the  essences  of  the
existing  objects,  for  since  these  objects  are  removed
facts  their  essences  cannot  be  present  to  intuition.  The
consequence  is  that  even  in  thought  the  given  essences
lose  their  interest ;  you  stop  asking  yourself  what  positive
notion  you  have  of  a  person  or  an  atom,  of  space  or  of
time,  or  of  a  sensation;  the  choice  between  these  notions
becomes  like  the  choice  of  words  in  a  sentence,  not
determined  so  much  by  their  intrinsic  character  as  by
the  relations  into  which  they  fall  and  the  current  of
intent  and  expectation  that  runs  through  some  in  one
direction  and  through  others  in  another.  In  other
words,  what  concerns  the  naturalistic  philosopher  in
his  choice  of  terms  is  the  external  relations  which,  in
using  them,  he  is  led  to  attribute  to  the  pressing  events
which  they  designate.  For  his  purposes  an  atom  is  the
unit  (whatever  it  may  be)  in  physical  transformations;
a  sensation  is  a  means  (no  matter  what)  of  registering  a
fact;  a  person  is  a  centre  (be  it  what  it  will)  of  observation
or  opinion.  In  this  way  not  only  physics  but  psychology
comes  to  disregard  the  actual  terms  in  which  it  frames
its  system,  and  empiricism  overlooks  the  only  objects
of  immediate  experience.

Nevertheless  the  bias  of  such  an  outlook  exclusively
towards  existence  is  too  violent  not  to  have  its  nemesis.

Essences  neglected  here  will  assert  themselves
there;  they  will  invade  and  perhaps  absorb  the
fills  bothng’  ultimate  description  of  what  is  supposed  to  be

illusions  an  ex^st^n§  world.  Those  who  reject  essences
as  terms  swallow  them  as  myths.  Descrip¬
tions  of  the  universe,  when  clear,  are  so  fantastic,  so


But,  in¬
evitably


SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES


159

evidently  mere  essences  evoked  in  human  thought,  that
the  very  interest  in  existence  which  begat  those  descrip¬
tions  presently  disowns  them,  and  everybody  wonders
how  such  studious  and  earnest  men  could  be  the  dupes
of  their  own  fables.  But  in  reality  those  fables  are  not
more  fantastic  than  the  daily  aspect  of  the  sunset  or
the  grammar  of  common  speech.  They  are  essences
appearing  just  as  immediately  to  the  mind,  only  more
laboured  and  articulate;  and  as  symbols  for  the  facts
of  nature  they  may  be  just  as  true.  Indeed,  their
immediate  charm  sometimes  overcomes  philosophers  at
the  end  of  their  speculation,  as  it  overcomes  artists  and
poets  at  the  beginning;  they  see  that  what  delights  them
is  not  a  fact,  not  even  a  truth,  but  an  absolute  essence.
This  ultimate  recognition  of  essence  is  normal  in
mathematics;  nor  can  it  be  easily  avoided  in  meta¬
physics,  especially  when  mathematics,  logic,  or  poetry
becomes  dominant  there,  and  takes  the  bit  in  its  teeth.

When  Descartes,  for  example,  identified  matter  with
extension,  he  substituted  essence  for  substance:  an
improvement,  no  doubt,  for  mathematical
purposes,  but  3,n  3bdiC3.tiori  in  genuine  substitut-
physics,  which  is  founded  on  animal  faith,  ing  essences
Substance  was  what  Descartes  meant  to  stances,
describe;  it  moved,  and  extension,  being  an  unintention-
essence,  cannot  move.  When  he  imagined  discourse  to
geometrical  figures,  indistinguishable  in  scale,  K *en°^y
parts,  or  quality,  and  bounded  by  merely
ideal  lines,  nevertheless  moving  in  reference  to  one
another,  he  was  substituting  a  possible  pattern  of
nature  for  living  nature  herself.  The  essence  in  his
clear  and  distinct  intuition  seemed  to  him  fundamental
and  final;  and  so  it  would  be  to  pure  spirit;  he  forgot
that  a  spirit  cannot  be  born,  die,  or  have  a  local  habita¬
tion  in  the  bosom  of  an  essence.  The  only  substance
remaining  in  his  system — the  only  being  self-existent
in  all  its  parts  and  in  actual  flux — was  accordingly  the


160  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

discourse  in  which  the  material  world  might  appear
as  a  picture.  Descartes  thus  became  the  father  of
psychologism  against  his  will;  and  the  scientific  reform
which  he  meant  to  establish  liberated  mathematics
and  mechanics,  but  otherwise  left  confusion  worse
confounded.

It  was  reserved  for  Spinoza,  still  under  the  persuasion
that  he  was  describing  substance,  to  conceive  the
Spinoza  dis-  realm  of  essence  in  its  omnimodal  immensity,
perns  the  Human  vanities,  whether  in  speculation  or
the  realm  in  manners,  were  not  lor  him.  He  had  a  just
of  essence,  conception  of  man’s  place  in  nature,  and  in  the
presence  of  the  infinite,  love  cast  out  both  fear  and
greed  from  his  mind.  His  approach  to  essence  is  the
more  interesting  for  not  being  guided  by  any  Platonic
motive;  as  he  never  cultivated  poetry  or  sentimental
theology,  so  he  might  have  neglected  essence  altogether,
if  he  had  taken  it  merely  for  what  it  is.  All  that  his
pious  heart  respected  was  substance — that  which  exerts
force,  works  in  nature,  and  might  feed  or  threaten  him
in  his  contentment.  In  spite  of  his  speculative  scope,
his  wisdom  was  Levitical;  he  craved  above  all  things
to  be  safe  and  sure  in  his  corner  of  the  Lord’s  house.
This  safety  had,  as  it  were,  two  phases,  or  two  dimen¬
sions:  materially,  in  the  lea  of  the  tempest,  the  swallow
might  build  his  temporary  nest;  such  happiness  was  a
part  of  what  universal  nature  provided;  but  ideally  he
might  borrow  the  wings  of  the  storm,  and  enjoy  perfect
freedom  in  identity  with  that  force  which  in  creating
and  destroying  all  things  is  never  exhausted  or  defeated.

It  was  the  plethora  of  this  passion,  at  once  sacrificial
and  omnivorous,  that  carried  Spinoza  into  the  realm
His  pan-  of  essence,  and  made  him  gloat  on  its  infinity.

leadf  Wrn  to  ^oun<^  a  cmel  pleasure  in  asserting  that
hypostatfse  every  part  of  it  existed,  thereby  putting  to
Jt-  shame  the  conceit  of  mankind,  and  in  that

abasement  finding  a  fanatical  compensation  for  his


SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES


161


own  frailty.  Why,  indeed,  should  not  all  essence
exist?  If  extension  be  the  essence  of  matter,  every
possible  geometrical  figure,  in  every  possible  super¬
position  and  substitution,  must  be  equally  real  at  every
point  in  nature;  and  yet  at  all  points  pure  extension,
motionless  and  undivided,  must  be  somehow  the  only
reality.  So  in  the  other,  the  psychological,  world.
If  thinking  be  the  substance  of  all  thoughts,  all  possible
thoughts  should  be  equally  present  in  every  act  of
thinking,  and  yet  nothing  in  any  thought  should  be
real  except  the  act  of  thinking  in  its  purity.

This  tragic  contradiction — tragic  because  so  many
instincts  and  passions  meet  and  destroy  themselves
there  —  comes  of  hypostatising  essence  and  The  prin-
attempting  to  rationalise  substance.  The  ciPle  of
substance  of  this  world  (as  I  may  have  cannot^
occasion  to  argue  in  its  place)  is  no  mere  rational,
essence,  such  as  extension,  pure  Being,  or  pure  con¬
sciousness,  hypostatised  in  its  bareness:  it  is  an  exis¬
tential  flux,  of  unknown  extent  and  complexity,  which
when  it  falls  into  certain  temporary  systems  which  we
call  living  bodies,  kindles  intuition  there,  and  brings
various  essences  to  light,  which  become  terms  in  belief
and  knowledge;  but  substance,  although  thus  posited
and  symbolised  by  the  animal  mind,  always  remains
obscure  to  it.  How  should  the  essences,  mainly
emotional  and  inwardly  elicited,  which  events  evoke  in
this  or  that  sensitive  organism,  reveal  substance  in  its
inmost  constitution  and  total  extent?  That  substance,
at  this  point,  has  produced  those  appearances  is  indeed
one  of  its  characteristics,  and  so  much  we  may  safely
assert  of  it  forthwith;  but  to  legislate  for  substance  in
our  private  parliament,  or  to  assert  that  the  whole
realm  of  essence  must  somewhere  be  reduced  to  act
(as  Spinoza  supposed)  is  perfectly  gratuitous.  More¬
over,  when  the  definition  of  the  realm  of  essence — all
distinct  beings  of  all  kinds — is  turned  into  a  definition

M


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


162


of  substance,  it  contradicts  another  definition — pure
Being — which  Spinoza  could  not  help  regarding,  with
equal  rashness,  as  the  essence  of  substance  in  some
deeper  sense.  Natural  substance  must  be  allowed  to
rejoice  in  whatever  essence  it  has,  and  to  change  it  as
often  as  it  will,  and  to  bring  to  intuition  in  our  scattered
minds  such  visions  as  it  likes;  and  meantime,  in  the
realm  of  essence,  pure  Being  and  all  beings  may  lie
eternally  together  like  the  lion  and  the  lamb,  in  the
peace  of  non-existence.  Very  likely,  in  its  chosen
ways,  the  existing  world  may  be  infinite;  but  the  in¬
evitable  absolute  infinity  of  the  realm  of  essence  (a
matter  of  definition)  does  not  justify  me  in  ascribing  a
fabulous  infinity  to  substance.

In  Leibniz  (who  had  a  wonderfully  clear  head)  the
realm  of  essence  appears  in  sharp  distinction  from
in  Leibniz  existence,  under  the  name  of  “  all  possible
it  reappears  worlds  ”;  but  this  notion  is  introduced  almost
andhpureTte  playfully,  in  the  midst  of  a  theological  myth,
dubious  We  are  invited  to  assist  at  the  deliberations
theological  of  the  Creator  when  in  his  primeval  solitude
context.  he  debated  which  of  the  worlds  that  he  could
imagine  might  most  congenially  keep  him  company;
for  it  was  not  good,  he  felt,  for  God  to  be  alone.  Now,
if  we  take  this  fable  literally,  the  Creator  already  ex¬
isted  and  was  himself  one  of  the  possible  worlds,  and
a  very  special  one ;  for  he  possessed  an  intuition  of  the
whole  realm  of  essence,  and,  beneath  that,  a  mysterious
propulsive  nature  of  his  own  which  inclined  him  to
create  other  living  beings,  and  enabled  him  to  dis¬
tinguish  a  better  and  a  worse  among  mere  possibles.
Indeed,  if  we  remember  the  religious  sources  of  this
conception,  which  Leibniz  was  obliged  to  treat  with
respect,  we  may  safely  say  that  this  gallery  of  possibles
present  to  the  Creator’s  mind  is  not  the  realm  of
essence  at  all,  but  an  emanation  of  his  particular
existing  nature;  just  as  it  is  not  the  realm  of  essence


SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES  163

in  its  entirety  that  swims  before  a  novelist  when  he
debates  what  conclusion  to  give  to  his  novel;  but  the
alternatives  that  suggest  themselves  are  only  a  few,
such  as  lie  within  his  experience  and  conspire  with  his
purpose  and  are  compatible  with  the  plot  of  the  novel
as  far  as  it  has  gone.  This  Creator  would  then  be  a
perfectly  contingent  existence,  a  particular  being  find¬
ing  himself  already  at  work.  He  could  not  have  asked
himself,  before  he  existed,  whether  he  would  be  the
best  possible  God.  The  fabled  problem  of  creation
must  already  have  been  solved  before  it  could  be  pro¬
posed;  and  a  mind  considering  which  world  to  choose
is  a  world  existing  without  ever  having  been  chosen.
The  notions  of  the  possible  and  the  best,  otherwise
unintelligible,  become  significant  in  reference  to  the
accidental  potencies  and  preferences  of  that  existing
being.  His  creations,  like  those  of  any  living  artist,
would  then  be  naturally  in  his  own  image,  and  it  would
turn  out  that  of  all  those  possible  worlds  only  the  best
was  really  possible,  since  a  motive  for  creating  one
of  the  others  would  necessarily  be  wanting:  the  best
would  be  simply  the  one  which  the  Creator  actually
preferred*  and  must  have  preferred  unless  (what  is  in¬
admissible)  he  did  not  know  his  own  mind.  I  need
not  enter  into  the  moral  difficulties  which  this  rigid
monotheism  involves ;  suffice  it  that  the  realm  of
essence  has  dropped  out  of  sight,  and  our  philosophy
is  reduced  to  an  account,  credible  or  incredible,  of
some  natural  events  and  some  natural  existences.

But  perhaps  we  should  not  press  in  this  manner
words  which  a  philosopher  could  only  have  meant
figuratively.  Leibniz  makes  some  explicit  How  this
reservations  about  time :  the  original  solitude  might  be
of  God  was  ontological  only,  not  historical, ratlonallsed-
and  time,  being  an  integral  part  of  creation,  could  not
have  preceded  the  creative  act.  In  reality,  then,  this
creative  act  would  be  the  perpetual  process  of  nature,


1 64  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

viewed  under  the  form  of  eternity  and  represented
poetically  as  deliberate  and  voluntary.  If  we  allowed
ourselves  to  continue  this  method  of  rationalisation,
perhaps  the  realm  of  essence  would  come  into  its  own
again,  and  the  mind  of  the  Creator  surveying  all
possible  worlds  would  be  only  a  dramatic  metaphor
for  that  immutable  background  which  the  realm  of
essence  supplies  for  all  the  shifts  of  existence.  Perhaps,
too,  the  moral  compulsion  which,  according  to  Leibniz,
God  was  under,  to  distinguish  and  to  create  the  best
of  possible  worlds,  might  be  interpreted  as  inverting
mythically  a  homely  truth:  namely,  that  the  best  and
only  possible  world  for  a  creature  to  live  in  is  the  world
that  produced  him.  We  may  grumble  and  we  may
suffer,  but  we  should  not  have  been  ourselves  in  any
other  world  or  nation  or  family;  the  circle  of  our
demands  and  ideals  is  but  a  floating  expression  of  the
faculties  which  reality  has  fostered  in  us.  The  actual
world,  in  type  if  not  in  detail,  is  therefore  always  such  as
it  would  be  if  the  good  to  which  it  aspires  had  created  it.
This  is  the  reason  why  at  bottom  most  people  are  so
well  satisfied  with  their  country  and  with  themselves,
and  why  existence  is  normally  regarded  as  a  benefit.

Leibniz  could  be  a  very  great  philosopher  when  he
chose,  when  the  press  of  business  allowed,  or  when
some  Serene  Highness  commanded  it;  but  he  was  a
diplomatist  even  in  philosophy,  and  his  chief  pre¬
occupation  was  to  reconcile  powerful  opinions  and  to
recommend  himself  to  the  orthodox  as  well  as  to  the
competent.  He  could  play  as  readily  with  the  notion
of  essence  as  with  any  other  notion,  but  his  sincerity
was  not  of  that  profound  sort  which  gives  to  human
conceptions  their  radical  values,  and  his  system  was  a
masterpiece  of  artificiality  in  which  nobody — not  even
himself — could  very  heartily  believe.

Essence  was  familiar  to  Descartes,  Spinoza,  and
Leibniz,  because  even  if  not  scholastic  themselves  they


SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES


admit  only

given

essences,

but  is  too

distracted

to  rest  in

them.


165

were  trained  in  the  scholastic  tradition,  which  was  itself
but  Platonism  made  prosaic  and  Christian;  but  the
same  cannot  be  said  of  the  British  and  German
philosophers.  Yet  both  psychology  and  the  Realism
criticism  of  knowledge  ought  to  bring  essence  should
to  light,  since  essences  are  the  only  objects
of  indubitable  and  immediate  experience.  A
profound  confusion,  however,  intervened.

The  objects  of  experience  were  confused  with
experience  itself,  which  was  assumed  to  be
self-conscious,  a  series  of  states  of  mind  which  know
what  they  are  and  are  what  they  know.  Essence
accordingly  became  a  needless  if  not  impossible  con¬
ception;  because  the  only  essences  that  could  then  be
found  or  thought  of  would  be  essences  existing  and
knowing  themselves  to  exist;  in  other  words,  they  would
not  be  essences  but  (what  is  a  contradiction  in  terms)
facts  given  in  intuition.  The  insecurity  and  anarchy
prevailing  in  these  schools  allow  them  to  traverse  the
ground  in  a  thousand  directions  without  ever  disengag¬
ing  the  radical  possibilities  and  principles  involved;
for  instance,  they  almost  always  combine  their  axiom
that  existence  is  self-conscious  with  a  naturalistic  view
of  the  course  of  human  experience,  deployed  in  time
and  distributed  among  well-known  persons  and  nations
— a  combination  which  would  be  impossible  if  either
of  the  two  views  had  been  thoroughly  analysed.  The
notion  that  existence  is  self-conscious,  and  conscious
only  of  the  state  of  mind  which  it  is,  excludes  the
possibility  of  any  transitive  knowledge  or  even  belief,
because  it  reduces  every  object,  whether  of  intuition  or
intent,  to  the  process  of  thinking  it.  The  notion  of  a
flux  of  experience  or  thought,  reporting  one  of  its  parts
to  another  of  its  parts,  is  accordingly  excluded;  and
yet,  without  such  naturalistic  history  and  psychology,
self-consciousness  would  lose  all  its  interest,  because  it
would  be  conscious  of  not  being  knowledge,  but  of


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


1 66


All  science
has  need  of
remember¬
ing  that
it  is  only-
discourse.


being  only  the  intuition  of  an  essence  devoid  of
meaning.

Of  late,  however,  various  judicious  persons,  trained
in  these  schools,  have  begun  to  confess  that  conscious¬
ness  is  not  aware  of  itself  but  of  objects
variously  styled  sense-data  or  concepts  or
neutral  entities  (neither  mental  not  material),
or  simply  “  objects  ”,  meaning  essences  present
to  sense  or  thought  as  opposed  to  the  events
in  nature  which  they  symbolise.  But  it  is  events,  in
natural  knowledge,  that  are  the  true  objects;  and  the
given  essences  are  only  the  terms  in  which  those  events
are  described.  If  these  terms  are  hypostatised  and  set
in  a  network  of  natural  relations,  as  if  they  were  things,
the  result  will  be  a  pictorial  physics  which  may  have  its
merits,  but  which  is  not  the  realm  of  essence;  to  reach
the  latter  conception  it  would  be  necessary  to  remember
that  what  is  given  never  has  any  relations  but  those
which  are  given  with  it.  It  is  therefore  always  an
eternal  essence  and  never  a  natural  fact.  Natural  facts
are  objects  of  intent  only;  and  then  the  propriety  of  the
names,  images,  categories,  or  other  essences  which  we
use  in  conceiving  them  becomes  problematical.

On  the  other  hand,  essences  problematical  as
descriptions  of  facts  are  manifest  as  ideas.  The  more
And  that  hypotheses  we  try,  and  the  more  alternatives
the  realm  we  consider,  whether  we  attain  absolute
of  essence  ts  truth  or  a  sufficient  symbolic  truth,  or  no
background  truth  at  all,  we  are  still  entertained  by  ideas
thing617'  which  are  innocent  if  we  do  not  abuse  them,
and  perhaps  beautiful  and  significant  if  they
express  our  own  playful  or  creative  impulses.  Nor  is
this  entertainment  with  essence  a  trivial  bond  with
reality.  Facts,  however  momentous,  are  transient  and
local,  and  truths,  however  eternal,  are  relative  to  these
transient  and  local  facts;  but  every  essence,  whether  it
ever  have  or  not  the  adventitious  dignity  of  a  truth,  is  in


SOME  KINDRED  DOCTRINES  167

its  own  right  a  something — a  verse  or  a  letter  in  that
infinite  Koran  sealed  from  all  eternity  in  the  bosom  of
Allah,  of  which  the  trembling  angel  of  life  may  read  to
us  a  few  Surahs.  That  it  should  be  these  and  not  those
is  the  tragic  mystery  of  our  fate,  and  of  all  existence;
that  others  also  should  some  day  be  manifested  in  other
worlds  or  to  other  spirits,  would  be  a  further  decree  of
fate;  but  that  all  should  lie  for  ever  in  the  realm  of
essence  is  a  luminous  necessity  raised  far  above  any
accident  of  destiny  or  decree  of  power.  It  could  not
be  otherwise.  If  you  deny  that  realm,  you  acknow¬
ledge  it.  If  you  forget  it,  you  consent  that  it  should
silently  laugh  at  you  in  your  sleep.


POSTSCRIPT


CORROBORATIONS  IN  CURRENT  OPINION

After  revolving  these  things  in  my  mind  for  many  years  in
intellectual  solitude,  when  at  last  I  was  bringing  this  book  to
a  close — not  without  profound  disappointment  that  for  all  my
labour  it  should  be  no  better  than  it  is — I  have  had  the  satis¬
faction  of  finding  that  quite  independently,  in  the  most  various
quarters,  the  same  intuition  is  returning  to  the  world.  Not
that  in  my  own  mind  it  needed  confirmation:  these  are  not
eventual  matters  of  fact  on  which  testimony  is  needed  or
witnesses  are  to  be  counted  like  so  many  head  of  cattle;  but
after  all,  a  book  is  addressed  to  the  public,  and  the  impulse
towards  expression  and  communication  would  remain  abortive
if  no  one  was  ready  to  listen  or  to  understand.  True,  my
doctrine  was  neither  new  nor  extinct.  Platonism  was  still
remembered;  round  the  corner,  though  strangely  out  of  sight,
there  was  always  Catholic  philosophy;  and  far  away  Indian
philosophy  loomed  impressively  in  its  unravelled  labyrinth.
But  the  notion  of  essence  in  these  systems  seemed  to  be  either
incomplete  or  impure,  or  both  impure  and  incomplete:  they
were  accidental  traditional  faiths  borrowing  from  logic  such
helps  or  extensions  as  they  could  welcome;  they  had  not  that
honest  personal  seat  nor  that  fearless  outlook  which  amid  so
many  weaknesses  made  the  strength  of  modern  philosophy.
My  allegiance  is  rather  to  the  earlier  Greeks,  who  looked  freely
and  ingenuously  on  the  universe  with  the  curiosity  of  children,
but  of  children  bred  nobly  and  protected  from  false  terrors  by
a  manly  civilisation.  The  autonomy  of  reason  which  they  so
beautifully  and  simply  achieved  is  not  to  be  surrendered.  In
part,  indeed,  it  had  been  recovered  by  the  modern  mind,  in  its
romantic  Protestantism;  but  without  the  Greek  clearness  and
inner  freedom.  The  British  and  German  schools  in  which  it


POSTSCRIPT


169

had  been  my  fate  to  be  educated,  were  themselves  obscurely
rooted  in  religious  confusions.  For  three  hundred  years  they
had  hardly  been  able  to  distinguish  the  universe  or  the  realm
of  essence  from  the  vapours  of  animal  feeling.

Of  late,  however,  various  rifts  or  transparencies  have
appeared  in  the  low  sky  of  subjectivism;  and  curiously,  it  is
the  realm  of  essence  that  seems  to  become  visible  first — the
stars,  as  it  were,  before  the  sun.  Matter,  though  so  much
nearer  and  dearer  to  the  heart  of  mankind,  is  even  harder  to
define  and  to  situate  from  a  psychological  point  of  view;  for
the  more  “objective”  a  psychological  idealist  wishes  to  render
his  “realities”,  the  more  empirical  and  sensualistic  they  must
become:  in  other  words,  the  more  subjective.  If  an  idea
develops  within  its  bosom  a  theory  of  its  own  origin  or  environ¬
ment,  it  remains  a  mere  idea  more  elaborate  than  it  was,  but
not  more  cognisant  of  anything  beyond;  whereas  if  it  is  satisfied
to  contemplate  and  to  define  its  internal  theme  or  quality,  it
thereby  begins  to  dominate  a  field  of  logical  relations  inde¬
pendent  of  its  momentary  attention  or  existence.  Thus
intelligence,  like  the  dove  after  the  Flood,  escapes  from  the
Ark  of  subjectivism  more  easily  through  the  window  than
through  the  door.

Three  recent  descriptions  of  the  realm  of  essence,  one
English,  one  German,  and  one  French,  lie  at  this  moment
before  me.  Perhaps  a  brief  report  of  them  may  serve  to
convince  the  reader  that  in  all  this  I  am  not  dreaming  alone,
but  that  on  the  contrary  I  am  introducing  him  to  an  eternal
background  of  reality,  which  all  minds  when  they  are  truly
awake  find  themselves  considering  together.

1.  In  a  volume  entitled  The  Concept  of  Nature,  by  A.  N.
Whitehead,  a  systematic  distinction  is  drawn  between  “events”
on  the  one  hand — which  is  the  name  there  given  to  all  self-
existing  facts  or  portions  of  nature,  and  on  the  other  hand
“sense  objects”  and  “scientific  objects” — which  are  the  names
given  to  essences,  or  at  least  to  such  essences  as  the  author  is
concerned  with.  That  he  should  recognise  essences  clearly,
yet  should  call  them  by  names  so  adventitious  to  their  intrinsic
nature,  is  an  anomaly  easily  explained  by  the  circumstances.
Whitehead  is  primarily  a  mathematician,  naturally  at  home
amongst  essences;  but  he  is  an  Englishman,  and  was  drawn
toward  metaphysics  at  a  time  and  in  a  circle  in  which  an


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


170

intense  local  reaction  was  taking  place  in  British  philosophy  in
favour  of  realism,  but  of  a  realism  that  should  be  still  empirical
and  moralistic.  It  is  characteristic  of  British  reformers  to
disown  the  distressing  consequences  of  some  traditional
principle,  in  order  to  be  free  to  cling  to  it  with  a  happier  mind;
and  as  an  Anglican  Catholic  must  denounce  the  Pope,  so  an
Anglican  realist  must  eschew  matter.  Here  the  traditional
principle  was  that  of  Berkeley,  that  the  only  objects  of  know¬
ledge  are  inert  ideas,  or  the  immediate  data  of  experience;
and  the  distressing  consequence  was  that  in  that  case  nothing
latent  or  dynamic  could  exist  in  nature  or  could  be  made  an
object  of  study.  This  consequence,  at  first  blush,  had  seemed
to  Berkeley  a  palmary  argument  for  religion,  and  later  it  was
deliberately  made  the  corner-stone  of  transcendental  idealism;
but  it  was  wormwood  now  in  the  mouths  of  the  new  realists,
engrossed  as  they  were  in  dogmatic  judgement,  in  mathematics,
and  in  cosmological  physics.  Might  not  this  consequence  be
denied,  while  maintaining  that  principle,  if  we  alleged  that
things  are  in  reality  compacted  of  ideas,  of  “objects”  immedi¬
ately  given  in  experience  but  existing  independently  of  know¬
ledge?  All  would  then  be  reality  and  nothing  appearance,  yet
nothing  would  exist  otherwise  than  just  as  it  appeared.  Events,
or  the  substantial  facts  in  nature,  would  be  concretions  of
human  “sense  objects”  and  of  human  “scientific  objects”;
they  would  no  longer  be  free  to  embody,  to  the  confusion  of
sense  and  science,  any  essences  whatsoever  which  the  Creator
might  have  wished  them  to  possess.

How  these  human  “objects”  enter  into  events  and  compose
them  I  will  abstain  from  inquiring;  suffice  it  that  in  themselves
these  ‘  ‘  objects  ”  are  evidently  essences  and  not  existing  elements.
Whitehead  continually  calls  them  “eternal  objects”;  and  that
is  final.  Nothing  can  be  more  opposite  to  an  event,  or  more
remote  from  natural  existence,  than  any  eternal  being.  Yet
that  the  terms — not  indeed  the  intended  objects — of  sense  and
science  are  eternal  essences  could  not  escape  so  accomplished
a  mathematician.  In  his  early  collaboration  with  Bertrand
Russell,  at  a  time  when  the  latter  shared  with  G.  E.  Moore  a
virgin  enthusiasm  for  ideal  entities,  Whitehead  could  daily
measure  the  gulf  which  separates  the  realm  of  logic  from  that
of  fact.  It  was  a  saying  of  his  in  those  days — for  youth  some¬
times  has  a  shrewdness  denied  to  distracted  age — that  some
truths  could  be  proved  but  were  unimportant,  and  others  were


POSTSCRIPT


f

J

\

171

important  but  could  not  be  proved.  Logic  evidently  was  never
quite  satisfying  to  this  logician;  even  while  feeding  on  its
manna,  he  yearned  for  the  flesh-pots  of  fact.  Tastes  are  free;
but  as  the  whole  virtue  of  flesh-pots  is  to  be  eaten,  so  the  whole
virtue  of  events  is  to  be  enacted;  an  effort  to  describe  the
cuisine  of  nature  exhaustively,  were  success  in  it  possible,
would  yield  dreadful  literature  and  no  food.  If,  nevertheless,
any  one  had  a  desire  for  such  preternatural  knowledge,  would
he  be  likely  to  attain  it  by  overlaying  the  current  cook-book  of
science,  which  after  all  has  a  relative  validity,  with  rich  meta¬
physics  of  his  sheer  invention?

In  a  later  book  on  Science  in  the  Modern  World,  Whitehead
has  distinguished  essences  even  more  clearly  from  the  occasions
on  which  they  may  be  realised.  “Each  eternal  object,”  he
tells  us,  “is  an  individual  which,  in  its  own  peculiar  fashion,
is  what  it  is.”  “Each  eternal  object  is  just  itself,  in  whatever
mode  of  realisation  it  is  involved.  There  can  be  no  distortion
of  the  individual  essence  without  thereby  producing  a  different
eternal  object.”  “Thus  actualisation  is  a  selection  among
possibilities.”  Each  “is  systematically  and  by  the  necessity  of
its  nature  related  to  every  other  eternal  object  ”.  “The  realm
of  eternal  objects  is  properly  described  as  a  ‘realm’,  because
each  eternal  object  has  its  status  in  this  general  systematic
complex  of  mutual  relatedness.”  “A  limited  set  of  such
objects  is  itself  an  eternal  object;  it  is  those  eternal  objects  in
that  relationship.”  “Thus  the  complexity  of  an  eternal  object
means  its  analysability  into  a  relationship  of  component  eternal
objects.”  “An  eternal  object,  such  as  a  definite  shade  of
green,  which  cannot  be  analysed  into  a  relationship  of  com¬
ponents,  will  be  called  ‘simple’.”

The  nature  of  essence  could  hardly  be  recognised  more
frankly:  it  is  eternal,  compacted  of  internal  relations,  indiffer¬
ently  simple  or  complex,  and  at  every  level  individual.  It
composes  an  infinite  pure  Being.  If  there  are  impurities  in
Whitehead’s  description  they  arise,  not  from  his  conception
of  the  field  of  essence  itself,  where  his  mathematical  expert¬
ness  gives  him  an  enviable  scope  and  fertility,  but  rather
from  refraction  in  the  thicker  atmosphere  through  which  he
approaches  it.

2.  Entirely  free  from  these  entanglements,  though  perhaps
caught  in  others,  is  the  view  of  essence  contained  in  the  Pure


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


172

Phenomenology  of  Edmund  Husserl.1  He  is  an  analytic  psycho¬
logist  of  the  most  conscientious  systematic  kind,  never  for¬
saking  the  plane  of  reflective  autobiography;  and  to  boot  he  is
a  convinced  transcendental  idealist,  always  remembering  the
activity  of  thought  involved  in  the  contemplation  or  definition
of  any  object;  so  that  his  theory  is  like  those  early  maps  of  the
known  world  in  which  the  geographer,  proud  of  his  young  art,
placed  in  the  foreground  a  representation  of  the  compass,
sextant,  and  telescope,  which  had  served  him  in  his  construc¬
tion;  while  in  another  part,  to  fill  in  some  large  tract  of  terra
incognita,  he  might  show  us  the  gallant  ship  in  which  he  made
his  voyages  of  discovery,  or  a  group  of  the  naked  savages  found
at  the  antipodes.  Such  marginal  decoration  is  not  without  its
charm;  and  the  modern  reader,  accustomed  to  romanticism
even  in  philosophers,  may  be  more  willing  to  look  on  essence
if  he  is  told  at  the  same  time  that  he  is  looking  at  it,  and  how
the  vision  has  been  achieved.  Autobiography  may  be  en¬
lightening  even  in  logic:  it  reminds  us  that  our  map  is  a  map;
but  it  is  also  grotesque,  since  it  is  not  the  map’s  business  to
describe  cartography;  and  thought  turns  towards  essence  for
the  sake  of  essence,  not  for  the  sake  of  thought.  Yet  there  are
advantages  in  this  circumspection  or  contortion;  it  is  not  so
easy  in  learned  Germany  as  in  England  or  America  for  the  gay
philosopher  to  ignore  transcendental  criticism  and  psycho¬
logical  fact  simply  because  they  were  known  to  some  past
generation,  or  because  they  annoy  him  and  he  is  interested  in
something  else.

Husserl  accordingly  professes  to  study  “phenomena”,
which  the  Platonic  tradition  identifies  with  appearances  and
the  positivistic  tradition  with  events;  and  we  might  doubt  for
a  moment  whether  he  is  considering  essences  at  all,  and  not
rather  facts  or  existing  objects.  But  no:  all  the  emphasis  falls
on  the  word  pure\  objects,  in  order  to  enter  the  realm  of  this
phenomenology,  must  be  thoroughly  purified.  This  purifica¬
tion  consists  in  reducing  the  object  to  its  intrinsic  and  evident
character,  disregarding  all  question  of  its  existence  or  non¬
existence,  or  of  its  locus  in  nature;  or,  in  my  language,  it
consists  in  suspending  animal  faith,  and  living  instead  con-

1  Ideen  zu  einer  reinen  Phanomenologie  und  phanomenologischen  Philo¬
sophic, von  Edmund  Husserl  ;  Halle,  1922.  I  translate  the  thankless  text
rather  freely  for  the  reader  s  convenience,  supplying  the  original  phrases  in
parentheses  where  fairness  seems  to  demand  it.


POSTSCRIPT


i73

templatively,  in  the  full  intuition  of  some  essence.  This
essence  may  be  as  complex  and  as  rich  in  inner  perspectives  as
imagination  can  make  it;  it  may  span  any  depth  of  specious
time,  or  intuited  duration;  every  idea  which  science  or  faith
may  turn  into  a  creed,  or  use  in  the  description  of  existence,
is  in  its  spiritual  immediacy  a  pure  essence,  a  term  given  to
contemplation,  distinct  logically  and  aesthetically;  otherwise
science  and  faith  would  be  mere  chatter,  verbiage  accompany¬
ing  certain  turns  in  action,  not  inner  possessions  or  forms  of
thought.  Nothing  is  therefore  removed  from  experience  by
purifying  it,  except  its  distraction;  and  an  essence,  far  from
being  an  abstraction  from  a  thing,  is  the  whole  of  that  thing  as
it  ever  can  be  directly  given,  or  spiritually  possessed.  “In¬
stead,”  says  Husserl,  “of  setting  up  a  natural  world  by  a
transcendental  act  of  naive  assertion,  and  being  driven  by  the
implications  of  that  assertion  to  posit  other  transcendent  things
one  after  another,  we  put  all  these  positings  aside,  we  refrain
from  becoming  accomplices  in  that  act;  and  we  direct  our
discerning,  scrutinising,  contemplative  glance  upon  the  field
of  pure  intuition  in  its  absolute  intrinsic  being.  .  .  .  We  live
henceforth  in  these  acts  of  supervening  attention,  ranging  over
the  infinite  field  of  absolute  immediacy — the  bed-rock  of
phenomenology.”

“Geometry  and  phenomenology,”  we  read  in  another  place,
“being  sciences  of  pure  essence,  lay  down  nothing  concerning
real  existences.  Hence  clear  fictions  will  not  only  serve  just
as  well  for  these  constructions  as  do  actual  perception  and
experience,  but  often  much  better.”  “Pure  or  transcendental
phenomenology  is  not  a  science  of  fact  but  a  science  of  essences
or  forms.  The  phenomena  of  transcendental  phenomenology
are  in  their  nature  non-existent  ( characterisiert  ah  irreal).  All
immediate  data  ( Erlebnisse )  transcendentally  purified  are  non¬
existent,  and  are  situated  out  of  all  local  relation  ( Einordnung )
to  the  ‘real  world’.”  “As  the  datum  of  personal  experimental
perception  is  a  particular  thing,  so  the  datum  of  intuition  is  a
pure  essence.”  “Every  science  of  fact  or  of  experience  must
needs  draw  the  fundamental  terms  of  its  theory  from  some
formal  ontology.”  “Immediate  vision,  not  necessarily  sensu¬
ous  observation  of  things,  but  awareness  yielding  any  original
datum,  no  matter  of  what  quality,  is  the  ultimate  source  of
validity  for  all  rational  assurance.”  “All  that  I  believe  to
exist  in  the  world  of  things  has,  in  principle,  only  a  presumptive


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


174

existence.”  And  finally,  in  answer  to  the  inevitable  reproach —
as  if  it  were  a  reproach!— of  being  a  Platonist,  the  author  says:
“If  ‘object’  meant  ‘existing  object’,  and  ‘reality’  meant
‘existing  reality’,  then  indeed  to  call  Ideas  objects  and  realities
would  be  to  indulge  in  a  perverse  hypostasis;  but  when  the
two  are  explicitly  opposed,  and  when  ‘object  ’  is  defined  as  any
theme  of  discourse  whatsoever,  what  can  be  the  remaining
objection?”  “Between  immediacy  and  existence  yawns  a
veritable  abyss  in  the  quality  of  being  (Sinn).  Existence  is
posited  in  perspectives,  never  given  absolutely  as  it  is,  and
has  an  accidental  and  relative  status:  whereas  being  in  the
immediate  is  certain  and  unconditioned,  and  by  its  very  nature
not  subject  to  perspective  or  given  in  an  external  view.”

Such  a  firm  adherence  to  transcendental  principles  serves
to  bring  out  the  fundamental  and  ultimate  part  played  by
essence  in  knowledge,  and  its  own  immaterial  and  incorruptible
nature;  but  perhaps  this  phenomenology  is  itself  only  an
external  view  and  a  perspective,  since  the  fact  that  experience
must  play  with  terms  or  essences  does  not  imply  that  all
essences  must  figure  in  experience.  No  doubt  the  field  of
possible  intuition,  the  range  of  pure  spirit,  is  infinite,  and  none
other  than  the  realm  of  essence  itself;  but  is  pure  spirit  itself
possible,  or  does  actual  intuition. realise  all  essences,  or  even  as
many  as  are  realised  in  the  unprobed  structure  of  nature?  A
naturalist  must  be  allowed  to  doubt  it ;  and  also  to  look  for  the
genesis  and  meaning  of  immediate  experience  in  the  material
and  animal  world,  where  a  malicious  transcendentalism,  one
that  isolates  mind  in  mind,  cannot  consistently  look  for  them.

3.  If  a  mathematical  physicist  can  vindicate  the  eternity  of
essences,  and  a  psychologist  their  purity,  a  pupil  of  the  Oriental
school  may  well  vindicate  their  infinity;  he  will  help  to  dis¬
sipate  any  lingering  suspicion  that  they  might  be  dependent  for
their  being  on  human  intuition  or  on  embodiment  in  nature.
In  the  books  of  Rene  Guenon 1  the  study  of  essence  in  its  own
absolute  sphere  is  called  metaphysics.  The  proper,  and  even
the  etymological,  sense  of  this  word,  he  tells  us,  “is  that  by
which  it  designates  whatever  lies  beyond  physics,  provided  we
understand  by  physics,  as  the  ancients  always  did,  the  whole
of  all  the  sciences  of  nature”.  “Nothing  can  be  metaphysical

1  Especially  Introduction  generate  a  V etude  des  doctrines  hindoues,  1921,
and  L’ Homme  et  son  devenir  selon  le  Veddnta,  1925.


POSTSCRIPT


i75

except  that  which  is  absolutely  stable,  permanent,  independent
of  all  events  and  in  particular  of  all  historical  circumstances.”
Metaphysics  is  the  consideration  of  the  universal,  of  the
absolutely  unlimited;  not  of  matters  which  “special  sciences
may  leave  out  because  their  present  development  is  more  or
less  incomplete,  but  rather  of  what,  by  its  every  nature,  eludes
the  touch  of  these  sciences.”  In  the  domain  of  metaphysics
no  experience,  no  contact  with  fact,  is  possible.  “Being  beyond
physics,  we  are  also,  for  that  very  reason,  beyond  experience  ”,
that  is,  our  thought  is  not  intent  on  surrounding  existences,  but
on  the  nature  and  relations  of  essences  chosen  and  defined  by
that  thought  itself.  “Hence,  in  questions  of  metaphysics,  all
that  can  change  with  times  and  places  is  merely  the  mode  of
exposition  .  .  .  that  which  is  beyond  nature,  is  also  beyond
change.  .  .  .  No  discoveries  are  at  all  possible  in  metaphysics.
.  .  .  All  that  is  discoverable  may  have  been  equally  known  by
certain  men  in  all  ages:  and  such  is,  in  fact,  what  we  may
gather  from  a  profound  examination  of  traditional  metaphysical
doctrines.  .  .  .  Metaphysics  excludes  hypothesis;  whence  it
follows  that  metaphysical  truths  cannot  be  in  the  least  doubt¬
ful  in  themselves;  if  there  is  ever  occasion  for  discussion  or
controversy,  it  can  only  be  on  account  of  some  defect  in  exposi¬
tion  or  in  comprehension.”  “  Metaphysical  truths  can  be
conceived  only  by  a  faculty  which,  because  its  operation  is
on  the  immediate,  we  may  call  intuitive;  if  it  be  thoroughly
understood  that  it  has  absolutely  nothing  in  common  with
what  certain  contemporary  philosophers  call  intuition,  a
merely  sensitive  and  vital  faculty  properly  inferior  to  dis¬
cursive  intelligence  and  not  superior  to  it.  .  .  .  We  speak  here
of  intellectual  intuition,  which  is  necessarily  infallible,  not
being  actually  distinct  from  its  object.  Such  is  the  essential
basis  of  metaphysical  certitude”;  whereas  reasoning  “is
evidently  fallible  in  consequence  of  its  discursive  and  mediate
character  ”.

This  use  of  the  term  metaphysics  would  be  unobjectionable,
if  it  could  be  adhered  to  with  constancy,  and  by  general  agree¬
ment:  but  metaphysics  has  always  been,  and  is  to-day,  an
attempt  to  establish  truths  about  nature  and  existence  other¬
wise  than  by  observation,  measurement,  and  experiment:  nor
am  I  sure  that  the  Indians,  and  their  French  interpreter  after
them,  do  not  attribute  to  their  metaphysics  any  physical  pre¬
rogatives,  or  to  their  intuition  any  feminine  or  Bergsonian


176  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

privilege  of  being  a  miraculous  substitute  for  intellect  and  a
short  cut  to  knowledge  of  fact.  There  is  a  sense,  indeed,  in
which  all  existing  things  depend  upon  the  non-existent  realm
of  pure  essence,  since  they  could  not  be  what  they  are,  either
intrinsically  or  in  their  internal  relations  to  every  other  nature,
did  they  not  realise  and  illustrate  some  part  of  that  primordial
structure  of  being;  so  that  any  elucidation  of  pure  essences
explores  a  part  of  those  essences  one  or  another  of  which  actual
things  must  assume  if  they  are  to  exist  at  all,  or  allow  anything
to  be  seen  or  said  of  them;  but  so  long  as  the  study  of  essences
is  a  priori ,  imaginative  and  metaphysical,  there  is  no  likelihood
or  presumption  that  those  essences  will  be  found  realised  in
anything  existent.  Before  any  such  assumption  can  be  made
legitimate,  we  must  turn  with  an  absolutely  docile  and  clear
mind  to  the  empirical  aspects  and  relations  of  the  facts  them¬
selves,  as  exploration  and  practical  mastery  unroll  them  before
us;  and  then,  when  we  have  ascertained  what  essence,  in  some
measure  and  in  some  respect,  these  existing  things  possess,  we
may  freely  develop  the  dialectical  relations  of  that  essence  and
deepen  thereby  our  intellectual  understanding  of  those  things:
as,  for  instance,  has  been  done  in  mathematics  to  every  one’s
satisfaction.  But  if  arithmetic  and  geometry  had  not  been
originally  the  coinage  of  mechanical  art,  stamped  upon  the
mind  by  commerce  with  things,  they  would  have  had  no
application  to  existence,  and  no  authority  over  it — as  indeed
they  have  not  over  the  whole  field  of  psychic  and  moral  being.
Pure  metaphysics,  then,  must  call  for  aid  on  sense  before  it
can  claim  to  describe  existence;  it  becomes  impure  and
abusive,  and  such  metaphysics  as  we  are  all  accustomed  to,
when  it  presumes  to  describe  nature  without  her  consent.
And  can  we  doubt  that  Indian  metaphysics  does  so  at  least  as
boldly  as  the  metaphysics  of  the  West?  Else  how  comes  it
infallibly  to  distinguish  five  physical  elements,  neither  more
nor  less,  or  to  know  that  qualities  of  human  sensation,  such  as
sound,  are  intrinsic  to  those  elements,  or  to  assume  the  trans¬
migration  of  souls,  or  to  posit  Ishwara  and  other  existing  deities
between  man  and  the  impersonal  infinite?  Far  be  it  from  me
to  quarrel  with  the  ideology  of  holy  men;  my  wish  is  rather  to
understand  and  revivify  as  far  as  possible  the  essences  which
any  spiritual  tradition  has  made  symbols  of  fate  or  themes  for
profound  contemplation:  my  own  native  themes  and  symbols
are  probably  not  better.  Only  I  would  not  let  the  lust  of


POSTSCRIPT


177

imposture,  in  others  or  in  myself,  distort  that  meditation.
Delusion  is  the  greatest  enemy  to  peace.

How  perfect  such  intellectual  peace  may  ultimately  become,
how  remote  from  all  bias  or  presumption,  appears  in  the
direction  of  all  Indian  discipline  upon  deliverance  from  exist¬
ence.  Of  course,  this  deliverance  can  be  imaginative  only,
else  peace  would  never  be  realised:  but  to  exist  as  if  not  exist¬
ing  is  a  blessed  deliverance,  not  only  from  the  troubles  of  the
flesh,  but  from  the  illusions  of  philosophy:  it  is  the  enlighten¬
ment  which  the  philosopher  seeks.  Existence  produces  a  false
isolation  and  a  vain  reinforcement  of  some  fragment  of  essence
which  by  the  logical  necessity  of  its  being  forms  part  of  an
infinite  and  eternal  realm.  We  therefore  escape  and  overcome
existence  automatically  in  the  act  of  understanding  what  exist¬
ence  is — that  it  is  blindness  to  almost  everything:  although  this
blindness  comes  of  being  dazzled  by  a  few  features  which
matter,  the  principle  of  existence,  happens  to  embody  and  to
press  upon  the  attention  of  the  organisms  which  it  forms.

The  universe,  then,  is  but  a  stain  in  the  purity  of  the  infinite,1
of  that  non-existence  by  accident  which  is  pure  Being  by
necessity.  Such  bandying  about  of  dark  phrases  need  not
irritate  a  tolerant  mind,  that  knows  the  various  realms  of  being
in  their  disparate  sorts  of  reality.  Thus  Gu6non  himself  uses
the  word  Being,  not,  indeed,  for  existence,  but  for  only  so
much  of  essence  as  is  illustrated  there:  precisely  for  that  seg¬
ment  of  essence  which  I  call  the  realm  of  truth.  “If  ontology
or  the  science  of  Being  ”,  he  writes,2  “  is  subordinate  to  meta¬
physics  and  belongs  to  it,  it  is  far  from  identical  with  meta¬
physics  as  a  whole:  because  Being  does  not  signify  the  non-
manifested  absolutely,  but  only  the  principle  of  the  manifested
part”;  that  is,  Being  is  so  much  of  the  eternal  script  as  the
reagent  is  destined  to  render  visible  at  one  time  or  another.
“Consequently  that  which  lies  beyond  Being  is  of  much  more
importance  metaphysically  than  is  Being  itself:  in  other  words,
it  is  Brahma,  not  Ishwara,  that  must  be  acknowledged  to  be
the  Supreme  Principle.”

According  to  this  use  of  language,  metaphysics  would  mean
the  description  of  the  realm  of  essence,  ontology  that  of  truth,
and  physics  or  natural  philosophy  that  of  existence:  existence

1  “  L’univers  n’est  qu’un  d6faut  dans  la  puret£  du  Non-fitre”:  Paul
Valery;  L’Ebauche  d’un  serpent ,  in  the  volume  of  poems  entitled  Charmes.

2  L’ Homme  et  son  devenir,  p.  45.


N


178  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

having  an  urgent  sort  of  reality,  but  a  derivative  and  a  lame
sort.  “Being,  while  it  is  properly  the  principle  of  universal
manifestation  ”,  the  essence  which  is  temporally  embodied  in
the  universe,  “lies  outside  and  beyond  this  manifestation  of
it — and  here  we  may  call  to  mind  the  ‘unmoved  mover’  of
Aristotle.”  The  existing  world,  as  well  as  its  eternal  essence,
“is  no  doubt  real,  but  only  in  a  relative  fashion,  by  virtue  of  its
subordination  to  its  principle,  and,  in  so  far  as  something  of
this  principle  is  reflected  in  it,  as  an  image  reflected  in  a  mirror
draws  all  its  reality  from  the  object,  without  which  it  would
have  no  existence.  But  this  subordinate  reality,  which  is  only
borrowed,  is  illusory  in  comparison  with  the  supreme  reality”
— that  is,  with  the  eternal  essence  there  momentarily  exempli¬
fied — “even  as  the  image  in  the  mirror  is  illusory  in  com¬
parison  with  the  object:  and  if  we  attempted  to  cut  the  image
off  from  its  original,  the  illusion  would  vanish  into  nonentity
pure  and  simple” — for  then,  besides  being  unsubstantial  and
impermanent  it  would  not  even  deceptively  manifest  any
essence.  “From  this  we  may  understand  that  existence,  or
conditioned  and  exemplified  Being,  is  at  once  real  in  one  sense
and  illusory  in  another;  a  point  which  people  in  the  West  have
never  rightly  understood.”

In  invoking  the  authority  of  the  Indians  and  of  their  lucid
French  interpreter,  I  wish  I  might  invoke  it  without  reserve;
but  there  is  a  mass  of  cosmological  and  historical  extravagance,
entangled  with  their  “metaphysics,”  which  is  nothing  to  my
purpose.  Tradition  is  venerable,  where  it  transmits  a  unani¬
mous  spiritual  discipline,  by  which  the  souls  of  essential
hermits,  in  every  age  and  country,  have  been  made  sensitive  to
the  contingency  of  fact  and  the  eternity  and  infinity  of  pure
Being;  but  superstitions  too  are  traditional,  and  not  for  that
reason  respectable.  Superstition  prevails  also  in  traditional
philosophy  in  the  West,  not  only  in  theology,  but  in  biology
and  psychology;  it  is  maintained  there  by  an  ancient  and
stubborn  confusion  of  formal  with  efficient  causes.  The  forms
which  things  wear,  since  these  things  could  not  be  themselves
without  those  forms,  are  said  to  make  the  things  what  they
are;  and  so  the  essence  by  which  a  thing  is  classified  and
named  is  introduced  among  the  efficient  conditions  which  have
ushered  it  into  existence  and  endowed  it  with  that  particular
form:  conditions  which  are  all  ultimately  material.  Matter  is
requisite  for  continuity  in  change,  or  for  brotherly  existence.


POSTSCRIPT


179

This  is  often  implied  and  sometimes  confessed  by  the  most
sweeping  idealisms:  thus  Guenon  himself  writes,1  “Individual
modifications,  such,  for  instance,  as  pleasure  and  pain  ...  all
proceed  from  the  plastic  principle,  Prakriti  or  Pradhana,  as
from  their  only  root.  It  is  in  this  substance,  containing
potentially  all  the  possibilities  of  manifestation,  that  the  modi¬
fications  are  produced  in  the  phenomenal  order,  by  the  mere
unfolding  of  these  possibilities,  or,  to  use  Aristotelian  terms,
by  their  passage  from  potentiality  into  act.  ‘Every  modifica¬
tion  (parinama),  says  Vijnana-Bhikshu,  from  the  original
formation  of  the  world  (that  is,  of  each  cycle  of  existence)
until  its  final  dissolution  comes  exclusively  out  of  Prakriti
and  its  derivatives.’”  Whence,  indeed,  should  change  come,
except  from  a  region  of  changes?  Where  else  should  existence
be  enacted,  save  in  a  medium  where  forms  may  arise  and
lapse,  may  be  irrationally  conjoined,  and  may  quarrel  for  their
substance  and  transmit  it  to  one  another?  The  realm  of
essence,  or  a  pure  spirit  eternally  contemplating  that  realm,
since  it  is  immutable  and  incapable  of  any  local  emphasis  or
arbitrary  exclusion,  can  have  no  influence  whatsoever  on  the
production  of  anything.

Nevertheless,  bewildering  equivocations  continue  to  play
about  the  word  make.  What  makes  this  table  a  table?  Surely,
we  may  innocently  answer,  its  form  and  its  uses.  Therefore,
in  contempt  of  the  wood  and  the  carpenter,  the  metaphysician
may  proceed  to  assure  us  that  the  essence  of  tabularity  or  the
essence  of  utility  is  the  true  and  only  creator  of  this  table.  An
air  of  profundity  may  be  given  to  this  nonsense  by  the  fact  that
the  genesis  of  things  in  nature  is  mysterious,  and  untraceable
by  human  fancy;  while  we  reconcile  ourselves  habitually  to
our  own  being  and  actions,  merely  by  naming  and  expecting
them.  As  within  us,  so  without  us,  the  flux  of  matter,  amid  a
welter  of  waste  and  chaos,  is  rich  in  transitory  harmonies;  and
this  world  is  truly  miraculous,  in  the  sense  in  which  any  exist¬
ing  world  was  bound  to  be  so.  The  verbiage  of  metaphysics
might  therefore  pass  as  decent  drapery  for  our  ignorance  or
eloquent  expression  of  it;  but  the  trouble  is  that  when  some
good  critic  detects  that  innocent  imposture,  he  may  extend  his
scorn  to  the  realm  of  essence  in  its  legitimate  prerogatives.
These  do  not  include  any  power  of  piecing  out  the  imper¬
fections  of  physics;  the  forms  of  things  conceived  to  exist

1  U Homme  et  son  devenir ,  p.  69.


180  THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE

before  the  things  and  to  call  them  into  existence  would,  indeed,
be  chimaerae  bombinantes  in  vacuo.  Nevertheless  the  forms
which  things  assume,  when  they  assume  or  suggest  them,  are
clearer,  more  interesting,  and  more  beautiful  than  their  sub¬
stance  or  their  causes.  It  would  be  a  pity  if  the  abuse  of  logic
hardened  men’s  hearts  against  poetry,  and  made  them  enemies
to  their  own  intellectual  life.  The  metaphysicians,  in  their
impatience  of  pure  essences,  which  are  their  appointed  food,
are  to  blame  for  this  misunderstanding:  they  insist  that  their
clairvoyance  is  historical  or  physical  knowledge;  but  this  pre¬
tension  is  not  only  easily  disproved,  but  is  unworthy  of  their
contemplative  vocation.  This  expressly  carries  their  thoughts
beyond  the  accidents  of  life,  and  lifts  them  into  communion
with  another  realm  of  being,  more  akin  to  the  spirit,  since  there
an  infinite  variety,  a  boundless  freedom,  coincides  with  peace,
and  possession  with  security.


INDEX


Abstraction  not  the  principle  of
essence,  16,  32-40;  incidental  to
discourse,  37

Aristotle,  62

Beauty  arrests  attention  on  es¬
sences,  8;  is  itself  typical  of
essence,  152- 154

Being  eminently  possessed  by  es¬
sence,  23,  24;  contrasted  with
existence,  47

Being,  Pure,  is  infinitely  pregnant,
50;  is  positive  and  inclusive,  57;
not  identical  with  the  idea  of
God,  58

Berkeley,  170

Buddha,  xxii

Catholic  philosophy,  v,  168

Complexity  no  anomaly  in  nature,
I4I

Composition  a  physical  process  im¬
possible  in  essences,  138-140,  and
Chapter  X.  passim

Contemplation  suspends  faith,  6.
Cf.  Intuition

Dante,  xviii,  114

Dasgupta’s  History  of  Indian  Philo¬
sophy,  xxii

Descartes,  159,  160,  164

Dialectic  moves  among  essences,  3;
its  basis  biological,  89-91,  and
Chapter  VII.  passim ;  its  transi¬
tions  not  essential,  96;  a  mode
of  moral  integration,  99-107;  its
issue  intuition,  ibid.

Error,  2,  124-126

Essence,  use  of  the  word,  33;  the
realm  of,  described,  viii,  24;
indestructible,  57,  167


Essences,  their  part  in  knowledge
of  facts,  viii,  ix;  not  temporal  or
dynamic,  15;  non-existent,  21;
real  even  when  not  manifested,
22-24;  often  not  beautiful,  30;
not  substances,  31;  not  abstrac¬
tions,  16,  32-40;  not  constituents
of  things,  43,  44;  inhuman,  72,
92;  their  unity  or  integration,  147;
better  than  things,  179,  180

Eternity  proper  to  essences,  24,  25,
170

Euclid,  105

Exemplification  and  alternative
terms,  121  note ;  how  it  may  be
imperfect,  123

Existence,  competitive,  xviii;  irra¬
tional,  21;  temporal,  25;  eludes
intuition,  48,  93;  is  a  surd,  109,
”9  .

Extension  an  essence,  not  a  sub¬
stance,  149-151,  159,  161

Feelingis  intuition  of  simple  essences,
146

Finitude  necessary  to  existence  and
value,  xiv

Flux,  cf.  Existence

Free-will,  80

General  terms  such  only  in  use,
36,  93;  their  biological  support,
97

God  sometimes  identified  with  pure
Being,  xxii,  45;  but  distinct  from
it,  58-64,  162-164,  176

Guenon,  R.,  174-179

Happiness  fixed  on  essences,  1 1

Hegel,  75,  84,  144;  alluded  to,  33,
34,  46,  53,  68-69

Heraclitus,  75


THE  REALM  OF  ESSENCE


182

Homer,  74
Husserl,  E.,  172-174

Ideas,  in  the  British  sense,  not
essences,  40-42

Idealism  of  the  moderns  impure,
165;  a  cover  for  materialism,  68,
69,143,144,150-152
Imaginary,  the,  distinguished  from
essence,  29

Imagination,  fundamental  in  mental
life,  ix,  x;  its  moral  supremacy,
xi,  xvi;  its  place  in  nature,  xiii
Implication  due  to  the  movement
of  the  psyche,  83,  84;  logical  only
when  it  means  inclusion,  85
Individuality  proper  to  essences,  not
to  things  or  persons,  76,  77,  93.
Cf.  Universal s

Infinity  of  the  realm  of  essence,  20,
21

Instances  implicate  essences  in  the
flux  of  existence,  121,  122
Intent,  112,  113;  may  be  fixed  on
absent  essences,  114,  115
Intuition  defined,  4;  not  Berg-
sonian,  175

Knowledge  transitive,  1,  4;  how
acquired,  vii;  its  terms  essences
unlike  its  objects,  viii;  the  emer¬
gence  of  these  terms  spontaneous
in  the  psyche,  ix;  not  the  ultimate
good  of  the  philosopher,  xii,  xiii;
symbolic,  35;  may  be  of  absent
essences,  68-70;  its  weakness,  74

Leibniz,  xxii,  162-164
Logos,  the  realm  of  essence  not  a,
81-83  .

Love,  ultimately  directed  to  essences,
16

Manifestation,  cf.  Exemplification
Materialism  explains  all  that  is
explicable,  140,  141;  latent  in
psychologism,  143 -145,  151
Matter,  the  realm  of,  revealed  in  the
practical  arts,  vi;  but  not  literally,
xii;  is  a  condition  for  the  mani¬
festation  of  essence,  15
Metaphysics  fictitious,  3;  proposed
name  for  the  study  of  essence,
174-179

Michaelangelo,  79
Moore,  G.  E.,  170


Nirvana,  xxii

Nonentity,  46,  53.  Cf.  Privation
Non-existence  identified  with  es¬
sence,  xxii,  54
Nothing,  idea  of,  53

Objective,  proper  sense  of  the  word,
129

One,  the,  its  dignity  not  intrinsic,
95.  Cf.  Unity

Pain,  48

Parallelism  between  mind  and  body,
134

Parmenides,  45,  51
Parsimony,  intellectual,  126;  out  of
sympathy  with  nature,  141
Philosophy,  its  function,  xi
Pity,  example  of  a  simple  essence,
148

Plato,  xxii,  13,  74,  155,  156,  157;
propounds  the  doctrine  of  essence,
155;  but  turns  it  into  pseudo¬
physics,  30,  31,  156,  157
Play,  the  first  phase  of  spiritual  life,
12

Plotinus,  82

Possibility,  ambiguities  of  the  notion,
26-29,  162-164

Privation  essential  to  all  essences,
54-57

Purity,  use  of  the  term,  49

Relativity  of  knowledge  implies
absolute  truth  beyond,  xv
Repetition,  35,  36,  42;  improbable
in  total  intuitions,  no;  posited
in  intended  essences,  ibid.

Russell,  B.,  170

Sanity,  proper  to  action,  not  to
thought,  ix
Shakespeare,  74,  144
Socrates,  13

Space  in  intuition  not  geometrical,
69;  not  compounded,  149,  150
Spinoza,  xviii,  xxii,  13,  14,  2.1,  22,
45,  5i,  52,  83,  160-162,  164
Spirit,  poetical  and  free,  x;  easily
overlooked,  2,  3 ;  inevitably  gener¬
ated  by  organic  life,  59;  may  be
disciplined,  60-64;  its  actual
poverty,  72;  implied  in  all
experience,  128;  its  essence,  129-
132

Spirit,  the  realm  of,  xxi.  Cf.
Imagination


INDEX


183


Subjectivism,  how  legitimate,  1 ;  is
converted  to  essence  more  easily
than  to  matter,  169

Substance,  necessarily  posited,  50;
is  matter,  51

System,  the  author’s,  xviii,  xix;  its
temper,  ibid.

Systems  of  philosophy  implicit  in
action,  v;  the  nucleus  of  a  true
one  exists  in  the  arts,  vi;  they
lapse  without  being  disproved,
x;  are  human,  relative,  and
temporary,  xvii;  should  be  dis¬
tinct  and  individual,  xviii

Taine,  144

Things,  66,  109;  their  essences
alien  to  minds,  112


Tintoretto,  142

Truth,  how  far  important,  xi,  xii;
how  far  discoverable,  xiii ;  absolute
and  eternal,  xv,  xvi

Unity,  70,  74,  75,  95  _

Universals  are  individual,  18,  19;
alone  present  in  appearance,  38-
40;  before,  within,  and  after  par¬
ticulars,  93

Vitalism  superstitious,  31

Whitehead,  A.  N.,  169-171
Words,  their  transitive  force,  117
World,  conventional  idea  of  the,  127
Worlds  of  Leibnitz,  the  possible,
162-164


THE  END


DATE  DUE

Jfc  8  69

flC  5  W

‘HD  1 7  TO

'

D£  1 7  7|

fE  972

MR  1  7  15

- - -

—

- !

GAYLORD

PRINTED  IN  U..S.  A.

Ill  Sa5


3  1T57  □□033D30  S
