The Life of Reason, Vol. IV: Reason in Art (George Santayana, 1905)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/dli.bengal.10689.11444). Vol. IV: reason in art — the plastic arts, music, and the rational pleasures of beauty.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


The  Life  of  Reason  :  or  the
Phases  of  Human  Progress

By  GEORGE  SANTAYANA

Asststaut  Pri>Jtss»f  Phtioso^Ay  tn  Harvard
Univtfiity

I.  INTRODUCTION  AND  REA¬
SON  IN  COMMON  SENSE,
n.  RE/*50N  IN  SOCIETY.

III.  REASON  IN  REMGION.

IV.  REASON  IN  ART.

V.  REASON  IN  SCIENCE.


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

OR  THE

PHASES  OF  HUMAN  1MU)GHESS

BY

GEORGE  SANTAYANA

UEASON  IN  ART

^  yap  vov  tvipy€ia  (iiyr}


LONDON

ARCHIBALD  CONSTABLE  &  CO.  Ltd.

1906


Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  fur  the
United  States  nf  Aiiicrit..i


Printed  by  the  Trow  IJirectory,  Priit^nij’ and  Dnokbiiidintf  Compan
•  New  York.  U.  S.  A.


CONTENTS


REASON  IN  ART

%

CHAPTER  I

THIS  BASIS  OF  ART  IN  INSTINCT  AND  EXPERISNCB

Man  affects  his  environment,  sometimes  to  good  pur¬
pose. — Art  is  plastic  instinct  conscious  of  its  aims.— It  is
automatic.— ^o  are  the  ideas  it  expresses. — We  are  said
to  control  whatever  obeys  us.— Utility  is  a^^ult. — The
useful  naturally  stable. — Intelligence  is  docility. — ^Art  is
reason  propagating  itself. — Reauty  an  incidoit  in  rational
art,  insepaiable  from  the  others . f . . Pages  3-17


CHAPTER  II

RATIONALITY  OP  II^USTRIAL  ART

Utility  is  ultimately  ideal. — ^Work  wasted  and  chances
missed. — ^Ideali^  must  be  interpreted,  not  prescribed. —
The  aim  of  industry  is  to  live  well.-^ome  arts,  but  no
men,  are  slaves  by  na^ire- — Servile  arts  may  grow  spon¬
taneous  or  their  products  ^lay  be  renounced. — Art  starts
from  two  potentialities:  its  material  and  its  problem. —
Each  must  be  definite  andi  congruous  with  the  other. — ^A
sophism  expofl^. — Industry  prepares  matter  for  the  Uberal
arts. — Each  partakes  of  the  other . Pages  13*-^


CHAPTER  III

miEROENGB  OF  FINE  ART

Art  is  spontaneous  action  made  stable  by  success. — ^It
combines  utility  and  automatism. — Automatism  funda¬
mental  and  irresponsible. — It  is  tamed  by  contact  with
the  world. — The  dance. — ^Functions  of  gesture.— Automatic
music . Pages  34-43

V


VI


CONTENTS


pHAPTER  IV

^  MUSIC

Music  is  a  world  apart. — It  justifies  itself. — It  is  vital
and  transient. — Its  ph^ical  affinities. — ^Physiology  of  ,
music. — Limits  of  musical  sensibility. — ^The  value  of  music
is  relative  to  them. — Wonders  of  musical  structure. —
Its  inherent  emotions. — In  growing  specific  they  remain
unearthly. — They  merge  witih  common  emotions,  and  ex¬
press  such  £9  find  no  object  in  nature. — ^IVlusic  lends  ele¬
mentary  feelings  an  intellectual  communicable  form. — All
essences  are  in  themselves  good,  even  the  passions. —
Each  itftpulse  calls  for  a  possible  congenial  world.—
Literature  incapable  of  expressing  pure  feeling.— -Music
may  do  so. — Instability  the  soul  of  matter. — ^eace  the
triumph  of  spirit. — Refinement  is  true  strength.

Pages  44-67

CHAPT35R  V

SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION

Sounds  well  fitted  to  be  symbols.— Language  has  a
’  structure  independent  of  things. — Words,  remaining
identical,  serve  to  identif;;!*  things  that  change. — ^Language
dialectical  garment  of  facts. — ^Words  are  wise  men’s
counters. — Nominalism  right  in  psychology  and  realism  in
logic. — Literature  moves  Letween  the  e^^mes  of  music
and  denotation. — Sound  and  object,  in  their  sensuous
presence,  may  have  affinity. — Synt^  I^itively  iwresentar
tive. — Yet  it  vitiates  what  if  represents. — Difficulty  in
subduing  a  living  medium.— ^Language  foreshortens  ex¬
perience. — It  is  a  pejmtual  mjithology. — It  may  be  apt  or
inapt,  with  equal  richness. — ^Absolute  langiihge  a  possible
but  (oolish  art . .Pages  68-86


»  CHAPTER  VI

POETRY  AND  PROBE

Force  of  primary  expressions. — Its  exclusiveness  and
narrowness. — ^Rudimentary  poetry  an  incantation  or
chann.^Inspiratlon  irresponsible. — ^Plato’s  discriminating
view.— Explosive  and  pregnant  expression. — Naturu


CONTENTS


Vll


history  of  inspiration. — ^Expressions  to  be  understood  must
bt  recreated,  and  so  changed. — E^^pressions  may  be  recast
per)(ersel^  humourously,  or  subj^mely.—The  nature  of
prose. — It  is  more  advanced  and  responsible  than  poetry.
— ^Maturity  brings  love  of  practical  truth. — Pure  prose
would  tend  to  efface  itself. — Form  alone,  or  substance
alone,  be  poetical. — Poetry  has  its  place  in  the  medium.

— It  is  the  best  medium  possible. — ^Might  it  not  convey
wliat  it  is  best  to  know? — A  rational  poetry  would  exclude
much  now  thought  poetical. — ^AU  apperc^tion  modifies
its  object. — Reason  has  its  own  bias  and  metRod; — ^Rational
poetry  would  envelop  exact  knowledge  in  ultimate  emo>
tions. — ^An  illustration. — ^Volume  can  be  found  in  scope
better  than  in  suggestion . Pages  87-115


CHAPTER  VII

PLASTIC  CONSTHUCTION

Automatic  egression  6ften  leav^  traces  in  the  outer
world.— Such  effects  fruitful. — Magic  authority  of  man’s
first  creations. — ^Art  bam^s  relief  from  idolatry. — ^Inertia
in  technique. — Inertia  in  appreciation. — ^Adventitious
effects  appreciated  first. — ^Approach  to  beauty  througfS
useful  structure. — Failure  diT  adapted  styles. — Not  all
structure  beautiful,  nor  all  beauty  stnictural. — Struc^^u^s
designed  for  display. — Appeal  made  by  decoration.— ^ts
natural  rig];its. — Its  alliance  with  structure  in  Greek
architecture. — Relations  of  the  two  in  Gothic  art. — ^The
r^ult  here  romantic^ — ^The  mediseval  artist. — ^Repiesentar
tion  introduced. — ^Transition  to  illustration.

Pages  116-143


CHAPTER  VIII

PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION

Psychology  of  imitation. — Sustained  sensation  involves
reproduction. — ^Imitative  art  repeats  with  intent  to  repeat,
and  in  a  new  material. — Imitation  leads  to  adaptation  and
to  knowledge. — How  the  artist  is  inspired  and  irresponsible.
— ^Need  of  knowing  and  loving  the  subject  rendered. —
^blic  interests  determine  the  subject  of  art,  and  the  sub-
ieot  the  medium. — Reproduction  by  actii^  ep^meial. —
High  demands  of  sculpture. — It  is  essentially  obsolete. —


CONTENTS


•  ••

Vlll

When  men  see  groups  Cind  backgrounds  they  are  natural
painters. — ^Evolution  ofipainting. — Sensuous  and  dramatic
adequacy  approacbec^*— Essence  of  landscape-j^aintiqg. —
Its  threatened  dissoliuion. — Reversion  to  pure  d^orative
design. — Sensuous  values  are  primordial  and  so  indispen¬
sable . Pages  144-165


CHAPTER  IX

^  ^  JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART

Art  is  subject  to  moral  censorship. — Its  initial  or  specific
cxcellenceds  not  enough. — All  satisfactions,  however  hurt¬
ful,  have  an  initial  worth. — But,  on  the  whole,  artistic
activity  is  innocent. — It  is  liberal,  and  typical  of  perfect
activity. — ^The  ideal,  when  incarnate,  becomes  subject  to
civil  society.— Plato’s  strictures:  he  exaggerates  the  effect
of  myths. — His  deeper  moral  objections. — ^Their  rightness.
— Importance  of  aesthetic  alternatives. — ^The  importance  of
aesthetic  goods  varies  with  temperaments. — ^The  aesthetic
temperament  requiiAs  tutelage. — ^iEsthetic  values  every¬
where  interfused. — ^They  are  pr^ordial. — To  superpose
them  adventitiously  is  to  destroy  them.  — ^They  flow  natu-
k:ally  from  perfect  function. — Even  inhibited  functions,  when
they  fall  into  a  new  rhythm^  yield  new  beauties. — He  who
loves  beauty  must  chasten  it . Pages  166-190


CHAPTER  X

THE  CRITERION  OF  rfASTB

Dogmatism  is  inevitable  but  may  be  enlighten^. — ^Taste
gains  in  authority  as  it  is  mor^  and  more  viitdely  based.
— Different  aesthetic  endowments  may  be  compared  in
(juantiey  or  force. — Authority  of  vital  over  verbal  judg¬
ments. — ^Tastes  differ  also  in  purity  or  consistency. — They
differ,  finaUy,  in  pertinence,  and  in  width  of  appeal. — ^Art
uiay«grow  cia^ic  by  idealising  the  familiar,  or  by  re¬
porting  the  ultimate. — Good  taste  demands  that  art  should
be  rational,  i.e.,  harmonious  with  all  other  interests. — ^A
mere  “work  of  art  ’’  a  baseless  artifice. — ^Human  uses  give
to  works  of  art  their  highest  expression  and  charm.— The
sad  values  of  appearance. — ^They  need  to  be  made  prophetic
of  practigal  goods,  which  in  turn  would  be  suffused  with
beauty . Pages  191-215


CONTENTS


ix


f

CHAPTER  yj

ART  AND  HAPPlNi^

Esthetic  hannonies  are  parodies  of  real  ones,  which  in
turn  would  be  suffused  with  beauty,  yet  prototypes  of  true
perfections.— Pros  and  cons  of  detached  indulgen<^. — The
nappy  imagination  is  one  initially  in  line  with  things,  and
brought  always  closer  to  them  by  experience. — Reason  is
the  principle  of  both  art  and  happiness. — O^ly  a  rational
society  can  have  sure  and  perfect  arts. — ^Why  art  is  now
empty  and  unstable. — Anomalous  character  of  the  irrational
artist. — ^True  art  measures  and  completes  h^pin^.

Pages  216-230


REASON  IN  ART


CHAPTEK  I


THE  BASIS  OP  ART  IN  INSTINCT  AND  EXPERIENCE


Man  exists  amid  a  universal  ferment  of  being,
and  not  only  needs  plasticity  in  his  habits  and  pur¬
suits  but  finds  plasticity  also  in  the  sur-

Man  affects  his  ^

environment,  rounding  world.  liife  18  an  equilib-

sometimes  to  pium  whicll  IS  maititained  now  by
good  purpose*  ”

accepting^modification  and  now  by  im¬
posing  it.  Since  the  organ  for  all  activity  is  a
body  in  mechanical  relati<^  to  other  material  ob¬
jects,  objects  which  the  creature’s  instincts  oftep.
compel  hipj  to  appropriate  or  transform,  changes
in  his  habits  and  pursuits  leave  their  mark  on
whatever  he  touclles.  His  habitat  must  needs
bear  malty  a  trace  of  his  presence,  from  which
intelligent  observers  n&ght  infer  something  about
his  life  and  action.  These  vestiges  of  acticn  are
for  the  most  part  imprinted  unconsciously  and
aimlessly  on  the  world.  They  are  in  themseWes
generally  useless,  like  footprints;  and  yet  almost
any  »gn  of  man's  passage  might,  under  certain
conditions,  interest  a  man.  A  footprint  could  fill
Hobinson  Crusoe  with  emotion,  the  devastation
wrought  by  an  army's  march  might  prove  many

3


4


THE  hltE  OF  REASON


things  to  a  historian^  and  even  the  disorder  jn
which  a  room  is  casually  left  may  exffress  yery
vividly  the  owner^s  ways  and  character.

Sometimes,  however,  man’s  traces  are  traces  o^
useful  action  which  has  so  changed  natural  ob¬
jects  as  to  make  them  congenial  to  his  mind.
Instead  of  u  footprint  we  might  find  an  arrow;
instead  of  a  disordered  room,  a  well-planted  or¬
chard — dthings  which  would  not  only  have  betrayed
the  agent’s  habits,  but  would  have  served  and  ex¬
pressed  his  intent.  Such  propitious  forms  given
by  man  to  matter  are  no  less  instrumental  in  the
Life  of  Reason  than  are  propitious  forms  assumed
by  man’s  own  habit  or  <ancy.  Any  operation
which  thus  humanises  and  rj.tionalises  objects  is
called  art.

All  art  has  an  instinctive  source  and  a  material
embodiment.  If  the  birds  in  building  nests  felt  the
utility  of  what  they  do,  they  would  be
practising  an  art ;  and  for  the  instinct
scious  of  to  be  called  rational  it  would  even
its  aim.  Suffice  that  their  traditional  purpose

and  method  should  become^conscious  (vcasionally.
Thu^  weaving  is  an  art,  although  the  weaver  may
not  be  at  every  moment  conscious  of  its  purpose,  but
may  be  carried  along,  like  any  other  workman,  by
the  routine  of  his  art;  and  language  is  a  rational
product,  not  because  it  always  has  a  use  or  mean¬
ing,  but  because  it  is  sometimes  felt  to  have  one.
"Arts  aje  no  less  automatic  than  instincts,  and  usu¬
ally,  as  Aristotle  observed,  less  thoroughly  purpos-


THE  BASIS  09  ART


6


'ive;  for  instincts,  being  transmitted  by  inheritance
and  imbedded  in  congenital  structure,  have  to  be
economically  and  deeply  organised.  If  they  go  far
wrong  they  constitute  a  burden  impossible  to  throw
off  and  impossible  to  bear.  The  man  harassed  by
inordinate  instincts  perishes  through  want,  vice,
disease,  or  madness.  Arts,  on  the  conirary,  being
transmitted  only  by  imitation  and  teaching,  hover
more  lightly  over  life.  If  ill-adjusted  th^  make
less  havoc  and  cause  less  drain.  Tiie  more  super¬
ficial  they  are  and  the  more  detached  from  prac¬
tical  habits,  the  more  extravagant  and  mean¬
ingless  they  can  dare  to  become;  so  that  the
higher  products  of  life*are  the  n^ost  often  gratui¬
tous.  No  instinct  or  institution  was  ever  so
absurd  as  is  a  large  part  of  human  poetry  and
philosophy,  while  the  margin  of  ineptitude  is
much  broader  in  religious  myth  than  in  religious
ethics.

Arts  are  linstincts  bred  and  reared  in  the  open,
creative  habits  acquired  in  the  light  of  reason.

•  Consciousness  accompanies  their  for-
It  is  ftutonuitiCt  •  -I  .

^nation;  a  oertain  uneasiness  or  desire
and  a  more  or  less  definite  conception  of  w^at  is
wanted  often  precedes  their  full  organisation.

That  the  need  should  be  felt  before  the  means  for

•

satisfying  it  have  been  found  has  led  the  unre¬
flecting  to  imagine  that  in  art  the  need  produces
the  discovery  and  the  idea  the  work.  Causes  at
best  are  lightly  assigned  by  mortals,  and  this  par¬
ticular  superstition  is  no  worse  than  any  other.


6


THE  LIVE  OF  REASON


The  data — the  plaA  and  its  execution — as  con¬
joined  empirically  in  the  few  interesting  cases
which  show  successful  achievement,  are  made  into
a  law,  in  oblivion  of  the  fact  that  in  more  numer¬
ous  cases  such  conjunction  fails  wholly  or  in  part,
and  that  even  in  the  successful  cases  other  natural
conditions  fre  present,  and  must  be  present,  to
secure  the  result.  In  a  matter  where  custom  is  so
ingrained  and  supported  by  a  constant  appercep¬
tive  illusion,  there  is  little  hope  of  making  thought
suddenly  exact,  or  exact  language  not  paradoxical.
We  must  observe,  however,  that  only  by  virtue  of
a  false  perspective  do  ideas  seems  to  govern  action,
or  is  a  felt  neces^ty  the  mether  of  invention.  In
truth  invention  is  the  child  of  abundance,  and
the  genius  or  vital  premonition  and  groping
which  achieve  art,  simultaneously  achieve  the
ideas  which  that  art  embodies;  or,  rather,  ideas
are  themselves  products  of  an  inner  movement
which  has  an  automatic  extension  outwards;  and
this  extension  manifests  the  ideas.  Mere  craving
has  no  lights  of  its  own  to  prophesy  by,  no  pre¬
science  of  what  the  world  may  contain  that  would
satis^,  no  power  of  imagining  what  would  allay
its  unrest.  Images  and  satisfactions  have  to  come
of  themselves;  then  the  blind  craving,  as  it  turns
into  an  incipient  pleasure,  first  recognises  its  ob¬
ject.  The  pure  wiU^s  impotence  is  absolute,  and
it  would  writhe  for  ever  and  consume  itself  in
darkness  if  perception  gave  it  no  light  and  experi¬
ence  no  premonition.


7


THE  BASIS  tv  ART


,  Now,  a  man  cannot  draw  bodily  from  external
pe^ceptibn  the  ideas  lie  is  supposed  to  create  or
So  ore  the  invent;  and  as  his  will  or  uneasiness,
ideas  It  before  he  creates  the  satisfying  ideas,
expresses.  jjypQt}jegis  without  them,  it  fol¬

lows  that  creation  or  invention  is  automatic.  The


ideas  come  of  themselves,  being  tfew  and  un-
thought-of  figments,  similar,  no  doubt,  to  old  per¬
ceptions  and  compacted  of  familiar  matccials,  but
re])roduced  in  a  novel  fashion  and  dropping  in
their  sudden  form  from  the  blue.  However  in¬


stantly  they  may  he  welcomed,  they  were  not
already  known  and  never  could  have  been  sum¬
moned.  In  the  stock  examxil#,  for  instance,  of
groping  for  a  forgo^en  name,  we  know  the  context
in  which  that  name  should  lie;  we  feel  the  en¬
vironment  of  our  local  vcjjd;  but  w^hat  finally  pops
into  that  place,  reinstated  there  by  the  surround¬
ing  tensions,  is  itself  unforeseen,  for  it  was  just
this  that  was  forgotten.  Could  we  have  invoked
the  name  w'e  sholild  not  have  needed  to  do  so,
having  it  already  at  our  disjiosal.  It  is  in  fact  a
palpable  impossibilit}^*  that  any  idea  should  call
itself  into  being,  or  tliat  any  act  or  any  preference
should  be  its  own  ground.  The  responsibility  as¬
sumed  for  these  things  is  not  a  determination  to
conceive  them  before  they  are  conceived  (which
is  a  contradiction  in  terms)  but  an  embrace  and
appropriation  of  them  once  they  have  appeared.
It  is  thus  that  ebullitions  in  parts  of  our^  nature
become  touchstones  for  the  whole;  and  the  inci-


8


THE  LIES  OF  REASON


dents  within  ns  seem^iardly  our  own  work  till  they
are  accepted  and  incorporated  into  the  neain  cur¬
rent  of  our  being.  All  invention  is  tentative/ all
art  experimental,  and  to  be  sought,  like  salvation,
with  fear  and  trembling.  There  is  a  painful  preg¬
nancy  in  genius,  a  long  incubation  and  waiting  for
the  spirit,  ai  thousand  rejections  and  futile  birth-
pangs,  before  the  wonderful  child  appears,  a  gift
of  the  gods,  utterly  undeserved  and  inexplicably
perfect.  Even  this  unaccountable  success  comes
only  in  rare  and  fortunate  instances.  What  is
ordinarily  produced  is  so  base  a  hybrid,  so  lame  and
ridiculous  a  changeling,  that  we  reconcile  ourselves
with  difficulty  to^  our  offspring  and  blush  to  be
represented  by  our  fated  works.

The  propensity  to  attribute  happy  events  to  our
own  agency,  little  as  we  understand  what  wo  mean

We  are  said  to  attribute  only  untoward

control  what-  results  to  external  forces,  has  its  ground
ever  obeys  us.  primitive  noxus  of  experience.

What  we  call  ourselves  is  a  centain  cycle  of  vege¬
tative  processes,  bringing  a  round  of  fan^iliar  im¬
pulses  and  ideas;  this  stream  has  a  general  direc¬
tion,  «a  conscious  vital  inertia,  in  harmony  with
which  it  moves.  Many  of  the  developments  within
it  ^re  dialectical;  that  is,  they  go  forward  by  inner
necessity,  like  an  egg  hatching  within  its  shell,
warmed  hut  undisturbed  by  an  environment  of
which  they  arc  wholly  oblivious;  and  this  sort
of  growth,  when  there  is  adequate  consciousness  of
it,  is  felt  to  be  both  absolutely  obvious  and  abso-


9


THE  BASIS  OP  J^T

liitefy  free.  •  The  emotion  that  accompanies  it  is
•pleasufable,  but  is  too  active  and  proud  to  call  itself
a  pleasure;  it  has  rather  the  quality  of  assurance
Snd  right.  This  part  of  life,  however,  is  only  its
courageous  core;  about  it  play  all  sorts  of  inciden¬
tal  processes,  allying  themselves  to  it  in»more  or
less  congruous  movement.  Whatever  peripheral
events  fall  in  with  the  central  impulse  are  accord¬
ingly  lost  in  its  energy  and  felt  to  be  not  so  much
peripheral  and  accidental  as  inwardly  grounded,
being,  like  the  stages  of  a  prosperous  dialectic,
spontaneously  demanded  and  instantly  justified
when  they  come.  ^  ^

The  sphere  of  the  self^s  power  is  accordingly,
for  primitive  consciouftiess,  simply  the  sphere  of
what  happens  vrell ;  it  is  the  entire  imolTending  and
obedient  part  of  the  world.  A.  man  who  has  good
luck  at  dice  prides  himself  upon  it,  and  believes
that  to  have  it  is  his  destiny  and  desert.  If  his
luck  were  absolutely  constant,  ho  would  say  he  had
the  power  to^  throw  high;  and  as  the  event  would,
by  hypothesis,  sustain  hi%  boast,  there  would  be
no  practical  error  in  that  assumption.  A  wdll  th^-t
never  found  anything  to  thwart  it  would  think
itself  omnipotent;  and  as  the  psychological  es¬
sence  of  omniscience  is  not  to  suspect  there  is  any¬
thing  which  you  do  not  know,  so  the  psychologic¬
al  essence  of  omnipotence  is  not  to  suspect  that
anything  can  happen  which  you  do  not  desire.
Such  claims  would  \mdoubtedly  be  made  if  experi¬
ence  lent  them  the  least  colour;  but  would  even


10


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


the  most  comfortable  and  innocent  assurances
of  this  sort  cease  to  be  precarious?  Might
not  any  moment  of  eternity  bring  the  unim¬
agined  contradiction,  and  shake  the  dreaming
god?

Utility,  like  significance,  is  an  eventual  hannony
in  the  arts  and  by  no  means  their  ground.  All
Utiutyi^is  a  useful  things  have  been  discovered  as
result.  Lilliputians  discovered  roast  pig;

and  the  casual  feat  has  furthermore  to  be  sup¬
ported  by  a  situation  favourable  to  maintaining
the  art.  The  most  useful  act  will  never  be  re¬
peated  unlcssJts  secret  remains  embodied  in  struc¬
ture.  Practice  and  endeavour  will  not  help  an
artist  to  remain  long  at  his  best;  and  many  a  per¬
formance  is  applauded  which  cannot  be  imitated.
To  create  the  requisite  structure  two  preformed
structures  are  needed:  one  in  the  agent,  to  give
him  skill  and  perseverance,  and  another  in  the
material,  to  give  it  the  right  plasticity.  Human
progress  w'ould  long  ago  have  reached  its  goal  if
every  man  who  recognised  a  good^  could  at  once
appropriate  ii,  and  possess  wisdom  for  ever  by  vir¬
tue  of  one  moment’s  insight.  Insight,  unfortu-
«  nately,  is  in  itself  perfectly  useless  and  inconse¬
quential;  it  can  neither  have  produced  its  own
occasion  nor  now  insure  its  own  recuiTcnce.
Nevertheless,  being  proof  positive  that  whatever
bi^sis  it  needs  is  actual,  insight  is  also  an  indica¬
tion  that  the  extant  structure,  if  circumstances
maintain  it,  may  continue  to  operate  with  the


11


THE  BASIS  OF  ART

%

same  moral  results,  maiiitaining«the  vision  which
it  h^s  once  supported.

•  *  When  men  find  that  by  chance  they  have  started
a  useful  change  in  the  world,  they  congratulate
^houseful  nat- themselves  upon  it  and  call  their  per-
uraUyatobie.  sistenco  ill  that  practice  a  free  activ¬
ity.  And  the  activity  is  indeed  rational,  since  it
subserves  an  end.  The  happy  organisation  which
enables  us  to  continue  in  that  rational  course  is
the  very  organisation  which  enabled  us  to  iifitiate
it.  If  this  new  process  was  formed  under  exter¬
nal  influences,  the  same  influences,  when  they
operate  again,  will  reconstitute  the  process  each
time  more  easily;  while  if  it  was  formed  quite  spon¬
taneously,  its  own  inertia  will  inaiRtain  it  quietly
in  the  brain  and  bring  it  to  the  surface  whenever
circumstances  permit.  Tliis  is  wdiat  is  called
learning  by  experience.  Su(Ji  lessons  arc  far  from
indelible  and  are  not  always  at  command.  Yet
what  has  oncti  been  done  may  be  repeated;  repeti¬
tion  reinforces  itself  and  becomes  habit;  and  a
clear  memory  of  the  benefit  once  attained  by  for¬
tunate  action,  representing  as  it  does  the  trace  left
by  that  actioft  in  the  system,  and  its  harmony  with
the  man’s  usual  impulses  (for  the  action  is  felf  to
he  beneficial),  constitutes  a  strong  presumption  that
the  act  will  be  repeated  automatically  on  occa¬
sion;  i.  e.,  that  it  has  really  been  learned.  Con¬
sciousness,  which  willingly  attends  to  results  only,
will  judge  either  the  memory  or  the  benefit,  or
both  confusedly,  to  be  the  ground  of  this  rtadi-


12


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

t

ness  to  act;  and  only  if  some  hitch  occurs  in  the
machinery,  so  that  rational  behaviour  fpils  to  takes
place,  will  a  surprised  appeal  be  made  to  material  ^
accidents,  or  to  a  guilty  forgetfulness  or  indocility
in  the  soul.

The  idiot  cannot  learn  from  experience  at  all,
because  a  pew  process,  in  his  liquid  brain,  does  not
Intelligence  is  ulodify  structure;  while  the  fool  uses
docility.  what  he  has  learned  only  inaptly  and
in  fri’lrolous  fragments,  because  his  stretches  of
linked  experience  are  short  and  their  connections
insecure.  But  when  the  cerebral  plasm  is  fresh
and  well  disposed  and  when  the  paths  are  clear,
attention  is  consecutive  and  learning  easy;  a  mul¬
titude  of  details*can  be  gathered  into  a  single  cycle
of  memory  or  of  potential  %’egard.  Under  such
circumstances  action  is  the  unimpeded  expression
of  healthy  instinct  in  an  environment  squarely
faced.  Conduct  from  the  first  then  issues  in  prog¬
ress,  and,  by  reinforcing  its  own  organisation  at
each  rehearsal,  makes  progress  continual.  For
there  will  subsist  not  only  a  readiness  to  act  and
a  great  precision  in  action,  but  if  any  significant
circumstance  has  varied  in  the  conditibns  or  in  the
intei*esta  at  stake,  this  change  will  make  itself
felt ;  it  will  check  the  process  and  prevent  precipi¬
tate  action.  Deliberation  or  well-founded  scruple
has  the  same  source  as  facility — a  plastic  and
quick  organisation.  To  be  sensitive  to  difficul¬
ties  and  dangers  goes  with  being  sensitive  to  oppor¬
tunities.


THE  BASIS  OP  ART


13


,  Of  all  reason’s  embodiments  art  is  therefore  the
most  sptendid  and  complete.  Merely  to  attain
Art  is  reason  categories  by  which  inner  experience
propagating  may  be  articulated,  or  to  feign  analogies
itself.  which  a  universe  may  be  conceived,

would  be  but  a  visionary  triumph  if  it  remained
ineffectual  and  went  with  no  actuah  remodelling
of  the  outer  world,  to  render  man’s  dwelling  more
appropriate  and  his  mind  bettor  fed  apd  more
largely  transmissil)le.  Mind  grows  self-perpetu¬
ating  only  by  its  expression  in  matter.  Wliat
makes  progi’ess  possible  is  that  rational  action
niav  leave  traces  in  nature,  such  that  nature  in
consequence  furnishes  a  better  J)asis  for  the  Life
of  Reason;  in  other  words  progress  is  art  better¬
ing  the  conditions  of  existence.  Until  art  arises,
all  achievement  is  internal  to  the  brain,  dies  with
the  individual,  and  even  fii  him  spends  itself  with¬
out  recovery,  like  music  heard  in  a  dream.  Art,
in  establi^ing  instruments  for  human  life  beyond
the  human  body,  <md  moulding  outer  things  into
sympathy  with  inner  valuess,  establishes  a  ground
whence  values  may  continually  spring  up;  the
thatch  that  protects  from  to-day’s  rain  will  last
and  keep  out  to-morrow’s  rain  also;  the  sign  that
once  expresses  an  idea  will  serve  to  recall  ij;  in
future.

Not  only  does  the  work  of  art  thus  perpetuate
its  own  function  and  produce  a  better  experience,
but  the  process  of  art  also  perpetuates  itself,
because  it  is  teachable.  Every  animal  learns


14


THE  LIBS  OF  REASON


something  by  living;  but  if  his  offspring  inherij
only  what  he  possessed  at  birth,  they  hav^to  learn
life's  lessons  over  again  from  the  beginning,  with
at  best  some  vague  help  given  by  their  parents’
example.  But  when  the  fruits  of  experience  exist
in  the  common  environment,  when  new  instru¬
ments,  unknown  to  nature,  are  offered  to  each  in¬
dividual  for  his  better  equipment,  although  he
must  still  learn  for  himself  how  to  live,  he  may
learn  in  a  humaner  school,  where  artificial  occa¬
sions  arc  constantly  open  to  him  for  expanding  his
powers.  It  is  no  longer  merely  hidden  inner  proc¬
esses  tliat  he  must  reproduce  to  attain  his  prede¬
cessors’  wisdom;  l^e  may  acquire  much  of  it  more
expeditiously  by  imitating  their  outward  habit —
an  imitation  wdiich,  furthermore,  they  have  some
means  of  exacting  from  him.  Wlierever  there  is
art  there  is  a  possibility  of  training.  A  father
who  calls  his  idle  sons  from  the  jungle  to  help  him
hold  the  plough,  not  only  inures  them  to  labour
but  compels  them  to  observe  tke  earth  upturned
and  refreshed,  and  to  watch  the  germination  there;
their  wandering  thought,  tfieir  incipient  rebell¬
ions,  Yull  be  met  by  the  hope  of  harvest;  and
it  will  not  be  impossible  for  them^  when  their
falbpr  is  dead,  to  follow  the  plough  of  their  own
initiative  and  for  their  own  children’s  sake.  So
great  is  the  sustained  advance  in  rationality  made
Ijossible  by  art  which,  being  embodied  in  matter,
is  teachable  and  transmissible  by  training;  for  in
art  the  values  secured  are  recognised  the  more


15


THE  BASIS  OF4ART


easily  for  having  been  first  ei joyed  when  other
^people  fniiiished  the  means  to  them;  while  the
maintenance  of  these  values  is  facilitated  by  an
external  tradition  imposing  itself  contagiously  or
by  force  on  each  new  generation.

Art  is  action  which  transcending  the  body
makes  the  world  a  more  congenial  stimulus  to  the


Beauty  an
incident  in
rational  art.


soul.  All  art  is  therefore  useful  and
practical,  and  the  notable  aesthetic
value  which  some  works  (if  aH  possess,


for  reasons  flowing  for  the  most  part  out  of  their


moral  significance,  is  itself  one  of  tjie  satisfactions


Avhicli  art  offers  to  human  nature  as  a  whole.


Between  sensation  and  aJ:)stract  di^ourse  lies  a  re¬
gion  of  deployed  sensibility  or  synthetic  represen¬
tation,  a  region  wher?  more  is  seen  at  arm’s  length
than  in  any  one  moment  could  be  felt  at  close


(luarters,  and  yet  where  the  demote  parts  of  experi¬
ence,  which  discourse  reaches  only  through  sym¬
bols,  are  redbvered  and  recomposed  in  something
like  their  native  cohuirs  and  experienciid  relations.
This  regipn,  called  imagination,  has  pleasiires
more  airy  and  huninous.tlian  those  of  sense,  more
massive  anJ  rapturous  than  those  of  intclligt^ce.
The  values  inherent  in  imagination,  in  instant  in¬
tuition,  in  sense  endowed  with  form,  are  called
aesthetic  values;  they  are  fouud  mainly  in  nature
and  living  beings,  but  often  also  in  man’s  artificial
works,  in  images  evoked  by  language,  and  in  the
realm  of  sound.

Productions  in  which  an  aesthetic  value  is*or  is


THE  IXFE  OF  REASON


16

supposed  to  be  pTOminent  take  the  name  of  fine
art;  but  the  work  of  fine  art  so  defined  is  almost
Inseparable  always  an  abstraction  from  the  actual
from  the  object,  which  has  many  non-ajsthetic
others  functions  and  values.  To  separate  the

aesthetic  element,  abstract  and  dependent  as  it
often  is,  is^an  artifice  which  is  more  misleading
than  helpful;  for  neither  in  the  history  of  art  nor
in  a  raj;ional  estimate  of  its  value  can  the  aesthetic
function  of  things  be  divorced  from  the  practical
and  moral.  "Wliat  had  to  be  done  was,  by  imag¬
inative  races,  done  imaginatively;  what  had  to  be
spoken  or  made,  was  s])oken  or  made  fitly,  lovingly,
beautifully.  Or>  to  take  the  matter  up  on  its  psy¬
chological  side,  the  ceaseless  experimentation  and
ferment  of  ideas,  in  breeding  what  it  had  a  pro¬
pensity  to  breed,  came  sometimes  on  figments  that
^gave  it  delightful  pause;  these  beauties  were  the
first  knowledges  and  these  arrests  the  first  hints
of  real  and  useful  things.  The  rose’s  grace  could
more  easily  be  plucked  from  ‘its  petals  than  the
beauty  of  art  from  its  subject,  occasion,*  and  use.
An  ajsthetic  fragrance, , indeed,  all  tjiings  may
have,  if  in  soliciting  man’s  senses  or  reason  they
can  awaken  his  imagination  as  well;  but  this  mid¬
dle  zone  is  so  mixed  and  nebulous,  and  its  limits
are  so  vague,  that  it  cannot  vrell  be  treated  in
theory  otherwise  than  as  it  exists  in  fact — as  a
phase  of  man’s  sympathy  with  the  world  he  moves
in.  If  art  is  that  element  in  the  Life  of  Reason
which  consists  in  modifying  its  environment  the


17


THE  BASIS  OF  ART

better  to  attain  its  end,  art  may  be  expected  to
^ubservg  all  parts  of  the  human  ideal,  to  increase
man’s  comfort,  knowledge,  and  delight.  And  as
nature,  in  her  measure,  is  wont  to  satisfy  these
interests  together,  so  art,  in  seeking  to  increase
that  satisfaction,  will  work  simultaneously  in  every
ideal  direction.  Nor  will  any  of  tl^ese  directions
be  on  the  whole  good,  or  tempt  a  well-trained  will,
if  it  leads  to  estrangement  from  all  other  inter¬
ests,  The  aesthetic  good  will  bo  adcordingly
hatched  in  the  same  nest  with  the  others,  and
incapable  of  flying  far  in  a  different  air.


CHAPTER  n


KATIONALITY  OF  INDUSTRIAL  ART

If  there  were  anything  wholly  instrumental
or  merel/  useful  its  rationality,  such  as  it  was,

utility  is  ulti-  be  perfectly  obvious.  Such  a

mateiy  ideal,  thing  would  be  exhaustively  defined
b}’’  its  result  and  conditioned  exclusively  by  its
expediency.  Yet  the  value  of  most  human  arts,
mechanical  as  tht^  may  appear,  has  a  some¬
what  doubtful  and  mixed  charr.cter.  Naval  ar¬
chitecture,  for  instance,  serves  a  clear  immediate
purpose.  Yet  to  cross  th^  sea  is  not  an  ultimate
gJod,  and  the  ambition  or  curiosity  that  first  led
man,  being  a  land-animal,  to  that  now  vulgar  ad¬
venture,  has  sometimes  found  moralists  to  con-
demn  it.  A  vessel’s  true  excellence  is  more  deeply
conditioned  than  the  ship-wright  may  imagine
when  he  prides  himself  on  having  made  something
that  will  float  and  go.  The  best  battle-ship,  or
racing  yacht,  or  freight  steamer,  might  turn  out  to
be  a  'worse  thing  for  its  specific  excellence,  if  the
action  it  facilitated  proved  on  the  whole  malefi¬
cent,  and  if  war  or  racing  or  trade  could  be  rightly
condemned  by  a  philosopher.  The  rationality  of
ship-buiWing  has  several  sets  of  conditions;  the

18  4


RATIONALITY  OF  INDUSTRIAL  ART  19

4

patron’*  demands  must  be  first  fulfilled;  then  the
patron’s  specifications  have  to  be  judged  by  the  pur¬
pose  he  in  turn  has  in  mind;  this  purpose  itself
has  to  be  justified  by  his  ideal  in  life,  and  finally
his  ideal  by  its  adequacy  to  his  total  or  ultimate
nature.  Error  on  any  of  these  planes  makes  the
ultimate  product  irrational;  and  if  a  finer  instinct,
even  in  the  midst  of  absorbing  subsidiary  action,*
warns  a  man  that  he  is  working  against  his  high¬
est  good,  his  art  will  lose  its  savour  and  its  most
skilful  products  will  grow  hateful,  even  to  his  im¬
mediate  apprehension,  infected  as  they  will  be  by
the  canker  of  folly.  ^


Art  thus  has  its  casuistry  no  less  than  morals,
and  philosopher?  in  the  future,  if  man  should  at

Work  wasted  havc  ceascd  to  battle  with  ghosts,
and  chances  might  be  cailed  upon  to  review  mate-
nusscd.  civilisation  from  its  beginnings,

testing  6ach  complication  by  its  known  ultimate
fruits  and  reaching  in  this  way  a  purified  and  or¬
ganic  Jdeal  of  human  industry,  an  ideal  which  edu¬
cation  and  political  ^action  might  help  to  embody.
If  nake'dness  or  a  single  garment  were  shown  to
be  wholesoiner  and  more  agreeable  than  compli¬
cated  clothes,  weavers  and  tailors  might  be  notably
diminished  in  number.  If,  in  another  quartef,  pop¬
ular  fancy  should  sicken  at  last  of  its  traditional
round  of  games  and  fictions,  it  might  discover  infi¬
nite  entertainment  in  the  play  of  reality  and  truth,
and  infinite  novelties  to  be  created  by  f rtiitful  la¬
bour  ;  so  that  many  a  pleasure  might  be  found  which


20


THE  LIE'E  OF  REASON


is  now  clogged  by  mere  apathy  and  nnint^lligenceC
Human  genius,  like  a  foolish  Endymion,  lies  fast
asleep  amid  its  opportunities,  wasting  itself  in
dreams  and  disinheriting  itself  by  negligence.

Descriptive  economy,  however,  will  have  to
make  great  progress  before  the  concrete  ethics  of
art  can  be  properly  composed.  History,  conceived
hitherto  as  a  barbarous  romance,  does  not  furnish


sufficient ’data  by  which  the  happiness  of  life  un¬
der  various  conditions  may  be  soberly  estimated.
Politics  has  receded  into  the  region  of  blind  im¬
pulse  and  factional  interests,  and  would  need  to
be  reconstituted  before  it  could  approach  again
that  scientific  pro*blem  which  Socrates  and  his
great  disciples  would  have  wiahed  it  to  solve.
Meantime  it  may  not  be  premature  to  say  some¬
thing  about  another  factojj  in  practical  philosophy,
sianely,  the  ultimate  interests  by  which  industrial
arts  and  their  products  have  to  be  estimated.  Even
before  we  know  the  exact  effects ^of  an  institution

Id  Is  must  some  extent  the  purposes

be  interpret-  which,  in  Order  to  be  beneficent,*it  will

sMibed!  subserve*  although  m  truth

such  antecedent  fixing  of  aims  cannot
go  far,  seeing  that  every  operation  reacts  on  the
organ  that  executes  it,  thereby  modifying  the  ideal
involved.  Doubtless  the  most  industrial  people
would  still  wish  to  be  happy  and  might  accord-
ingly  lay  down  certain  principles  which  its  indus¬
try  should  never  transgress,  as  for  instance  that
production  should  at  any  price  leave  room  for  lib-


RATIONALITY  OF  INDUSTRIAL  ART  21

cr4y,  leisure,  beauty,  and  a  spirit  of  general  co¬
operation  ^nd  goodwill.  But  a  people  once  hav¬
ing  become  industrial  will  hardly  be  happy  if  sent
back  to  Arcadia;  it  will  have  formed  busy  habits
which  it  cannot  relax  without  tedium;  it  will  have
developed  a  restlessness  and  avidity  which  will
crave  matter,  like  any  other  kind  Tif  hunger.
Every  experiment  in  living  qualifies  the  initial  pos¬
sibilities  of  life,  and  the  moralist  would  i*eckon
without  his  host  if  he  did  not  allow  for  the  change
which  forced  exercise  makes  in  instinct,  adjusting
it  more  or  less  to  extant  conditions  originally,  per¬
haps,  unwelcome.  It  is  too  late  for  the  highest
good  to  prescribe  flying  for  quadrupeds  or  peace
for  tile  sea  waves.

«

What  antecedent  interest  does  mechanical  art
subserve?  What  is  the  initial  and  commanding
ideal  of  life  by  which  all  industrial  developments
are  to  be  proved  rational  or  condemned  as  vain?
If  we  look  to  the  most  sordid  and  instrumental
of  industries  we  see'that  their  purpose  is  to  pro¬
duce  a  foreordained  result  with  the  minimum  of
effort.  They  serve,  in  a  word,  to  cheapen  commod¬
ities.  But  the  value  of  such  an  aeJiievememt  is
clearly  not  final;  it  hangs  on  two  underlying  ideals,
one  demanding  abundance  in  the  things  produce^
and  the  other  diminution  in  the  toil  required  to
produce  them.  At  least  the  latter  interest  may
in  turn  be  analysed  further,  for  to  diminish  toil
is  itself  no  absolute  good;  it  is  a  good  only  ^hen
such  diminution  in  one  sphere  liberates  energies


22


THE  r.IFE  OF  REASON

i

which  may  be  employed  in  other  fields^  so  that  the
total  human  accomplishment  may  be  greater.
Doubtless  useful  labour  has  its  natural  limits,  for
if  overdone  any  activity  may  impair  the  power  of
enjoying  both  its  fruits  and  its  operation.  Yet
in  so  far  as  labour  can  become  spontaneous  and  in
itself  delightful  it  is  a  positive  benefit;  and  to  its
intrinsic  value  must  be  added  all  those  possessions
or  useful  dispositions  which  it  may  secure.  Thus
one  ideal — to  diminish  labour — ^falls  back  into  the
other — to  diffuse  occasions  for  enjoyment.  The
aim  is  not  to  curtail  occupation  but  rather  to  ren¬
der  occupation  liberal  by  supplying  it  with  more
appropriate  objects.

It  is  then  liberal  life,  fos^red  by  industry  and
commerce  or  involved  in  them,  that  alone  can
The  aim  of  justify  these  instrumental  pursuits,
industry  is  Those  philosophers  whose  ethics  is
to  live  weu,  nothing  but  sencimental  pj^ysics  like  to

point  out  that  happiness  arises  out  of  work  and
that  compulsory  activities,  Rutifully  performed,
underlie  freedom.  Of  course  matter  or  ferce  under¬
lies  everything;  but  rationality  does  not  accrue
to  spirit  because  mechanism  supports  it;  it  accrues
to  mechanism  in  so  far  as  spirit  is  thereby  called
into  existence;  so  that  while  values  derive  exist¬
ence  only  from  their  causes,  causes  derive  value
only  from  their  results.  Functions  cannot  be  ex¬
ercised  until  their  organs  exist  and  are  in  opera¬
tion  so  that  what  is  primary  in  the  order  of  genesis
is  always  last  and  most  dejicndent  in  the  order


RATIONALITY  OF  INDUSTRIAL  ART  23

of*  worth.  The  primary  substance  of  things  is
-  their  mere  material;  their  first  cause  is  their
lowest  instrument.  Matter  has  only  the  val¬
ues  of  the  forms  which  it  assumes,  and  while
each  stratification  may  create  some  intrinsic  ideal
and  achieve  some  good,  these  goo^  are  dull
and  fleeting  in  proportion  to  their  rudimentary
character  and  their  nearness  to  protoplasmic
thrills.  Where  reason  exists  life  cannot.  Indeed,
be  altogether  slavish;  for  any  operation,  however
menial  and  fragmentary,  when  it  is  accompanied
by  ideal  representation  of  the  ends  pursued  and
by  felt  success  in  attaining  them,  becomes  a  sam¬
ple  and  anagram  of  all*freedom.  ^Nevertheless  to
arrest  attention  on«a  means  is  really  illiberal,
though  not  so  much  by  what  such  an  interest  con¬
tains  as  by  what  it  ignores.  ^Happiness  in  a  tread¬
mill  is  far  from  inconceivable;  but  for  that  happi¬
ness  to  be  national  the  wheel  should  be  nothing
less  than  the  whole  sky  from  which  influences  can
descend  upon  us.  I'here  would  be  meanness  of
soul  in  being  content  with  a  smaller  sphere,  so  that
not  everything  that  waif  relevant  to  our  welfare
should  be  envisaged  in  our  thoughts  and  purposes.
To  be  absorbed  by  the  incidental  is  the  animal’s
portion;  to  be  confined  to  the  instrumental  is  thS
slave’s.  For  though  within  such  activity  there  may
be  a  rational  movement,  the  activity  ends  in  a
fog  and  in  mere  physical  drifting.  Happiness  has
to  be  begged  of  fortune  or  found  in  mystical*  in¬
difference:  it  is  not  yet  subtended  by  rational  art.


24


THE  MFE  OF  REASON

/

%

The  Aristotelian  theory  of  slavery,  in  makkig
servile  action  wholly  subservient,  sins  indeed
against  persons,  but  not  against  arts.
bu™no^n.  It  sins  against  persons  because  there  is
ar«  slaves  by  inconsiderate  haste  in  asserting  that
whole  classes  of  men  arc  capable  of  no
activities,  except  the  physical,  which  justify  them¬
selves  inherently.  The  lower  animals  also  have
physical  interests  and  natural  emotions.  A  man,
if  he  deserves  the  name,  must  be  credited  with
some  rational  capacity:  prospect  and  retrospect,
hope  and  the  ideal  portraiture  of  things,  must  to
some  extent  employ  him.  Freedom  to  cultivate
these  interests  fa  then  his  inherent  riglit.  As  the
lion  vindicates  his  prerogative  to  ferocity  and  dig¬
nity,  so  every  rational  creature  vindicates  his  pre¬
rogative  to  spiritual  freedom.  But  a  too  sum¬
mary  classification  of  individuals  covers,  in  Aris¬
totle,  a  just  discrimination  among  thc^  arts.  In  so
far  as  a  man^s  occupation  is  merely  instrumental
and  justified  only  externally,  lie  is  obviously  a
slave  and  his  art  at  best  an  evil  necessity.  For
the  operation  is  by  hypbthesis  not  its  own  end;
and  if  the  jiroduct,  needful  for  some  ulterior  pur¬
pose,  had  been  found  ready  made  in  nature,  the
bther  and  self-justifying  activities  could  have  gone
on  unimpeded,  without  the  arrest  or  dislocation
which  is  involved  in  first  establishing  the  needful
conditions  for  right  action.  If  air  had  to  be  manu-
fac«Jiured,  as  dwellings  must  he,  or  breathing  to  be
learned  like  speech,  mankind  would  start  with  an


RATIONALITY  OF  INDU


RIAL  ART


25


everf  greater^handicap  and  would  never  have  come
within  sight  of  such  goals  as  it  can  now  pursue.
Thus  all  instrumental  and  remedial  arts,  however
indispensable,  are  pure  burdens;  and  progress  con¬
sists  in  abridging  them  as  much  as  is  possible  with¬
out  contracting  the  basis  for  moral  life.  ^

This  needful  abridgment  can  take  place  in  two
directions.  The  art  may  become  instinctive,  un-

Serviie  arts  conscious  of  the  utility  that  backs  it

may  grow  and  conscious  only  of  the  solicitation

spontaneous  leads  it  on.  In  that  measure

or  tneir  proa*

ucts  may  be  human  nuturc  is  adapted  to  its  coiidi-
renounced.  tions;  Icssons  loug  dictated  by  experi¬
ence  are  actually  learned  and  becdhie  hereditary
habits.  So  inclinatioji  to  hunt  and  fondness  for
nursing  children  have  passed  into  instincts  in  the
human  race;  and  what  if  i|  were  a  forced  art
would  be  servile,  by  becoming  spontaneous  hfis
risen  to  be  aji  ingredient  in  ideal  life;  for  sport
and  maternity  arc  human  ideals.  In  an  opposite
direction  servile  arts  may  be  abridged  by  a  lapse
of  the  demdnd  which  required  them.  The  servile
art  of  vine-dressers,  for  instance,  would  meet  such
a  fate  if  the  course  of  history,  instead  of  tendihg
to  make  the  vintage  an  ideal  episode  and  to  cre¬
ate  worshippers  of  Bacchus  and  Priapus,  tended*
rather  to  bring  about  a  distaste  for  w’ine  and  made
the  whole  industry  superfluous.  This  solution  is
certainly  less  happy  than  the  other,  insomuch  as
it  suppresses  a  function  instead  of  taking  it  up  into
organic  life;  yet  life  to  be  organic  has  to  be  ex-


26


THlj^LIFE  OF  REASON

elusive  and  finite;  it  has  to  work  out  specific  tend¬
encies  in  a  specific  environment;  and  therefore  to
surrender  a  particular  impeded  impulse  may  in¬
volve  a  clear  gain,  if  only  a  compensating  unim¬
peded  good  thereby  comes  to  light  elsewhere.  Jf
wine  disgippeared,  with  all  its  humane  and  sym¬
bolic  consecrations,  that  loss  might  bring  an  ulti¬
mate  gain,  could  some  less  treacherous  friend  of
frankness  and  merriment  be  thereby  brought  into
the  world.

In  practice  servile  art  is  usually  mitigated  by
combining  these  two  methods;  the  demand  sub¬
served,  being  but  ill  supported,  learns  to  restrain
itself  and  be  *less  imporfunate;  while  at  the  same
time  habit  renders  the  labour  which  was  once  un¬
willing  largely  automatic,  and  even  overlays  it  with
ideal  associations.  JIuman  nature  is  happily  elas¬
tic;  there  is  hardly  a  need  that  may  not  be  muflled
or  suspended,  and  hardly  an  employment  that  may
not  be  relieved  by  the  auix)matic  interest  with
which  it  comes  to  be  pursued.  To  this  automatic
interest  other  palliatives  are  often  aflded,  some¬
times  religion,  sotnetinnibs  mere  dulness  and  resig¬
nation;  but  in  these  cases  the  evil  imposed  is
merely  counterbalanced  or  forgotten,  it  is  not
•remedied.  Reficctive  and  spiritual  races  mini¬
mise  labour  by  renunciation,  for  they  find  it
easier  to  give  up  its  fruits  than  to  justify  its  ex¬
actions.  Among  energetic  and  self-willed  men,  on
th«  contrary,  the  demand  for  material  progress
remains  predominant,  and  philosophy  dwells  by


RATIONALITY  OF  INDU^RIAL  ART  27


prefference  oji  the  possibility  that  a  violent  and  con-
^tinual  subjection  in  the  present  might  issue  in  a
glorious  future  dominion.  This  possible  result  was
hardly  realised  by  the  Jews,  nor  long  maintained
by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  it  remains  to  be
seen  whether  modern  industrialism  can  achieve  it.
In  fact,  we  may  suspect  that  success  only  comes
when  a  nation’s  external  task  happens  to  coincide
with  its  natural  genius,  so  that  a  minimum  its
labour  is  servile  and  a  maximum  of  its  play  is
beneficial.  It  is  in  such  cases  that  we  find  colossal


achievements  and  apparently  inexhaustible  ener¬
gies.  Prosperity  is  indeed  the  basis  of  every  ideal
attainment,  so  that  prematurely  ^  recoil  from
hardship,  or  to  be  habitually  conscious  of  hardship
at  all,  amounts  to  renouncing  beforehand  all
earthly  goods  and  all  chance  o^  spiritual  greatness.
Yet  a  chance  is  no  certainty.  When  glory  requires
Titanic  labours  it  often  finds  itself  in  the  end


buried  under  a  pyramid  rather  than  raised  upon  a
pedestal.  Energies  which  are  not  from  the  begin¬
ning  self- justifying  and  flooded  with  light  seldom
lead  to  ideal  greatness.  *

The  action  to  which  industry  should  minister
is  accordingly  liberal  or  spontaneous  action;  and

Art  starts  condition  of  rationality  in

from  two  the  arts.  But  a  second  condition  is

itrmatoSr*  the  first:  freedom  means

and  its  prob-  freedom  in  some  operation,  ideality
means  the  ideality  of  something  em¬
bodied  and  material.  Activity,  achievement,  a


28


THEJLIFE  OF  REASON

passage  from  prospect  to  realisation,  evidditly
essential  to  life.  If  all  ends  were  already  reached,^
and  no  art  were  requisite,  life  could  not  exist  at
all,  much  less  a  Life  of  Reason.  I^o  politics,  no
morals,  no  thought  would  be  possible,  for  all  these
move  tov^rds  some  ideal  and  envisage  a  goal  to
which  they  presently  pass.  The  transition  is  the
activity,  without  which  achievement  would  lose  its
zest  and  indeed  its  meaning;  for  a  situation  could
never  be  achieved  which  had  been  given  from  all
eternity.  The  ideal  is  a  concomitant  emanation
from  the  natural  and  has  no  other  possible  status.
Those  human  possessions  which  are  perennial  and
of  inalienable  value  are*  in  a  manner  potential
possessions  only.  Knowledge,  art,  love  are  always
largely  in  abeyance,  while  power  is  absolutely
synonymous  with  potentiality.  Fruition  requires  a
continual  recovery,  a  repeated  re-esiablishment  of
the  state  we  enjoy.  So  breath  and  imtrition,  feel¬
ing  and  thought,  come  in  ^pulsations;  they  have
only  a  periodic  and  rhythmic  sort  of  actuality.
The  operation  may  be  sustained  indefinitely,  but
only  if  it  admits  a  certHin  internal  oscillation.

A  creature  like  man,  whose  mode  of  being  is
a  life  or  experience  and  not  a  congealed  ideality,
*8uch  as  eternal  truth  might  show%  must  accord¬
ingly  find  something  to  do;  he  must  operate  in  an
environment  in  which  everything  is  not  already
what  he  is  presently  to  make  it.  In  the  actual
wdl’ld  this  first  condition  of  life  is  only  too  amply
fulfilled;  the  real  difficulty  in  man's  estate,  the


RATIONALITY  OF  INDl^TRIAL  ART  29

trfte  danger  to  his  vitality,  lies  not  in  want  of  work
but  in  so  colossal  a  disproportion  between  demand
and  opportunity  that  the  ideal  is  stunned  out  of
existence  and  perishes  for  want  of  hope.  The  Life
of  Reason  is  continually  beaten  back  upon  its  ani¬
mal  sources,  and  nations  are  submerged  in  deluge
after  deluge  of  barbarism.  Impressed*as  we  may
well  be  by  this  ancient  experience,  we  should  not
overlook  the  complementary  truth  whielu  under
more  favourable  circumstances  would  be  as  plain
as  the  other:  namely,  that  our  deepest  interest  is
after  all  to  live,  and  we  could  not  live  if  all  acqui¬
sition,  assimilation,  government,  and  creation  had
been  made  impossible  ffjr  us  by  th#ir  foregone  real¬
isation,  so  that  evq^y  operation  was  forestalled  by
the  given  fact.  The  distinction  between  the  ideal
and  the  real  is  one  which  the  human  ideal  itself
insists  should  be  preserved.'*  It  is  an  essential  ex¬
pression  o4  life,  and  its  disappearance  would  be
tantamount  to  death,  making  an  end  to  voluntary
transition  and  idcffl  representation.  All  objects
envisaged  either  in  vulgar  action  or  in  the  airiest
cognition  must  be  at  fust  ideal  and  distinct  from
the  given  facts,  otherwise  action  would  havo  lost
its  function  at  the  same  moment  that  thought  lost
its  signihcancc.  All  life  would  have  collapsed  iivto
a  purposeless  datum.

The  ideal  requires,  then,  that  opportunities
should  he  offered  for  realising  it  through  action,
and  that  transition  should  he  possible  to  it^from
a  given  state  of  things.  One  form  of  such  transi-


30  THE  I^FE  OP  REASON

tion  is  art,  where  the  ideal  is  a  possible  and  more
excellent  form  to  be  given  to  some  external  sub¬
stance  or  medium.  Art  needs  to  iind  a  material
relatively  formless  which  its  business  is  to  shape;
and  this  initial  formlessness  in  matter  is  essential


to  art^s  existence.  Were  there  no  stone  not  yet
sculptured  and  built  into  walls,  no  sentiment  not
yet  perfectly  uttered  in  poetry,  no  distance  or  ob¬
livion  yet  to  be  abolished  by  motion  or  inferential
thought,  activity  of  all  sorts  would  have  lost  its
occasion.  Matter,  or  actuality  in  what  is  only  po¬
tentially  ideal,  is  therefore  a  necessary  condition
for  realising  an  ideal  at  all.

This  potentially,  howeve^',  in  so  far  as  the  ideal
requires  it,  is  a  quite  definite  disposition.  Abso-
Each  must  l^te  chaos  would  defeat  life  as  surely
be  definite  would  absolute  ideality.  Activity,

gruous  with  m  presupposiug  material  conditions,
the  other.  prcsupposcs  them  to  be  favourable,  so
that  a  movement  towards  the  ideal  may  actually
take  place.  Matter,  which  fi'ofh  the  point  of  view
of  a  given  ideal  is  merely  its  poientialRy,  is  in
itself  the  potentiality  of  every  other  ideal  as  well;
it  is  accordingly  responsible  to  no  ideal  in  particu¬
lar  and  proves  in  some  measure  refractory  to  all.
It^makes  itself  felt,  eitlier  as  an  opportune  mate¬
rial  or  as  an  accidental  hindrance,  only  when  it
already  possesses  definite  form  and  atfinities;  given
in  a  certain  quantity,  quality,  and  order,  matter
feeds  Jihe  specific  life  which,  if  given  otherwise,  it
would  impede  or  smother  altogether.


RATIONALITY  OF  INDTjSTRIAL  ART  31

•Art,  in  calling  for  materials,  calls  for  materials
plastic  to  its  influence  and  definitely  predisposed
to  its  ends.  Unsuitableness  in  the  data  far  from
grounding  action  renders  it  abortive,  and  no  expe-
A  sophism  dicnt  coiild  be  more  sophistical  than
exposed  wliich  thcodicy,  ii^  its  desper¬

ate  straits,  has  sometimes  been  driven,  of  trying
to  justify  as  conditions  for  ideal  achievement  tlie
very  conditions  which  make  ideal  achievement  im¬
possible.  The  given  state  from  which  transition  is
to  take  place  to  the  ideal  must  support  that  transi¬
tion;  so  that  the  desirable  want  of  ideality  which
plastic  matter  should  possess  is  merely  relative  and
strictly  determined.  Art  and  rerffeon  find  in  na¬
ture  the  backgroup^l  they  require;  but  nature,  to
be  wholly  justified  by  its  ideal  functions,  would
have  to  subserve  thc?m  perfectly.  It  would  have
to  offer  to  reason  and  art  a*  sufficient  and  favour¬
able  basis;  it  would  have  to  feed  sense  ivith  the
right  stimuli  at  the  right  intervals,  so  that  art  and
reason  might  continually  flourish  and  be  always
moving  to  some  new  success.  A  poet  needs  emo¬
tions  and  percei)tions  to*  translate  into  language,
since  those  are  his  subject-matter  and  his  inspira¬
tion;  but  starvation,  physical  or  moral,  will  not
help  him  to  sing.  One  thing  is  to  meet  with  thifj
conditions  inherently  necessary  for  a  given  action;
another  thing  is  to  meet  with  obstacles  fatal  to  the
same.  A  propitious  formlessness  in  matter  is  no
sort  of  evil;  and  evil  is  so  far  from  being  a  pro¬
pitious  formlessness  in  matter  that  it  is  rather


32  THE  IfFE  OF  REASON


an  impeding  form  which  matter  has  ^Iready  As¬
sumed.


Out  of  this  appears,  with  sufficient  clearness,
the  rational  function  which  the  arts  possess.

They  give,  as  nature  does,  a  form  to
pares  matter  ^natter,  blit  they  give  it  a  more  propi-
for  the  liberal  tious  form.  Such  success  in  art  is  pos-

Arts*  ^

siblc  only  when  the  materials  and
organs* at  hand  are  in  a  largo  measure  already  Avell
disposed;  for  it  can  as  little  exist  with  a  dull  organ


as  with  no  organ  at  all,  while  there  are  winds  in
which  every  sail  must  be  furled.  Art  depends
upon  profiting  by  a  bonanza  and  learning  to  sail
in  a  good  breeze*  strong  enough  for  speed  and  con¬
scious  power  but  placable  ew'Ugh  for  dominion
and  liberty  of  soul.  Then  perfection  in  action  can
be  attained  and  a  sclf-;[ustifyi  ng  energy  can  emerge
out  of  apathy  on  the  one  hand  and  out  of  servile
and  wasteful  work  on  the  other.  Art*  has  accord¬


ingly  two  stages:  one  mechanical  or  industrial,  in
which  untoward  matter  is  befter  prepared,  or  im¬
peding  media  are  overcome;  the  other  liberal,  in
which  perfectly  fit  inattef  is  appropriated  to  ideal
uses  and  endowed  with  a  direct  spiritual  function.
A  premonition  or  rehearsal  of  these  two  stages  may
Re  seen  in  nature,  where  nutrition  and  reproduc¬
tion  fit  the  body  for  its  ideal  functions,  whereupon
sensation  and  cerebration  make  it  a  direct  organ
of  mind.  Industry  merely  gives  nature  that  form
whifch,  if  more  thoroughly  humane,  she  might  have
originally  possessed  for  our  benefit;  liberal  arts


RATIONALITY  OF  INDUSTRIAL  ART  ^  33

t)riiig  to  ^spiritual  fruition  the  matter  which  either
nature  or  industry  has  prepared  and  rendered  pro¬
pitious.  This  spiritual  fruition  consists  in  the  ac¬
tivity  of  turning  an  apt  material  into  an  expres¬
sive  and  delightful  form,  thus  filling  the  world
with  objects  which  by  symbolising  ideal  energies
tend  to  revive  them  under  a  favouring  influence
and  therefore  to  strengthen  and  refine  them.

It  remains  merely  to  note  that  all  induetry  con¬
tains  an  element  of  fine  art  and  all  fine  art  an  ele-
Each  partakes  mcut  of  industry;  sincc  every  proxi-
of  the  other  jYiate  end,  in  being  attained,  satisfies
the  mind  and  manifests  the  intent  that  pursued  it;
while  every  operatioir  upon  a  material,  even  one  so
volatile  as  sound^^finds  that  material  somewhat  re¬
fractory.  Before  the  product  can  attain  its  ideal
function  many  obstacles  to  its  transparency  and
fitness  have  to  be  removed.  A  certain  amount  of
technical.and  instrumental  labour  is  thus  involved
in  every  work  of  genius,  and  a  certain  genius  in
every  technical  success.


CHAPTER  III


EMERGENCE  OF  FINE  ART


Action'  which  is  purely  spontaneous  is  merely
tentative.  Any  experience  of  success  or  utility
which  might  have  preceded,  if  it  availed

toleoM  Irton  ”1®^®  action  sure,  would  avail  to
made  stable  by  make  it  also  intentional  and  conscious
success.  ulterior  results.  Now  the  actual

issue  which  an  action  is  destined ‘^fco  have,  since  it
is  something  future  and  problematical,  can  exert
no  influence  on  its  own  antecedents;  but  if  any
picture  of  what  the  issue  is  likely  to  be  accom¬
panies  the  heat  and  momentum  of  action,  that
picture  being,  of  all  antecedents^ in  the  o]jeration,
the  one  most  easily  remembered  and  described,
may  be  picked  out  as  essential,  and  dignified  with
the  name  of  motive  or  cause.  This  will  not  hap¬
pen  to'  every  prophetic  idea;  we  may  live  in  fear
and  trembling  as  easily  as  with  an  arrogant  con-
sciohsness  of  power.  The  difference  flows  from
the  greater  or  lesser  affinity  that  happens  to  exist
between  expectation  and  instinct.  Action  re¬
mains  always,  in  its  initial  phase,  spontaneous  and
automatic;  it  retains  an  inwardly  grounded  and
perfectly  blind  tendency  of  its  own;  but  this  tend-

34


35


EMERGENCE  OF  FINE  ART

h


•ncy  may  agree  or  clash  with  the  motor  impulses
subtending  whatever  ideas  may  at  the  same  time
people  the  fancy.  If  the  blind  and  the  ideal  im-
fiulses  agree,  spontaneous  action  is  voluntary  and
its  result  intentional;  if  they  clash,  the  ideas
remain  speculative  and  idle,  random,  ineffectual
wishes;  while  the  result,  not  being  reiferable  to  any
idea,  is  put  down  to  fate.  The  sense  of  power,
accordingly,  shows  either  that  events  have  largely
satisfied  desire,  so  that  natural  tendency  goes  hand
in  hand  with  the  suggestions  of  experience,  or  else
that  experience  has  not  been  allowed  to  count  at
all  and  that  the  future  is  being  painted  a  priori.


In  the  latter  case  the  sense  of  ^lower  is  illusory.
'Action  will  the^  never  really  issue  in  the  way
intended,  and  oven  thought  will  only  seem  to


make  progress  by  constantly  forgetting  its  original


direction.


Thougl^lifc,  however,  is  initially  experimental
and  always  remains  experimental  at  bottom,  yet
experiment  fortifiefte  certain  tendencies  and  cancels
others,  «o  that  a  gradual  sediment  of  habit  and
wisdom  is  formed  in  the  stream  of  time.  Action
then  ceases  to  be  merely  tentative  and  sponta¬
neous,  and  becomes  art.  Foresight  begins  to  ac¬
company  practice  and,  as  we  say,  to  guide  •it.
I’urpose  thus  supervenes  on  useful  impulse,  and
conscious  expression  on  self-sustaining  automa¬
tism.  Art  lies  between  two  extremes.  On  the
one  side  is  purely  spontaneous  fancy,  which  jrould
never  foresee  its  own  works  and  scarcely  recognise


36


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

9

or  value  them  after  they  had  been  created,  since
at  the  next  moment  the  imaginative  current  would
as  likely  as  not  have  faced  about  and  might  be
making  in  the  opposite  direction;  and  on  the  other
side  is  pure  utility,  which  would  deprive  the  work
of  all  inherent  ideality,  and  render  it  inexpressive
of  anything  m  man  save  his  necessities.  War,  for
instance,  is  an  art  when,  having  set  itself  an  ideal
end,  it  devises  means  of  attaining  it;  but  this  ideal
end  has  for  its  chief  basis  some  failure  in  politics
and  morals.  War  marks  a  weakness  and  disease
in  human  society,  and  its  best  triumphs  are  glori¬
ous  evils — cruel  and  treacherous  remedies,  big
with  new  germs  6f  disease.  « War  is  accordingly  a
servile  art  and  not  essentially  liberal;  whatever  in¬
herent  values  its  exercise  may  have  would  better
be  realised  in  another  medium.  Yet  out  of  the
pomp  and  circumstance  of  war  fine  arts  may  arise
— music,  armoury,  heraldry,  and  eloquence.  So
utility  leads  to  art  when  its  vehicle  acquires  in¬
trinsic  value  and  becomes  expressive.  On  the
other  hand,  spontaneous  action  leads  to  art  when
it  acquires  a  rational  function.  Thus  utterance,
which  is  primarily  automatic,  becomes  the  art  of
speech  when  it  serves  to  mark  crises  in  experi-
en«e,  making  them  more  memorable  and  influen¬
tial  through  their  artificial  expression;  but  expres¬
sion  is  never  art  while  it  remains  expressive  to  no
purpose.

A  good  way  of  understanding  the  fine  arts  would
be  to  study  how  they  grow,  now  out  of  utility,  now


EMERGENCE  OF  FINE  ART


37


oiTPfc  of  automatism.  We  should  thus  see  more
clearly  how  they  approach  their  goal,  which  can

It  combines  nothing  but  the  complete  super-

utiiity  and  position  of  these  two  characters.  If  all
automatism,  practice  were  art  and  all  art  perfect,  no

action  would  remain  compulsory  and  not  justified
inherently,  while  no  creative  impulse* would  any
longer  bo  wasteful  or,  like  the  impulse  to  thrum,
symptomatic  merely  and  irrelevant  to  progiess.  It
is  by  contributing  to  the  Life  of  Reason  and  merg¬
ing  into  its  substance  that  art,  like  religion  or
science,  first  becomes  worthy  of  praise.  Each  ele¬
ment  comes  from  a  ditferent  quarter,  bringing  its
ppecifi<^  excellence  and# needing  iiw  peculiar  puri¬
fication  and  enlightenment,  by  co-ordination  with
all  the  others;  ancT  this  process  of  enlightenment
and  purification  is  what  we  call  development  in
each  department-  The  meanest  arts  are  those
which  lie  near  the  limit  cither  of  utility  or  of  auto¬
matic  self-e.xpression.  They  become  nobler  and
more  rational  as  tlfcir  utility  is  rendered  sponta¬
neous  or  •their  spontaneity  beneficent.

The  sj)ontaneous  arts ^ire  older  than  the  useful,
since  man  must  live  and  a(ft  before  he  can  djjviso
^  ^  ^  instruments  for  living  and  acting  bet-

fundamentai  Roth  tlic  power  to  construct  m^-

and  irrespon-  chines  and  the  end  which,  to  be  useful,

Bible.

they  would  have  to  serve,  need  to  be
given  in  initial  impulse.  There  is  accordingly  a  vast
amount  of  irresponsible  play  and  loose  experiment
in  art,  as  in  consciousness,  before  these  gropings


38


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


acquire  a  settled  habit  and  function,  and  rationfil-
ity  begins.  The  farther  back  we  go  into  barbar¬
ism  the  more  we  find  life  and  mind  busied  with
luxuries;  and  though  these  indulgences  may  repel
a  cultivated  taste  and  seem  in  the  end  cruel  and
monotonous,  their  status  is  really  nearer  to  that
of  religion  and  spontaneous  art  than  to  that  of
useful  art  or  of  science.  Ceremony,  for  instance,
is  compulsory  in  society  and  sometimes  truly  op¬
pressive,  yet  its  root  lies  in  self-expression  and  in
a  certain  ascendency  of  play  which  drags  all  life
along  into  conventional  channels  originally  dug
out  in  irresponsible  bursts  of  action.  This  occurs
inevitably  and  ^‘according  ^  to  physical  analogies.
Bodily  organs  grow  automatically  and  become
necessary  moulds  of  life.  We  must  either  find  a  use
for  them  or  bear  as  best  we  may  the  idle  burden
they  impose.  Of  such  burdens  the  barbarian  car¬
ries  the  greatest  possible  .sum;  and  while  he  paints
the  heavens  with  his  grotesque  mythologies,  he  en¬
cumbers  earth  with  inventioifs  and  prescriptions
almost  as  gratuitous.  The  fiendish  dafsices  and
shouts,  the  cruel  initiatiojis,  mutilations,  and  sac¬
rifices  in  which  savages  indulge,  are  not  planned
by  them  deliberately  nor  justified  in  reflection.
Men  find  themselves  falling  into  these  practices,
driven  by  a  tradition  hardly  distinguishable  from
instinct.  In  its  periodic  fury  the  spirit  hurries
them  into  wars  and  orgies,  quite  as  it  kindles  sud¬
den  j^aming  visions  in  their  brains,  habitually  so
torpid.  The  spontaneous  is  the  worst  of  tyrants,


EMERGENCE  OF  FINE  ART


39


fof  it  exorcises  a  needless  and  fruitless  tyranny  in
the  guise  oi  duty  and  inspiration.  Without  miti¬
gating  in  the  least  the  subjection  to  external
forces  under  which  man  necessarily  labours,  it  adds
a  new  artificial  subjection  to  his  own  false  steps
and  childish  errors.

This  mental  vegetation,  this  fitful  nervous  grop¬
ing,  is  nevertheless  a  sign  of  life,  out  of  which  art

It  1.  fauned  by  ‘-‘lucrgcs  by  discipline  and  by  a  gradual
contact  with  application  to  real  issues.  An  artist  is
the  world.  ^  dreamer  consenting  to  dream  of  the

actual  world;  he  is  a  highly  suggestible  mind
hypnotised  by  reality.  Even  barliaric  genius  may
find  points  of  application  in  the^*  world.  These
points  will  he  inof^ numerous  the  more  open  the
eyes  have  been,  the  more  docile  and  intelligent
the  mind  is  that  gathers  and  renders  back  its  im¬
pressions  in  a  synthetic  and  ideal  form.  Intuition
will  then  rejjfesont,  at  least  symbolically,  an  actual
situation.  Grimace  and  gesture  and  ceremony
will  be  modified  by  a^ensc  of  their  elfect;  they  will
become  ar4fnl  and  will  transform  their  automatic
expressiveness  into  ideal©  expression.  They  will
become  significant  of  what  it  is  intended  to  edm-
municate  and  important  to  know;  they  will  have
ceased  to  he  irresponsible  exercises  and  vents  for*
passing  feeling,  by  which  feeling  is  dissipated,  as
in  tears,  without  being  embodied  and  intellectual-
ised,  as  in  a  work  of  art.

The  dance  is  an  early  practice  that  passes  after
this  fashion  into  an  art.  A  prancing  stallion  may


40


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


transfigure  his  movements  more  beautifully  than
man  is  capable  of  doing ;  for  the  springl  and  limits

of  effect  are  throughout  mechanical.
The  dance.  man,  in  more  than  one  respect,

would  have  to  become  a  centaur  before  he  could
rival  the  horse’s  prowess.  Human  instinct  is  very
imperfect  m  this  direction,  and  grows  less  happy
the  more  artificial  society  becomes;  most  dances,
even  the  savage  ones,  are  somewhat  ridiculous.  A
rudimentary  instinct  none  the  less  remains,  which
not  only  involves  a  faculty  of  heightened  and
rhythmic  motion,  but  also  assures  a  direct  appre¬
ciation  of  such  motion  when  seen  in  others.  The
conscious  agility,  fow^we,«and  precision  which  fill
the  performer  become  contagio.us  and  delight  the
spectator  as  well.  There  are  indeed  dances  so
ugly  that,  like  those  of  contemporary  society,  they
cannot  be  enjoyed  unless  they  are  shared;  they
yield  pleasures  of  exercise  only,  or  at  best  of  move¬
ment  in  unison.  But  when  man  was  nearer  to
the  animal  and  his  body  and-  soul  were  in  happier
conjunction,  when  society,  too,  was  more  compul¬
sive  over  the  individual,  he  could  lend  himself
more  willingly  and  gracefully  to  being  a  figure  in
the  general  pageant  of  the  world.  The  dance
'•could  then  detach  itself  from  its  early  association
with  war  and  courtship  and  ally  itself  rather  to
religion  and  art.  From  being  a  spontaneous  vent
for  excitement,  or  a  blind  means  of  producing  it,
tlv5  dance  became  a  form  of  discipline  and  con¬
scious  social  control — ^a  cathartic  for  the  soul;  and


EMERGENCE  OF  FINE  ART


41


tlrfs  by  a  quite  intelligible  transition.  Gesture,  of
which  the  dance  is  merely  a  pervasive  use,  is  an
incipient  action.  It  is  conduct  in  the  groping
Functions  of  Stage,  before  it  has  lit  on  its  purpose,
gesture.  as  can  be  seen  unmistakably  in  all  the
gesticulation  of  love  and  defiance.  Ip  this  way
tlie  dance  is  attached  to  life  initially  by  its  physi¬
ological  origin.  Being  an  incipient  act,  it  nat¬
urally  leads  to  its  own  completion  and  may  arouse
in  others  the  beginnings  of  an  appropriate  re¬
sponse.  Gesture  is  only  less  catching  and  less  elo¬
quent  than  action  itself.  But  gesture,  while  it
has  this  power  of  suggesting  action  and  stimula¬
ting  the  response  which  would  b^  appropriate  if
the  action  took  pl^e,  may  be  arrested  in  the  pro¬
cess  of  execution,  since  it  is  incipient  only;  it  will
then  have  revealed  an  intention  and  betrayed  a
state  of  mind.  Thus  it  will  have  found  a  function
which  actiop.  itself  can  seldom  fulfil.  When  an
act  is  done,  indications  of  what  it  was  to  be  are
superfluous;  but  indications  of  possible  acts  are  in
the  highest  degree  useful  and  interesting.  In  this
way  gesture  assumes  thft  r61e  of  language  and
becomes  a  means  of  rational  expression.  It  *re-
mains  suggestive  and  imitable  enough  to  convey
an  idea,  but  not  enough  to  precipitate  a  full  re-*
action;  it  feeds  that  sphere  of  merely  potential
action  which  we  call  thought;  it  becomes  a  vehicle
for  intuition.

Under  these  circumstances,  to  tread  the  meas¬
ures  of  a  sacred  dance,  to  march  with  an  army,  to


42


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


bear  one  *  share  in  any  universal  act,  the  h4ari
with  a  voluminous  silent  emotion.  The  massive
suggestion,  the  pressure  of  the  ambient  will,  is  out
of  all  proportion  to  the  present  call  for  action.
Infinite  resources  and  definite  premonitions  are
thus  stored  up  in  the  soul;  and  merely  to  have
moved  solemnly  together  is  the  best  possible
preparation  for  living  afterwards,  even  if  apart,
in  the  consciousness  of  a  general  monition  and
authority.

Parallel  to  this  is  the  genesis  and  destiny  of
music,  an  art  originally  closely  intertwined  with
Automatic  dance.  The  same  explosive  forces

music.  that  agitate  th^  limbs  loosen  the  voice;

hand,  foot,  and  throat  marluitheir  wild  rhythm
together.  Birds  probably  enjoy  the  pulsation  of
their  singing  rather  than  its  sound.  Even  human
music  is  performed  long  before  it  is  listened  to,
and  is  at  first  no  more  an  art  than  sighing.  The
original  emotions  connected  with  it  arc  felt  by
participation  in  the  performance — ^a  participation
which  can  become  ideal  only  because,  ^t  bottom,
it  is  always  actual.  Thtf  need  of  exercise  and  self-
expression,  the  force  of  contagion  and  unison,  bears
the  soul  along  before  an  artistic  appreciation  of
music  arises;  and  we  may  still  observe  among  civil¬
ised  races  how  music  asserts  itself  without  any  aes¬
thetic  intent,  as  when  the  pious  sing  hymns  in  com¬
mon,  or  the  sentimental,  at  sea,  cannot  refrain  from
wlfining  their  whole  homely  repertory  in  the
moonlight.  Here  as  elsewhere,  instinct  and  habit


EMERGENCE  OF  FINE  ART


43


are  phases  of  the  same  inner  disposition.  What
has  once  occurred  automatically  on  a  given  occa-
•  sion  will  be  repeated  in  much  the  same  form  when
a  similar  occasion  recurs.  Thus  impulse,  rein¬
forced  by  its  own  remembered  expression,  passes
into  convention.  Savages  have  a  music^singularly
monotonous,  automatic,  and  impersonal;  they  can¬
not  resist  the  indulgence,  though  they  probably
have  little  pleasure  in  it.  The  same  thing  hap¬
pens  with  customary  sounds  as  with  other  pre¬
scribed  ceremonies;  to  omit  them  would  be  shock¬
ing  and  well-nigh  impossible,  yet  to  repeat  them
serves  no  end  further  than  to  avoid  a  sense  of
strangeness  or  inhibitit)n.  Thes6^  automatisms,
however,  in  workiij^  themselves  out,  are  not  with¬
out  certain  retroactive  effects:  they  leave  the  sys¬
tem  exhausted  or  relieved,  and  they  have  mean¬
time  played  more  or  less  agreeably  on  the  senses.
The  music  make  automatically  we  cannot  help
hearing  incidentally;  the  sensation  may  even
modify  the  expressioh,  since  sensation  too  has  its
physical  sale.  The  expression  is  reined  in  and
kept  from  becoming  vagrant,  in  proportion  as  its
form  and  occasion  are  remembered.  The  auto¬
matic  performer,  being  henceforth  controlled  more
or  less  by  reflection  and  criticism,  becomes  some-*
thing  of  an  artist:  he  trains  himself  to  be  con¬
secutive,  impressive,  agreeable;  he  begins  to  com¬
pare  his  improvisation  with  its  subject  and
function,  and  thus  he  develops  what  is  called  st^le
and  taste.


CHAPTER  IV


MUSIC

Sound  readily  acquires  ideal  values.  It  has
power  in  itself  to  engross  attention  and  at  the
Music  Is  a  same  time  may  he  easily  diversified,  so
world  apart,  gg  to  hecome  a  symbol  for  other  things.
Its  direct  empire  is  to  be  compared  with  that  of
stimulants  and  bpiates,  yetdt  presents  to  the  mind,
as  these  do  not,  a  perception  thqjt, corresponds,  part
by  part,  with  the  external  stimulus.  To  hear  is
almost  to  understand.  The  process  we  undergo
in  mathematical  or  dialectical  thinking  is  called
understanding,  because  a  natural  sequejriee  is  there
adequately  translated  into  ideal  terms.  Logical
connections  seem  to  be  intertially  justified,  while
only  the  fact  that  we  perceive  them  here  and  now,
with  more  or  less  facility,  is  attributed  to  brute
cau&cs.  Sound  approaches  this  sort  of  ideality;  it
presents  to  sense  something  like  the  efficacious
structure  of  the  object.  It  is  almost  mathemati¬
cal;  but  like  mathematics  it  is  adequate  only  by
being  abstract;  and  while  it  discloses  point  by  point
one  strain  in  existence,  it  leaves  many  other
strajus,  which  in  fact  are  interwoven  with  it,
wholly  out  of  account.  Music  is  accordingly,  like

44  4


MUSIC


45


mathematics,  very  nearly  a  world  by  itself;  it  con¬
tains  a  whole  gamut  of  experience,  from  sensuons
elements  to  ultimate  intellectual  harmonies.  Yet
this  second  existence,  this  life  in  music,  is  no  mere
ghost  of  the  other;  it  has  its  own  excitements,  its
quivering  alternatives,  its  surprising  turns;  the
abstract  energy  of  it  takes  on  so  much  body,  that
in  progression  or  declension  it  seems  quite  as  im¬
passioned  as  any  animal  triumph  or  any  moral
drama.


That  a  pattering  of  sounds  on  the  ear  should
have  such  moment  is  a  fact  calculated  to  give
It  justmes  pause  to  those  philosophers  who  at-
itseif.  tempt  to  explain  consciousness  by  its

utility,  or  who  ^ish  to  make  physical  and  moral
processes  march  side  by  side  from  all  eternity.
Music  is  essentially  useless,  as  life  is:  but  both
have  an  ideal  extension  which  lends  utility  to  its
conditions^  That  the  way  in  which  idle  sounds
run  together  should  matter  so  much  is  a  mystery
of  the  same  order  as  the  spirit’s  concern  to  keep
a  particular  body  alive,  or  to  propagate  its  life.
Such  an  interest  is,  frora^n  absolute  point  of  view,
wholly  gratuitous;  and  so  long  as  the  natural  basis
and  expressive  function  of  spirit  are  not  perceived,
this  mystery  is  baffling.  In  truth  the  order  of
values  inverts  that  of  causes;  and  experience,  in
which  all  values  lie,  is  an  ideal  resultant,  itself


ineffectual,  of  the  potencies  it  can  conceive.  De¬
light  in  music  is  liberal;  it  makes  useful  the  organs
and  processes  that  subserve  it.  These  agencies.


46


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


when  they  support  a  conscious  interest  in  their
operation,  give  that  operation  its  first  glimmering
justification,  and  admit  it  to  the  rational  sphere.
Just  so  when  organic  bodies  generate  a  will  bent
on  their  preservation,  they  add  a  value  and  a  moral
function  Ip  their  equilibrium.  In  vain  should
we  ask  for  what  purpose  existences  arise,  or
become  important;  that  purpose,  to  be  such,  must
already  have  been  important  to  some  existence;
and  the  only  question  that  can  be  asked  or  an¬
swered  is  what  recognised  importance,  what  ideal
values,  actual  existences  involve.

We  happen  to  breathe,  and  on  that  account  are
interested  in  brbathing;  and  it  is  no  greater  marvel

It  is  vital  and  happening  tojie  subject  to  in¬

transient.  tricate  musical  sensations,  we  should

be  in  earnest  about  these  too.  The  human  ear
discriminates  sounds  with  ease;  what  it  hears  is
so  diversified  that  its  elements  can  ^be  massed
without  being  confused,  or  can  form  a  sequence
having  a  character  of  its*  own,  to  be  ap¬
preciated  and  remembered.  The  eye  too  has  a
field  in  which  clear  distinctions  and  relations
app&ar,  and  for  that  reason  is  an  organ  favourable
to  intelligence;  but  what  gives  music  its  superior
dlnotional  power  is  its  rhythmic  advance.  Time
is  a  medium  which  appeals  more  than  space  to
emotion.  Since  life  is  itself  a  flux,  and  thought  an
operation,  there  is  naturally  something  immediate
andc breathless  about  wdiatever  flows  and  expands.
The  visible  world  offers  itself  to  our  regard  with


MUSIC


47


a  certain  Jazy  indifference.  Peruse  me,”  it
seems  to  say,  “  if  you  will.  I  am  here;  and  even
if  you  pass  me  by  now  and  later  find  it  to  your
advantage  to  resurvey  me,  I  may  still  be  here.”
The  world  of  sound  speaks  a  more  urgent  lan¬
guage.  It  insinuates  itself  into  our^very  sub¬
stance,  and  it  is  not  so  mucli  the  music  that  moves
us  as  we  that  move  with  it.  Its  rhythms  seize
upon  our  bodily  life,  to  accelerate  or  to  deepen  it;
and  w^c  must  either  become  inattentive  altogether
or  remain  enslaved.

Tills  imperious  function  in  music  has  lent  it
functions  which  are  far  from  aesthetic.  Song  can
Its  physical  nscd  to  k6ep  in  unison  many  men's
affinities.  efforts,!^  as  wdien  sailors  sing  as  they
heave;  it  can  make  persuasive  and  obvious  senti¬
ments  Avhicli,  if  not  set  to  music,  might  seem
absurd,  as  often  in  love  songs  and  in  psalmody.
It  may  indeed  serve  to  prepare  the  mind  for  any
impression  whatever,  and  render  the  same  more
intense  when  it  comes.  Music  W’as  long  used
before  it  Was  loved  or  people  took  pains  to  refine
it.  It  Avould  have  seemed  as  strange  in  primi¬
tive  times  to  turn  utterance  into  a  fine  art  as  ribw
to  make  aesthetic  paces  out  of  mourning  or  child¬
birth.  Primitive  music  is  indeed  a  wail  and  a*
parturition;  magical  and  suggestive  as  it  may  be,
for  long  ages  it  never  bethinks  itself  to  be  beau¬
tiful.  It  is  content  to  furnish  a  contagious  mel¬
ancholy  employment  to  souls  without  a  language
and  with  little  interest  in  the  real  world.  Bar-


48


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


baric  musicians,  singing  and  playinj  together
more  or  less  at  random,  are  too  much  carried  away
by  their  performance  to  conceive  its  effect;  they
cry  far  too  loud  and  too  unceasingly  to  listen.  A
contagious  tradition  carries  them  along  and  con¬
trols  them;,  in  a  way,  as  they  improvise;  the  as¬
sembly  is  hardly  an  audience;  all  are  performers,
and  the  crowd  is  only  a  stimulus  that  keeps  every
one  dancing  and  howling  in  emulation.  This  un¬
considered  flow  of  early  art  remains  present,  more
or  less,  to  the  end.  Instead  of  vague  custom  we
have  schools,  and  instead  of  swaying  multitudes
academic  example;  but  many  a  discord  and  man¬
nerism  survive ‘simply  bcc&use  the  musician  is  so
suggestible,  or  so  lost  in  the  tiinjjilt  of  production,
as  never  to  reconsider  what  he  does,  or  to  perceive
its  wastefulness.

Nevertheless  an  inherent  value  exists  in  all
emitted  sounds,  although  barbaric  practice  and
theory  are  slow  to  recognise  it.  Each  tone  has  its
quality,  like  jewels  of  different  water;  every  ca¬
dence  has  its  vital  expression,  no  less  inlierent  in
it  than  that  which  comes  in  a  posture  or  in  a
thoVight.  Everything  audible  thrills  merely  by
sounding,  and  tliough  this  perceptual  thrill  be  at
hrst  overpowered  by  the  effort  and  excitement  of
action,  yet  it  eventually  fights  its  way  to  the  top.
Participation  in  music  may  become  perfunctory
or  dull  for  the  great  majority,  as  when  hymns  are
sung  in  church;  a  mere  suggest! oji  of  action  will
doubtless  continue  to  colour  the  impression  re-


MUSIC


49


ceived,  for  a  tendency  to  act  is  involved  in  per¬
ception;  but  this  suggestion  will  be  only  an  over¬
tone  or  echo  behind  an  auditory  feeling.  Some
performers  will  be  singled  out  from  the  crowd;
those  whom  the  public  likes  to  hear  will  be  asked
to  continue  alone;  and  soon  a  certain  stiasion  will
be  exerted  over  them  by  the  approval  or  censure
of  others,  so  that  consciously  or  unconsciously  they
will  train  themselves  to  please.

The  musical  quality  of  sounds  has  a  simple
])hysieal  measure  for  its.  basis;  and  the  rate  of
Physiology  vibration  ia  complicated  by  its  sweep  or
of  music.  loudness,  and  by  concomitant  sounds.
What  a  rich  note  is  to  a  pure  and  thin  one,  that
a  chord  is  to  a  note;  nor  is  melody  wholly  differ¬
ent  in  principle,  for  it  is  a  chord  rendered  piece¬
meal.  Time  intervenes,  and  the  harmony  is  de¬
ployed;  so  that  in  melody  rhythm  is  added,  with
its  immena^  appeal,  to  the  cumulative  effect  al¬
ready  secured  by  rendering  many  notes  together.
The  heightened  effect  which  a  note  gels  by  figur¬
ing  in  a  phrase,  or  a  phrase  in  a  longer  passage,
comes  of  course  from  th extensions  established  and
surviving  in  the  sensorium — a  case,  differently
shaded,  of  chords  and  overtones.  The  difference
is  only  that  the  more  emphatic  parts  of  the  mel¬
ody  survive  clearly  to  the  end,  while  the  detail,
which  if  perceived  might  now  clash,  is  largely
lost,  and  out  of  the  preceding  parts  perhaps  noth¬
ing  but  a  certain  swing  and  potency  is  present  at
the  close.  The  mind  has  been  raked  and  set


50


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


vibrating  in  an  unusual  fashion,  so  thrt  the  finale
comes  like  a  fulfilment  after  much  premonition
and  desire,  whereas  the  same  event,  unprepared
for,  might  hardly  have  been  observed.  The  whole
technique  of  music  is  but  an  immense  elaboration
of  this  principle.  It  deploys  a  sensuous  harmony
by  a  sort  of  dialectic,  suspending  and  resolving  it,
so  tliat  the  parts  become  distinct  and  their  rela¬
tion  vital.

Such  elaboration  often  exceeds  the  synthetic
power  of  all  but  the  best  trained  minds.  Both  in
Limits  of  scopc  and  in  articulation  musical  fae-
musicai  sensi-  ulty  varies  prodigiously.  There  is  no
bUity.  fixeS.  limit  to  fne  power  of  sustaining

a  given  conscious  process  while  new  features  ap¬
pear  in  the  same  field;  nor  is  there  any  fixed  limit
to  the  power  of  recovering,  under  changed  circum¬
stances,  a  process  that  was  formerly  suspended.  A
whole  symphony  might  be  felt  at  once,  if  the  musi¬
cian's  power  of  sustained  r*r  cumulative  hearing
could  stretch  so  far.  As  w^e  all  survey  two  notes
and  their  interval  in  one  sensation  (actual  experi¬
ence  being  always  transitive  and  pregnant,  and  its
terms  ideal),  so  a  trained  mind  might  survey  a
wdiole  composition.  This  is  not  to  say  that  time
wmuld  be  transcended  in  such  an  experience;  the
apperception  would  still  have  duration  and  the
object  would  still  have  successive  features,  for  evi¬
dently  music  not  arranged  in  time  would  not  be
mus6C,  while  all  sensations  with  a  recognisable
cliaracter  occupy  more  than  an  instant  in  passing.


MUSIC


51


But  the  p«sssing  sensation,  throughout  its  lapse,
presents  some  experience;  and  this  experience,
taken  at  any  point,  may  present  a  temporal  se¬
quence  with  any  number  of  members,  according
to  the  synthetic  and  analytic  power  exerted  by  the
given  mind.  MTiat  is  tedious  and  formless  to  the
inattentive  may  seem  a  perfect  whole  to  one  who,
as  they  say,  takes  it  all  in;  and  similarly  what  is  a
frightful  deafening  discord  to  a  sense  incapable  of
discrimination,  for  one  who  can  hear  the  parts  may
break  into  a  celestial  chorus.  A  musical  educa¬
tion  is  necessary  for  musical  Judgment.  What
most  people  relish  is  hardly  musi^  it  is  rather  a
drowsy  revery  relieved ’by  nervous  thrills.

The  degree  to  which  music  should  be  elaborated
depends  on  the  capacity  possessed  by  those  it  ad-

The  value  of  ^^^sses.  There  are  limits  to  every
music  is  reia-  man's  syutlictic  powcrs,  and  to  stretch
tive  to  them.  powers  to  thcir  limit  is  exhaust¬

ing.  Excitement  then  becomes  a  debauch;  it
leaves  the  soul  less  capable  of  habitual  harmony.
Es|X3ciallf  is  such  extreme  tension  disastrous
w'hen,  as  in  music,  nothing  remains  to  be  the  fruit
of  that  mighty  victory;  the  most  pregnant  revela¬
tion  sinks  to  an  illusion  and  is  discredited  when
it  cannot  maintain  its  inspiration  in  the  world’s
presence.  Everything  has  its  own  value  and  sets
up  its  price;  but  others  must  Judge  if  that  price
is  fair,  and  sociabilit}"  is  the  condition  of  all  ra¬
tional  excellence.  There  is  therefore  a  limit  to
right  complexity  in  music,  a  limit  set  not  by  the


52


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


nature  of  music  itself,  but  by  its  pla«c  in  human
economy.  This  limit,  though  clear  in  principle,
is  altogether  variable  in  practice;  duly  cultivated
people  will  naturally  place  it  higher  than  the  un¬
musical  would.  In  other  words,  popular  music
needs  to  be  simple,  although  elaborate  music  may
be  beautiful  to  the  few.  Wlien  elaborate  music
is  the  fashion  amoi:g  p  ople  to  whom  all  music  is
a  voluptuous  mystei'y,  we  may  be  sure  that  what
they  love  is  voluptuousnesi^  or  fashion,  and  not
music  itself.


Beneath  its  hypnotic  power  music,  for  the  inuei*
cian,  has  an  intellectual  ^s>iPnre.  Out  of  simple
Wonders  chords  and  nfielodies,  which  at  first
of  musical  catch  only  the  ear,  he  weaves  elaborate
structure.  compositions  that  by  their  form  appeal

also  to  the  mind.  This  side  of  music  resembles  a


richer  versification;  it  may  be  compared  also  to
mathematics  or  to  arabesques.  A  moving  arabesque
that  has  a  vital  dimension,  an  audible  mathe¬
matics,  adding  sense  to  form,  and  a  versification
that,  since  it  has  no  subject-matter,  canfiot  do  vio¬


lence  to  it  by  its  complex:  artifices — ^thesc  are  types
of  'pure  living,  altogether  joyful  and  delightful
things.  They  combine  life  with  order,  precision
Vith  spontaneity;  the  flux  in  them  has  become
rhytlimical  and  its  freedom  has  passed  into  a  ra¬
tional  choice,  since  it  has  come  in  sight  of  the
eternal  form  it  would  embody.  The  musician,
like,  an  architect  or  goldsmith  working  in  sound,
but  freer  than  they  from  material  trammels,  can


MUSIC


53


expand  for  ever  his  yielding  labyrinth;  every  step
opens  up  itew  vistas,  every  decision — ^how  unlike
those  made  in  real  life! — multiplies  opportunities,
and  widens  the  horizon  before  him,  without  pre¬
venting  him  from  going  back  at  will  to  begin
afresh  at  any  point,  to  trace  the  other  possible
jiatbs  leading  thence  through  variv>us  magic  land¬
scapes.  Pure  in’isic  is  extreme  ab¬

straction  is  balanced  by  its  ontn^.  sxiontaneity,  and,
while  it  has  no  external  significance,  it  bears  no
int'^ruftl  '^•'n’se.  It  is  something  to  which  a  few
sTsrits  may  ‘"oP  surrende.  themselves,  sure  that
in  1  liberal  commonwealth  they  will  be  thanked
for  their  iaeai  labour, .the  fruits  J&f  which  many
may  en^  .  Such  excursions  into  ultra-mundane
regions,  wdiere  order  is  free,  refine  tlic  mind  and
make  it  familiar  with  perfection.  By  analogy  an
ideal  form  comes  to  be  conceived  and  desiderated
in  other  regions,  where  it  is  not  produced  so  read¬
ily,  and  the  music  heard,  as  the  Pythagoreans
hoped,  makes  the  soul  also  musical.

It  muty;  be  confessed,  however,  that  a  world  of
sounds  and  rhythms,  all  about  nothing,  is  a  by¬
world  and  a  mere  distraction  for  a  political  animal.
Its  substance  is  air,  though  the  spell  of  it  may  have
moral  affinities.  Nevertheless  this  ethereal  art  may
be  enticed  to  earth  and  married  with  what  is  mor¬
tal.  Music  interests  humanity  most  when  it  is  wed¬
ded  to  human  events.  Tlie  alliance  comes  about
through  the  emotions  which  music  and  life  arouse
in  common.  For  sound,  in  sweeping  through  the


54


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


body  and  making  felt  there  its  kinetic  and  poten¬
tial  stress,  provokes  no  less  interest  than  does  any
Its  inherent  other  physical  event  or  premonition,
emotions.  Music  can  produce  emotion  as  directly
as  can  fighting  or  love.  If  in  the  latter  instances
the  body’s  whole  life  may  be  in  jeopardy,  this  fact
is  no  explanation  of  our  concern;  for  many  a  dan¬
ger  is  not  felt  and  there  is  no  magic  in  the  body’s
future  condition,  that  it  should  now  affect  the  soul.
'V^^lat  touches  the  soul  is  the  body’s  condition  at
the  moment;  and  this  is  altered  no  less  truly  by
a  musical  impression  than  by  some  protective  or
reproductive  act.  If  emotions  accompany  the  lat¬
ter,  they  migkt  as  well  /iccompany  the  former;
and  in  fact  they  do.  Nor  is  music  the  only  idle
cerebral  commotion  that  enlists  attention  and  pre¬
sents  issues  no  less  momentous  for  being  quite
imaginary;  dreams  do  the  same,  and  seldom  can
the  real  crises  of  life  so  absorb  the  soul,  or  prompt
it  to  such  extreme  efforts,  as  can  delirium  in  sick¬
ness,  or  delusion  in  what  passes  for  health.

There  is  perhaps  no  emotion  incident, to  human
life  that  music  cannot  render  in  its  abstract  me¬
dium  by  suggesting  the  pang  of  it;  though  of
course  music  cannot  describe  the  complex  situa¬
tion  which  lends  earthly  passions  their  specific
colour.  It  is  by  fusion  with  many  suggested
emotions  that  sentiment  grows  definite;  this  fusion
can  hardly  come  about  without  ideas  intervening,
and  certainly  it  could  never  be  sustained  or  ex¬
pressed  without  them.  Occasions  define  feelings;


MUSIC


65


we  can  cojvey  a  delicate  emotion  only  by  deli¬
cately  describing  the  situation  which  brings  it
on.  Music,  with  its  irrelevant  medium,
can  never  do  this  for  common  life,
remain  un-  the  passions,  as  music  renders

them,  are  always  general,  ^'it  music
has  its  own  substitute  for  conceptual  dis¬
tinctness.  It  makes  feeling  specific,  nay,  more
delicate  and  precise  than  association  with  things
could  make  it,  by  uniting  it  with  musical  form.
We  may  say  that  besides  suggesting  abstractly
all  ordinary  passions,  music  creates  a  new  realm
of  form  far  more  subtly  impassioned  than  is
vulgar  experience.  Human  life  /s  confined  to
a  dramatic  repertory  which  has  already  be¬
come  somewhat  classical  and  worn,  but  music  has
no  end  of  new  situations,  shaded  in  infinite  ways ;
it  moves  in  all  sorts  of  bodies  to  all  sorts  of


adventures.^  In  life  the  ordinary  routine  of  des¬
tiny  beats  so  emphatic  a  measure  that  it  does  not
allow  free  play  to  feeftng;  we  cannot  linger  on  any¬
thing  longicnough  to  exhaust  its  meaning,  nor  can
we  wander  far  from  the  beaten  path  to  catch  new
impressions.  But  in  music  there  are  no  mortal
obligations,  no  imperious  needs  calling  us  back  to
reality.  Here  nothing  beautiful  is  extravagant,^
nothing  delightful  unworthy.  Musical  refine¬
ment  finds  no  limit  but  its  own  instinct,  so  that  a
thousand  shades  of  what,  in  our  blundering  words,
we  must  call  sadness  or  mirth,  find  in  music  th«ir
distinct  expression.  Each  phrase,  each  composi-


56


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tion,  articulates  perfectly  what  no  hx^man  situa¬
tion  could  embody.  These  fine  emotions  are
really  new;  they  are  altogether  musical  and  unex¬
ampled  in  practical  life;  they  are  native  to  the
passing  cadence,  absolute  postures  into  which  it
throws  thCf  soul.


There  is  enough  likeness,  however,  between
musical  and  mundane  feeling  for  the  first  to  be
They  merge  entertaining  the  second.  Hence

\nth  common  the  singular  privilege  of  this  art:  to

fo™  to  what  is  naturally  inar-
as  and  no  Ob-  ticulate,  and  express  those  depths  of
ject  m  nature,  nature  which  can  speak  no  lan¬

guage  current  in  the  world.  Emotion  is  prima¬
rily  about  nothing,  and  much  of  it  remains  about
nothing  to  the  end.  What  rescues  a  part  of  our
passions  from  this  pathological  plight,  and  gives
them  some  other  function  than  merely  to  be,  is  the
ideal  relevance,  the  practical  and  mutually  rep¬
resentative  character,  which  they  sometimes  ac¬
quire.  All  experience  is  pafliological  if  we  con¬
sider  its  ground;  but  a  part  of  it  is  also'rational  if
we  consider  its  import.  The  words  I  am  now  writ¬


ing  have  a  meaning  not  because  at  this  moment
they  are  fused  together  in  my  animal  soul  as  a
“dream  might  fuse  them,  however  incongruous  the
situation  they  depict  might  be  in  waking  life;
they  are  significant  only  if  this  moment’s  product
can  meet  and  conspire  with  some  other  thought
speaking  of  what  elsewhere  exists,  and  uttering  an
intuition  that  from  time  to  time  may  be  actually


MUSIC


67


recovered.  JThe  art  of  distributing  interest  among
the  occasions  and  vistas  of  life  so  as  to  lend  them
•a  constant  worth,  and  at  the  same  time  to  give
feeling  an  ideal  object,  is  at  bottom  the  sole  busi¬
ness  of  education;  but  the  undertaking  is  long,  and
much  feeling  remains  unemployed  ^d  unac¬
counted  for.  This  objectless  emotion  chokes  the
h(  art  with  its  dull  importunity;  now  it  impedes
right  action,  now  it  feeds  and  fattens  illusion.
Much  of  it  radiates  from  primary  functions
which,  though  their  oporalion  is  half  known,
have  only  base  or  pitiful  associations  in  human
life;  so  th^it  they  trouble  us  with  deep  and
subtle  cravings,  the  unclaimed  Ilinferland  of  life.
When  music,  either  by  vcr})al  indications  or  by
sensuous  affinities,  or  by  both  at  once,  succeeds  in
tapping  this  fund  of  suppressed  feeling,  it  accord¬
ingly  supplies  a  great  need.  It  makes  the  dumb
speak,  andjducks  from  the  animal  heart  poten¬
tialities  of  expression  which  might  render  it,  per¬
haps,  even  more  thad  human.

By  its  omolional  range  music  is  appropriate  to
all  intense  occasions:  w-e  chance,  pray,  and  mourn
to  music,  and  the  more  inadequate  words  or  ex¬
ternal  acts  are  to  the  situation,  the  more  grateful
music  is.  As  the  only  bond  between  music  and*
life  is  emotion,  music  is  out  of  place  only  where
emotion  itself  is  absent.  If  it  breaks  in  upon  us
in  the  midst  of  study  or  business  it  becomes  an
interiuption  or  alternative  to  our  activity,  rather
than  an  expression  of  it;  wo  must  either  remain


58


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


inattentive  or  pass  altogether  into  the  realm  of
sound  (which  may  he  unemotional  enough)  and
become  musicians  for  the  nonce.  Music  brings  ita
sympathetic  ministry  only  to  emotional  moments;
there  it  merges  with  common  existence,  and  is  a
welcome  substitute  for  descriptive  ideas,  since  it
co-operates  with  us  and  helps  to  deliver  us  from
dumb  subjection  to  influences  which  we  should
not  know  how  to  meet  otherwise.  There  is  often
in  what  moves  us  a  certain  ruthless  persistence,
together  with  a  certain  poverty  of  form;  the  power
felt  is  out  of  proportion  to  the  interest  awakened,
and  attention  is  kept,  as  in  pain,  at  once  strained
and  idle.  AS,  such  a  moment  music  is  a  blessed


Music  lends  resource.  Without  attempting  to  re-
•lementary  move  a  iTiood  that  is  pcrliap.s  inevitable,

»  congruoiis  filling.  Thus
communi-  the  mood  is  justified  by  an  illustratioTi
cable  fonn.  expression  which  seems  Jo  offer  some

objective  and  ideal  ground  for  its  existence;  and
the  mood  is  at  the  same  time  relieved  by  absor])-
tion  in  that  impersonal  object.  So  ontertained,
the  feeling  settles.  The  passion  to  which  at  first
we  succumbed  is  now  tamed  and  appropriated.
We  have  digested  the  foreign  substance  in  giving
it  a  rational  form:  its  energies  are  merged  in  that
strength  by  which  we  freely  operate.

In  this  way  the  most  abstract  of  arts  serves  the
dumbest  emotions.  Matter  which  cannot  enter


the  moulds  of  ordinary  perception,  capacities
which  a  ruling  instinct  usually  keeps  under,  flow


MUSIC


59


suddenly  in^o  this  new  channel.  Muaic  is  like
jthose  branches  which  some  trees  put  forth  close  to
the  ground,  far  below  the  point  where  the  other
boughs  separate;  almost  a  tree  by  itself,  it  has
nothing  but  the  root  in  common  with  its  parent.
Somewhat  in  this  fashion  music  divert  into  an
abstract  sphere  a  part  of  those  forces  which  abound
beneath  the  point  at  wdiich  human  understand¬
ing  grows  articulate.  It  flourishes  on  saps  which
other  branches  of  ideation  are  too  narrow  or  rigid
to  take  up.  Those  elementary  substances  the
musician  can  spiritualise  by  his  special  methods,
taking  away  their  reproach  and  redeeming  them
from  blind  intensity.

There  is  consequently  in  music  a  sort  of  Chris¬
tian  piety,  in  that  it  comes  not  to  call  the  just  but
sinners  to  repentance,  and  understands  the  spirit¬
ual  possibilities  in  outcasts  from  the  respectable
world.  If  we  look  at  things  absolutely  enough,
and  from  their  own  |Apint  of  view,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  each  has  its  own  ideal  and  does  not
(question  its  own  justification.  Lust  and  frenzy,
revery  or  despair,  fatal  as  they  may  be  to  a  crea¬
ture  that  has  general  ulterior  interests,  are  not
perverse  in  themselves:  each  searches  for  its  own  ,
Au  essences  affinities,  and  has  a  kind  of  inertia
which  tends  to  maintain  it  in  being,
even  the  and  to  attach  or  draw  in  whatever  is

passions.  propitious  to  it.  Feelings  are  as  blame¬

less  as  so  many  forms  of  vegetation;  they  can  bo
poisonous  only  to  a  different  life.  They  are  all


60


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


primordial  motions,  eddies  which  the  Universal  fli  x
makes  for  no  reason,  since  its  habit  of  falling  Into
such  attitudes  is  the  ground- work  and  exemplar  for'
nature  and  logic  alike.  That  such  strains  should
exist  is  an  ultimate  datum;  justification  cannot  be
required  them,  but  must  be  offered  to  each  of
them  in  turn  by  all  that  enters  its  particulai  orbit.
There  is  no  will  but  miglit  find  a  world  i  disport
itself  in  and  to  call  good,  and  thcreuc  boast  to
have  created  that  in  which  it  found  itself  ex¬
pressed.  But  sucl.  satisfaction  has  been  denied
to  the  majority;  the  equilibrium  of  things  has  at
least  postpo^jed  th#^ir  da}^  Yet  they  are  rot
altogether  extinguished,  since  the  equilibrium  of
things  is  mechanical  and  results  from  no  prccuii-
certed  harmony  such  as  would  have  abolished
everything  contrary  to  its  t  vn  perfection.  Many
ill-suppressed  possibilities  enu^rt  m  matter,  and
peep  into  being  through  crevices,  as  it  were,  of
the  dominant  woriu.  Weeds  they  are  called  by
the  tyrant,  but  in  themselves  they  are  aware  of
being  potential  gods.  Why  should  nof  every  im¬
pulse  expand  in  a  congemal  paradise?  Why
should  each,  made  evil  now  only  by  an  adventitious
^  appellation  or  a  contrary  late,  not  vindicate  its  own
ideal?  If  there  is  a  piety  towards  things  de¬
formed,  because  it  is  not  they  that  are  perverse,
but  the  world  that  by  its  laws  and  arbitrary  stand¬
ards  decides  to  treat  them  as  if  they  were,  hovr
much  more  should  there  be  a  piety  towards  things
altogether  lovely,  when  it  is  only  space  and


MUSIC


61


ii  attei  ihik.  are  wanting  for  their  perfect  real-
i^4»tion?

Pijjlosophers  talk  of  self-contradiction,  but  there
is  evidcDtl}"  no  such  thing,  if  we  take  for  the  self
what  is  really  vital,  each  propulsive,  definite  strain
of  being,  each  nucleus  for  e^tiniatien  and  for
nlcasiiru  and  pain.  Each  impulse  may  be  contra¬
dicted,  but  not  by  itself;  it  may  find  itself  opposed,
in  '  Aeatre  which  it  has  entered  it  knows  not  how,
i)y  '«^i^lent  personages  that  it  has  never  wished
to  encou^t^er.  l%e  environment  it  calls  for  is
ccmgenial  with  it;  and  by  that  environ-
inent  it  could  Trevor  Jje  thwarted  or
oossibip  con-  i  ondenined.  The  lumbering  course  of
events  may  ”^iced  involve  it  in  ruin,
•id  a  mind  with  perii'an^ut  interests  to  defend
may  at  once  rule  ^ut  "^^ri^hing  inconsistent  with
possible  ha'mo’iies  bu’  '5uch  rational  judgments
come  from  outside  and  represent  a  compromise
struck  with  material  forces  Moral  judgments
and  ecn.licts  are  possible  only  in  the  mind  that
represents  many  interests  synthetically:  in  nature,
where  primary  •’^nulseg  collide,  all  conflict  is
physical  and  '*nll  innocent.  Imagine  some  in-
i*-<-dieii*  of  humani+v  loosed  from  its  oppressive
erj"”rormeiit  in  human  economy:  it  would  at  on^e
and  flower  into  some  ideal  form,  such  as
we  see  exuberantly  displayed  in  nature.  If  we
can  only  suspend  for  a  moment  the  congested
traffic  in  the  brain,  iliese  initial  movements  will
begin  to  traverse  it  playfully  and  show  their


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


62

paces^  and  we  shall  live  in  one  of  thobe  plausible
worlds  which  the  actual  world  has  made  impos¬
sible.

Man  possesses^  for  example^  a  native  capacity
for  joy.  There  are  moments,  in  friendship  or  in
solitude,  when  joy  is  realised;  but  the

Utontufo  "

Incapable  of  Occasions  are  often  trivial  and  could
ezpressinc  never  justify  in  reflection  the  feelings
that  then  happen  to  bubble  up.  Nor
can  pure  joy  be  long  sustained:  cross-currents  of  las¬
situde  or  anxiety,  distracting  incidents,  irrelevant
associations,  trouble  its  course  and  make  it  lan¬
guish,  turning  ^t  before  long  into  dulness  or  mel¬
ancholy.  Language  cannot  express  a  joy  that
shall  be  full  and  pure;  for  to  keep  the  purity
nothing  would  have  to  be  named  which  carried  the
least  suggestion  of  sadness  with  it,  and,  in  the
world  that  human  language  refers  to,  such  a  con¬
dition  would  exclude  every  situation  possible.  O
joy,  O  joy,^'  would  be  the  whole  ditty :  hence  some
dialecticians,  whose  experience  is  largely  verbal,
til  ink  whatever  is  pure  necessarily  thin.

That  feeling  should  hi  so  quickly  polluted  is,
however,  a  superficial  and  earthly  accident.  Spirit
is  clogged  by  what  it  flows  through,  but  at  its
s]f)rings  it  is  both  limpid  and  abundant.  There  is
matter  enough  in  joy  for  many  a  universe,  though
the  actual  world  has  not  a  single  form  quite  fit  to
embody  it,  and  its  too  rapid  syllables  are  excluded
from  the  current  hexameter.  Music,  on  the  con¬
trary,  has  a  more  flexible  measure ;  its  prosody  ad^


MUSIC


63


niits  every  ^ord.  Its  rhythms  can  explicate  every
emotion,  through  all  degrees  of  complexity  and
*  Music  may  volumc,  without  once  disavowing  it.
do  so.  Thus  unused  matter,  which  is  not  less

fertile  than  that  which  nature  has  absorbed,  comes
to  fin  out  an  infinity  of  ideal  forms.  Tile  joy  con¬
demned  by  practical  exigencies  to  scintillate  for  a
moment  uncommunicated,  and  then,  as  it  were,  to
be  buried  alive,  may  now  find  an  abstract  art  to
embody  it  and  bring  it  before  the  public,  formed
into  a  rich  and  constant  object  called  a  musical
composition.  So  art  succeeds  in  vindicating  the
forgotten  regions  of  spirit:  a  new#  spontaneous
creation  shows  how  little  autliority  or  finality  the
given  creation  lias.

What  is  true  of  joy  is  no  less  true  of  sorrow,
which,  though  it  arises  from  failure  in  some  nat¬
ural  ideal,  carries  with  it  a  sentimental  ideal  of
its  own.  Even  confusion  can  find  in  music  an
expression  and  a  catharsis.  That  death  or  change
should  grieve  does  not  follow  from  the  material
nature  of  fliese  phenomena.  To  cliange  or  to  dis-
a])pear  might  be  as  normal  a  tendency  as  to  move;
and  it  actually  happens,  when  nothing  ideal  has
been  attained,  that  not  to  he  thus  is  the  whole  law
instabiuty  the  <>f  being.  There  is  then  a  nameless
soul  of  matter,  satisfaction  in  passing  on;  which  is  the

virtual  ideal  of  pain  and  mere  willing.  Death
and  change  acquire  a  tragic  character  when  they
invade  a  mind  which  is  not  ready  for  them  in  all
its  parts,  so  that  those  elements  in  it  which  aiQ


64


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


still  vigorous,  and  would  maintai^i  someiR'hat
longer  their  ideal  identity,  suffer  violence  at  the
hands  of  the  others,  already  mastered  by  decay"
and  willing  to  be  self-destructive.  Thus  a  man
whose  physiological  complexion  involves  more
poignant  ^'motion  than  his  ideas  can  absorb — one
who  is  sentimental — ^will  yearn  for  new  objects
that  may  explain,  embody,  and  focus  his  dumb
feelings;  and  these  objects,  if  art  can  produce
them,  will  relieve  and  glorify  those  feelings  in  the
act  of  expressing  them.  Catharsis  is  nothing  more.

There  would  be  no  pleasure  in  expressing  pain,
if  pain  were  :|jot  dominated  through  its  expression.
To  know  how  just  a  cause  we  have  for  grieving  is
already  a  consolation,  for  it  is  already  a  shift  from
feeling  to  understanding.  By  such  consideration
of  a  passion,  the  intellectual  powers  turn  it  into

Peace  the  tri-  subjoct-mattcr  to  Operate  upon.  All
umph  of  spirit,  utterance  is  a  feat,  all  apprehension  a
discovery;  and  this  intellectual  victory,  sounding
in  the  midst  of  emotional  sti  aggies,  hushes  some
part  of  their  brute  importunity.  It  is  at  once  sub¬
lime  and  bencliccnt,  like  a  god  stilling  a  tempest.
Melancholy  can  in  this  way  he  the  food  of  art;  and
it  is  no  paradox  that  such  a  material  may  he  beau-
'tiful  when  a  fit  form  is  imposed  upon  it,  since  a
fit  form  turns  anything  into  an  agreeable  object;
its  beauty  runs  as  deep  as  its  fitness,  and  stops
where  its  adaptation  to  human  nature  begins  to
fail.  Whatever  can  interest  may  prompt  to  expres¬
sion,  as  it  may  have  satisfied  curiosity;  and  the


MUSIC


65


mind  celeb?*ates  a  little  triumph  whenever  it  can
formulate  a  truth,  however  unwelcome  to  the  flesh,
or  discover  an  actual  force,  however  unfavourable  .
to  given  interests.  As  meditation  on  death  and
on  life  make  equally  for  wisdom,  so  the  expression
of  sorrow  and  joy  make  equally  for  beauty.  Medi¬
tation  and  expression  are  themselves  congenial
activities  with  an  intrinsic  value  which  is  not  les¬
sened  if  what  they  deal  with  could  have  been  abol¬
ished  to  advantage.  If  once  it  exists,  we  may
understand  and  interpret  it;  and  this  reaction  will
serve  a  double  purpose.  At  first,  in  its  very  act,
it  will  suffuse  and  mollify  the  un^ut^lcome  experi¬
ence  by  another,  digesting  it,  which  is  welcome;
and  later,  by  the  broader  adjustment  which  it  will
bring  into  the  mind,  it  will  help  us  to  elude  or
confront  the  evils  thus  laid  clearly  before  us.

Catharsis  has  no  such  effect  as  a  sophistical  op¬
timism  ^vtshes  to  attribute  to  it;  it  does  not  show
us  that  evil  is  good,  or  that  calamity  and  crime  are
things  to  be  grateful  for:  so  forced  an  apology
for  evil  lias  nothing  to  do  with  tragedy  or  wis¬
dom;  it  belongs  to  apoLegetics  and  an  artificial
theodicy.  Catharsis  is  rather  the  consciousness  of
how  evil  evils  are,  and  how  besetting;  and  how  pos¬
sible  goods  lie  between  and  involve  serious  renun¬
ciations.  To  understand,  to  accept,  and  to  use
the  situation  in  which  a  mortal  may  find  himself  is
the  function  of  art  and  reason.  Such  mastery  is
desirable  in  itself  and  for  its  fruits;  it  does  not
make  itself  responsible  for  the  chaos  of  goods  and


66


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


evils  that  it  supervenes  upon.  Whatever  writhes
in  matter,  art  strives  to  give  form  to ;  and  however
unfavourable  the  field  may  be  for  its  activity,  it
does  what  it  can  there,  since  no  other  field  exists  in
which  it  may  labour.

Sad  musi^  pleases  the  melancholy  because  it  is
sad  and  other  men  because  it  is  music.  When  a
Refinement  is  composGr  attempts  to  reproduce  corn-
true  strength,  pjgx  conflicts  in  his  score  he  will  please

complex  or  disordered  spirits  for  expressing  their
troubles,  but  other  men  only  for  the  order  and
harmony  he  may  have  brought  out  of  that  chaos.
The  chaos  in  iteelf  will  offend,  and  it  is  no  part  of
rational  art  to  produce  it.  As  well  might  a  physi¬
cian  poison  in  order  to  give  an  antidote,  or  maim
in  order  to  amputate.  The  subject  matter  of  art
is  life,  life  as  it  actually  is;  but  the  function  of  art
is  to  make  life  better.  The  depth  to  which  an
artist  may  find  current  experience  to  b6‘  sunk  in
discord  and  confusion  is  net  Ijis  special  concern;
liis  concern  is,  in  some  measure,  to  lift  experience
out.  The  more  barbarous  his  age,  the  more  dras¬
tic  and  violent  must  begins  operation.  He  will
have  to  shout  in  a  storm.  His  strength  must
needs,  in  such  a  case,  be  very  largely  physical  and
his  methods  sensational.  In  a  gentler  age  he  may
grow  nobler,  and  blood  and  thunder  will  no  longer
seem  impressive.  Only  the  weak  are  obliged  to
be  violent;  the  strong,  having  all  means  at  com¬
mand,  need  not  resort  to  the  worst.  Refined  art
is  not  wanting  in  power  if  the  public  is  refined


MUSIC


67


also.  An<J  as  refinement  comes  only  by  experi¬
ence,  by  comparison,  by  subordinating  means  to
ends  and  rejecting  what  hinders,  it  follows  that  a
rtifined  mind  will  really  possess  the  greater  vol¬
ume,  as  well  as  the  subtler  discrimination.  Its
ecstasy  without  grimace,  and  its  submission  with¬
out  tears,  will  hold  heaven  and  earth  better
together — and  hold  them  better  apart — than  could
a  mad  imagination.


CHAPTER  V

"PEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION

Music  rationalises  sound,  but  a  more  momentous
rationalising  of  sound  is  seen  in  language.  Tjan-

Sounds  W.U  useful  of

fitted  to  be  things,  yet  the  greater  part  of  it  still
symbols.  remains  (what  it  must  all  have  been  in
the  beginning)' useless  and  without  ulterior  signifi¬
cance.  The  musical  side  of  language  is  its  primary
and  elementary  side.  Man  is  endowed  with  vocal
organs  so  plastic  as  to  emit  a  great  variety  of
delicately  varied  sounds;  and  by  good  fortune  his
ear  has  a  parallel  sensibility,  so  that  much  vocal
expression  can  be  registered  and  confronted  by
auditory  feeling.  It  has  been  ea id  that  man’s  pre¬
eminence  in  nature  is  due  to  his  possessing  hands;
his  modest  participation  in  the  ideal  world  may
similarly  be  due  to  his  |)r>ssessing  tongue  and  ear.
For  when  he  finds  shouting  and  vague  moaning
efter  a  while  fatiguing,  he  can  draw  a  new  pleasure
from  uttering  all  sorts  of  labial,  dental,  and  gut-
teral  sounds.  Their  rhythms  and  oppositions  can
entertain  him,  and  he  can  begin  to  use  his  lingual
gamut  to  designate  the  whole  range  of  his  per¬
ceptions  and  passions.


68


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


69


Here  we  touch  upon  one  of  the  great  crises  in
creation.  As  nutrition  at  first  established  itself
•in  the  face  of  waste,  and  reproduction  in  the  face
of  death,  so  representation  was  able,  by  help  of
vocal  symbols,  to  confront  that  dispersion  inherent
in  experience,  which  is  something  in  itself  ephem¬
eral.  Merely  to  associate  one  thing  witli  another
brings  little  gain;  and  merely  to  have  added  a
vocal  designation  to  fleeting  things — a  designation
which  of  course  would  have  been  taken  for  a  part
of  their  essence — would  in  itself  have  encumbered
phenomena  without  rendering  them  in  any  way
more  docile  to  the  will.  But  the  encumbrance  in
this  instance  proved  to  be  a  wonderful  preserva¬
tive  and  means  of  comparison.  It  actually  gave
each  moving  thing  its  niche  and  cenotaph  in  the
eternal.  For  the  universe  of  vocal  sounds  was  a
field,  like  that  of  colour  or  number,  in  which  the
elements  relations  and  transitions  easy  to

dominate.  It  was  a  key-board  over  which  atten¬
tion  could  run  backhand  forth,  eliciting  many  im¬
plicit  ha);j!aonies.  Henceforth  when  various  sounds
had  been  idly  associated  with  various  things,  and
identified  with  them,  the  things  could,  by  virtue
of  their  names,  be  carried  over  mentally  into  the
linguistic  system;  they  could  be  manipulated  there*
ideally,  and  vicariously  preserved  in  representation.
Needless  to  say  that  the  things  themselves  re¬
mained  unchanged  all  the  while  in  their  ef&cacy
and  mechanical  succession,  just  as  they  remain
unchanged  in  those  respects  when  they  pass  for


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


70

the  mathematical  observer  into  theiil}  measure  or
symbol;  but  as  this  reduction  to  mathematical  form
makes  them  calculable,  so  their  earlier  reduction-
to  words  rendered  them  comparable  and  memo¬
rable,  first  enabling  them  to  figure  in  discourse
at  all.

Language  had  originally  no  obligation  to  sub¬
serve  an  end  which  wc  may  sometimes  measure  it
by  now,  and  depute  to  be  its  proper
function,  namely,  to  stand  for  things
independent  adapt  itself  perfectly  to  their  struc-

of  tfaiofs*  ^  i  e/

ture.  In  language  as  in  every  other
existence  idealism  precedes  realism,  since  it  must
be  a  part  of  n^aturc  living  its  own  life  before  it  can
become  a  symbol  for  the  rest  and  bend  to  external
control..  The  vocal  and  musical  medium  is,  and
must  always  remain,  alien  to  the  spatial.  What
makes  terms  correspond  and  refer  to  one  another
is  a  relation  eternally  disparate  from  the  relation
of  propinquity  or  derivation  between  existences.
Yet  when  sounds  were  attaciied  to  an  event  or
emotion,  the  sounds  became  symbols  foiv  that  dis¬
parate  fact.  The  net  of  vocal  relations  caught
that  natural  object  as  n  cobweb  might  catch  a  fly,
without  destroying  or  changing  it.  The  object’s
quality  passed  to  the  word  at  the  same  time  that
the  w^ord’s  relations  enveloped  the  object;  and  thus
a  new  weight  and  significance  was  added  to  sound,
previously  nothing  but  a  dull  music.  A  conflict
at  once  established  itself  between  the  drift  proper
to  the  verbal  medium  and  that  proper  to  the  dcs-


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


71


ignated  things;  a  conflict  which  the  whole  history
of  language  and  thought  has  embodied  and  which
continues  to  this  day.

Suppose  an  animal  going  down  to  a  frozen  river
which  he  had  previously  visited  in  summer.  Marks

Words,  re-  would  awaken  Jn  him  an

maining  iden-  old  train  of  reactions;  he  would  doubt-
^css  feel  premonitions  of  satisfied  thirst
that  change,  splash  of  Water.  Ou  finding,

however,  instead  of  the  fancied  liquid,  a  mass  of
something  like  cold  stone,  he  would  be  discon¬
certed.  His  active  attitude  would  be  pulled  up
short  and  contradicted.  In  his  fairyland  of  faith
and  magic  the  old  river  would  have  been  simply
annihilated,  the  dreamt-of  water  would  have
become  a  vanished  ghost,  and  this  ice  for  the  mo¬
ment  the  hard  reality.  He  would  turn  away  and
live  for  a  while  on  other  illusions.  When  this
shock  wasjpvergrown  by  time  and  it  was  summer
again,  the  original  habit  might,  however,  reassert
itself  once  more.  I^he  revisited  the  stream,  some
god  would  seem  to  bring  back  something  from  an
old  familiar  world;  and  the  chill  of  that  temporary
estrangement,  the  cloud  tha*t  for  a  while  had  made
the  good  invisible,  would  soon  be  gone  and  for¬
gotten.

If  we  imagine,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  ani¬
mal  could  speak  and  had  from  the  first  called  his
haunt  the  river y  he  would  have  repeated  its  name
on  seeing  it  even  when  it  was  frozen,  for  he  had
not  failed  to  recognise  it  in  that  guise.  The  varia-


72


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tion  afterwards  noticed,  upon  finding  it  hard,
would  seem  no  total  substitution,  but  a  change;  for
it  would  be  the  same  river,  once  flowing,  that  was
now  congealed.  An  identical  word,  covering  all
the  identical  qualities  in  the  phenomena  and  serv¬
ing  to  abstract  them,  would  force  the  inconsistent
qualities  In  those  phenomena  to  pass  for  accidents ;
and  the  useful  proposition  could  at  once  be  framed
that  the  same  river  may  be  sometimes  free  and
sometimes  frozen.

This  proposition  is  true,  yet  it  contains  much
that  is  calculated  to  offend  a  scrupulous  dialec-

Lansuage  the  language  and  categories  are

dialectical  gar-  not  purely  logical,  but  largely  physical
ment  of  facts.  representative.  The  notion  that

what  changes  nevertheless  endures  is  a  remarkable
hybrid.  It  arises  when  rigid  ideal  terms  are  im¬
posed  on  evanescent  existence.  Feelings,  taken
alone,  would  show  no  identities;  they  wpuld  be  lost
in  changing,  or  be  woven  into  the  infinite  feeling
of  change.  NTotions.  taken  -done,  would  allow  no
lapse,  but  would  merely  lead  attention  about  from
point  to  point  over  an  eternal  system  of  relations.
Power  to  understand  ;.he  world,  logical  or  scien¬
tific  mastery  of  existence,  arises  only  by  the  forced
•and  conventional  marriage  of  these  two  essences,
when  the  actual  flux  is  ideally  suspended  and  an
ideal  harness  is  loosely  flung  upon  things.  For
this  purpose  words  are  an  admirable  instrument.
They  have  dialectical  relations  based  on  an  ideal
import,  or  tendency  to  definition,  which  makes


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


73


their  essenoe  their  signification;  yet  they  can  be
freely  bandied  about  and  applied  for  a  moment  to
the  ambiguous  things  that  pass  through  existence.

Had  men  been  dumb,  an  exchange  and  circu¬
lation  of  images  need  not  have  been  wanting,  and
_  .  associations  might  have  ari^n  between

w«se  men's  ideals  in  the  mind  and  corresponding
cimntcrs.  reactivG  liabits  in  the  body.  What

words  add  is  not  power  of  discernment  or  action,
but  a  medium  of  intellectual  exchange.  Lan¬
guage  is  like  money,  without  which  specific  rela¬
tive  values  may  well  exist  and  be  felt,  but  cannot
be  reduced  to  a  common  denominiftor.  And  as


money  must  have  a  certain  intrinsic  value  of  its
own  in  order  that  its  relation  to  other  values  may
be  stable,  so  a  word,  by  which  a  thing  is  repre¬
sented  in  discourse,  must  be  a  part  of  that  thing’s
context,  an  ingredient  in  the  total  apparition  it  is
destined  td  recall.  Words,  in  their  exi.stence,  are
no  more  universal  than  gold  by  nature  is  a  worth¬
less  standard  of  value  in  other  things.  Words  are
a  raateriaf  accompaniment  of  phenomena,  at  first
an  idle  accompaniment,  but  one  which  happens  to
subserve  easily  a  universal  function.  Some  other
clement  in  objects  might  conceivably  have  served
for  a  common  denominator  between  them;  but
words,  just  by  virtue  of  their  adventitious,  detach¬
able  status,  and  because  they  are  so  easily  com¬
pared  and  manipulated  in  the  world  of  sound,  were
singularly  well  fitted  for  this  oflRce.  They  are  not
vague,  as  any  common  quality  abstracted  from


74


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


things  would  necessarily  become;  and  though
vagueness  is  a  quality  only  too  compatible  with
perception,  so  that  vague  ideas  can  exist  without'
end,  this  vagueness  is  not  what  makes  them  uni¬
versal  in  their  functions.  It  is  one  thing  to  per¬
ceive  an  iK-determiued  form  and  quite  another  to
attribute  to  it  a  precise  general  predicate.  Words,
distinct  in  their  own  category  and  perfectly  recog¬
nisable,  can  accordingly  perform  very  well  the
function  of  embodying  a  universal;  for  they  can
be  identified  in  turn  with  many  particulars  and
yet  remain  througliout  particular  themselves.

The  psycM)logy  of  nominalism  is  undoubtedly
right  where  it  insists  that  every  image  is  particular
ifominau^  and  cvcry  term,  in  its  existential  aspect,
right  in  flaium  vocisj  but  iioiiiinalists  should

and  realism  have  recognised  that  images  may  have
In  logic  any  degree  of  vagueness  and  generality
when  measured  by  a  conceptual  standard.  A
figure  having  obviously  three  sides  and  three  cor
ners  may  very  well  be  prcbont  to  the  mind  when
it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  it  is  an  Equilateral
or  a  rectangular  trisiigle.  Functional  or  logical
universality  lies  in  another  sphere  altogether,  being
a  matter  of  intent  and  not  of  existence.  When  we
say  that  universals  alone  exist  in  the  mind  ”  we
mean  by  "mind^^  something  unknown  to  Berke¬
ley;  not  a  bundle  of  psychoses  nor  an  angelic  sub¬
stance,  but  quick  intelligence,  the  faculty  of  dis¬
course.  Predication  is  an  act,  understanding  a
spiritual  and  transitive  operation:  its  existential


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


75


basis  may  )Jell  be  counted  in  psychologically  and
reduced  to  a  stream  of  immediate  presences;  but
its  meaning  can  bo  caught  only  by  another  mean¬
ing,  as  life  only  can  exemplify  life.  Vague  or  gen¬
eral  images  are  as  little  universal  as  sounds  are;
but  a  sound  better  than  a  flickering  abstraction
can  serve  the  intellect  in  its  operation  of  compari¬
son  and  synthesis.  Words  are  therefore  the  body
of  discourse,  of  which  the  soul  is  understanding.

The  categories  of  discourse  are -in  part  merely
representative,  in  part  nicrely  grammatical,  and

Literature  altribiitable  to  both  spheres,

moves  be-  Euplioiiy  and  phonetic  laws  are  prin-

governing  language  without  any
music  and  de-  reference  to  its  meaning;  here  speech  is
notation.  ^  music.  At  the  other  ex¬


treme  lies  that  ultimate  form  of  prose  which  we
see  in  mathematical  reasoning  or  in  a  telegraphic
style,  whafe  absolutely  nothing  is  rhetorical  and
speech  is  denuded  of  every  feature  not  indispen¬
sable  to  its  symbolic  role.  Between  these  two  ex¬
tremes  lies  the  broad  field  of  poetry,  or  rather  of
imaginative  or  playful  expression,  where  the  verb¬
al  medium  is  a  medium  indeed,  having  a  certain
transparency,  a  certain  reference  to  independent
facts,  but  at  the  same  time  elaborates  the  fact  irf


expressing  it,  and  endows  it  with  affinities  alien  to
its  proper  nature.  A  pun  is  a  grotesque  example
of  such  diremption,  where  ambiguities  belonging
only  to  speech  are  used  to  suggest  impossible  sub¬
stitutions  in  ideas.  Less  frankly,  language  habitu-


76


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ally  wrests  its  subject-matter  in  some  nteasure  from
its  real  context  and  transfers  it  to  a  represented
and  secondary  world,  the  world  of  logic  and  le^ec-'
tion.  Concretions  in  existence  are  subsumed,  "hen
named,  under  concretions  in  discourse.  Orammar
lays  violent  hands  upon  experience,  and  cv’e'''  thing
becomes  a  prey  to  wit  and  fancy,  a  jjioloriai  for
fiction  and  eloquence.  Man’s  intellectuf»f  progr^-'^s
has  a  poetic  phase,  in  which  he  imagines  rhe  worlu;
and  then  a  scientific  phase,  in  which  he  sifts  and
tests  what  he  has  imagined.

In  what  measure  do  inflection  and  f. yntax  rep¬
resent  anythiiig  in  the  subject-reatter  (»+‘  discourse?
In  what  measure  are  tliey  an  independent  play  of
expression,  a  quasi-musical,  quasi-mathematical
veil  interposed  between  reflection  and  existence?
One  who  knows  only  languages  of  a  single  family
can  give  but  a  biassed  answer  to  this  question.
There  are  doubtless  many  approaches  ;tc  correct
symbolism  in  language,  whicli  grammar  may  have
followed  up  at  different  tiiroi^  in  strangely  differ¬
ent  ways.  That  the  medium  in  every  art  has  a
Sound  and  character  of  its  own,  a  character  limit-
object,  in  ing  its  representative  value,  may

jffwnM*n«y  P^^^^aps  be  safoly  asserted,  and  this
iLave«mnity>  intrinsic  character  in  the  medium  ante¬
dates  and  permeates  all  representation. .  Phonetic
possibilities  and  phonetic  halflts  belong,  in  lan¬
guage,  to  this  indispensable  vehicle;  what  the
throat  and  lips  can  emit  easily  and  distinguish-
ably,  and  what  sequences  can  appeal  to  the  car  and


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


77


be  retaineef^  depen^l  alike  on  physiological  con-
and  no  inatl  3r  how  convenient  or  incon-
^hese  cjiiditious  may  be  for  signification,
tliey  will  always  make  themselves  felt  and  may
sometiines  remain  predominant.  In  poetry  they
arc  st  'll  conspicuous.  Euphony,  metres  and  rhyme
A'*  •mages  they  transmit  and  add  a  charm
"  !.^  'ly  t  curnwic  and  imputed.  In  this  immersion
i.  .  h  the  medium  and  in  its  intrinsic
‘.‘•"c Tier  I  {  oiag’c  of  jToctry  lies;  and  the  miracle

Ts  iLe  .s  more  or  less  native  analogy
wec’  medium’s  movement  and  that  of  the
.iibjeet-rn.L^  .er.  •

Roili  language  and  ideas  involve  processes  in  the
l)ra'Ji.  The  two  j^roccsscs  may  be  wholly  dispar¬
ate  if  we  regard  their  objects  only  and  forget
their  seat,  as  Athena  is  in  no  way  linked  to  an
elephant’s  tusk;  yet  in  perception  all  processes  are
eontiguows  and  exercise  a  single  organism,  in  which
tliey  may  find  themselves  in  sympathetic  or  anti¬
pathetic  vibration.*  On  this  circumstance  hangs
that  suljtle  congniily  between  subject  and  veliicle
which  is  otherwise  such  a  mystery  in  expression.
If  to  think  of  Athena  and  to  look  on  ivory  are
congruous  pliysiological  processes,  if  they  sustain
or  heighten  each  otlier,  tlien  to  represent  Athene
in  ivory  will  be  a  happy  expedient,  in  which  the
very  nature  of  the  medium  will  already  be  helping
na  forward.  Scent  and  form  go  better  together,
for  instance,  in  tlie  violet  or  the  rose  than  in  the
hyacinth  or  the  poppy:  and  being  better  compacted


78


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


for  human  perception  they  seem  more  expressive
and  can  be  linked  more  unequivocally  with  other
sources  of  feeling.  So  a  given  vocal  sound  may
have  more  or  less  analogy  to  the  thing  it  is  used
to  signify;  this  analogy  may  be  obvious,  as  in  ono¬
matopoeia,  tr  subtle,  as  when  short,  sharp  sounds
go  with  der.sion,  or  involved  rhythms  and  vague
reverberations  with  a  floating  dream.  Wliat  seems
exquisite  to  one  poet  may  accordingly  seem  vapid
to  another,  when  the  texture  of  experience  in  tlie
two  minds  differs,  so  that  a  given  composition
rustles  through  one  man^s  fancy  as  a  wind  might
through  a  wo<m1,  but  finds  no  sympathetic  response


in  the  other  organism,  nerved  as  it  may  be,  per¬
haps,  to  precision  in  thought  and  action.

The  structure  of  language,  when  it  passes  beyond
the  phonetic  level,  begins  at  once  to  lean  upon  ex-


Sjmtax  posi-
ttvely  repre-
sentativ*.


istences  and  to  imitate  the  structure  of
things.  We  distinguish  the*  parts  of
speech,  for  instance,  in  subservience  to


distinctions  which  we  make  in  'ideas.  The  feeling


or  quality  represented  by  an  adjective,  thtf  relation
indicated  by  a  verb,  tl^  substance  or  concretion
of  qualities  designated  by  a  noun,  are  diversities
growing  up  in  experience,  by  no  means  attributable
tb  the  mere  play  of  sound.  The  parts  of  speech
are  therefore  representative.  Their  inflection  is
representative  too,  since  tenses  mark  important
practical  differences  in  the  distribution  of  the
events  described,  and  cases  express  the  respective
rdles  played  by  objects  in  the  operation.  "  I  struck


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


79


him  and  he  will  strike  me,”  renders  in  linguistic
symbols  a  marked  change  in  the  situation;  the
^variation  in  phrase  is  not  rhetorical.  Language
here,  though  borrowed  no  doubt  from  ancestral
poetry,  has  left  all  revery  far  behind,  and  has  been
submerged  in  the  Life  of  Heason.  •

The  medium,  however,  constantly  reasserts
itself.  An  example  may  be  found  in  gender.
Yet  it  viti-  which,  clearly  representative  in  a  meas-
ates  what  it  ure,  cuts  loose  in  language  from  all
represents.  genuine  representation  and  becomes  a

feature  in  abstract  linguistic  design,  a  formal
characteristic  in  expression.  Contrasted  senti¬
ments  permeate  an  animal’s  dealings  with  his  own
sex  and  with  the  other;  nouns  and  adjectives  rep¬
resent  this  contrast  by  taking  on  masculine  and
feminine  forms.  The  distinction  is  indeed  so  im¬


portant  that  wholly  different  words — man  and
woman,  biill  and  cow — stand  for  the  best-known
animals  of  different  sex;  while  adjectives,  where
declension  is  extinct*  as  in  English,  often  take  on
a  connotation  of  gender  and  are  applied  to  one  sex
only — ^as  we  say  a  beautiful^  woman,  but  hardly  a
beautiful  man.  But  gender  in  language  extends
juuch  farther  than  sex,  and  even  if  by  some  subtle
analogy  all  the  masculine  and  feminine  nouns  in
a  language  could  be  attaelied  to  something  suggest¬
ing  sex  in  the  objects  they  designate,  yet  it  can
hardly  be  maintained  tliat  the  elaborate  concor¬
dance  incident  upon  that  distinction  is  representa¬
tive  of  any  felt  quality  in  the  things.  So  remote


80


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


an  analogy  to  sox  could  not  assert  itself  pervasively.
Thus  Horace  says :

Quis  muUa  gracilis  te  puer  in  rosa
perfusis  liquidis  urget  odoribus

grato,  Pyrrha,  sub  antrof

«

Here  we  nmy  perceive  why  the  rose  was  instinc¬
tively  made  feminine,  and  we  may  grant  that  tlie
bower,  though  the  reason  escape  us,  was  somehow
properly  masculine;  but  no  one  would  urge  that  a
profusion  of  roses  was  also  intrinsically  feminine,
or  that  the  pleasantness  of  a  bower  was  ever  spe¬
cifically  masttuline  to  sense.  The  epithets  muUa
and  grato  take  their  gender  from  the  nouns,  even
though  the  quality  they  designate  fails  to  do  so.
Their  gender  is  therefore  non-representative  and
purely  formal;  it  marks  an  intra-linguistic  accom¬
modation.  The  medium  lias  developed  a  syntacti¬
cal  structure  apart  from  any  intrinsic  &’gnificance
thereby  accruing  to  its  elements.  Artificial  con¬
cordance  in  gender  doct'  not  express  gender:  it
merely  emphasises  the  grammatical  liirirs  in  the
phrases  and  makes  greater  variety  possible  in  the
arrangement  of  words.

This  example  may  prepare  us  to  understand  a
*  general  principle:  that  language,  while  essentially
significant  viewed  in  its  function,  is
«lbd^Ig«r  indefinitely  wasteful,  being  mechanical
Uving  and  tentative  in  its  origin.  Tt  over-

medium.  loads  itself,  and  being  primarily  mnsic,
and  a  labyrinth  of  sounds,  it  dev  elops  an  articula-


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


81


t

tion  and  method  of  its  own,  which  only  in  the  end,
and  with  much  inexactness,  reverts  to  its  function
bf  expression.  How  great  the  possibilities  of  ef¬
fect  are  in  developing  a  pure  medium  we  can  best
appreciate  in  music;  but  in  language  a  similar  de¬
velopment  goes  on  while  it  is  being  appMed  to  rep¬
resenting  things.  The  organ  is  spontaneous,  the
function  adventitious  and  superimposed.  Ehetoric
and  utility  keeji  language  going,  as  centrifugal  and
centripetal  forces  keep  a  planet  in  its  course.
Euphony,  verbal  analogy,  grammatical  fancy,
poetic  confusion,  continually  drive  language  afield,
ill  its  own  tangential  direction;  whilef  the  business
of  life,  in  which  language  is  employed,  and  the
natural  lapse  of  rhetorical  fashions,  as  continually
draw  it  back  towards  convenience  and  exacti¬
tude.

Between  music  and  bare  symbolism  language
has  its  fiotid  expansion.  Until  music  is  subordi-
Lansuage  nated,  spcccli  has  little  sense;  it  can
foreshortens  hardly  tcll  a  story  or  indicate  an  object
experience.  #  unequivocally.  Yet  if  music  were  left

behind  altogether,  language^would  pass  into  a  sort
of  algebra  or  vocal  sliorlhand,  without  literary
quality; ’it  would  become  wholly  indicative  and
record  facts  without  colouring  them  ideally.  This
medium  and  its  intrinsic  development,  though
they  make  the  bane  of  reproduction,  make  the
essence  of  art;  they  give  representation  a  new  and
specific  value  such  as  the  object,  before  represen¬
tation,  could  not  have  possessed.  Consciousness


82


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


I

itself  is  such  a  medium  in  resj>ect  to  diffuse  exis¬
tence,  which  it  foreshortens  and  elevates  into  syn¬
thetic  ideas.  Reason,  too,  by  bringing  the  move-**
ment  of  events  and  inclinations  to  a  head  in  single
acts  of  refieciion,  thus  attaining  to  laws  and  pur¬
poses,  introduces  into  life  the  influence  of  a  rcprc-
resentative  medium,  without  which  life  could  never
pass  from  a  process  into  an  art.  Language  acquires
scope  in  the  same  way,  by  its  kindly  infidelities;
its  metaphors  and  syntax  lend  experience  perspec¬
tive.  Language  vitiates  the  experience  it  ex¬
presses,  but  thereby  makes  the  burden  of  one
moment  rel(?Vant  to  that  of  another.  The  two
experiences,  identified  roughly  with  the  same  con¬
cretion  in  discourse,  are  pronounced  similar  or
comparable  in  character.  Thus  a  proverb,  by
its  verbal  pungency  and  rhythm,  becomes  more
memorable  than  the  event  it  first  described  would
ever  have  been  if  not  translated  into  a^l  epigram
and  rendered,  so  to  speak,^  applicable  to  new
cases;  for  by  that  translation  the  event  has  be¬
come  an  idea.

To  turn  events  into^idoas  is  the  function  of  lit¬
erature.  Music,  which  in  a  certain  sense  is  a  mass
of  pure  forms,  must  leave  its  ideas  imbedded  in
their  own  medium — ^they  are  musical  ideas — ^and
cannot  impose  them  on  any  foreign  material,  such
as  human  affairs.  Science,  on  the  contrary,  seeks
to  disclose  the  bleak  anatomy  of  existence,  strip¬
ping  off  as  much  as  possible  the  veil  of  prejudice
and  words.  Literature  takes  a  middle  course  and


83


StEBCH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


tries  to  subdue  music,  which  for  its  purposes  would
be  futile  and  too  abstract,  into  conformity  with

It  is  a  per-  general  experience,  making  music
petuai  myth-  thereby  significant-  Literary  art  in  the
end  rejects  all  unmeaning  flourishes,  all
complications  that  have  no  counterpaii  in  things
or  no  use  in  expressing  their  relations;  at  the  same
time  it  aspires  to  digest  that  reality  to  which  it
confines  itself,  making  it  over  into  ideal  substance
and  material  for  the  mind.  It  l(X)k;s  at  things  with
an  incorrigibly  dramatic  eye,  turning  them  into
peynanent  unities  (which  they  never  are)  and
almost  into  persons,  grouping  them  hj^  their  imagi¬
native  or  moral  affinities  and  retaining  in  them
chiefly  what  is  incidental  to  their  being,  namely,
the  part  they  may  chance  to  play  in  man’s  adven¬
tures.


Such  literary  art  demands  a  subject-matter  other
than  the  literary  impulse  itself.  The  literary  man
is  an  interpreter  and  hardly  succeeds,  as  the  musi¬
cian  may,  without*  experience  and  mastery  of
Jiuman  affairs.  His  art  is  half  genius  and  half
fidelity.  He  needs  inspiration;  he  must  wait  for
automatic  musical  tendencies  to  ferment  in  his
mind,  proving  it  to  he  fertile  in  devices,  compari¬
sons,  and  bold  assimilations.  Yet  inspiration*
alone  will  lead  him  astray,  for  his  art  is  relative
to  something  other  than  its  own  formal  impulse;
it  comes  to  clarify  the  real  world,  not  to  encum¬
ber  it;  and  it  needs  to  render  its  native  agility
practical  and  to  attach  its  volume  of  feeling  to


84


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


.  c

what  is  momentous  in  human  life.  Literature  has
its  piety,  its  conscience;  it  cannot  long  forget,
without  forfeiting  all  dignity,  that  it  serves  a  bur^
dened  and  perplexed  creature,  a  human  animal
struggling  to  persuade  the  universal  Sphinx  to  pro¬
pose  a  mote  intelligible  riddle.  Irresponsible  and
trivial  in  its  abstract  impulse,  man’s  simian  chatter
becomes  noble  as  it  becomes  symbolic;  its  represen¬
tative  function  lends  it  a  serious  beauty,  its  utility
endows  it  with  moral  w’orth.


These  relations,  in  determining  the  function  of
language,  determine  the  ideal  which  its  structure
^  ^ould  approach.  Any  sort  of  gram-
apro/inapt,  and  rhetoric,  the  most  absurd  and


with  eqtial
richness.


inapplicable  as  well  as  the  most  descrip¬
tive,  can  be  spontaneous;  fit  organisms


are  not  less  natural  than  those  that  are  unfit.


Felicitous  genius  is  so  called  because  it  meets  ex¬
perience  half-way.  A  genius  which  flic&  in  the  op¬
posite  direction,  though  not  less  fertile  internally,
is  externally  inept  and  is  called  madness.  Inepti¬
tude  is  something  which  language  needs  to  shake
off.  Better  surrender^altogelher  some  verbal  cate¬
gories  and  start  again,  in  that  respect,  with  a  clean
slate,  than  persist  in  any  line  of  development  that
alienates  thought  from  reality.  The  language  of
birds  is  excellent  in  its  way,  and  those  ancient  sages
who  are  reported  to  have  understood  it  very  likely
had  merely  perceived  that  it  was  not  meant  to  be
intelligible;  for  it  is  not  to  understand  nature  to
reduce  her  childishly  to  a  human  scale.  Man,  who


SPEECH  AND  SIGNIFICATION


85


is  merged  in  universal  naiiire  at  the  roots  of  his
being,  is  not  without  profound  irrational  intuitions
4)y  which  he  can  half  divine  her  secret  processes;
and  his  heart,  in  its  own  singing  and  fluttering,
might  not  wholly  misinterpret  tlie  birds.  But
human  discourse  is  not  worth  having  ii  it  is  mere
piping,  and  helps  not  at  all  in  mastering  things;
for  man  is  intelligent,  wdiich  is  another  way  of  say¬
ing  that  he  aspires  to  envisage  in  fliouglit  what  he
is  dealing  with  in  action.  Discourse  that  absolved
itself  from  that  observant  duty  would  not  be  cog¬
nitive;  and  in  failing  to  be  cognitive  it  would  fail
to  redeem  the  practical  forces  it  ignored  from  their


brute  externality,  and  to  make  them  tributary  to
the  Life  of  Beason.  Thus  its  own  dignity  and
continued  existence  depend  on  its  learning  to  ex¬
press  momentous  facts,  facts  important  for  action
and  happiness;  and  there  is  nothing  which  so
quickly  discredits  itself  as  empty  rhetoric  and  dia¬
lectic,  or  poetry  that  wanders  in  dim  and  private
worlds.  If  pure  music,  even  with  its  immense
sensuous  a])peai,  is  so  easily  tedious,  what  a  uni¬
versal  yawn  must  meet  tlie  verbiage  which  develops
nothing  but  its  own  irridescence.  Absolute  ver-


Absolute  lan¬
guage  a  pos-


sification  and  absolute  dialectic  may
have  their  place  in  society;  they  give*


Bible  but  fool¬
ish  art


play  to  an  organ  that  has  its  rights  like
any  other,  and  that,  after  serving  for  a


while  in  the  economy  of  life,  may  well  claim  a  holi¬


day  in  which  to  disport  itself  irresponsibly  among


the  fowls  of  the  air  and  the  lilies  of  the  field.


86


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


But  the  exercise  is  trivial;  and  if  its®high  priests
go  through  their  mummeries  with  a  certain  unction,
and  pretend  to  be  wafted  by  them  into  a  highet^
world,  the  phenomenon  is  neither  new  nor  remark¬
able.  Language  is  a  wonderful  and  pliant  me¬
dium,  andiwhy  should  it  not  lend  itself  to  impos¬
ture?  A  systematic  abuse  of  words,  as  of  other
things,  is  never  without  some  inner  harmony  or
propriety  that  makes  it  prosper;  only  the  man  who
looks  beyond  and  sees  the  practical  results  awakes
to  the  villainy  of  it.  In  the  end,  however,  those
who  play  with  words  lose  their  labour,  and  preg¬
nant  as  they,,  feel  themselves  to  be  with  new  and
wonderful  universes,  they  cannot  humanise  the  one
in  which  they  live  and  rather  banish  themselves
from  it  by  their  persistent  egotism  and  irrelevance.


CHAPTER  VI


POETRY  AND  PROSE


siom


There  is  both  truth  and  illusion  in  the  saying
that  primitive  poets  are  sublime.  Genesis  and  the
Force  of  pri-  (works  doubtless  backed  by  a  long

expres-  tradition)  are  indeed  sublime.  Primi¬
tive  men,  having  perhaps  developed
language  before  the  other  arts,  used  it  with  singu¬
lar  directness  to  describe  the  chief  episodes  of  life,
which  was  all  that  life  as  yet  contained.  They  had
frank  passions  and  saw  things  from  single  points
of  view.  A  breath  from  that  early  world  seems
to  enlargcFour  natures,  and  to  restore  to  language,
which  we  have  sophisticated,  all  its  magnificence
and  truth.  But  there  is  more,  for  (as  we  have
seen)  language  is  spontaneous;  it  constitutes  an  act
before  it  registers  an  observation.  It  gives  vent
to  emotion  before  it  is  adjusted  to  things  external
and  reduced,  as  it  were,  to  its  own  echo  rebounding
from  a  refractory  world.  The  lion’s  roar,  the  bel¬
lowing  of  bulls,  even  the  sea’s  cadcjice  has  a  great
sublimity.  Though  hardly  in  itself  poetry,  an  ani¬
mal  cry,  when  still  audible  in  human  language,
renders  it  also  the  unanswerable,  the  ultimate  voice
of  nature.  Nothing  can  so  pierce  the  soul  as  the

87


88


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


uttermost  sigh  of  the  body.  There  is  ho  utterance
so  til  rilling  as  that  of  absolute  impulse,  if  abso¬
lute  impulse  has  learned  to  speak  at  all.  An  in^
tense,  inhospitable  mind,  filled  with  a  single  idea,
in  which  all  animal,  social,  and  moral  interests
are  fused  iogetlier,  sjieaks  a  language  of  incom¬
parable  force.  Thus  the  Hebrew  prophets,  in
theii*  savage  concentration,  poured  into  one  tor¬
rent  all  that  their  souls  possessed  or  could  dream
of.  What  other  men  are  wont  to  pursue  in  poli¬
tics,  business,  religion,  or  art,  they  looked  for  from
one  wave  of  national  repentance  and  consecration.
Their  age,  swvept  by  this  ideal  passion,  possessed
at  the  same  time  a  fresh  and  homely  vocabulary;
and  the  result  was  an  eloquence  so  elemental  and
combative,  so  imaginative  and  so  bitterly  practical,
that  the  world  has  never  heard  its  like.  Such
single-mindedness,  with  such  heroic  sini])licity  in
words  and  images,  is  hardly  possible  in  a  late  civil¬
isation.  Cultivated  poets  are  not  unconscioual)
sublime.


The  sublimity  of  earl;;  utterances  should  not  b(
hailed,  however,  with  unmixed  admiration.  It  h
.  a  sublimity  born  of  defect  or  at  least  oJ
ness  and  uar-  disproportion.  The  will  asserts  itscl:
rowness.  magnificently;  images,  like  thunder

clouds,  seem  to  cover  half  the  firmament  at  once
But  such  a  will  is  sadly  inexperienced;  it  has  hardb
fasted  or  even  conceived  any  possible  or  high  satis
factions.  Its  lurid  firmament  is  poor  in  stars
To  throw  the  whole  mind  upon  something  is  no


POETRY  AND  PROSE


89


BO  great  a  feat  when  the  mind  has  nothing  else  to
throw  itself  upon.  Plvery  animal  when  goaded
H)ecomes  intense;  and  it  is  perhaps  merely  the
apathy  in  wdiich  mortals  are  wont  to  live  that
keeps  them  from  being  habitually  sublime  in  their
sentiments.  The  sympathy  that  malces  a  sheep
hasten  after  its  fellow^s,  in  vague  alarm  or  in  vague
affection;  the  fierce  premonitions  that  drive  a  bull
to  the  heifer;  the  patience  wdth  which  a  hen
sits  on  her  eggs;  the  loyalty  which  a  dog  shows
to  his  master — ^what  thoughts  may  not  all  these
instincts  involve,  which  it  needs  only  a  medium
of  communication  to  translate  into  poetry?

Man,  though  wnlh  less  w^holeness  of  soul,  en¬
acts  the  same  dramas.  lie  hears  voices  on  all
occasions;  he  incorporates  what  little  he  observes
of  nature  into  his  verbal  dreams;  and  as  each  new
impulse  bubbles  to  the  surface  he  feels  himself
on  the  verge  of  some  inexpressible  heaven  or  hell,
lie  needs  but  to  abandon  himself  to  that  seething
chaos  which  perpetually  underlies  conventional
sanity — a  chaos  in  wliich  memory  and  prophecy,
vision  and  impersonation,  sound  and  sense,  are  in¬
extricably  jumbled  together — to  find  himself  at
once  in  a  magic  world,  irrecoverable,  largely  un-^
meaning,  terribly  intricate,  but,  as  he  wdll  conceive,
deep,  inward,  and  absolutely  real.  lie  will  have
reverted,  in  other  words,  to  crude  experience,  to
primordial  illusion.  The  movement  of  his  animal
or  vegetative  mind  will  be  far  from  delightful;  it
will  be  unintelligent  and  unintelligible;  nothing


90


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

e

in  particular  will  be  represented  therein;  but  it
will  be  a  movement  in  the  soul  and  for  the
soul,  as  exciting  and  compulsive  as  the  souTt^
volume  can  make  it.  In  this  muddy  torrent  words
also  may  be  carried  down;  and  if  these  words  are
by  chance  strung  together  into  a  cadence,  and  are
after’vards  written  dowm,  they  may  remain  for  £
memento  of  that  turbid  moment.  Such  words  we
may  at  first  hesitate  to  call  poetry,  since  very  likely
they  arc  nonsense;  but  this  nonsense  will  have
some  quality — some  rhyme  or  rhytlim — that  makes
it  memorable  (else  it  would  not  have  survivj^l);
and  moreover  the  words  will  probably  show,
in  their  connotation  and  order,  some  sympathy
with  the  dream  that  cast  them  up.  For  the
man  himself,  in  whom  such  a  dnjarn  may  be  part¬
ly  recurrent,  they  may  consequently  have  a  con¬
siderable  power  of  suggestion,  and  they  may
even  have  it  for  others,  whenever  the  rhythm  and
incantation  avail  to  plunge  thorn  also  into  a  sim¬
ilar  trance.

Memorable  nonsense,  or  sound  with  a  certair


hypnotic  power,  is  the  really  primitive  and  radica

form  of  poetry.  Nor  is  such  ])oetry  yet
.poetTF  an  cxtinct:  children  still  love  and  compose
incantation  and  every  genuine  poet,  on  one  side

or  charm.  .  i.  x  -i.  j*  i-  -i

of  his  genius,  reverts  to  it  from  explicit
speech.  As  all  language  has  acquired  its  mean¬
ing,  and  did  not  have  it  in  the  beginning,  so  the
man  who  launches  a  new  locution,  the  poet  who
creates  a  symbol,  must  do  so  without  knowing


POETRY  AND  PROSE


91


what  significance  it  may  eventually  acquire,  and
conscious  at  best  only  of  the  emotional  back-
••  ground  from  which  it  emerged.  Pure  poetry  is
pure  experiment;  and  it  is  not  strange  that  nine-
tentlis  of  it  should  be  pure  failure.  For  it  matters
little  what  unutterable  things  may  lijfve  originally
gone  together  with  a  phrase  in  the  dreamer’s  mind;
if  they  were  not  uttered  and  the  phrase  cannot
call  them  back,  this  verbal  relic  is  none  tlie  richer
for  the  high  company  it  may  once  have  kept.  Ex¬
pressiveness  is  a  most  accidental  matter.  What  a
li^e  suggests  at  one  reading,  it  may  never  suggest
again  even  to  the  same  person.  Fffr  this  reason,
among  others,  poets  are  partial  to  their  own  com-
j)ositions;  they  truly  discover  there  depths  of  mean¬
ing  which  exist  for  nobody  else.  Those  readers
who  appropriate  a  poet  and  make  him  their  own
fall  into  a  similar  illusion;  they  attribute  to  him
what  tlfhy  themselves  supply,  and  whatever  he
reels  out,  lost  in  his  own  personal  re  very,  seems
to  them,  like  sortes  hibliccB,  written  lo  fit  their
own  ease.

Justice  has  never  been  done  to  Plato’s  remark¬
able  consistency  and  boldness  in  declaring  that

Inspiration  poets  are  inspired  by  a  divine  madness
irresponsible,  and  yet,  when  they  transgress  rational
bounds,  are  to  be  banished  from  an  ideal  republic,
though  not  without  some  marks  of  Platonic  re¬
gard.  Instead  of  fillets,  a  modern  age  might  as¬
sign  them  a  coterie  of  flattering  dames,  and  instead
of  banishment,  starvation;  but  the  result  would  be


92


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


the  same  in  the  end.  A  poet  is  inspired  because
what  occurs  in  his  brain  is  a  true  experiment  in
creation.  His  api)rehension  plays  with  w'ords  and  *
their  meanings  as  nature,  in  any  spontaneous
variation,  plays  with  her  own  structure.  A  me¬
chanical  force  shifts  the  kaleidoscope;  a  now  direc¬
tion  if  given  to  growth  or  a  new  gist  to  significa¬
tion.  This  inspiration,  moreover,  is  mad,  being
wholly  ignorant  of  its  own  issue;  and  though  it
has  a  confused  fund  of  experience  and  verbal
habit  on  which  to  draw,  it  draws  on  this  fund
blindly  and  quite  at  random,  consciously  possessf,d
by  nothing  but  a  certain  stress  and  pregnancy  and
the  pains,  as  it  were,  of  parturition.  I'inally  the
new  birth  has  to  be  inspected  critically  by  the  pub¬
lic  censor  before  it  is  allowed  to  live;  most  probably
it  is  too  feeble  and  defective  to  prosper  in  the  com¬
mon  air,  or  is  a  monster  that  violates  some  primary
rule  of  civic  existence,  tormenting  itself  to  disturb
others.


Plato  seems  to  have  exaggerated  the  havoc
which  these  poetic  dragons  can  work  in  the  world.

Plato’s  dis-  They  arc  in  fact  more  often  absurd
criminating  than  vonomous,  and  no  special  legisla-
tion  is  needed  to  abolish  them.  They
soon  die  quietly  of  universal  neglect.  The  poetry
that  ordinarily  circulates  among  a  people  is  poetry
of  a  secondary  and  conventional  sort  that  propa¬
gates  established  ideas  in  trite  metaphors.  Popu¬
lar  poets  are  the  parish  priests  of  the  Muse,  re¬
tailing  her  ancient  divinations  to  a  long  since


POETRY  AND  PROSE


93


converted  public.  Platons  quarrel  was  nut  so  much
with  poetic  art  as  with  ancient  myth  and  emotional
laxity:  he  was  preaching  a  crusade  against  the
i‘sta])lished  church.  For  naturalistic  deities  he
wished  to  substitute  moral  symbols;  for  the  joys
of  sense,  austerity  and  abstraction.  To  i)roscribe
Homer  was  a  marked  way  of  protesting  against
the  frivolous  reigning  ideals.  The  case  is  much
as  if  we  should  now  proscribe  the  book  of  Oenesis^
on  account  of  its  mythical  cosiuogony,  or  in  order
to  proclaim  the  philosophic  truth  that  the  good,
beiij^  an  ad(‘quate  exjwession  to  be  attained  ])y
creation,  could  not  possibly  have  ])it3ceded  it'  or
been  its  source.  AVe  might  admit  at  the  same  time
that  (tenesis  contains  excellent  images  and  that
its  poetic  force  is  remarkable;  so  that  if  serious
misuiidcrstanding  could  bo  avoided  the  censor
might  be  glad  to  leave  it  in  everybody’s  hands.
Plato  in  ^ome  such  way  recognised  that  Homer
was  poetical  and  referred  his  works,  mischievous
ns  they  might  prove  incidentally,  to  divine  inspira¬
tion.  Poetic  madness,  like  madness  in  prophecy
or  love,  bursts  the  body  of  things  to  escape  from
it  into  some  ideal;  and  even  the  Homeric  world,
though  no  model  for  a  rational  state,  was  a  cheer¬
ful  heroic  vision,  congenial  to  many  early  impulses
and  dreams  of  the  mind.

Homer,  indeed,  was  no  primitive  poet;  he  was  a
consummate  master,  the  heir  to  generations  of  dis¬
cipline  in  both  life  and  art.  This  appears  in  his
perfect  prosody,  in  his  limpid  style,  in  his  sense


94


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


for  proportion,  his  abstentions,  and  the  frank
pathos  of  his  portraits  and  principles,  in  which
there  is  nothing  gross,  subjective,  or  arbitrary
The  inspirations  that  came  to  him  never  carried
him  into  crudeness  or  absurdity.  Every  moderr
poet,  though  the  world  he  describes  may  be  mon
refined  in  spots  and  more  elaborate,  is  less  advancec
in  his  art;  for  art  is  made  rudimentary  not  by  its
date  but  by  its  irrationality.  Yet  even  if  Home
had  been  primitive  he  might  well  have  been  in¬
spired,  in  the  same  way  as  a  Bacchic  frenzy  or  t
mystic  trance;  the  most  blundering  explosions  J^la3
be  justified  Antecedently  by  the  plastic  force  thal
is  vented  in  them.  They  may  be  expressive,  ir

Explosive  and  physical  sense  of  this  ambiguoiu
presxuuit  ex-  word;  for,  far  as  they  may  be  from  con-
pression.  veying  an  idea,  they  may  betray  a  tend¬
ency  and  prove  that  something  is  stirring  in  tin
soul.  Expressiveness  is  often  sterile; 'but  it  b
sometimes  fertile  and  capable  of  reproducing  ii
representation  the  experience  from  which  i^
sprang.  As  a  tree  in  tliL  autumn  sheds  leaves  anc
seeds  together,  so  a  ripening  experience  comes  in
differently  to  various  manifestations,  some  barrel
and  without  further  function,  others  fit  to  earn
the  parent  experience  over  into  another  mind,  anc
give  it  a  new  embodiment  there.  Expressivenesi
in  the  former  case  is  dead,  like  that  of  a  fossil;  ii
the  latter  it  is  living  and  efficacious,  recreating  iti
original.  The  first  is  idle  self-manifestation,  tin
second  rational  art.


POETRY  AND  PROSE


95


Self-manifestation,  so  soon  as  it  is  noted  and
accepted  as  such,  seems  to  present  the  same  mar-

Vatuniihis-  ^*^3^  ideal  success.  Such  self-

to^  of  in-  manifestation  is  incessant,  many-sided,
spiration.  unavoidable;  yet  it  seems  a  miracle

when  its  Conditions  are  looked  back  up*on  from  the
vantage  ground  of  their  result.  By  reading  spirit
out  of  a  work  we  turn  it  into  a  feat  of  inspiration.
Thus  even  the  crudest  and  least  coherent  utter¬
ances,  when  we  suspect  some  soul  to  bo  groping  in
them,  and  striving  to  address  us,  become  oracular;
a  divine  afflatus  breathes  behind  their  gibberish
an3  they  seem  to  manifest  some  deep'lntcnt.  The
miracle  of  creation  or  inspiration  consists  in  noth¬
ing  but  this,  that  an  external  effect  should  embody
an  inner  intention.  The  miracle,  of  course,  is
apparent  only,  and.due  to  an  inverted  and  captious
point  of  view.  In  truth  the  tendency  that  exe¬
cuted  th^  work  was  what  first  made  its  conception
possible;  but  this  conception,  finding  the  work  re¬
sponsive  in  some  measure  to  its  inner  demand,
attributes  that  response  to  its  own  magic  preroga¬
tive.  Hence  the  least  stir  and  rumble  of  forma¬
tive  processes,  when  it  generates  a  soul,  makes
itself  somehow  that  soul’s  interpreter;  and  dim  as
the  spirit  and  its  expression  may  both  remain,  they
are  none  the  less  in  profound  concord,  a  concord
which  wears  a  miraculous  providential  character
when  it  is  appreciated  without  being  under¬
stood.

lh*imitive  poetry  is  the  basis  of  all  discourse.


96


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Expressions
to  be  under¬
stood  must
be  recreated*
and  so
changed.


If  we  open  any  ancient  book  we  come  at  once  npon
an  elaborate  language,  and  on  divers  conventional
concepts,  of  vvliose  origin  ami  history
we  hear  nothing.  We  must  read  on,
until  by  dint  of  guessing  and  by  con¬
fronting  instances  we  grow  to  under¬
stand  those  symbols.  The  writer  was
himself  heir  to  a  linguistic  tradition  which  he
made  his  own  by  the  same  process  of  adoption  and
tentative  use  ])y  which  wo,  in  turn,  interpret  his
phrases :  he  understood  what  he  heard  in  terms  of
his  own  experience,  and  attributed  to  his  predqpes-
sors(no  matter  what  their  incommunicable  feelings
may  have  l)een)  such  ideas  as  their  words  generated
in  his  own  thinking.  In  this  way  e.xprossions  con¬
tinually  change  their  sense;  they  can  communicate
a  thought  only  by  diffusing  a  stimulus,  and  in
passing  from  mouth  to  mouth  they  will  wholly
reverse  their  connotation,  unless  some"^  external
object  or  some  recurring  human  situation  gives
them  a  constant  slandard.  by  wliicli  private  abei ra¬
tions  may  be  cheeked.  Thus  in  the  first  plirase
of  Genesis,  In  the  beginning  (tod  created  the
heavens  and  the  earth the  words  liave  a  stable
^meaning  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  indicative  and
bring  ns  back  to  a  stable  object.  What  heavens  ’’
and  “earth”  stand  for  can  be  conveyed  by  ges¬
tures,  by  merely  pointing  up  and  down;  but  beyond
that  sensuous  connotation  their  meaning  has  en¬
tirely  changed  since  they  were  here  written;  and
no  two  minds,  even  to-day,  will  respond  to  these


POETRY  AND  PROSE  97

familiar  words  with  exactly  the  same  images.

Beginning  ”  and  created  ”  have  a  superficial
clearness,  though  their  implications  cannot  be  de¬
fined  without  precipitating  the  most  intricate’
metaphy^(^,  which  would  end  in  nothing  but  a
proof  that  both  terms  were  ambiguous  and  un¬
thinkable.  As  to  the  word  God,”  all  mutual
understanding  is  impossible.  It  is  a  fioating  lit¬
erary  symbol,  with  a  value  which,  if  we  define  it-
scientifically,  becomes  quite  algebraic.  x\s  no  ex¬
perienced  object  coiTCsponds  to  it,  it  is  without
fixec^ndicative  force,  and  admits  any  sense  which
its  context  in  any  mind  may  happen"*  to  give  it.
In  the  first  sentence  of  Genesis  its  meaning,  we
may  safely  say,  is  “  a  masculine  being  by  whom
heaven  and  earth  were  created.”  To  fill  out  this
implication  other  instances  of  the  word  would
have  to  be  gathered,  in  each  of  which,  of  course,
tlui  word  would  appear  with  a  new  and  perhaps
incompatible  meaning.

Whenever  a  word  appears  in  a  radically  new
context  it  has  a  radically  new  sense:  the  expres-
Expressions  ill  wliicli  it  SO  figures  is  a  poetic

may  be  re-  figment,  a  fresli  literary  creation.  Such

humorously,  invention  IS  sometimes  perverse,  soine-
or  sublimely,  times  liumorous,  sometimes  sublime;

that  is,  it  may  either  buffet  old  associations  with¬
out  enlarging  them,  or  give  them  a  plausible  but
impossible  twist,  or  enlarge  them  to  cover,  with
unexpected  propriety,  a  much  wider  or  more  mo¬
mentous  experience.  The  force  of  experience  in


98


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

S.

any  moment — we  abstract  from  represente
values — is  emotional;  so  that  for  sublime  poetr
what  is  required  is  to  tap  some  reservoir  of  fq^]
ing.  If  a  phrase  opens  the  flood-gates  of  e^.^jtior
it  has  made  itself  most  deeply  signifir-ant.  It
discursive  range  and  clearness  may  not  oe  remark
able;  its  emotional  power  will  quite  suffice.  Fo
tJiis  reason  again  primitive  j)octry  may  be  sublime
in  its  inchoate  phrases  there  is  affinity  to  raw  pat
sion  and  their  very  blindness  may  serve  to  brin,
that  passion  back.  Poetry  has  body;  it  represent
the  volume  of  ex})erience  as  well  as  its  fornij^am
to  express  Volume  a  primitive  poet  will  rely  rathe
on  rhythm,  sound,  and  condensed  suggestion  thai
on  discursive  fulness  or  scope.

The  descent  from  poetry  to  prose  is  in  one  sens
a  progress.  When  use  has  worn  down  a  poeti
The  nature  phrase  to  its  external  import,  and  ren
of  prose.  dered  it  an  indifferent  symbol  for  a  par
ticular  thing,  that  phrase  has  become  prosaic;  i
has  also  become,  by  the  same  process,  transparen
and  purely  instruniontdl.  In  poetry  feeling  i
transferred  by  contagion;  in  ju'ose  it  is  comm  uni
cated  by  bending  the  attention  upon  determinat
objects;  the  one  stimulates  and  the  other  informs
Under  the  influence  of  poetry  various  minds  radi
ate  from  a  somewhat  similar  core  of  sensatior
from  the  same  vital  mood,  into  the  most  divers(
and  incommunicable  images.  Interlocutors  speak
ing  prose,  on  the  contrary,  pelt  and  besiege  on:
another  with  a  peripheral  attack;  they  come  int


POETRY  AND  PROSE


99


contact  at  sundry  superficial  points  and  thence
push  their  agreement  inwards,  until  perhaps  a
pr^tical  coincidence  is  arrived  at  in  their  thought.
Agrasment  is  produced  by  controlling  each  mind.
externahiSL  through  a  series  of  checks  and  little
appeals  to  possible  sensation;  whereas  in  poetry  the
agreement,  where  it  exists,  is  vague  and  massive;
there  is  an  initial  fusion  of  minds  under  hypnotic
musical  influences,  from  which  each  listener,  as  he ,
awakes,  passes  into  his  own  thoughts  and  inter¬
pretations.  In  prose  the  vehicle  for  communica¬
tion  is  a  conventional  sign,  standing  in  the  last
anal^is  for  some  demonstrable  objeet  or  con¬
trollable  feeling.  By  marshalling  specific  details
a  certain  indirect  suasion  is  exercised  on  the  mind,
as  nature  herself,  by  continual  checks  and  denials,
gradually  tames  the  human  will.  The  elements  of
prose  are  always  practical,  if  we  run  back  and  re¬
construct  4heir  primitive  essence,  for  at  bottom
every  experience  is  an  original  and  not  a  copy,  a
nucleus  for  ideation  rather  than  an  object  to
which  ideas  may  refer.  It  is  when  these  stimula¬
tions  are  shaken  together  and  become  a  system  of
mutual  checks  that  they  begin  to  take  on  ideally
a  rhythm  borrowed  from  the  order  in  which  they
actually  recurred.  Then  a  pro])hetic  or  represen¬
tative  movement  arises  in  thought.  Before  this
comes  about,  experience  remains  a  constantly  reno¬
vated  dream,  as  poetry  to  the  end  conspires  to  keep
it.  For  poetry,  w^hile  truly  poetical,  never  loses
sight  of  initial  feelings  and  underlying  appeals;  it


100


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


r


is  incorrigibly  transcendental,  and  takes  ever
present  passion  and  every  private  dream  in  tun
for  the  core  of  the  universe.  By  creating  ncT
signs,  or  by  recasting  and  crossing  those  jyhid
have  become  conventional,  it  keeps  commj^vujcatio'
massive  and  instinctive,  immersed  in  jnusic,  an


inexhaustible  by  clear  thought.

Lying  is  a  privilege  of  poets  because  they  hav
not  yet  reached  the  level  on  which  truth  and  erre


It  is  more
advanced  and


are  discernible.  Veracity  and  signif
cance  are  not  ideals  for  a  primiti\


rwponsibie  mind;  we  learn  to  value  them  as  w
iearn  to  live,  when  we  discover  that  tl


spirit  cannot  be  wholly  free  and  solipsistic.  T.
have  to  distinguish  fact  from  fancy  is  so  great
violence  to  the  inner  man  that  not  only  poets,  b\
theologians  and  philosophers,  still  protest  again
such  a  distinction.  They  urge  (what  is  perfect
true  for  a  rudimentary  creature)  that  facts  a
mere  conceptions  and  conceptions  full-fledg(
facts;  but  this  interesting  embryonic  lore  th
apply,  in  their  intellectual  weakness,  to  retracth
or  undermining  those  human  categories  whic
though  alone  fruitful  or  applicable  in  life,  are  n
congenial  to  their  half-formed  imagination.  H
treating  deeper  into  the  inner  chaos,  they  bri]
to  bear  the  whole  momentum  of  an  irresponsil
dialectic  to  frustrate  the  growth  of  representati
ideas.  In  this  they  are  genuine,  if  somewhat  I
latcd,  poets,  experimenting  anew  with  solv
problems,  and  fancying  how  creation  might  ha


POETRY  AND  PROSE


101


moved  upon  other  lines.  The  great  merit  that
prose  shares  with  science  is  that  it  is  responsible.
Its  conscience  is  a  new  and  wiser  imagination,  by
creative  thought  is  rendered  cumulative  and
progrbm^ve;  for  a  man  does  not  build  less  boldly
or  solidr)i^if  he  takes  the  precaution  of  building
in  baked  brick.  Prose  is  in  itself  meagre  and  bodi¬
less,  merely  indicating  the  riches  of  the  world.
Its  transparency  helps  us  to  look  through  it  to  the
issue,  and  the  signals  it  gives  fill  the  mind  with
an  honest  assurance  and  a  prophetic  art  far  nobler
than  any  ecstasy.

/m  men  of  action  have  a  better  intelligence  than
poets,  if  only  their  action  is  on  a  broad  enough
stage,  so  the  pi’osaic  rendering  of  ex-
bringsiove  pcriencc  has  the  greater  value,  if  only
of  practical  experience  rendered  covers  enough

human  interests.  Youth  and  aspira¬
tion  indulge  in  poetry;  a  mature  and  masterful
mind  will  often  despise  it,  and  prefer  to  express
itself  laconically  in  prose.  It  is  clearly  proper
that  prosaic  habits  should  supervene  in  this  way
on  the  poetical;  for  youth,  being  as  yet  little  fed
by  experience,  can  find  volume  and  depth  only  in
the  soul;  the  half-seen,  the  supra-mundane,  the
inexpressible,  seem  to  it  alone  beautiful  and  worthy
of  homage.  Time  modifies  this  sentiment  in  two
directions.  It  breeds  lassitude  and  indifference
towards  impracticable  ideals,  originally  no  less
worthy  than  the  practicable.  Ideals  which  cannot
he  realised,  and  are  not  fed  at  least  hy  partial  real-


102


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


isatiosLB^  soon  grow  dormant.  Life-blood  passes  t
other  veins;  the  urgent  and  palpitating  interests  c
life  appear  in  other  quarters.  While  things  im
possible  thus  lose  their  serious  charm,  thjfig
actual  reveal  their  natural  order  and  varietj*^  thes
not  only  can  entertain  the  mind  abstractly**,  but  the
can  offer  a  thousand  material  rewards  in  ^bserva
tion  and  action.  In  their  presence,  a  privat
dream  begins  to  look  rather  cheap  and  hysterica!
Kot  that  existence  has  any  dignity  or  prerogativ
in  the  presence  of  will,  but  that  will  itself,  beinj
clastic,  grows  definite  and  firm  when  it  is  fed  b
success;  and-its  formed  and  expressible  ideals  tliei
put  to  shame  the  others,  which  have  remained
vague  for  want  of  practical  expression,  Matur
interests  centre  on  soluble  problems  and  task
capable  of  execution;  it  is  at  such  points  that  th
ideal  can  be  really  served.  Tlie  individual’s  drean
straightens  and  reassures  itself  by  merging  witl
the  dream  of  humanity.  To  dwell,  as  irratioiia
poets  do,  on  some  private  experience,  on  si.m
emotion  without  representative  or  ulterior  value
tlien  seems  a  waste  of  time.  Fiction  becomes  les
interesting  than  affairs,  and  poetry  turns  into  i
sort  of  incompetent  whimper,  a  childish  fore
-shortening  of  the  outspread  world.

On  the  other  hand,  prose  has  a  great  defect
which  is  abstractness.  It  drops  the  volume  of  ex
perience  in  finding  bodiless  algebraic;  symbols
which  to  express  it.  The  verbal  form,  instead  o
transmitting  an  image,  seems  to  constitute  it,  ii


POETRY  AND  PROSE


103


so  far  as  thtrc  is  an  image  suggested  at  all;  and
the  ulterior  situation  is  described  only  in  the  sense

Pure  prose  induced  in  the  hearer

w^iM^ndto  which  prepares  him  to  meet  that  situa-.

tion.  Prosc  seems  to  be  a  use  of
languagGSi,n  the  service  of  material  life.  Tt  would
tend,  in  that  case,  to  undermine  its  own  basis;  for
in  proportion  as  signals  for  action  are  quick  and
efficacious  they  diminish  their  sensuous  stimulus

■

and  fade  frojn  consciousness.  Were  language  such
a  set  of  signals  it  would  be  something  merely
instrumental,  which  if  made  perfect  ought  to  be
auto«iatic  and  unconscious.  Tt  would  be  a  buzzing
in  the  cars,  not  a  music  native  to  the  mind.  Sucli
a  theory  of  language  would  treat  it  as  a  necessary
evil  and  would  look  forward  hopefully  to  the  ex¬
tinction  of  lilerature,  in  which  it  would  recognise
nothing  ideal.  There  is  of  course  no  reason  to
doprecatq^tho  use  of  vocables^  or  of  any  other
material  agency,  to  expedite  aifairs ;  but  an  art  of
speccli,  if  it  is  to  add  any  ultimate  charm  to  life,
has  to  supervene  u])on  a  mere  code  of  signals.
Ih’osc,  could  it  1)0  purely  representative,  would  l)0
ideally  superfluous.  A  literary  prose  accordingly
OW71S  a  double  allegiance,  and  its  life  is  amphibi¬
ous.  It  must  convey  intelligence,  but  intelligence
clothed  in  a  language  that  lends  the  message  an
intrinsic  value,  and  makes  it  delightful  to  appre¬
hend  apart  from  its  importance  in  ultimate  theory
or  practice.  Prose  is  in  that  measure  a  fine  art.
It  might  be  called  poetry  that  had  become  per-


104


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


vasively  representative,  and  was  altoge^er  faithfi
to  its  rational  function.

We  may  therefore  with  good  reason  distinguis
prosaic  form  from  prosaic  substance.  A  novj^j''
satire,  a  book  of  speculative  phih^iSoph

or  substance  have  a  most  prosaic  exterior;  eve;

alone*  may  be  phrase  may  convey  its  idea  econorc
poetical.  cally;  but  the  substance  may  neverth

leas  be  poetical,  since  these  ideas  may  be  irrel
vant  to  all  ulterior  events,  and  may  expre
nothing  but  the  imaginative  energy  that  call
them  forth.  On  the  other  hand,  a  poetic  vehicle
which  there  is  much  ornamental  play  of  langua
and  rhythm  may  clothe  a  dry  ideal  skeleton.  •
those  tremendous  positivists,  the  Hebrew  prophe
had  the  most  prosaic  notions  about  the  goo
and  evils  of  life.  So  Lucretius  praised,
will  not  say  the  atoms  merely,  but  even  fecundi
and  wisdom.  The  motives,  to  take  apjrither  e
ample,  which  Racine  attributed  to  his  personag
were  prosaically  conceived;  a  physiologist  could  b
be  more  exact  in  his  calculations,  for  even  love  m
be  made  the  mainspring  in  a  clock-work  of  eir
tions.  Yet  that  Racine  was  a  bom  poet  appet
in  the  music,  nobility,  and  tenderness  of  his  n
dium;  he  clothed  his  intelligible  characters
magical  and  tragic  robes;  the  aroma  of  sen  time
rises  like  a  sort  of  pungent  incense  between  thi
and  us,  and  no  dramatist  has  ever  had  so  sure
mastery  over  transports  and  tears.

In  the  medium  a  poet  is  at  home;  in  the  woi


POETRY  AND  PROSE


105


he  tries  to  render,  he  is  a  child  and  a  stranger.
Poetic  notions  are  false  notions ;  in  so  far  as  their
Poetry  has  its  f'liiction  is  representative  they  are  viti-
piafhi^the  ated  by  containing  elements  not  pres-
mediua.  ^  things.  Truth  is  a  jewel  which

should  not  be  painted  over;  but  it  may  be  set


to  advantage  and  shown  in  a  good  light.  The
poetic  way  of  idealising  reality  is  dull,  bungling,
and  impure;  a  better  acquaintance  with  things  ren¬
ders  such  flatteries  ridiculous.  That  very  effort
of  thought  by  which  opaque  masses  of  experience
were  first  detached  from  the  flux  and  given  a  cer¬
tain  ^individuality,  seeks  to  continue  to  clarify
them  until  they  become  as  transparent  as  pos¬
sible.  To  resist  this  clarification,  to  love  the
chance  incrustations  that  encumber  human  ideas,
is  a  piece  of  timid  folly,  and  poetry  in  this  respect
is  nothing  but  childish  confusion.  Poetic  appre¬
hension  makeshift,  in  so  far  as  its  cognitive
worth  is  concerned;  it  is  exactly,  in  this  respect,
what  myth  is  to  science.  Ajiproachiug  its  subject-
matter  from  a  distance,  with  incongruous  cate¬
gories,  it  translates  it  into  some  vague  and  mis¬
leading  symbol  rich  in  emotions  which  the  object
as  it  is  could  never  arouse  and  is  sure  presently  to
contradict.  What  lends  these  hybrid  ideas  their
temporary  eloquence  and  charm  is  their  congruity
with  the  mind  that  breeds  them  and  with  its  early
habits.  Falsification,  or  rather  clouded  vision,
gives  to  poetry  a  more  human  accent  and  a  readier
welcome  than  to  truth.  In  other  words,  it  is  the


106


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


medium  that  asserts  itself;  the  apperceptive  powe
indulge  their  private  humours,  and  neglect  t]
office  to  which  they  were  assigned  once  for  all  1
their  cognitive  essence.

That  the  medium  should  so  assert  itspM,  ho
ever,  is  no  anomaly,  the  cognitive  function  ben

It  is  the  best  ulterior  one  to  which  ideas  are  by  :
medium  pos-  means  obliged  to  conform.  Appcrce
tion  is  itself  an  activity  or  art,  and  li
all  others  terminates  in  a  product  which  is  a  go
in  itself,  apart  from  its  utilities.  If  wo  abstra-
then,  from  the  representative  function  which  m
perhaps  acci'ue  to  speech,  and  regard  it  merfety
an  operation  absorbing  energy  and  occasioning  c
light,  we  see  that  poetic  language  is  language
its  best.  Its  essential  success  consists  in  fusi
ideas  in  charming  sounds  or  in  metaphors  tt
shine  by  their  own  brilliance.  Poetry  is
eloquence  justified  by  its  spontaneity;  as  e
quence  is  a  poetry  justified  by  its  applicatir
The  first  draws  the  whole  soul  into  the  sit\
tion,  and  the  second  ]'uts  the  whole  situation  1
fore  the  soul.

Is  there  not,  we  may  ask,  some  ideal  form
discourse  in  which  apperceptive  life  could  l)e  c
gaged  with  all  its  volume  and  trai

Might  it  not  ,  .  ,  .  ,  ,  .

convey  what  muting  powcr,  and  in  which  at  i

It  is  beat  to  same  time  no  misrepresentation  shoi
know?

be  involved?  Transmutation  is  i
erroneous  when  it  is  intentional;  misrepresentati
does  not  please  for  being  false,  but  only  becai


POETRY  AND  PROSE


107


truth  would  be  more  congenial  if  it  resembled  such
a  fiction.  Why  should  not  discourse,  then,  have
nothing  but  truth  in  its  import  and  nothing  but
beaiffcy  in  its  form?  With  regard  to  euphony  and
grammatical  structure  there  is  evidently  nothing
impossible  <n  such  an  ideal;  for  these  radical  beau¬
ties  of  language  are  independent  of  the  subject-
matter.  They  form  the  body  of  poetry;  but  the
ideal  and  emotional  atmosphere  whicli  is  its  soul
depends  on  things  external  to  ianguage,  which  no
perfection  in  the  medium  could  modify.  It  might
seem^as  if  the  brilliant  substitutiouws,  the  magic
suggestions  essential  to  poetry,  would  necessarily
vanish  in  the  full  light  of  day.  The  light  of
day  is  ilself  beautiful;  but  would  not  the  los&
be  terrible  if  no  other  light  \vero  ever  suffered  to
shine  ?

The  Life  of  Reason  involves  sacrifice.  Wliat
forces  yearn  for  the  ideal,  being  many  and  incoin-
A  rational  patible,  have  to  yield  and  partly  deny
poetry  would  themsclvos  in  order  to  attain  any  ideal

exclude  much

now  thought  at  all.  There  is  something  sad  in  all
poetical.  possible  attainment  so  long  as  the  ra¬
tional  virtue  (which  wills  sucli  attainment)  is  not
pervasive;  and  even  then  there  is  limitation  to  put
up  with,  and  the  memory  of  many  a  defeat.  Ra¬
tional  poetry  is  possible  and  w’ould  bo  infinitely
more  beautiful  than  the  other;  but  the  charm  of
unreason,  if  unreason  seem  charming,  it^certainly
could  not  preserve.  In  what  human  fancy  de¬
mands,  as  at  present  constituted,  there  are  irra-


108  THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

tional  elements.  The  given  world  seems  insuffi¬
cient;  impossible  things  have  to  be  imagined,  bott
to  extend  its  limits  and  to  fill  in  and  vivify  its  tex¬
ture.  Homer  has  a  mythology  without  which  ex¬
perience  would  have  seemed  to  him  undecipher¬
able;  Dante  has  his  allegories  and  his  mcfck  science;
Sha^'espeare  has  his  romanticism;  Goethe  his  sym¬
bolic  characters  and  artificial  machinery.  All  this
lumber  seems  to  have  been  somehow  necessary  tc
their  genius;  they  could  not  reach  expression  ir
more  honest  terms.  If  such  indirect  expressior
could  be  discarded,  it  would  not  be  missed^  bu‘
while  the  mind,  for  want  of  a  better  vocabulary,  is
reduced  to  using  these  symbols,  it  pours  into  them
a  part  of  its  own  life  and  makes  them  beautiful
Their  loss  is  a  real  blow,  while  the  incapacity  thal
called  for  them  endures;  and  the  soul  seems  to  b€
crippled  by  losing  its  crutches.

There  are  certain  adaptations  and  abbreviationf
of  reality  which  thought  can  never  outgrow
AUapper-  Thought  is  representative;  it  enriches
caption  modi-  ^jj^h  soul  and  each  moment  with  pre-

nes  its  object.

monitions  of  surrounding  existences
If  discourse  is  to  be  significant  it  must  transfer  tc
^  its  territory  and  reduce  to  its  scale  whatever  ob¬
jects  it  deals  with:  in  other  words,  thought  has  £
point  of  view  and  cannot  see  the  world  except  ir
perspective.  This  point  of  view  is  not,  for  reason
locally  or'  naturally  determined;  sense  alone  is  lim¬
ited  in  that  material  fashion,  being  seated  in  the
body  and  looking  thence  centrifugally  upon  thing


POETRY  AND  PROSE


109


in  so  far  as  they  come  into  dynamic  relations  with
that  body.  Intelligence,  on  the  contrary,  sallies
from  that  physical  stronghold  and  consists  pre¬
cisely  in  shifting  and  universalising  the  point  of
view,  neutralising  all  local,  temporal,  or  personal
conditionsi  Yet  intelligence,  notwithstanding,  has
its  own  centre  and  point  of  origin,  not  explicitly
in  space  or  in  a  natural  body,  but  in  some  specific
interest  or  moral  aim.  It  translates  animal  life
into  moral  endeavour,  and  what  figured  in  the  first
as  a  local  existence  figures  in  the  second  as  a
specific  good.  Reason  accordingly  has  its  essential
bias,  and  looks  at  things  as  they  affect  the  par¬
ticular  form  of  life  which  reason  expresses;  and
though  all  reality  should  be  ultimately  swept  by
the  eye  of  reason,  the  whole  would  still  be  surveyed
by  a  particular  method,  from  a  particular  starting-
point,  for  a  particular  end;  nor  would  it  take  much
shrewdtless  to  perceive  that  this  nucleus  for  dis¬
course  and  estimation,  this  ideal  life,  corresponds
in  the  moral  world  to  that  animal  body  which  gave
sensuous  experience  its  seat  and  centre;  so  that
rationality  is  notliing  but  the  ideal  function  or
aspect  of  natural  life.  Reason  is  universal  in  its
outlook  and  in  its  sympathies:  it  is  the  faculty  of
changing  places  ideally  and  representing  alien'
points  of  view;  but  this  very  self -transcendence
manifests  a  certain  special  method  in  life,  an  equi¬
librium  which  a  far-sighted  being  is  able  to  estab¬
lish  between  itself  and  its  comprehended  condi¬
tions.  Reason  remains  to  the  end  essentially


110  THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

{

human  and,  in  its  momentary  actuality,  necessarily
personal.

We  have  here  an  essential  condition  of  discourse
which  renders  it  at  bottom  poetical.  Selection  and
Reason  has  applicabiJity  govern  all  thinking,  and
its  own  bias  govcm  it  in  the  interests  o#  the  soul,
and  method.  is  itsolf  a  Specific  medium;  so

Unit  prose  can  jievcr  attain  that  perfect  trans-
j)arency  and  mei  c  utility  which  we  were  attributing
to  it.  We  should  not  w'ish  to  know  things  in
themselves,”  even  if  wc  were  able.  What  it  con¬
cerns  us  to  know  about  them  is  merely  the  service
or  injury  they  arci  able  to  do  us,  and  in  what
fashion  they  can  affect  our  lives.  To  know  this
would  be,  in  so  far,  truly  to  know  them;  but  it
would  be  to  know  them  through  our  own  faculties
and  through  their  supposed  effects;  it  would  be  to
know  them  by  their  appearance.  A  singular  proof
of  the  frivolous  w^iy  in  which  philosophers  often
proceed,  wdien  they  think  they  are  particularly  pro¬
found,  is  seen  in  this  puzzle,  on  which  they  sol¬
emnly  ask  us  to  fix  our  thoughts:  ITow  is  it  possible
to  know  reality,  if  all  we  can  attain  in  ex])erience
is  but  appearance?  The  meaning  of  knowledge,
which  is  an  intellectual  and  living  thing,  is  here
forgotten,  and  the  notion  of  sensation,  or  bodily  pos¬
session,  is  substituted  for  it;  so  what  we  are  really
asked  to  consider  is  how,  had  w'c  no  understanding,
we  should  be  able  to  understand  what  we  endure.
It  is  by  conceiving  what  we  endure  to  be  the  appear¬
ance  of  something  beyond  us,  that  we  reach  knowl-


POETRY  AND  PROSE


111


edge  that  something  exists  beyond  ns,  and  that
it  plays  in  respect  to  us  a  determinate  role.  There
could  be  no  knowledge  of  reality  if  what  conveyed
that  knowledge  were  not  felt  to  be  appearance;  nor
can  a  medium  of  knowledge  better  than  appear¬
ance  be  by  any  possibility  conceived.  To  have
such  appearances  is  what  makes  realities  know’^able.
Knowledge  transcends  sensation  by  relating  it  to
other  sensation,  and  thereby  rising  to  a  supersen^
siioiis  plane,  ihc  plane  of  principles  and  causes  by
which  scnsibles  are  identified  in  character  and  dis¬
tributed  in  existence.  •  Tliese  principles  and  causes
are  \vl:iat  we  call  the  intelligible  or  the  real  world;
and  the  sensations,  when  they  have  been  so  inter¬
preted  and  underpinned,  are  what  we  call  experi¬
ence.


If  a  poet  could  clarify  the  myths  he  begins  with,
so  as  to  reach  ultimate  scientific  notions  of  nalure

Rational  ^  would  still  be  dealing

poetry  would  with  vivid  fccling  and  with  its  iniagina-

knowiedgTin  expression.  The  prosaic  landscape
ultimate  emo-  before  him  would  still  be  a  work  of  art,
*****“■  painted  on  the  human  brain  by  human


reason.  If  he  found  that  landsca])e  uninteresting,
it  \vould  be  because  he  was  not  rt^ally  interested  in
life;  if  he  found  it  dull  and  unpoetical,  he  would
be  manifesting  his  small  capacity  and  childish
whims.  Tragic,  fatal,  intractable,  he  might  w^ell
feel  that  the  truth  was;  but  these  qualities  have
never  been  absent  from  that  half-mythical  world
through  which  poets,  for  want  of  a  rational  edu-


112  THE  LIFE  OF  REASON

cation,  have  hitherto  wandered.  A  rational  poet’s
vision  would  have  the  same  moral  functions  which
myth  was  asked  to  fulfil,  and  fulfilled  so  treacher¬
ously;  it  would  employ  the  same  ideal  faculties
which  myth  expressed  in  a  confused  and  hasty
fashion.  More  detail  would  have  been«added,  and
more  variety  in  interpretation.  To  deal  with  so
great  an  object,  and  retain  his  mastery  over  it,  a
poet  would  doubtless  need  a  robust  genius.  If
he  possessed  it,  and  in  transmuting  all  existence
falsified  nothing,  giving  that  picture  of  everything
which  human  experience  in  the  end  would  have
drawn,  he  would  achieve  an  ideal  result!  In
prompting  mankind  to  imagine,  he  would  be  help¬
ing  them  to  live.  His  poetry,  without  ceasing  to
be  a  fiction  in  its  method  and  ideality,  would  be
an  ultimate  truth  in  its  practical  scope.  It  would
present  in  graphic  images  the  total  efficacy  of  real
things.  Such  a  poetry  would  be  mofe  deeply
rooted  in  human  experience  than  is  any  casual
fancy,  and  therefore  more  appealing  to  the  heart.
Such  a  poetry  would  represent  more  thoroughly
than  any  formula  the  concrete  burden  of  exi)eri-
cnce;  it  would  become  the  most  trustworthy  of
companions.  The  images  it  had  worked  out  would
confront  human  passion  more  intelligibly  than
does  the  world  as  at  present  conceived,  with  its
mechanism  half  ignored  and  its  ideality  half
invented}  they  would  represent  vividly  the  uses  of
nature,  and  thereby  make  all  natural  situations
seem  so  many  incentives  to  art.


POETRY  AND  PROSE


113


Rational  poetry  is  not  wholly  unknown.  When
Homer  mentions  an  object,  how  does  he  render

it  poetical?  First,  doubtless,  by  the

An  illustration.

euphony  of  its  name  or  the  sensuous
glow  of  some  epithet  coupled  with  it.  Sometimes,
however,  c^ren  this  ornamental  epithet  is  not  merely
sensuous;  it  is  very  likely  a  patronymic,  the  name
of  some  region  or  some  mythical  ancestor.  In
other  words,  it  is  a  signal  for  widening  our  view
and  for  conceiving  the  object,  not  only  vividly  and
with  pause,  but  in  an  adequate  historic  setting.
Macj^eth  tells  us  that  his  dagger  was  ^^unman¬
nerly  breeched  in  gore.”  Achilles  would  not
have  amused  himself  with  such  a  metaphor,  even
if  breeches  had  existed  in  his  day,  but  would
rather  have  told  us  whose  blood,  on  other  occa¬
sions,  had  stained  the  same  blade,  and  perhaps
what  filler  or  mother  had  grieved  for  the  slaugh¬
tered  hero,  or  what  brave  children  remained  to
continue  his  race.  Shakespeare’s  phrase  is  in¬
genious  and  fanciful ;  it  dazzles  for  a  moment,  but
in  the  end  it  seems  violent  and  crude.  What
Homer  would  have  said,  on  the  contrary,  being
simple  and  true,  might  have  grown,  as  we  dwelt
upon  it,  always  more  noble,  pathetic,  and  poeti¬
cal.  Shakespeare,  too,  beneath  his  occasional  ab¬
surdities  of  plot  and  diction,  ennobles  his  stage
with  actual  history,  with  life  painted  to  the  quick,
with  genuine  human  characters,  politics*,  and  wis¬
dom;  and  surely  these  are  not  the  elements  that
do  least  credit  to  his  genius.  In  every  poet,  in-


114


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


deed,  there  is  some  fidelity  to  nature,  mixed  with
that  irrelevant  false  fancy  with  which  poetry  is
sometimes  identified;  and  the  degree  in  which  a
2)oet's  imagination  dominates  reality  is,  in  the
end,  the  exact  measure  of  his  importance  and
dignity.  ®

Before  prosaic  objects  are  descried,  the  volume
and  richness  needful  for  poetry  lie  in  a  blurred  and
Volume  can  Undigested  chaos;  but  after  the  com-
sV*e*bctt”  world  has  emerged  and  has  called

thaninsug-  <ui  prosc  to  describe  it,  the  same  vol-
gestion.  richness  may  be  recovered;

and  a  new  and  clarified  poeti*y  may  arise  through
synthesis.  Scope  is  a  better  thing  than  sugges¬
tion,  and  more  truly  ])oetical.  It  has  expressed
what  .suggestion  pointed  to  and  felt  in  the  bulk:
it  possesses  what  was  yearned  for.  A  real  thing,
when  all  its  pertinent  natural  associates  re  dis¬
cerned,  touches  wonder,  pathos,  and  beauty  on
every  side;  the  rational  poet  is  one  who,  without
feigning  anything  unfeal,  perceives  these  momen¬
tous  ties,  and  presents  his  suliject  loaded  with  its
whole  fate,  missing  no  source  of  worth  which  is
in  it,  no  ideal  influence  which  it  may  have.  Homer
remains,  perhaps,  the  greatest  master  in  this  art.
The  world  he  glorified  by  showing  in  how  many
ways  it  could  serve  reason  and  beauty  was  but  a
simple  world,  and  an  equal  genius  in  these  days
might  be  ‘distracted  by  the  Babel  about  him,  and
be  driven,  as  poets  now  are,  into  incidental  dreams.
Yet  the  ideal  of  mastery  and  idealisation  remains


POETRY  AND  PROSE


115


the  same,  if  any  one  could  only  attain  it:  mastery,
to  see  things  as  they  are  and  dare  to  describe  them
ingenuously;  idealisation,  to  select  from  this  real¬
ity  what  is  pertinent  to  ultimate  interests  and  can
speak  eloquently  to  the  soul.


CHAPTER  VII

«


PLASTIC  CONSTBUCTION"


We  have  seen  how  arts  founded  on  exercise


and  automatic  self-expression  develop  into  music.
Automatic  ex-  poctry,  and  prose.  By  an  indirect  ap-


pression  often
leaves  traces
in  the  outer


proaeh  they  come  to  represent  #outer
conditions,  till  they  are  interwoven  in


world.


a  life  which  has  in  some  measure  gone


out  to  meet  its  opportunities  and  learned  to  turn


them  to  an  ideal  use.  We  have  now  to  see  how


man's  reactive  habits  pass  simultaneously  into  art
in  a  wholly  different  region.  Spontaneoij/  expres¬
sion,  such  as  song,  comes  when  internal  growth  in
an  animal  system  vents  itself,  as  it  were,  by  the
way.  At  the  same  time  animal  economy  has  play¬
ful  manifestations  concerned  with  outer  things,
such  as  burrowing  or  collecting  objects.  These
practices  are  not  less  spontaneous  than  the  others,
and  no  leas  expressive;  but  they  seem  more  exter¬
nal  because  the  traces  they  leave  on  the  environ¬
ment  are  more  clearly  marked.

To  change  an  object  is  the  surest  and  most  glori¬
ous  way  of  changing  a  perception.  A  shift  in  pos¬
ture  may  relievo  the  body,  and  in  that  way  satisfy,

116


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


117


but  the  new" attitude  h  itself  unsiablo.  Its  pleas¬
antness,  like  its  existence,  is  transient,  and  scarcely
is  a  movement  executed  when  both  its  occasion  and
its  charm  are  forgotten.  Self-expression  by  exer¬
cise,  in  spite  of  its  pronounced  automatism,  is
therefore  something  comparatively  passive  and  in¬
glorious.  'A  man  has  hardly  done  anything  when
he  has  laughed  or  yawned.  Even  the  inspired
poet  retains  something  of  this  passivity:  his  work
is  not  his,  but  that  of  a  restless,  irresponsible  spirit
passing  through  him,  and  hypnotising  him  for  its
own  ends.  Of  the  result  he  has  no  profit,  no  glory,
and  J^ittlc  understanding.  So  the  mystic  also  posi¬
tively  gloats  on  his  own  nothingness,  and  puts  his
whole  genuine  being  in  a  fancied  instrumentality
and  subordination  to  something  else.  Far  more
virile  and  noble  is  the  sense  of  having  actually
done  something,  and  left  at  least  the  temporary
stamp  ^f  one^s  special  will  on  the  world.  To  chop
a  stick,  to  catch  a  fly,  to  pile  a  heap  of  sand,  is  a
satisfying  action;  for  the  sand  stays  for  a  while  in
its  novel  arrangement,  proclaiming  to  the  sur¬
rounding  level  that  we  have  made  it  our  instru¬
ment,  while  the  fly  will  never  stir  nor  the  stick
grow  together  again  in  all  eternity.  If  the  im¬
pulse  that  has  thus  left  its  indelible  mark  on
things  is  constant  in  our  own  bosom,  the  world
will  have  been  permanently  improved  and  human¬
ised  by  our  action.  Nature  cannot  but  be  more
favourable  to  those  ideas  which  have  once  found
an  efflcacious  champion.


118


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Plastic  impulses  find  in  this  way  ah  immediate
sanction  in  the  sense  of  victory  and  dominion
Such  effects  which  they  carry  with  them;  it  is  so
fruitful.  evident  a  proof  of  power  in  ourselves
to  see  things  and  animals  bent  out  of  their  habit¬
ual  form  and  obedient  instead  to  our  idea.  But
a  far  weightier  sanction  immediately  follows.
Man  r.epends  on  things  for  his  experience,  yet  by
automatic  action  ho  changes  these  very  things
so  that  it  becomes  possible  that  by  his  action  he
should  promote  his  welfare.  He  may,  of  course,
no  less  readily  precipitate  his  ruin.  The  animal  is
more  subject  to  vicissitudes  than  the  plant,  \<fhich
makes  no  effort  to  escape  them  or  to  give  chase
to  what  it  feeds  upon.  The  greater  perils  of
action,  however,  arc  in  animals  covered  partly  by
fertility,  partly  by  adaptability,  partly  by  success.
The  mere  possibility  of  success,  in  a  world  gov¬
erned  by  natural  selection,  is  an  earnest  Qf  prog¬
ress.  Sometimes,  in  impressing  the  environment,
a  man  will  improve  it:  which  is  merely  to  say  that
a  change  may  sometimes  fortify  the  impulse  which
brought  it  about.  As  soon  as  this  retroaction  is
perceived  and  the  act  is  done  with  knowledge  of  its
ensuing  benefits,  plastic  impulse  becomes  art,  and
the  world  begins  actually  to  change  in  obedience
to  reason.

One  respect,  for  instance,  in  which  man  depends
on  things  is  for  the  jEsthetic  quality  of  his  percep¬
tions.  If  he  happens,  by  a  twist  of  the  hand,  to
turn  a  flowering  branch  into  a  wreath,  thereby


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


119


making  it  more  interesting,  he  will  have  discovered
a  decorative  art  and  initiated  himself  auspiciously
into  the  practice  of  it.  Experimentation  may  fol¬
low,  and  whenever  the  new  form  given  to  the  ob¬
ject  improves  it — i.  e.,  increases  its  interest  for  the
eye — ^the  experimenter  will  triumph  and  will  con¬
gratulate  himself  on  his  genius.  The  garland  so
arranged  will  be  said  to  express  the  taste  it
satisfies;  insight  and  reason  will  he  mythically
thought  to  have  guided  the  work  by  which  they
are  sustained  in  being.  It  is  no  small  harmony,
however,  that  they  should  be  sustained  by  it.  The
consc  lances  man  introduces  into  nature  will  fol¬
low  him  wherever  ho  goes.  It  will  no  longer  be
necessary  that  nature  should  supply  them  spon¬
taneously,  by  a  rare  adventitious  harmony  with
his  demands.  His  new  habit  will  habitually  rear¬
range  her  chance  arrangements,  and  his  path  will
be  marked  by  the  beauties  he  has  strewn  it  with.
So  long  as  the  same  plastic  impulse  continues
operative  it  uill  be  accompanied  by  knowledge
and  criticism  of  its  happy  results.  Self-criticism,
being  a  second  incipient  artistic  impulse,  con¬
trasting  itself  with  the  one  which  a  work  embod¬
ies,  may  to  some  extent  modify  the  next  perform¬
ance.  If  life  is  drawn  largely  into  this  deepening
channel,  physical  proficiency  and  its  ideal  sanc¬
tions  will  develop  more  or  less  harmoniously  into
what  is  called  a  school  of  art.

The  first  felt  utilities  by  which  plastic  instinct
is  sanctioned  arc  of  course  not  distinctly  aesthetic,


120


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


V


much  less  distinctly  practical;  they  are  magical.
A  stone  cut  into  some  human  or  animal  semblance


Kagic  author¬
ity  of  man’s
first  creations.


fascinates  the  savage  eye  much  more
than  would  a  useful  tool  or  a  beautiful
idol.  The  man  wonders  at  his  own


"woTk,  and  petrifies  the  miracle  of  lys  art  into
miracrlous  properties  in  its  product.  Primitive
art  is  incredibly  conservative;  its  first  creations,
having  once  attracted  attention,  monopolise  it
henceforth  and  nothing  else  will  be  trusted  to  work
the  miracle.  It  is  a  sign  of  stupidity  in  general  to
stick  to  physical  objects  and  given  forms  apart
from  their  ideal  functions,  as  when  a  child  cries
for  a  broken  doll,  even  if  a  new  and  better  one  is
at  hand  to  replace  it.  Inert  associations  establish
themselves,  in  such  a  case,  with  that  part  of  a
thing  which  is  irrelevant  to  its  value — ^its  material
substance  or  perhaps  its  name  Art  can  make  no
progress  in  such  a  situation.  A  man  reinains  in¬
corrigibly  unhappy  and  perplexed,  cowed,  and
helpless,  because  not  intelligent  enough  to  readjust
his  actions;  his  idol  mast  be  the  self-same  hered¬
itary  stock,  or  at  least  it  must  have  the  old  sanc¬
tified  rigidity  and  stare.  Plastic  impTilse,  as  yet
sporadic,  is  overwhelmed  by  a  brute  idolatrous
awe  at  mere  existence  and  actuality.  What  is,
what  has  always  been,  what  chance  has  associated
with  one  person,  alone  seems  acceptable  or  con-
ceivablet

Idolatry  is  by  no  means  incident  to  art;  art,
on  the  contrary,  is  a  release  from  idolatry.  A


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


121


cloud,  an  animal,  a  spring,  a  stone,  or  the  whole
heaven,  will  serve  the  pure  idoIatcr^s  purpose  to
Art  brings  perfection;  these  things  have  existence
relief  from  and  a  certain  hypnotic  power,  so  that  he
idolatry  them  a  focus  for  his  dazed

contemplation.  Wlien  the  mind  takes  to  gener¬
alities  it  finds  the  same  fascination  in  Being  or  in
the  Absolute,  something  it  needs  no  art  to  discover.
The  more  indeterminate,  immediate,  and  unuttef-
ahle  the  idol  is,  the  better  it  induces  panic  self-
contraction  and  a  reduction  of  all  discourse  to  the


infinite  intensity  of'  zero.  When  idolaters  pass
from  drying  to  evoke  the  Absolutely  Existent  to
apostrophising  the  sun  or  an  ithyphailic  bull  they
have  made  an  immense  progress  in  art  and  religion,
for  now  their  idols  represent  some  specific  and
beneficent  function  in  nature,  something  pro¬
pitious  ^o  ideal  life  and  to  its  determinate  expres¬
sion.  Isaiah  is  very  scornful  of  idols  made  with
hands,  because  they  have  no  physical  energy.  He
forgets  that  perhaps  they  represent  something,  and
so  liave  a  spiritual  dignity  which  things  living  and
powerful  never  have  unless  they  too  become  rep¬
resentative  and  exi^ress  some  ideal.  Isaiah’s  con¬
ception  of  Jehovah,  for  instance,  is  itself  a  poetic
image,  the  work  of  man’s  brain;  and  the  innocent
worship  of  it  would  not  be  idolatry,  if  that  con¬
ception  represented  something  friendly  to  human
happiness  and  to  human  art.  The  question  merely
is  whether  the  sculptor’s  image  or  the  prophet’s
stands  for  the  greater  interest  and  is  a  more  ade-


122


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


quate  symbol  for  the  good.  The  noblest  art  will  be
the  one,  whether  plastic  or  literary  or  dialectical,
which  creates  figments  most  truly  representative
of  what  is  momentous  in  human  life.  Similarly
the  least  idolatrous  religion  would  be  the  one
which  used  the  most  perfect  art,  and  nyjst  success¬
fully  abstracted  the  good  from  the  real.

Conseiwatism  rules  also  in  those  manufactures
which  are  tributary  to  architecture  and  the  smaller
Inertia  in  plastic  arts.  Utility  makes  small  head-
technique.  ^ay  against  custom,  not  only  when  cus¬
tom  has  become  religion,  but  even  when  it  remains
inert  and  without  mythical  sanction.  To  ^dmit
or  trust  anything  new  is  to  overcome  that  inertia
which  is  a  general  law  in  the  brain  no  less  than
elsewhere,  and  which  may  be  distinguished  in  re¬
flection  into  a  technical  and  a  social  conservatism.
Technical  conservatism  appears,  for  instance,  in  a
man’s  handwriting,  which  is  so  seldom  iitiproved,
even  when  admitted,  perhaps,  to  be  execrable.
Every  artist  has  his  tricks  of  execution,  every
school  its  hereditary,  irrational  processes.  These
refractory  habits  are  to  blame  for  the  rare  and
inimitable  quality  of  genius;  they  impose  excel¬
lence  on  one  man  and  refuse  it  to  a  million.  A
happy  physiological  structure,  by  creating  a  man¬
nerism  under  the  special  circumstances  favourable
to  expression,  may  lift  a  man,  perhaps  inferior  in
intelligence,  to  heights  which  no  insight  can  at¬
tain  with  inferior  organs.  As  a  voice  is  necessary
for  singing,  so  a  certain  quickness  of  eye  and  hand


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


123


is  needed  for  good  execution  in  the  plastic  arts.
The  same  principle  goes  deeper.  Conception  and
imagination  are  themselves  automatic  and  run  in
grooves,  so  that  only  certain  forms  in  certain  com¬
binations  will  ever  suggest  themselves  to  a  given
designer.  .Every  writer’s  style,  too,  however  varied
within  limits,  is  single  and  monotonous  compared
with  the  ideal  possibilities  of  expression.  Genius
at  every  moment  is  confined  to  the  idiom  it  *ia
creating.

Social  inertia  is  due  to  the  same  causes  working
in  the  community  at  large.  The  fancy,  for  in-
inertia^in  ap-  stance,  of  buildiiig  churches  in  the
predation.  shape  of  a  cross  has  largely  determined
Christian  architecture.  Builders  were  prevented
by  a  foregone  suggestion  in  tliemselves  and  by
tboir  patrons’  demands  from  conceiving  any  alter-
native^to  that  convention.  Early  pottery,  they
say,  imitates  wicker-work,  and  painted  landscape
was  for  ages  not  allowed  to  exist  without  figures,
although  even  the  old  masters  show  plainly  enough
in  their  backgrounds  that  they  could  love  land¬
scape  for  its  own  sake.  When  one  link  with
humanity  has  been  rendered  explicit  and  familiar,
jxjople  assume  that  by  no  other  means  can  human¬
ity  be  touched  at  all;  even  if  at  the  same  time
their  own  heart*  is  expanding  to  the  highest  rap¬
tures  in  a  quite  different  region.  The  severer
Greeks  reprobated  music  without  wosds;  Saint
Augustine  complained  of  chants  that  rendered  the
sacred  text  unintelligible;  the  Puritans  regarded


124


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


elaborate  music  as  diabolical,  little  knowing  how
soon  some  of  their  descendants  would  find  religion
in  nothing  else.  A  stupid  convention  still  looks
on  material  and  mathematical  processes  as  some¬
how  distressing  and  ugly,  and  systems  of  philos¬
ophy,  artificially  mechanical,  arc  invented  to  try
to  expbin  natural  mechanism  away;  whereas  in  no
region  can  the  spirit  feel  so  much  at  home  as  among
natural  causes,  or  realise  so  well  its  universal  affini¬
ties,  or  so  safely  enlarge  its  happiness.  Mech¬
anism  is  the  source  of  beauty.  It  is  not  neces¬
sary  to  look  so  high  as  the  stars  to  perceive  this
truth:  the  action  of  an  animaFs  limbs  or  the  Move¬
ment  of  a  waterfall  will  i)rove  it  to  any  one  who
has  eyes  and  can  shake  himself  loose  from  verbal
prejudices,  those  debris  of  old  perceptions  which
choke  all  fresh  perception  in  the  soul.  Irration¬
al  hopes,  irrational  shames,  irrational  decencies,
make  man’s  chief  desolation.  A  slight  knocking  of
fools’  heads  together  might  be  enough  to  break  up
the  ossifications  there  and  start  the  blood  coursing
again  through  possible  channels.  Art  has  an  in¬
finite  range;  nothing  shifts  so  easily  as  taste  and
yet  nothing  so  persistently  avoids  the  directions  in
which  it  might  find  most  satisfaction.

Since  construction  grows  rational  slowly  and  by
indirect  pressure,  we  may  expect  that  its  most

Adventitious  Superficial  merits  will  be  the  first  appre-
effects  ciated.  Ultimate  beauty  in  a  building
euted  first.  would  consist,  of  course,  in  respond¬
ing  simultaneously  to  all  the  human  faculties


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


125


affected:  to  the  eye,  by  the  building’s  size,  form,
and  colour;  to  the  imagination,  by  its  fitness  and
ideal  expression.  Of  all  grounds  for  admiration
those  most  readily  seized  are  size,  elaboration,
splendour  of  materials,  and  difficulties  or  cost  in-
Yclvod.  Ifaving  built  or  dug  in  the  conventional
way  a  man  may  hang  before  his  door  some  trophy
of  battle  or  the  chase,  bearing  witness  to  his  prow¬
ess;  just  as  people  now,  not  thinking  of  making
their  rooms  beautiful,  fill  them  with  photographs
of  friends  or  places  they  have  known,  to  suggest
and  reburnish  in  their  minds  their  interesting
persf>hal  history,  which  even  they,  unstimulated,
might  tend  to  forget.  That  dwelling  will  seem
best  adorned  which  contains  most  adventitious
objects ;  bare  and  ugly  will  be  whatever  is  not  con¬
cealed  by  something  else.  Again,  a  barbarous
architect,  without  changing  his  model,  may  build
in  a  more  precious  material ;  and  his  work  will  be
admired  for  the  evidence  it  furnishes  of  wealth
and  wilfulness.  As  a  community  grows  luxurious
and  becomes  accustomed  to  such  display,  it  may
come  to  seem  strange  and  hideous  to  sec  a  wooden
plate  or  a  pewter  spoon.  A  beautiful  house  will
need  to  be  in  marble  and  the  sight  of  plebeian
brick  will  banish  all  satisfaction.

Less  irrational,  and  therefore  less  vulgar,  is  the
wonder  aroused  by  great  bulk  or  difficulty  in  the
work.  Exertions,  to  produce  a  great  result,  even
if  it  be  material,  must  be  allied  to  perseverance
and  intelligent  direction.  Roman  bridges  and


126


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


aqueducts,  for  instance,  gain  a  profound  emotional
power  when  we  see  in  their  monotonous  arches  a
symbol  of  the  mightiest  enterprise  in  history,  and
in  their  decay  an  evidence  of  its  failure.  Curi¬
osity  is  satished,  historic  imagination  is  stimulated,
tragic  reflection  is  called  forth.  We  capnot  refuse
admin!  tion  to  a  work  so  full  of  mind,  even  if  no
great  plastic  beauty  happens  to  distinguish  it.
It  is  at  any  rate  beautiful  enough,  like  the  sea  or
the  skeleton  of  a  mountain.  We  may  rely  on  the
life  it  has  made  possible  to  add  more  positive
charms  and  clothe  it  with  imaginative  functions.
Modern  engineering  works  often  have  a  fiffmilar
value;  the  force  and  intelligence  they  express  merge
in  an  aesthetic  essence,  and  the  place  they  hold  in
a  portentous  civilisation  lends  them  an  almost  epic
dignity.  New  York,  since  it  took  to  doing  busi¬
ness  in  towers,  has  become  interesting  to  look  at
from  the  sea;  nor  is  it  possible  to  walk  through  the
overshadowed  streets  without  feeling  a  pleasing
wonder.  A  city,  when  enough  people  swarm  in  it,
is  as  fascinating  as  an  ant-hill,  and  its  buildings,
whatever  other  charms  they  may  have,  are  at  least
as  curious  and  delightful  as  sea-shells  or  birds^
nests.  The  purpose  of  improvements  in  modem
structures  may  be  economic,  just  as  the  purpose  of
castles  was  military;  but  both  may  incidentally
please  the  contemplative  mind  by  their  huge  forms
and  humf«n  associations.

Of  the  two  approaches  which  barbaric  architec¬
ture  makes  to  beauty— one  through  omamenta-


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


127


tion  and  the  other  through  mass — the  latter  is  in
general  the  more  successful.  An  engineer  fights

Approach  to  nature  hand  to  hand ;  he  is  less

beauty tbrouch  easily  extravagant  than  a  decorator;’ he
^uietnic-  can  hardly  ever  afford  to  be  absurd.

,  lie  becomes  accordingly  more  rap¬
idly  civilised  and  his  work  acquires,  in  spite  of
itself,  more  rationality  and  a  more  permanent
charm.  A  self-sustaining  structure,  in  art  as 'in
life,  is  the  only  possible  basis  for  a  vital  ideal.
When  the  framework  is  determined,  when  it  is
tested  by  trial  and  found  to  stand  and  serve,  it
will  gradually  ingratiate  itself  with  the  observer;
affinities  it  may  have  in  his  memory  or  appercep¬
tive  habits  will  come  to  light;  they  will  help  him
to  assimilate  the  new  vision  and  will  define  its  a?s-
thetic  character.  Whatever  beauty  its  lines  may
have  jvill  become  a  permanent  possession  and
whatever  beauties  they  exclude  will  be  rejected  by
a  faithful  artist,  no  matter  how  sorely  at  first  they
may  tempt  him.  Not  that  these  excluded  beau¬
ties  would  not  be  really  beautiful;  like  fashions,
they  would  truly  please  in  their  day  and  very  likely
would  contain  certain  absolute  excellences  of  form
or  feeling  which  an  attentive  eye  could  enjoy  at
any  time.  Yet  if  appended  to  a  structure  they
have  no  function  in,  these  excellences  will  hardly
impose  themselves  on  the  next  builder.  Being
adventitious  they  will  remain  optional,*  and  since
fancy  is  quick,  and  exotic  beauties  are  many,  there
will  be  no  end  to  the  variations,  in  endless  direc*


128


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tions,  which  art  will  undergo.  Caprice  will  fol¬
low  caprice  and  no  style  will  be  developed.

A  settled  style  is  perhaps  in  itself  no  desider¬
atum.  A  city  that  should  be  a  bazaar  of  all  pos-
Faiiure  of  sible  architectures,  adding  a  multitude
adapted  styles.  Qf  inventions  to  sampleg  of  every

historic::!  style,  might  have  a  certain  interest;  yet
carnival  can  hardly  be  enjoyed  all  the  year  round
and  there  is  a  certain  latent  hideousness  in  mas¬
querades  in  spite  of  their  glitter.  Not  only  are
the  effects  juxtaposed  incongruous,  but  each  apart
is  usually  shallow  and  absurd.  A  perruque  can¬
not  bring  back  courtly  manners,  and  a  st^e  of
architecture,  when  revived,  is  never  quite  genuine;
adaptations  have  to  be  introduced  and  every  adap¬
tation,  the  bolder  it  is,  runs  the  greater  risk  of
being  extravagant.  Nothing  is  more  pitiable  than
the  attempts  people  make,  who  think  they  have
an  exquisite  sensibility,  to  live  in  a  house  all  of
one  period.  The  connoisseur,  like  an  uncritical
philosopher,  boasts  to  have  patched  his  dwelling
perfectly  together,  but  he  has  forgotten  himself,  its
egregious  inhabitant.  Nor  is  he  merely  a  blot  in
his  own  composition;  his  presence  secretly  infects
and  denaturalises  everything  in  it.  Ridiculous
himself  in  such  a  setting,  he  makes  it  ridiculous
too  by  his  aesthetic  pose  and  appreciations;  for
the  objects  he  has  collected  or  reproduced  were
once  used«and  prized  in  all  honesty,  when  life  and
inevitable  tradition  had  brought  them  forth,  while
now  they  are  studied  and  exhibited,  relics  of  a  dead


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


129


past  and  evidences  of  a  dead  present.  Historic
remains  and  restorations  might  well  be  used  as  one
uses  historic  knowledge,  to  serve  some  living  in¬
terest  and  equip  the  mind  for  the  undertakings  of
the  hour.  An  artist  may  visit  a  museum  but  only
a  pedant  c;^n  live  there.  Ideas  that  have  long
been  used  may  be  used  still,  if  they  remain  ideas
and  have  not  been  congealed  into  memories.  In¬
corporated  into  a  design  that  calls  for  them,  tra¬
ditional  forms  cease  to  be  incongruous,  as  words
that  still  have  a  felt  meaning  may  be  old  without
being  obsolete.  All  depends  on  men  subserving
an  actlnal  ideal  and  having  so  firm  and  genuine  an
appreciation  of  the  past  as  to  distinguish  at  once
what  is  still  serviceable  in  it  from  what  is  already
ghostly  and  dead.

An  artist  may  be  kept  true  to  his  style  either  by
ignorance  of  all  others  or  by  love  of  his  own.

This  fidelity  is  a  condition  of  prog-

ture  beautifJu  When  he  has  learned  to  appre-

norau  beauty  ciate  whatever  is  aesthetically  appre-
structural.  ,

ciable  in  his  problem,  he  can  go  on  to
refine  his  construction,  to  ennoble,  and  finally  to
decorate  it.  As  fish,  flesh,  and  fowl  have  specific
forms,  each  more  or  less  beautiful  and  adorned,  so
every  necessary  structure  has  its  specific  charac¬
ter  and  its  essential  associations.  Taking  his  cue
from  these,  an  artist  may  experiment  freely;  he
may  emphasise  the  structure  in  the  classic  manner
and  turn  its  lines  into  ornament,  adding  only  what
may  help  to  complete  and  unite  its  suggestions.


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


This  Puritanism  in  design  is  rightly  commended,
but  its  opposite  may  be  admirable  too.  We  may
admit  that  nudity  is  the  right  garment  for  the
gods,  but  it  would  hardly  serve  the  interests  of
beauty  to  legislate  that  all  mortals  should  always
go  naked.  The  veil  that  conceals  natural  imper¬
fections  may  have  a  perfection  of  its  own.  Max¬
ims  in  art  are  pernicious;  beauty  is  here  the  only
commandment.  And  beauty  is  a  free  natural  gift.
When  it  has  appeared,  we  may  perceive  that  its
influence  is  rational,  since  it  both  expresses  and
fosters  a  harmony  of  impressions  and  impulses  in
tlie  soul;  but  to  take  any  mechanism  whatev^,  and
merely  because  it  is  actual  or  necessary  to  insist
that  it  is  worth  exhibiting,  and  that  by  divine  de¬
cree  it  shall  be  pronounced  beautiful,  is  to  be  quite
at  sea  in  moral  philosophy.

Beauty  is  adventitious,  occasional,  incidental,  in
human  products  no  less  than  in  nature.  Works  of
art  are  automatic  figments  which  nature  fashions
through  man.  It  iti  impossible  they  should  he
wholly  beautiful,  as  it  is  impossible  that  they  should
offer  no  foothold  or  seed-plot  for  beauty  at  all.
Beauty  is  everywhere  potential  and  in  a  way  per¬
vasive  l>ecause  existence  itself  presupposes  a  modi¬
cum  of  harmony,  first  within  the  thing  and  then
between  the  thing  and  its  environment.  Of  this  en¬
vironment  the  observer’s  senses  are  in  this  case  an
important.part.  Man  can  with  difficulty  maintain
senses  quite  out  of  key  with  the  stimuli  furnished
by  the  outer  world.  They  would  then  be  useless


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


131

burdens  to  his  organism.  On  the  other  side,  even
artificial  structures  must  be  somehow  geometrical
or  proportional,  because  only  such  structures  hold
physically  together.  Objects  that  are  to  be  es¬
teemed  by  man  must  further  possess  or  acquire


some  function  in  his  economy;  otherwise  they
would  not  Tbe  noticed  nor  be  so  defined  as  to  be


recognisable.  Out  of  these  physical  necessities
beauty  may  grow;  but  an  adjustment  must  first
take  place  between  the  material  stimulus  and  the
sense  it  affects.  Beauty  is  something  spiritual
and,  being  such,  it  rests  not  on  the  material  con¬
stitution  of  each  existence  taken  apart,  but  on  their
conspiring  ideally  together,  so  that  each  furthers
the  other^s  endeavour.  Structure  by  itself  is  no
more  beautiful  than  existence  by  itself  is  good.
They  are  only  potentialities  or  conditions  of  ex¬
cellence.


An  architect,  when  his  main  structure  is  unin¬


teresting,  may  have  recourse  to  a  subsidiary  con-


Structtires
designed  for
display.


struction.  The  fac^ade,  or  a  part  of  it,
or  the  interior  may  still  have  a  natural
form  that  lends  itself  to  elaboration.


This  beautiful  feature  may  be  developed  so  as  to
ignore  or  even  conceal  the  rest;  then  the  visible
portion  may  be  entirely  beautiful,  like  the  ideal
human  figure,  though  no  pledges  be  given  concern¬
ing  the  anatomy  within.  Many  an  Italian  palace
has  a  false  front  in  itself  magnificent.  We  may
chance  to  observe,  however,  that  it  overtops  its
backing,  perhaps  an  amorphous  rambling  pile  in


132


7flE  LIFE  OF  REASON


quite  another  material.  What  we  admire  is  not
80  much  a  fagade  as  a  triumphal  gateway,  set  up
in  front  of  the  house  to  be  its  ambassador  to  the
world,  wearing  decidedly  richer  apparel  than  its
master  can  afford  at  home.  This  was  not  vanity
in  the  Italians  so  much  as  civility  to  the  public,  to
whose  taste  this  flattering  embassy  was  addressed.
However  our  moral  sense  may  judge  the  matter,
it  is  clear  that  two  separate  monuments  occupied
the  architect  in  such  cases,  if  indeed  inside  and
outside  were  actually  designed  by  the  same  hand.
Structure  may  appear  in  each  independently  and
may  be  frankly  enough  expressed.  The  mos^  beau¬
tiful  fagades,  even  if  independent  of  their  build¬
ing,  are  buildings  themselves,  and  since  their
construction  is  decorative  there  is  the  greater
likelihood  that  their  decoration  should  be  struc¬
tural.

In  relation  to  the  house,  however,  the  fagadc  in
such  an  extreme  case  would  be  an  abstract  orna¬
ment;  and  so,  though  the  ornament  be  structural
within  its  own  lines,  we  have  reverted  to  the  style
of  building  where  construction  is  one  thing  and
decoration  another.  Applied  ornament  has  an  in-
deflnite  range  and  there  would  be  little  profit  in
reasoning  about  it.  Philosophy  can  do  little  more
at  this  point  than  expose  the  fallacies  into  which
dogmatic  criticism  is  apt  to  fall.  Everything  is
true  decoration  which  truly  adorns,  and  everything
adorns  which  enriches  the  impression  and  pleas¬
antly  entertains  the  eye.  There  is  a  decorative  im-


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


133


pulse  as  well  as  a  sense  for  decoration.  As  I  sit
idle  my  stick  makes  meaningless  marks  upon  the
sand;  or  (what  is  nearer  to  the  usual  origin  of
ornament)  I  make  a  design  out  of  somebody’s  ini¬
tials,  or  symbolise  fantastically  something  lying  in
my  thouglits.  We  place  also  one  thing  upon
another,  the  better  to  see  and  to  think  of  two
things  at  once.

To  love  decoration  is  to  enjoy  synthesis:  in  other
words,  it  is  to  have  hungrv  senses  and  unused
Appeal  made  powers  of  attention.  This  hunger,  when
by  decoration,  cannot  well  be  fed  by  recollecting
thing*  past,  relishes  a  profusion  of  things  simul¬
taneous.  Nothing  is  so  much  respected  by  unin¬
telligent  people  as  elaboration  and  complexit,y.
They  are  simply  dazed  and  overawed  at  seeing  at
once  so  much  more  than  they  can  master.  To
overwhelm  the  senses  is,  for  them,  the  only  way  of
filling  the  mind.  It  takes  cultivation  to  appre¬
ciate  in  art,  as  in  philosophy,  the  consummate  value
of  what  is  simple  and  finite,  because  it  has  found
its  pure  function  and  ultimate  import  in  the  world.
What  is  just,  what  is  delicately  and  silently  ad¬
justed  to  its  special  office,  and  thereby  in  truth
to  all  ultimate  issu’es,  seems  to  the  vulgar  some¬
thing*  obvious  and  poor.  What  astonishes  them  is
the  crude  and  paradoxical  jumble  of  a  thousand
suggestions  in  a  single  view.  As  the  mystic  yearns
for  an  infinitely  glutted  consciousness^ that  feels
everything  at  once  and  is  not  put  to  the  incon¬
venience  of  any  longer  thinking  or  imagining,  so


134


THE  LlrE  OF  REASON


the  barbarian  craves  the  assault  of  a  myriad  sen¬
sations  together,  and  feels  replete  and  comfortable
when  a  sort  of  infinite  is  poured  into  him  without
ideal  mediation.  As  ideal  mediation  is  another
name  for  intelligence,  so  it  is  the  condition  of  ele¬
gance.  Intelligence  and  elegance  naturally  exist
together,  since  they  both  spring  from  a  subtle  sense
for  absent  and  eventual  processes.  They  are  sus¬
tained  by  exjw'rionee,  by  nicety  in  foretaste  and
selection.  Before  ideality,  however,  is  developed,
volume  and  variety  must  be  given  bodily  or  they
cannot  be  givt'n  at  all.  At  that  earlier  stage  a
furious  ornamentation  is  the  chief  vehieVi  for
beauty.

That  the  ornate  may  be  very  beautiful,  that  in
fact  what  is  to  be  completely  beautiful  needs  to
Its  natural  be  ‘^OmcllOW  Picll,  is  a  fact  of  ex¬
rights.  perience  which  further  justifies  the

above  analysis.  For  sensation  is  the  matter  of
ideas;  all  representation  is  such  only  in  its  func¬
tion;  in  its  existence  it  remains  mere  feeling.
Decoration,  by  stimulating  the  senses,  not  only
brings  a  primary  satisfaction  with  it,  independent
of  any  fhat  may  supervene,  but  it  furnishes  an
element  of  effect  which  no  higher  beauty  can  ever
render  unwelcome  or  inappropriate,  since  any
higher  beauty,  in  moving  the  mind,  must  give
it  a  certain  sensuous  and  emotional  colouring.
Decoration  is  accordingly  an  independent  art,  to
be  practised  for  its  own  sake,  in  obedience  to  ele¬
mentary  plastic  instincts.  It  is  fundamental  in


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


135


design,  for  everything  structural  or  significant
produces  in  the  first  instance  some  sensuous  im¬
pression  and  figures  as  a  spot  or  pattern  in  the  field
of  vision.  The  fortunate  architect  is  he  who‘  has,
for  structural  skeleton  in  his  work,  a  form  in  itself
decorative  and  beautiful,  who  can  carry  it  out  in  a
beautiful  material,  and  who  finally  is  suffered  to
add  so  much  decoration  as  the  eye  may  take  in
with  pleasure,  without  losing  the  expression -and
lucidity  of  the  whole.

It  is  impossi])le,  however,  to  imagine  before¬
hand  what  these  olenionts  should  bo  or  how  to
combi^io  them.  Ilic  problem  must  exist  before
its  solution  can  be  found.  The  forms  of  good
taste  and  beaut^'^  which  a  man  can  think  of  or
esteem  arc  limited  by  the  scope  of  his  previous
experience.  It  would  be  impossible  to  foresee  or
desire  a  beauty  which  had  ;mt  somehow  gri)wn  up
of  itself  and  been  recognised  receptively.  A  sat¬
isfaction  cannot  be  conceived  ideally  wlien  neither
its  organ  nor  its  occasion  has  as  yet  arisen.  TJiat
ideal  conception,  to  exist,  would  have  to  bring  both
into  play.  The  fine  arts  are  butter  to  man’s  daily
bread;  there  is  no  conceiving  or  creating  them  ex¬
cept  as  they  spring  out  of  social  exigencies.  Their
types  are  imposed  by  utility:  their  ornamentation
betrays  the  tradition  that  happens  to  envelop  and
diversify  them;  their  expression  and  dignity  are
borrowed  from  the  company  they  keep  in^the  world.

The  Greek  temple,  for  instance,  if  we  imagine
it  in  its  glory,  with  all  its  colour  and  furniture,


136


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


was  a  type  of  human  art  at  its  best,  where  decora¬
tion,  without  in  the  least  restricting  itself,  took
naturally  an  exquisitely  subordinate

Its  ftUiAZIC^  *  £  _  1  lx  *11-  T*x

with  structure  ^nd  perYasive  form ;  each  detail  had  its
in  Greek  archi- splendour  and  refinement,  yet

*®®*"”*  place  in  the  whole.  Struc¬

ture  and  decoration  were  alike  traditional  and  im¬
posed  by  ulterior  practical  or  religious  purposes;
yet,  by  good  fortune  and  by  grace  of  that  rationality
which  unified  Greek  life,  they  fell  together  easily
into  a  harmony  such  as  imagination  could  never
have  devised  had  it  been  invited  to  decree  pleasure-
domes  for  non-existent  beings.  Had  the  jGreek
gods  been  hideous,  their  images  and  fable  could
not  so  readily  have  beautified  the  place  where  they
were  honoured;  and  had  the  structural  theme  and
uses  bf  the  temple  been  more  complicated,  they
would  not  have  lent  themselves  so  well  to  decora¬
tion  without  being  submerged  beneath  it.  ’

In  some  ways  the  ideal  Gothic  church  attained
a  similar  perfection,  because  there  too  the  struc¬
ture  remained  lucid  and  predominant,  while  it
was  enriched  by  many  necessary  appointments
— altars,  stalls,  screens,  chan  tin  os — ^which,  while
really  the  raison  d^Ure  of  the  whole  edifice,  ajs-
thetically  regarded,  served  for  its  ornaments.  It
may  be  doubted,  however,  whether  Gothic  con¬
struction  was  well  grounded  enough  in  utility  to
be  a  sound  and  permanent  liasis  for  beauty;  and
the  extreme  instability  of  Gothic  style,  the  fever¬
ish  inconstancy  of  architects  straining  after  effects


;.^LASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


137


never,  apparently,  satisfactory  when  achieved,
shows  that  something  was  wrong  and  artificial  in
Relations  of  situation.  The  structure,  in  be-

the  two  in  coining  an  ornament,  ceased  to  be  any-
Gothicart.  thing  else,  and  could  be  discarded  by

any  one  wl\pse  fancy  preferred  a  different  image.

For  this  reason  a  building  like  the  cathedral
of  Amiens,  where  a  structural  system  is  put  through
consistently,  is  far  from  representing  mediaeval  art
in  its  full  and  ideal  essence;  it  is  rather  an  inciden¬
tal  achievement,  a  sport  in  which  an  adventitious
interest  is,  for  a  moment,  emphasised  overwhelm¬
ingly.  •  Intelligence  here  comes  to  the  fore,  and  a
sort  of  mathematical  virtuosity:  but  it  was  not
mathematical  virtuosity  nor  even  intelligence  to
which,  in  Christian  art,  the  leading  role  properly
belonged.  What  structural  elucidation  did  for
church  architecture  was  much  like  what  scholastic
elucidation  did  for  church  dogma:  it  insinuated
a  logic  into  the  traditional  edifice  which  was  far
from  representing  its  soul  or  its  genuine  value.
The  dialectic  introduced,  might  be  admirable  in
itself,  in  its  lay  and  abstruse  rationality;  but  it
could  not  be  applied  to  the  poetic  material  in  hand
without  rendering  it  absurd  and  sterile.  The
given  problem  was  scientifically  carried  out,  but
the  given  problem  was  itself  fantastic.  To  vault
at  such  heights  and  to  prop  that  vault  with  ex¬
ternal  buttresses  was  a  gratuitous  undertaking.
The  result  was  indeed  interesting,  the  ingenuity
and  method  exhibited  were  masterly  in  their  way;


138


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


yet  the  result  was  not  proportionate  in  beauty  to
the  effort  required;  it  was  after  all  a  technical
and  a  vain  triumph.

The  true  magic  of  that  very  architecture  lay  not
in  its  intelligible  structure  but  in  the  bewildering
The  result  incidental  effects  which  th^t  structure
here  romantic,  permitted.  The  part  in  such  churches
is  better  than  the  symmetrical  whole ;  often  incom¬
pleteness  and  accretions  alone  give  grace  or  ex¬
pression  to  the  monument.  A  cross  vista  where
all  is  wonder^  a  side  chapel  where  all  is  peace,  strike
the  key-note  here;  not  that  punctilious  and  wooden
repetition  of  props  and  arches,  as  a  builder’^  model
might  boast  to  exhibit  them.  Perhaps  the  most
beautiful  Gothic  interiors  are  those  without  aisles,
if  what  we  are  considering  is  their  proportion  and
majesty;  elsewhere  the  structure,  if  perceived  at
all,  is  too  artificial  and  strange  to  be  perceived  in¬
tuitively  and  to  have  the  glow  of  a  genuine  beauty.
There  is  an  over-ingenious  mechanism,  redeemed
by  its  colour  and  the  thousand  intervening  objects,
when  these  have  not  been  swept  away.  Glazed
and  painted  as  Gothic  churches  were  meant  to  be,
they  were  no  doubt  exceedingly  gorgeous.  When
we  admire  their  structural  scheme  we  are  per¬
haps  nursing  an  illusion  like  that  which  senti¬
mental  classicists  once  cherished  when  they  talked
about  the  purity  of  white  marble  statues  and  the
ideality  tf  their  blank  and  sightless  eyes.  What
we  treat  as  a  supreme  quality  may  have  been  a
mere  means  to  mediaeval  builders,  and  a  mechani-


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


139


cal  expedient:  their  simple  hearts  were  set  on  mak¬
ing  their  churches,  for  God’s  glory  and  their  own,
as  large,  as  high,  and  as  rich  as  jwssible.  After
all,  an  uninterrupted  tradition  attached  them  to
Byzantium;  and  it  was  the  sudden  passion  for
stained  glass  and  the  goldsmith’s  love  of  intricate
fineness — wliich  the  Saracens  also  had  shown —
that  carried  them  in  a  century  from  Romanesque
to  flamboyant.  The  structure  was  but  the. in¬
evitable  underpinning  for  the  desired  display.  If
these  sanctuaries,  in  their  spoliation  and  ruin,  now
show  us  their  admirable  bones,  we  should  thank
nature^or  that  rational  skeleton,  imposed  by  ma¬
terial  conditions  on  an  art  which  in  its  life-time
was  goaded  on  only  by  a  pious  and  local  emulation,
and  wished  at  all  costs  to  be  sumptuous  and  as¬
tonishing.

It  was  rather  in  another  direction  tliat  groping
mediaeval  art  reached  its  most  congenial  triumphs.
The  medis-  That  was  an  age,  so  to  speak,  of  epi-
vai  artist.  demic  privacy;  social  contagion  was  ir¬
resistible,  yet  it  served  only  to  make  each  man’s
life  no  less  hard,  narrow,  and  visionary  than  that
of  every  one  else.  Like  bees  in  a  hive,  each  soul
worked  in  its  separate  cell  by  the  same  impulse  as
every  other.  Each  was  absorbed  in  saving  itself
only,  but  according  to  a  universal  prescription.
This  isolation  in  unanimity  appears  in  those
patient  and  childlike  artists  who  copied  each  his
leaf  or  flower,  or  imagined  each  his  curious  angels
and  devils,  taking  what  was  told  of  them  so  much


140


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


to  heart  that  his  rendering  became  deeply  indi¬
vidual.  The  lamp  of  sacrifice — or  perhaps  rather
of  ignorance — ^burned  in  every  workshop;  much
labour  was  wasted  in  forgetfulness  of  the  function
which  the  work  was  to  perform,  yet  a  certain  pathos
and  expression  was  infused  into  the^  detail,  on
which  all  invention  and  pride  had  to  be  lavished.
Carvings  and  statues  at  impossible  elevations,  mi¬
nute  symbols  hidden  in  corners,  the  choice  for  ar¬
chitectural  ornament  of  animal  and  vegetable
forms,  copied  as  attentively  and  quaintly  as  pos¬
sible — all  this  shows  how  abstractedly  the  artist
surrendered  himself  to  the  given  task.  Ht  dedi¬
cated  his  genius  like  the  widow^s  mite,  and  left  the
universal  composition  to  Providence.

Nor  was  this  humility,  on  another  side,  wholly
pious  and  sacrificial.  The  Middle  Ages  were,  in
their  way,  merry,  sturdy,  and  mischievous.  A
fresh  breath,  as  of  convalescence,  breathed  through
their  misery.  hTever  was  spring  so  green  and
lovely  as  when  men  greeted  it  in  a  cloistered  gar¬
den,  vrith  hearts  quite  empty  and  clean,  only  half-
awakened  from  a  long  trance  of  despair.  It  mat¬
tered  little  at  such  a  moment  where  a  work  was
to  figure  or  whether  any  one  should  ever  enjoy  it.
The  pleasure  and  the  function  lay  here,  in  this
private  revelation,  in  this  playful  dialogue  between
a  bit  of  nature  and  a  passing  mood.  When  a
Greek  workman  cut  a  volute  or  a  moulding,  he  was
not  asked  to  be  a  poet;  hc»  was  merely  a  scribe,
writing  out  what  some  master  had  composed  before


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


141


him.  The  spirit  of  his  art,  if  that  was  called  forth
consciously  at  all,  could  be  nothing  short  of  intel¬
ligence.  Those  lines  and  none  other,  he  would
say  to  himself,  are  requisite  and  sufficient:  to  do
less  would  be  unskilful,  to  do  more  would  be  per¬
verse.  But  the  mediaeval  craftsman  was  irrespon¬
sible  in  his  earnestness.  The  whole  did  not  con¬
cern  him,  for  the  whole  was  providential  and
therefore,  to  the  artist,  irrelevant.  He  was.  only
responsible  inwardly,  to  his  casual  inspiration,  to
bis  individual  model,  and  his  allotted  block  of
stone.  With  these  he  carried  on,  as  it  were,  an
mgenuous  dialectic,  asking  them  questions  by  a
blow  of  the  hammer,  and  gathering  their  oracular
answers  experimentally  from  the  result.  Art,  like
salvation,  proceeded  by  a  series  of  little  miracles;
it  was  a  blind  work,  half  stubborn  patience,  half
unmerited  grace.  If  the  product  was  destined  to
fill  a  niche  in  the  celestial  edifice,  that  was  God’s
business  and  might  be  left  to  him:  what  concerned
the  sculptor  was  to-day’s  labour  and  joy,  with  the
shrcAvd  wisdom  they  might  bring  after  them.

Gothic  ornament  was  accordingly  more  than  or¬
nament;  it  was  sculpture.  To  the  architect  sculp-
Rcpresentation  ture  and  painting  are  only  means  of
introduced.  -variegating  a  surface;  light  and  shade,
depth  and  elaboration,  are  thereby  secured  and  aid
him  in  distributing  his  masses.  For  this  reason
geometrical  or  highly  conventionalised  ornament
is  all  the  architect  requires.  If  his  decorators
furnish  more,  if  they  insist  on  copying  natural


142


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


forms  or  illustrating  history,  that  is  their  own
affair.  Their  humanity  will  doubtless  give  them,
as  representative  artists,  a  new  claim  on  human
regard,  and  the  building  they  enrich  in  their  pic¬
torial  fashion  will  gain  a  new  charm,  just  as  it
would  gain  by  liistoric  associations  or  bj^  the  smell
of  incense  clinging  to  its  walls.  When  the  arts
superpose  their  effects  the  total  impression  belongs
to  none  of  them  in  particular;  it  is  imaginative
merely  or  in  the  broadest  sense  poetical.  So  the
monumental  function  of  Greek  sculpture,  and  the
interpretations  it  gave  to  national  myths,  made
every  temple  a  storehouse  of  poetic  memories  In
the  same  way  every  great  cathedral  became  a  pious
story-book.  Construction,  by  admitting  applied
decoration,  offers  a  splendid  basis  and  background
for  representative  art.  It  is  in  their  decorative
function  that  construction  and  representation
meet;  they  are  able  to  conspire  in  one  ideal  effect
by  virtue  of  the  common  appeal  which  they  un¬
wittingly  make  to  tiie  senses.  If  construction
were  not  decorative  it  could  never  ally  itself  im¬
aginatively  to  decoration;  and  decoration  in  turn
would  never  be  willingly  representative  if  the
forms  which  illustration  requires  were  not  decora¬
tive  in  themselves.

Illustration  has  nevertheless  an  intellectual
function  by  which  it  diverges  altogether  from
decoration  qnd  oven,  in  the  narrowest  sense  of  the
word,  from  art:  for  the  essence  of  illustration  lies
neither  in  use  nor  in  beauty.  The  illustrator’s


PLASTIC  CONSTRUCTION


143


impulse  is  to  reproduce  and  describe  given  ob¬
jects.  He  wishes  in  the  first  place  to  force  ob-

Transition  Servers-— overlooking  all  logical  scru-

to  iUustra-  ples — to  q^ill  liis  work  by  the  name'  of

its  subject  matter;  and  then  he  wishes
to  inform  them  further,  through  his  representa¬
tion,  and  to*  teach  them  to  apprehend  the  real  ob¬
ject  as,  in  its  natural  existence,  it  might  never
have  been  apprehended.  His  first  task  is  to  trans¬
late  the  object  faithfully  inlu  his  special  medium ;
his  second  task,  somewhat  more  ambitious,  is  so  to
penetrate  into  the  object  during  that  process  of
“  translation  that  this  translation  may  become  at  the
same  time  analytic  and  imaginati\e,  in  that  it  sig¬
nalises  the  object’s  structure  and  emphasises  its
ideal  suggobtions.  Tn  such  reproduction  both  hand
and  mind  are  called  upon  to  construct  and  build
up  a  new  apparition;  but  hero  construction  has
ceased  to  be  chiefly  decorative  or  absolute  in  order
to  become  representative.  The  aesthetic  element  in
art  has  begun  to  recede  before  the  intellectual ;  and
sensuous  effects,  while  of  course  retained  and  still
studied,  seem  to  be  impressed  into  the  service  of
ideas.


CHAPTER  VIII


PLASTIC  HEPRESENTATION

Imitation  is  a  fertile  principle  in  the  Life  of
Reason.  We  have  seen  that  it  furnishes  the  only
Psychology  rational  sanction  for  belief  in  any
of  imitation,  fellow  mind;  now  we  shall  see  how  it
creates  the  most  glorious  and  interesting  oftplastic
arts.  The  machinery  of  imitation  is  obscure  but
its  prevalence  is  obvious,  and  even  in  the  present
rudimentary  state  of  human  biology  vve  may  per¬
haps  divine  some  of  its  general  features.  In  a
motor  image  the  mind  represents  prophetically
what  the  body  is  about  to  execute:  but  all  images
are  more  or  less  motor,  so  that  no  idea,  apparently,
can  occupy  the  mind  unless  the  body  has  received
some  impulse  to  enact  the  same.  The  plastic  in¬
stinct  to  reproduce  what  is  seen  is  therefore  simply
an  uninterrupted  and  adequate  seeing;  these  two
phenomena,  separable  logically  and  divided  in
Cartesian  psychology  by  an  artificial  chasm,  are
inseparable  in  existence  and  are,  for  natural  his¬
tory,  two  parts  of  the  same  event.  That  an  image
should  e$ist  for  consciousness  is,  abstractly  re¬
garded,  a  fact  which  neither  involves  motion  nor
constitutes  knowledge;  hut  that  natural  relation

144


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


145


to  ulterior  events  which  endows  that  image  with
a  cognitive  function  identifies  it  at  the  same  time
with  the  motor  impulse  which  accompanies  the
idea.  If  the  image  involved  no  bodily  attitude  an^
prophesied  no  action  it  would  refer  to  no  eventual
existence  lyid  would  have  no  practical  meaning.
Even  if  it  meant  to  refer  to  something  ulterior  it
would,  under  those  circumstances,  miss  its  aim,
seeing  that  no  natural  relation  connected  it  With
any  object  which  could  support  or  verify  its  as¬
severations.  It  might  feel  significant,  like  a  dream,
but  its  significance  would  be  vain  and  not  really
self-tAn  seen  (lent;  for  it  is  in  the  world  of  events
that  logic  must  find  application,  if  it  cares  for  ap¬
plicability  at  all.  This  needful  bond  between  ideas
and  the  further  existences  they  forebode  is  not
merely  a  logical  postulate,  taken  on  trust  because
the  ideas  in  themselves  assert  it;  it  is  a  previous
and  genetic  bond,  proper  to  the  soil  in  which  the
idea  flourishes  and  a  condition  of  its  existence.
For  the  idciu  expresses  unawares  a  present  cerebral
event  of  which  the  ulterior  event  consciously  looked
to  is  a  descendant  or  an  ancestor ;  so  that  the  ripen¬
ing  of  that  idea,  or  its  prior  history,  leads  ma¬
terially  to  the  fact  which  the  idea  seeks  to  repre¬
sent  ideally.

In  some  such  fashion  we  may  come  to  conceive
how  imitative  art  is  simply  the  perfection  and  ful¬
filment  of  sensation.  The  act  of  appeweption  in
which  a  sensation  is  reflected  upon  and  under¬
stood  is  already  an  internal  reproduction.  The


146


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


object  is  retraced  and  gone  over  in  the  mind,  not
without  quite  perceptible  movements  in  the  limbs.

Sustained  sen-  ^hich  sway,  as  it  were,  in  sympathy
sation  involves  with  the  object’s  habit.  Presumably
reproduction,  incipient  imitation  of  the  ob¬

ject  is  the  physical  basis  for  apperception  itself;
the  stimulus,  whatever  devious  courses  it  may  pur¬
sue,  reconstitutes  itself  into  an  impulse  to  render
the  object  again,  as  we  acquire  the  accent  which
we  often  hear.  This  imitation  sometimes  has  the
happiest  results,  in  that  the  animal  fights  with  one
that  fights,  and  runs  after  one  that  runs  away  from
him.  All  this  happens  initially,  as  we  ma?/  still
observe  in  ourselves,  quite  without  thought  of
eventual  profit;  although  if  chase  loads  to  contact,
and  contact  stimulates  hunger  or  lust,  movements
important  for  preservation  will  quickly  follow.
Such  eventual  utilities,  however,  like  all  utilities,
are  supported  by  a  prodigious  gratuitous  vitality,
and  long  before  a  practical  or  scientific  use  of
sensation  is  attained  its  artistic  force  is  in  full
operation.  If  art  bo  play,  it  is  only  because  all
life  is  play  in  the  beginning.  Rational  adjust¬
ments  to  truth  and  to  benefit  supervene  only  occa¬
sionally  and  at  a  higher  level.

Imitation  cannot,  of  course,  result  in  a  literal
repetition  of  the  object  that  suggests  it.  The  copy
is  secondary;  it  does  not  iterate  the  model  by  cre¬
ating  a  second  object  on  the  same  plane  of  reality,
but  reproduces  the  form  in  a  new  medium  and
gives  it  a  different  function.  In  these  latter  cir-


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


147


cumstances  lies  the  imitative  essence  of  the  second
image:  for  one  leaf  does  not  imitate  another  nor
imitatiTe  art  is  each  twin  the  other’s  copy.  Like
totent^rri  sensibilit^%  imitation  remodels  a  given
peat,  and  in  being  SO  that  it  becomes,  in  certain
anewmatoriaL^formal  rcspects,  like  another  being
in  its  environment.  It  is  a  response  and  an  in¬
dex,  by  which  note  is  taken  of  a  situation  or  of
its  possible  developments.  When  a  man  involun¬
tarily  imitates  other  men,  he  does  not  become
those  other  persons;  he  is  simply  modified  by  their
presence  in  a  manner  that  allows  him  to  conceive
their  ^ill  and  their  independent  existence,  not
without  growing  similar  to  them  in  some  measure
and  framing  a  genuine  representation  of  them  in
his  soul.  He  enacts  what  he  understands,  and  his
understanding  consists  precisely  in  knowing  that
he  is  re-enacting  something  which  has  its  collateral
existence  elsewhere  in  nature.  An  element  in  the
percipient  repeats  the  total  movement  and  tend¬
ency  of  the  person  perceived.  The  imitation,
though  akin  to  what  it  imitates,  and  reproducing
it,  lies  in  a  different  medium,  and  accordingly  has
a  specific  individuality  and  specific  effects.  Imi¬
tation  is  far  more  than  similarity,  nor  does  its  ideal
function  lie  in  bringing  a  flat  and  unmeaning
similarity  about.  It  has  a  representative  and  in¬
tellectual  value  because  in  reproducing  the  forms
of  things  it  reproduces  them  in  a  fres^  substance
to  a  new  purpose.

If  I  imitate  mankind  by  following  their  fashions.


148


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


I  add  one  to  the  million  and  improve  nothing:  but
if  I  imitate  them  under  proper  inhibitions  and  in
the  service  of  my  own  ends,  I  really  understand
them,  and,  by  representing  \^hat  I  do  not  bodily
become,  I  preserve  and  enlarge  my  own  being  and
make  it  relevant  ideally  to  what  it  physically  de-
pend<»  upon.  Assimilation  is  a  way  *of  drifting
through  the  flux  or  of  letting  it  drift  through  one¬
self;  representation,  on  the  contrary,  is  a  principle
of  progress.  To  grow  by  accumulating  passions
and  fancies  is  at  best  to  grow  in  bulk:  it  is  to
become  what  a  colony  or  a  hydra  might  be.  But
to  make  the  accretions  which  time  brings  your
being  representative  of  what  you  are  not,  and  do
not  wish  to  be,  is  to  grow  in  dignity.  It  is  to  be
wise  and  prepared.  It  is  to  survey  a  universe
without  ceasing  to  be  a  mind.

A  product  of  imitative  sensibility  is  accordingly
on  a  higher  plane  than  the  original  existences  it  in¬
troduces  to  one  another — ^the  ignorant

Imitation  leads  .t--,,  -i.i  i

to  adaptation  individual  and  the  unknown  w'orld.


andtoknowi-  Imitation  in  softening  the  body  into
physical  adjustment  stimulates  the
mind  to  ideal  representation.  This  is  the  case
even  when  the  stimulus  is  a  contagious  influence
or  habit,  though  the  response  may  then  be  slavish
and  the  repre.sentation  vague.  Sheep  jumping  a
wall  after  their  leader  doubtless  feel  that  they  are
not  alone and  though  their  action  may  have  no
purpose  it  probably  has  a  felt  sanction  a^gid  re¬
ward.  Men  also  think  they  invoke  an  authority


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


149


when  they  appeal  to  the  quod  semper  et  ubique  et
ab  omnibus,  and  a  conscious  unanimity  is  a  human
if  not  a  rational  joy.  When,  however,  the  stimulus
to  imitation  is  not  so  jpervasivc  and  touches  chiefly
a  single  sense,  when  what  it  arouses  is  a  movement
of  the  hand  or  eye  retracing  the  object,  then  the
response  becomes  very  definitely  cognitive.  It
constitutes  an  observation  of  fact,  an  acquaintance
with  a  thing’s  structure  amounting  to  technical
knowledge;  for  such  a  survey  leaves  behind  it  a
power  to  reconstitute  the  process  it  involved.  It
leaves  an  efficaciaus  idea.  In  an  idle  moment,
*when  tjie  information  thus  acquired  need  not  be
put  to  instant  use,  the  new-born  faculty  may  work
ilself  out  spontaneously.  The  sound  heard  is  re¬
peated,  the  thing  observed  is  sketched,  the  event
conceived  is  acted  out  in  pantomime.  Then  imi¬
tation  rounds  itself  out;  an  uninhibited  sensation


has  become  an  instinct  to  keep  that  sensation
alive,  and  plastic  representation  has  begun.

The  secret  of  representative  genius  is  simple
enough.  All  hangs  on  intense,  exhaustive,  re-


How  the  artist  sensation.  To  paint  is  a  way

is  inspired  and  of  Icttiiig  vision  work ;  nor  should  the
irresponsible,  ainatcur  imagine  that  while  he  lacks


technical  knowledge  lie  can  have  in  his  possession


all  the  ideal  burden  of  an  art.  His  reaction  will


be  personal  and  adventitious,  and  ho  will  miss  the
artist’s  real  inspiration  and  ignore  his  genuine
succea$es.  You  may  instruct  a  poet  about  litera¬
ture,  but  his  allegiance  is  to  emotion.  You  may


150


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


offer  the  sculptor  your  comparative  observations  on
style  and  taste;  he  may  or  may  not  care  to  listen,
but  what  he  knows  and  loves  is  the  human  body.
Critics  are  in  this  way  always  one  stage  behind
or  beyond  the  artist;  their  operation  is  reflective
and  his  is  direct.  In  transferring  to  his  special
medium  what  he  has  before  him  his  whole  mind
is  lost  in  the  object;  as  the  marksman,  to  shoot
straight,  looks  at  the  mark.  How  successful  the  re¬
sult  is,  or  how  appealing  to  human  nature,  he  judges
afterwards,  as  an  outsider  might,  and  usually
judges  ill ;  since  there  is  no  life  less  apt  to  yield  a
broad  understanding  for  human  affairs  or  f\ven  for
the  residue  of  art  itself,  than  the  life  of  a  man
inspired,  a  man  absorbed,  as  the  genuine  artist
is,  in  his  own  travail.  But  into  this  travail,  into
this  digestion  and  reproduction  of  the  thing  seen,
a  critic  can  hardly  enter.  Having  himself  the
ulterior  office  of  judge,  he  must  not  hope  to  rival
nature’s  children  in  their  sportiveness  and  intui¬
tion.

In  an  age  of  mor.il  confusion,  these  circum¬
stances  may  lead  to  a  strange  shifting  of  roles.
The  critic,  feeling  that  something  in  the  artist  has
escaped  him,  may  labour  to  })ut  himself  in  the
artist’s  place.  If  he  succeeded,  the  result  would
only  be  to  make  him  a  biographer;  he  would  be
describing  in  words  the  very  intuitions  which  the
artist  had  rendered  in  some  other  medium.  To
understand  how  the  artist  felt,  however,  is  not
criticism;  criticism  is  an  investigation  of  what  the


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


151


work  is  good  for.  Its  function  may  be  chiefly  to
awaken  certain  emotions  in  the  beholder,  to  deepen
in  him  certain  habits  of  apperception;  but  even
this  most  aesthetic  Qlement  in  a  work’s  operation
does  not  borrow  its  value  from  the  possible  fact
that  the  artist  also  shared  those  habits  and  emo¬
tions.  If  he  did,  and  if  they  are  desirable,  so  mucli
the  better  for  him;  but  his  work’s  value  would
still  consist  entirely  in  its  power  to  propagate  su(;h
good  effects,  whether  they  were  already  present  in
him  or  not.  All  criticism  is  therefore  moral,  since


it  deals  with  benefits  and  their  relative  weight.

*Psycho4ogical  penetration  and  reconstructed  biog¬
raphy  may  be  excellent  sport;  if  they  do  not  reach
historic  truth  they  may  at  least  exercise  dramatic
talent.  Criticism,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  serious
and  public  function;  it  shows  the  race  assimilating
the  individual,  dividing  the  immortal  from  the
mortal  part  of  a  soul.

Representation  naturally  repeats  those  objects
which  are  most  interesting  in  themselves.  Even

Need  of  know  medium,  when  a  choice  is  possible,
ingand  loving  is  iisually  determined  by  the  sort  of  ob-


the  subject
rendered.


jects  to  be  reproduced.  Instruments
lose  their  virtue  with  their  use  and  a


medium  of  representation,  together  with  its  ma¬
nipulation,  is  nothing  but  a  vehicle.  It  is  fit  if  it
makes  possible  a  good  rendition.  All  accordingly
hangs  on  what  life  has  made  interestiijg  to  the
eenses,  on  what  presents  itself  persuasively  to  the
artist  for  imitation;  and  living  arts  exist  only  while


152


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


well-known,  much-loved  things  imperatively  de¬
mand  to  be  copied,  so  that  their  reproduction  has
some  honest  non-sesthetic  interest  for  mankind.
Although  subject  matter  is  often  said  to  be  indif¬
ferent  to  art,  and  an  artist,  when  his  art  is  sec¬
ondary,  may  think  of  his  technique  only,  nothing
is  really  so  poor  and  melancholy  as  alt  that  is  in¬
terested  in  itself  and  not  in  its  subject.  If  any
remnant  of  inspiration  or  value  clings  to  such  a
performance,  it  comes  from  a  surviving  taste  for
something  in  the  real  world.  Thus  the  literature
that  calls  itself  purely  aisthctic  is  in  truth  prurient ;
without  this  half-avowed  weakness  to  pla,v  upon,*"
the  coloured  images  evoked  would  have  bad  noth¬
ing  to  marshall  or  to  sustain  them.

A  good  way  to  understand  schools  and  styles
and  to  appreciate  their  respective  functions  and

PubUc  inter-  ^uccesses  is  to  Consider  first  what  re-
ests  determine  gioii  of  nature  preoccupied  the  age  in
art^d^hc*^  which  thoy  arose.  Perception  can  cut
subject  the  the  world  up  into  many  patterns,  which
medium.  isolates  and  dignifies  with  the  name

of  things.  It  must  distinguish  before  it  can  re¬
produce  and  the  objects  which  attention  distin¬
guishes  are  of  many  strange  sorts.  Thus  the
single  man,  the  hero,  in  his  acts  of  prowess  or  in
his  readiness,  may  be  the  unit  and  standard  in  dis¬
course.  It  will  then  be  his  image  that  will  pre¬
occupy  the  arts.  For  such  a  task  the  most  ade¬
quate  art  is  evidently  sculpture,  for  sculpture  is
the  most  complete  of  imitations.  In  no  other  art


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


153


can  apprehension  render  itself  so  exhaustively  and
with  such  recuperative  force.  Sculpture  retains
form  and  colour,  with  all  that  both  can  suggest,
and  it  retains  them*  in  their  integrity,  leaving  the
observer  free  to  resurvey  them  from  any  point  of
view  and  drink  in  their  quality  exhaustively.

Tlie  movement  and  speech  which  are  wanting,
the  stage  may  be  called  upon  to  supply;  but  it  can-

Reproduction  s^PP^y  thcm  without  a  terrible  sac-
hj  acting  rificc,  for  it  cannot  give  permanence  to
ephemera^  its  expression.  Acting  is  for  this  rea¬
son  an  inferior  art,  not  perhaps  in  difficulty  and
certaiwly  not  in  effect,  but  inferior  in  dignity,
since  the  effort  of  art  is  to  keep  what  is  interesting
in  existence,  to  recreate  it  in  the  eternal,  and  this
ideal  is  half  frustrated  if  the  represent ation  is  itself
fleeting  and  the  rendering  has  no  firmer  subsis¬
tence  than  the  inspiration  that  gave  it  birth.  By
making  himself,  almost  in  his  entirety,  the  medium
of  his  art,  the  actor  is  morally  diminished,  and  as
little  of  him  remains  in  his  work,  when  this  is
good,  as  of  his  work  in  history.  lie  lends  himself
without  interest,  and  after  being  Brutus  at  one
moment  and  Falstaff  at  another,  he  is  not  more
truly  himself.  lie  is  abolished  by  his  creations,
which  nevertheless  cannot  survive  him.

Being  so  adequate  a  rendering  of  its  object,
sculpture  demands  a  perfect  mastery  over  it  and
High  demands  is  Correspondingly  difficult.  Jt  requires
of  sculpture,  taste  and  training  above  every  other

art;  for  not  only  must  the  material  form  he  repro-


154


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


cluced,  but  its  motor  suggestions  and  moral  expres¬
sion  must  be  rendered;  things  which  in  the  model
itself  are  at  best  transitory,  and  which  may  never
be  found  there  if  a  heroic  or  ideal  theme  is  pro¬
posed.  The  sculptor  is  obliged  to  have  caught
on  the  wing  attitudes  momentarily  |ichieved  or
vaguely  imagined;  yet  these  must  grow  firm  and
harmonious  under  his  hand.  Nor  is  this  enough;
for  sculpture  is  more  dependent  than  other  arts  on
its  model.  If  the  statue  is  to  be  ideal,  i.  e.,  if  it
is  to  express  the  possible  motions  and  vital  charac¬
ter  of  its  subject,  the  model  must  itself  be  refined.,
Training  must  have  cut  in  the  flesh  tho^e  lines
which  are  to  make  the  language  and  eloquence  of
the  marble.  Trivial  and  vulgar  forms,  such  as
modern  sculpture  abounds  in,  reflect  an  undis¬
ciplined  race  of  men,  one  in  which  neither  soul
nor  body  has  done  anything  well,  because  the  two
have  done  nothing  togetiier.  The  frame  has  re¬
mained  gross  or  awkward,  while  the  face  has  taken
on  a  tense  expression,  betraying  loose  and  undig¬
nified  habits  of  mind.  To  carve  such  a  creature
is  to  perpetuate  a  caricature;.  The  modern  sculp¬
tor  is  stopped  short  at  the  first  conception  of  a
figure;  if  he  gives  it  its  costume,  it  is  grotesque;
if  he  strips  it,  it  is  unmeaning  and  pitiful.

Greece  was  in  all  these  respects  a  soil  singu¬
larly  favourable  to  sculpture.  The  success  there
It  is  essen-  ‘  achieved  was  so  conspicuous  that  two
tiaiiy  obsolete,  thousand  years  of  essential  superfluity

have  not  availed  to  extirpate  the  art.  Plastic  im-


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


155


pulse  is  indeed  immortal,  and  many  a  hand,  even
without  classic  example,  would  have  fallen  to  mod¬
elling.  In  the  middle  ages,  while  monumental
sculpture  was  still  rudely  reminiscent,  ornamental
carving  arose  spontaneously.  Yet  at  every  step
the  experimental  sculptor  would  run  up  against
disaster.  ^That  could  be  seen  in  the  streets,  while
it  offered  plenty  of  subjects,  offered  none  that
could  stimulate  his  talent.  His  patrons  asked  only
for  illustration  and  applied  ornament;  his  models
offered  only  the  smirk  and  sad  humour  of  a  stunted
life.  Here  and  there  his  statues  might  attain  a
certain  sweetness  and  grace,  such  as  painting  might
perfectly  well  have  rendered;  but  on  the  whole
sculpture  remained  decorative  and  infantile.

The  Renaissance  brought  back  technical  freedom
ajid  a  certain  inspiration,  unhappily  a  retrospective
and  exotic  one.  The  art  cut  praiseworthy  capers
in  the  face  of  the  public,  but  nobody  could  teach
the  public  itself  to  dance.  If  several  great  tem¬
peraments,  under  the  auspices  of  fashion,  could
then  call  up  a  magic  world  in  which  bodies  still
spoke  a  heroic  language,  that  was  a  passing
dream.  Society  could  not  feed  such  an  artificial
passion,  nor  the  schools  transmit  an  arbitrary  per¬
sonal  style  that  responded  to  nothing  permanent
in  social  conditions.  Academies  continued  to
offer  prizes  for  sculpture,  the  nude  continued  to
be  seen  in  studios,  and  equestrian  or  otJjer  rhetori¬
cal  statues  continued  occasionally  to  be  erected  in
public  squares.  Heroic  sculpture,  however,  in


156


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


modern  society,  is  really  an  anomaly  and  confesses
as  much  by  being  a  failure.  No  personal  talent
avails  to  rescue  an  art  from  laboured  insignificance
when  it  has  no  steadying  function  in  the  moral
world,  and  must  waver  between  caprice  and  con¬
vention.  Where  something  modest  and  genuine
peeped  out  was  in  portraiture,  and  also  at  times  in
that  devotional  sculpture  in  wood  which  still  re¬
sponded  to  a  native  interest  and  consequently  kept
its  sincerity  and  colour.  Pious  images  may  be
feeble  in  the  extreme,  but  they  have  not  the  weak¬
ness  of  being  merely  assthetic.  The  purveyor  of
church  wares  has  a  stated  theme;  he  is  employed
for  a  purpose;  and  if  he  has  enough  technical  re¬
source  his  work  may  become  truly  beautiful:
which  is  not  to  say  that  he  will  succeed  if  his  con¬
ceptions  are  without  dignity  or  his  style  without
discretion.  There  arc  good  Mater  dolorosas;  there
is  no  good  Sacred  Heart.

It  may  happen,  however,  that  people  are  not  in¬
terested  in  subjects  that  demand  or  allow  ropro-
Whenmen  duction  in  bulk.  The  isolated  figure
see  groups  and  or  simple  group  may  seem  cold  apart

they^natu-  from  its  natural  setting.  In  rendering
rai  painters,  action  you  may  need  to  render  its

scene,  if  it  is  the  circumstance  that  gives  it  value
rather  than  the  hero.  You  may  also  wish  to  trace
out  the  action  through  a  series  of  episodes  with
many  figures.  In  the  latter  case  you  might  have
recourse  to  a  bas-relief,  which,  although  durable,
is  usually  a  thankless  work ;  there  is  little  in  it  that
might  not  be  conveyed  in  a  drawing  with  distinct-


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


157


ness.  As  some  artists,  like  Michael  Angelo,  have
carried  the  sculptor's  spirit  into  painting,  many
more,  when  painting  is  the  prevalent  and  natural
art,  have  produced  9arved  pictures.  It  may'  be
said  that  any  work  is  essentially  a  picture  which
is  conceived  from  a  single  quarter  and  meant  to
be  looked  only  in  one  light.  Objects  in  such  a
case  need  not  bo  so  truly  apperceived  and  appro¬
priated  as  they  would  have  to  be  in  true  sculpture.
One  aspect  suffices:  the  subject  presented  is  not  so
much  constructed  as  dreamt.

The  whole  history  of  painting  may  be  strung  on
this  si]|gle  thread — the  eifort  to  reconstitute  im-
Evoiutionof  pressions,  first  the  dramatic  impression
palatine.  and  then  the  sensuous.  A  summary
and  symbolic  representation  of  things  is  all  that  at
first  is  demanded;  the  point  is  to  describe  some¬
thing  pictorially  and  recall  people’s  names  and  ac¬
tions.  It  is  characteristic  of  archaic  painting  to  be
quite  discursive  and  symbolic;  each  figure  is  treated
separately  and  stuck  side  by  side  ivith  the  others
upon  a  golden  ground.  The  painter  is  here  smoth¬
ered  in  the  recorder,  in  the  annalist;  only  those
perceptions  are  allowed  to  stand  which  have  indi¬
vidual  names  or  chronicle  facts  mentioned  in  the
story.  But  vision  is  really  more  sensuous  and  rich
than  report,  if  art  is  only  able  to  hold  vision  in
suspense  and  make  it  explicit.  When  painting  is
still  at  this  stage,  and  is  employed  on  hieroglyph¬
ics,  it  may  reach  the  maximum  of  decorative  splen¬
dour.  Whatever  sensuous  glow  finer  representa¬
tions  may  later  acquire  will  be  not  sensuous  merely,


158


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


but  poetical;  Titians,  Murillos,  or  Turners  are  eoU
ourists  in  representation,  and  their  canvases  would
not  be  particularly  warm  or  luminous  if  they  rep¬
resented  notliing  human  or,  mystical  or  atmos¬
pheric.  A  stained-glass  window  or  a  wall  of  tiles
can  outdo  them  for  pure  colour  and  decorative
magic.  Leaving  decoration,  ‘  cc.irdin^ly,  to  take
care  of  itself  and  be  applied  as  sense  may  from
time  to  time  require,  painting  gotfi  on  to  elaborate
the  symbols  with  which  it  begins,  to  make  them
symbolise  more  and  more  of  what  their  object  con
tains.  A  catalogue  of  persons  will  into  a
group,  a  group  will  be  fused  into  a  dn^maiic
action.  Conventional  as  the  separate  figures'  may
still  be,  their  attitudes  and  relations  w  recoi  -
stitute  the  dramatic  impression.  The  event  will
be  rendered  in  its  own  language;  it  will  not,  to  be
recognised,  have  to  appeal  to  words.  Thus  a  sym¬
bolic  crucifixion  is  a  crucifixion  only  because
know  by  report  that  it  is;  a  plastic  crucifixion
would  first  teach  us,  on  the  contrary,  ^  hat  a  real
crucifixion  might  be.  It  only  n  mains  to  supply
the  aerial  medium  and  make  dramatic  truth  sen¬
suous  truth  also.

To  work  up  a  sensation  intellectually  and  re¬
awaken  all  its  passionate  associations  is  to  reach  a

Sensuous  and  more  exciting  sensation  which

dramatic  we  Call  emotion  or  thought.  As  in
adequacy  poetry  there  are  two  stages,  one  preg-
nant  and  prior  to  prose  and  another
posterior  and  synthetic,  so  in  painting  we  have  not


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


159


only  a  reversion  to  sense  but  an  ulterior  synthesis
of  the  sensuous,  its  interpretation  in  a  dramatic  or
poetic  vision.  Archaic  paintSng,  with  its  abstract
rendering  of  sepai  things,  is  the  prose  of  design.
It  would  not  be  bea  utiful  at  all  but  for  its  colour
and  technical  ^Viing — that  expression  of  candour
and  satisfaction  Wi  ieh  may  pervade  it,  as  it  might
a  La,../i  -hynie  Tc  jrrcct  this  thinness  and  dis¬
location,  ti*  T'-;  !  life  without  losing  significance,

‘raindng  iii-Ut  roceed  to  accumulate  symbol  upon
boj,  1  th  original  impression  is  almost  re-
stt  ,  out  restored  that  it  contains  all  the  ar-
".iation  which  a  thorough  analysis  had  given  it.
.  pa‘  ‘ting  as  Tintoretto’s  or  Paolo  Veronese’s
•  Tipressions  as  a  cultivated  sense  might  re-

'  -c  tiien  It  glow's  wiP"*  visible  light  and  studies
the  sensuous  appearance,  but  it  contains  at  the
same  time  an  intellig'ut  expression  of  all  those
mech*?nisms,  d  situations  and  passions,  with
which  the  liv.  w^rld  is  diversified.  It  is  not  a
design  in  ipots,  meant  merely  to  outdo  a  sunset;
it  is  a  richn'  Ireain  of  experience,  meant  to  out¬
shine  th^  reality.

In  order  to  reconstitute  the  image  we  may  take
an  a  Aract  representation  or  hieroglyphic  and
gradualb'  increase  its  depth  and  its  scope.  As  the
painter  becomes  aware  of  what  at  first  he  had
ignored,  he  adds  colour  to  outline,  modelling  to
colour,  and  finally  an  observant  renderi^jg  of  tints
and  values.  This  process  gives  back  to  objects
their  texture  and  atmosphere,  and  the  space  in


160


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


which  they  lie.  From  a  representation  which  is
statuesque  in  feeling  and  which  renders  figures  by
furnishing  a  visible  inventory  of  their  parts  and
attributes,  the  artist  passes  to  ponsidering  his  fig¬
ures  more  and  more  as  parts  of  a  whole  and  as
moving  in  an  ambient  ether.  They  tend  accord¬
ingly  to  lose  their  separate  emphasis,  fh  order  to
be  like  flowers  in  a  field  or  trees  in  a  forest.  They
become  elements,  interesting  chiefly  by  their  in¬
terplay,  and  shining  by  a  light  which  is  mutually
reflected.


When  this  transformation  is  complete  the  paint¬
ing  is  essentially  a  landscape.  It  may  not  ^epre-
Essence  of  precisely  the  open  country:  it  may

landscape-  eveu  depict  an  interior,  like  Velas-
painting.  quez^s  Meiiiiias.  But  the  observer,  even
in  the  p:ftsence  of  men  and  artificial  objects,  has
been  overcome  by  the  medium  in  which  they  swim,
lie  is  seeing  the  air  and  what  it  happens  to  hold.
He  is  impartially  recreating  from  within  all  that
nature  puts  before  him,  quite  as  if  his  imagination
had  become  their  diffused  material  substance.


Whatever  individuality  and  moral  value  these  bits
of  substance  may  have  they  acquire  for  him,  as
for  nature,  incidentally  and  by  virtue  of  ulterior
relations  consequent  on  their  physical  being.  If
this  physical  being  is  wholly  expressed,  the  human¬
ity  and  morality  involved  will  be  expressed  like¬
wise,  even,  if  expressed  unawares.  Thus  a  pro¬
found  and  omnivorous  reverie  overflows  the  mind;
it  devours  its  objects  or  is  absorbed  into  them,  and


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


161


the  mood  which  this  active  self-alienation  brings
with  it  is  called  the  spirit  of  the  scene,  the  senti¬
ment  of  the  landscape.

Perception  and  art.^  in  this  phase,  easily  grow
mystical ;  they  are  readily  lost  in  primordial  phys¬
ical  sympathies.  Although  at  first  a  certain  articu^
lation  and  dfscursiveness  may  be  retained  in  the
picture,  so  that  the  things  seen  in  their  atmos¬
phere  and  relations  may  still  be  distinguished
clearly,  the  farther  the  impartial  absorption  in
them  goes,  the  more  what  is  inter-individual  rises
fmd  floods  the  individual  over.  All  becomes  light
and  depth  and  air,  and  those  particular  objects
threaten  to  vanish  which  we  had  hoped  to  make
luminous,  breathing,  and  profound.  The  initi¬
aled  eye  sees  so  many  nameless  tints  and  sur¬
faces,  that  it  can  no  longer  select  any  Creative
•limits  for  things.  There  cease  to  be  fixed  out¬
lines,  continuous  colours,  or  discrete  existences  in
nature.

An  artist,  however,  cannot  afford  to  forget  that
even  in  such  a  case  units  and  divisions  would  have

Its  threatened  to  be  introduced  by  him  into  his  work,
dissolution.  A.  man,  in  falling  back  on  immediate

reality,  or  immediate  appearance,  may  well  feel  his
mind^s  articulate  grammar  losing  its  authority,  but
that  grammar  must  evidently  be  reasserted  if  from
the  immediate  he  ever  wishes  to  rise  again  to  ar¬
ticulate  mind;  and  art,  after  all,  exists  for  the
mind  and  must  speak  humanly.  If  we  crave  some¬
thing  else,  we  have  not  so  far  to  go:  there  is  always


162


THE  Lli'E  OF  REASON


the  infinite  about  us  and  the  animal  within  us  to
absolve  us  from  human  distinctions.

Moreover,  it  is  not  quite  true  that  the  imme¬
diate  has  no  real  diversity.  Jt  evidently  suggests
the  ideal  terms  into  which  we  divide  it,  and  it  sus-
tifins  our  apprehension  itself,  with  all  the  diver¬
sifies  this  may  create.  To  what  T  call  right  and
left,  light  and  darkness,  a  real  opposition  must
correspond  in  any  reality  which  is  at  all  relevant
to  my  experience;  so  that  I  should  fail  to  integrate
my  impression,  and  to  absorb  the  only  reality  that
concerns  me,  if  I  obliterated  those  points  of  refer¬
ence  which  originally  made  the  world  figured  and
visible.  Space  remains  absolutely  dark,  for  all  the
infinite  light  which  we  may  declare  to  be  radiating
through  it,  until  this  light  is  concentrated  in  one
body  or  reflected  from  another;  and  a  landscape
cannot  be  so  much  as  vaporous  unless  mists  are
distinguishable  in  it,  and  through  them  some
known  object  which  they  obscure.  In  a  word,
landscape  is  alv/ays,  in  spite  of  itself,  a  collection
of  particular  representations.  It  is  a  mass  of
hieroglyphics,  each  the  graphic  symbol  for  some
definite  human  sensation  or  reaction;  only  these
symbols  have  been  extraordinarily  enriched  and
are  fused  in  representation,  so  that,  like  instru¬
ments  in  an  orchestra,  they  are  merged  in  the
voluminous  sensation  they  constitute  together,  a
sensation  i.n  which,  for  attentive  perception,  they
never  cease  to  exist.

Impatience  of  such  control  as  reality  must


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


163


always  exercise  over  representation  may  drive

Revenionto  P^^^ing  back  to  a  simpler  function,
pure  decora-  When  a  designer,  following  his  own
tive  design,  automatic  impulse,  conventionalises  a

form,  he  makes  a  legifimate  exchange,  substituting
fidelity  to  his  apperceptive  instincts  for  fidelity
to  his  external  impressions.  When  a  landscape-
painter,  revolting  against  a  tedious  discursive
style,  studies  only  masses  of  colour  and  abstract
systems  of  lines,  he  retains  something  in  itself
beautiful,  although  no  longer  representative,  per¬
haps,  of  anything  in  nature.  A  pure  impression
cannot  Jje  illegitimate;  it  cannot  be  false  until  it
pretends  to  represent  something,  and  then  it  will
have  ceased  to  be  a  simple  feeling,  since  something
in  it  will  refer  to  an  ulterior  existence,  to  which  it
ought  to  conform.  This  ulterior  existence  (since
intelligence  is  life  understanding  its  own  condi¬
tions)  can  be  nothing  in  the  end  but  what  pro¬
duced  that  impression.  Sensuous  life,  however,
has  its  value  within  itself;  its  jdeasurcs  are  not  sig¬
nificant.  Representative  art  is  accordingly  in  a
Ktuisc  secondary  ;  beaut}'’  and  expression  begin
farther  back.  They  are  present  whenever  the
outer  stimulus  agreeably  strikes  an  organ  and
thereby  arouses  a  sustained  image,  in  which  the
consciousness  of  both  stimulation  and  reaction  is
embodied.  An  abstract  design  in  outline  and
colour  will  amply  fulfil  these  conditions,  if  sen¬
suous  and  motor  harmonies  are  preserved* in  it,  and
if  a  sufficient  sweep  and  depth  of  reaction  is  se-


164


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


cured.  Stained-glass,  tapestry,  panelling,  and  in
a  measure  all  objects,  by  their  mere  presence  and
distribution,  have  a  decorative  function.  When
sculpture  and  painting  cease  to  be  representative
they  pass  into  the  same  category.  Decoration  in
turn  merges  in  construction;  and  so  all  art,  like
the  whole  Life  of  Reason,  is  joined  together  at  its
roots,  and  branches  out  from  the  vital  processes  of
sensation  and  reaction.  Diversity  arises  centrifu-
gally,  according  to  the  provinces  explored  and  the
degree  of  mutual  cheeking  and  control  to  which
the  various  extensions  arc  subjected.

Organisation,  both  internal  and  adaptive,  marks
the  dignity  and  authority  which  each  art  may  have
Sensuous  vai-  attained;  but  this  advantage,  important
uesare^pri-^  as  it  must  seem  to  a  philosopher  or  a

so  indispens-  legislator,  is  not  what  the  artist  chiefly
able.  considers.  His  privilege  is  to  remain^

capricious  in  his  response  to  the  full-blown  uni¬
verse  of  science  and  passion,  and  to  be  still  sensuous
in  his  highest  imaginings.  He  cares  for  structure
only  when  it  is  naturally  decorative.  He  thinks
gates  were  invented  for  the  sake  of  triumphal
arches,  and  forests  for  the  sake  of  poets  and  deer.
Representation,  with  all  it  may  represent,  means
to  him  simply  what  it  says  to  his  emotions.  In
all  this  the  artist,  though  in  one  sense  foolish,  in
another  way  is  singularly  sane ;  for,  after  all,  every¬
thing  must  pass  through  the  senses,  and  life,  what¬
ever  its  "complexity,  remains  always  primarily  a
feeling.


PLASTIC  REPRESENTATION


165


To  render  this  feeling  delightful,  to  train  the
senses  to  their  highest  potency  and  harmony  in
operation,  is  to  begin  life  well.  Were  the  founda¬
tions  defective  and  subject  to  internal  strain  there
could  be  little  souAdness  in  the  superstructure.
/15sthetic  activity  is  far  from  being  a  late  or  adven¬
titious  ornament  in  human  economy;  it  is  an  ele¬
mentary  factor,  the  perfection  of  an  indispensable
vehicle.  Whenever  science  or  morals  have  done

ft

violence  to  sense  they  have  decreed  their  own  dis¬
solution.  To  sense  a  rebellious  appeal  will  pres¬
ently  be  addressed,  and  the  appeal  will  go  against
•rash  and  empty  dogmas.  A  keen  aesthetic  sensi¬
bility  and  a  flourishing  art  mark  the  puberty  of
reason.  Fertility  comes  later,  after  a  marriage
with  the  practical  world.  But  a  sensuous  ripening
is  needed  first,  such  as  myth  and  ornament  betray
in  their  exuberance.  A  man  who  has  no  feeling
for  feeling  and  no  felicity  in  expression  will  hardly
know  what  he  is  about  in  his  further  undertakings,
lie  will  have  missed  his  first  lesson  in  living  spon¬
taneously  and  well.  Not  knowing  himself,  he  will
be  all  hearsay  and  pedantry.  He  may  fall  into  the
superstition  of  supposing  that  what  gives  life  value
can  be  something  external  to  life.  Science  and
morals  are  themselves  arts  that  express  natural
impulses  and  find  experimental  rewards.  This
fact,  in  betraying  their  analogy  to  aesthetic  activity,
enables  them  also  to  vindicate  their  excellence


CHAPTEB  IX

(f

JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART

It  is  no  longer  the  fashion  among  philosophers
to  decry  art.  Either  its  influence  seems  to  them
Art  is  subject  slight  to  excite  alarm,  or  their  sys-
to  moral  cen-  tems  are  too  lax  to  subject  anything  to
sorship.  censure  which  has  the  least  glamour  or
ideality  about  it.  Tired,  perhaps,  of  daily  resolv¬
ing  the  conflict  between  science  and  religion,  they
prefer  to  assume  silently  a  harmony  between  mor¬
als  and  art.  Moral  harmonies,  however,  are  not
given;  they  have  to  be  made.  The  curse  of  super¬
stition  is  that  it  justifies  and  protracts  their  ab¬
sence  by  proclaiming  their  invisible  presence.  Of
course  a  rational  religior  could  not  conflict  with  a
rational  science;  and  similarly  an  art  that  was
wholly  admirable  W'ould  necessarily  play  into  the
hands  of  progress.  But  as  the  real  difficulty  in
the  former  case  lies  in  saying  what  religion  and
what  science  would  be  truly  rational,  so  here  the
problem  is  how  far  extant  art  is  a  benefit  to  man¬
kind,  and  how  far,  perhaps,  a  vice  or  a  burden.

That  art  is  prima  facie  and  in  itself  a  good
cannot  be  doubted.  It  is  a  spontaneous  activity,

166


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


167


and  that  settles  the  question.  Yet  the  function
of  ethics  is  precisely  to  revise  prima  facie  judg-

its  initial  or  kind  and  to  fix  the  ulti-

specificex-  mate  resultant  of  all  given  interests,

ceiience  is  not  f^j.  jjg  be  combined.  In

enough.  _

the  actual  disarray  of  human  life  and
desire,  wisd^im  consists  in  knowing  what  goods  to
sacrifice  and  what  simples  to  pour  into  the  supreme
mixture.  The  extent  to  which  aesthetic  values  are
allowed  to  colour  the  resultant  or  highest  good  is
a  point  of  great  theoretic  importance,  not  only
for  art  but  for  general  philosophy.  If  art  is  ex¬
cluded  altogether  or  given  only  a  trivial  role,  per¬
haps  as  a  necessary  relaxation,  we  feel  at  once
that  a  philosophy  so  judging  human  arts  is  ascetic
or  post-rational.  It  pretends  to  guide  life  from
above  and  from  without;  it  has  discredited  human
nature  and  mortal  interests,  and  has  thereby  under¬
mined  itself,  since  it  is  at  best  but  a  partial  ex¬
pression  of  that  humanity  which  it  strives  to
transcend.  If,  on  the  contrary,  art  is  prized  as
something  supreme  and  irresponsible,  if  the  poetic
and  mystic  glow  which  it  may  bring  seems  its  own
complete  justification,  then  philosophy  is  evidently
still  prcrational  or,  rather,  non-existent;  for  the
beasts  that  listened  to  Orpheus  belong  to  this
school.

To  he  bewitched  is  not  to  be  saved,  though  all
the  magicians  and  ajsthetes  in  the  world  should
pronounce  it  to  be  so.  Intoxication  is  a‘  sad  busi¬
ness,  at  least  for  a  philosopher;  for  you  must  either


168


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


drown  yourself  altogether,  or  else  when  sober  again
you  will  feel  somewhat  fooled  by  yesterday’s  joys
and  somewhat  lost  in  to-day’s  vacancy.  The  man
who  would  emancipate  art  from  discipline  and  rea¬
son  is  trying  to  elude  rationality,  not  merely  in  art,
but  in  all  existence.  He  is  vexed  at  conditions  of
exc  ellence  that  make  him  conscious 'of  his  own
incompetence  and  failure.  Rather  than  consider
his  function,  he  proclaims  his  self-sufficiency.  A
way  foolishness  has  of  revenging  itself  is  to  ex¬
communicate  the  world.

It  is  in  the  vrorld,  however,  that  art  must  find
its  level.  It  must  vindicate  its  function^ in  the
human  commonwealth.  What  direct  acceptable
contribution  does  it  make  to  the  highest  good?
What  sacrifices,  if  any,  does  it  impose?  W'^hat  in¬
direct  influence  does  it  exert  on  other  activities?
Our  answer  to  these  questions  will  be  our  apology
for  art,  our  proof  that  art  belongs  to  the  Life  of
Reason.

When  moralists  deprecate  passion  and  contrast
it  with  reason,  they  do  so,  if  they  are  themselves
AU  satisfac-  rational,  only  because  passion  is  so
tions,  hov-  often  guilty,”  because  it  works  havoc

have  an  iiS-  SO  often  in  the  surrounding  world  and
tiai worth.  leaves,  among  other  ruins,  ‘'a  heart
high-sorrowful  and  cloyed.”  Were  there  no  dan¬
ger  of  such  after-effects  within  and  without  the
sufferer,  no  passion  would  be  reprehensible.  Na¬
ture  is  innocent,  and  so  are  all  her  impulses  and
moods  when  taken  in  isolation;  it  is  only  on  meet-


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


169


ing  that  they  blush.  If  it  be  true  that  matter  is
sinful,  the  logic  of  this  truth  is  far  from  being  what
the  fanatics  imagine  who  commonly  propound  it.
Matter  is  sinful  only  because  it  is  insufficient,  or
is  wastefully  distribifted.  There  is  not  enough  of
it  to  go  round  among  the  legion  of  hungry  ideas.
To  embody* or  enact  an  idea  is  the  only  way  of
making  it  actual;  but  its  embodiment  may  mutilate
it,  if  the  material  or  the  situation  is  not  propitious.
So  an  infant  may  be  maimed  at  biidh,  when  what
injures  him  is  not  being  brought  forth,  but  being
brought  forth  in  the  wrong  manner.  Matter  has
a  doub^  function  in  respect  to  existence;  essentially
it  enables  the  spirit  to  be,  yet  chokes  it  incidentally.
Men  sadly  misbegotten,  or  those  who  are  thwarted
at  every  step  by  the  times’  penury,  may  fall  to
thinking  of  matter  only  by  its  defect,  ignoring  the
material  ground  of  their  own  aspirations.  All  flesh
will  seem  to  them  weak,  except  that  forgotten
piece  of  it  which  makes  their  own  spiritual  strength.
Kvery  impulse,  however,  had  initially  the  same
authority  as  this  censorious  one,  by  which  the  oth¬
ers  are  now  judged  and  condemned.

If  a  practice  can  point  to  its  innocence,  if  it
can  absolve  itself  from  concern  for  a  world  with

w'hich  it  does  not  interfere,  it  has  jus-
whoie,  artistic  tified  itself  to  those  who  love  it,  though
activity  is  in-  n  jjjay  not  yet  have  recommended  itself

to  those  who  do  not.  Now  art,  more
than  any  other  considerable  pursuit,  more  even
than  speculation,  is  abstract  and  inconsequential.


170


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Born  of  suspended  attention,  it  ends  in  itself.  It
encourages  sensuous  abstraction,  and  nothing  con¬
cerns  it  less  than  to  influence  the  world.  Nor
does  it  really  do  so  in  a  notable  degree.  Social
changes  do  not  reach  artistic  ^expression  until  after
their  momentum  is  acquired  and  their  other  col¬
lateral  effects  arc  fully  predetermined.*'  Scarcely  is
a  school  of  art  established,  giving  expression  to
prevailing  sentiment,  when  this  sentiment  changes
and  makes  that  style  seem  empty  and  ridiculous.
The  expression  has  little  or  no  power  to  maintain
the  movement  it  registers,  as  a  waterfall  lias  little
or  no  power  to  bring  more  water  down.  Qurrents
may  indexed  cut  deej)  channels,  but  they  can¬
not  feed  their  own  springs — at  least  not  until
the  whole  revolution  of  nature  is  taken  into
account.

In  the  individual,  also,  art  registers  passions
without  stimulating  thorny  on  the  contrary,  in  stop¬
ping  to  depict  them  it  steals  away  their  life;  and
whatever  interest  and  delight  it  transfers  to  their
expression  it  subtracts  from  their  vital  energy.
This  appears  unmistakably  in  erotic  and  in  religi¬
ous  art.  Though  the  artist’s  avowed  purpose  here
be  to  arouse  a  practical  impulse,  ho  fails  in  so
far  as  he  is  an  artist  in  truth;  for  he  then  will
seek  to  move  the  given  passions  only  through
beauty,  but  beauty  is  a  rival  object  of  passion  in
itself.  Lascivious  and  pious  works,  when  beauty
has  touched  them,  cease  to  give  out  what  is  wil¬
ful  and  disquieting  in  iheir  subject  and  become


JUSTIFICATION  OP  ART


171


altogether  intellectual  and  sublime.  There  is  a
high  breathlessness  about  beauty  that  cancels  lust
and  superstition.  The  artist,  in  taking  the  latter
for  his  theme,  renders  them  innocent  and  inter¬
esting,  because  he  loo'ks  at  them  from  above,  com¬
poses  their  attitudes  and  surroundings  harmoni¬
ously,  and  makes  them  food  for  the  mind.  Ac¬
cordingly  it  is  only  in  a  refined  and  secondary
stage  that  active  passions  like  to  amuse  themselves
with  their  aesthetic  expression.  Unmitigated  lusti¬
ness  and  raw  fanaticism  will  snarl  at  pictures.
Representations  begin  to  interest  when  crude  pas¬
sions  Tjecede,  and  feel  the  ne(‘d  of  conciliating
liberal  interests  and  adding  some  intellectual
charm  to  their  dumb  attractions.  Thus  art,  while
by  its  subject  it  may  betray  the  preoccupations
among  which  it  springs  up,  embodies  a  new  and
quite  innocent  interest.

This  interest  is  more  than  innocent,  it  is  lib¬
eral.  Not  being  concerned  with  material  reality

so  much  as  with  the  ideal,  it  knows

It  is  liberal.

neither  nlterior  motives  nor  quantita¬
tive  limits;  the  more  beauty  there  is  the  more
there  can  be,  and  the  higher  one  artist’s  imagina¬
tion  soars  the  better  the  whole  flock  flies.  In
aisthetic  activity  we  have  accordingly  one  side  of
rational  life;  sensuous  experience  is  dominated
there  as  mechanical  or  social  realities  ought  to  be
dominated  in  science  and  politics.  Such  dominion
comes  of  having  faculties  suited  to  their  conditions
and  consequently  finding  an  inherent  satisfaction


172


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


in  their  operation.  The  justification  of  life  must
be  ultimately  intrinsic;  and  wherever  such  self-
justifying  experience  is  attained,  the  ideal  has  been
in  so  far  embodied.  To  have  realised  it  in  a  meas¬
ure  helps  us  to  realise  it  further;  for  there  is  a
cumulative  fecundity  in  those  goods  which  come
not  by  increase  of  force  or  matter,  hut  by  a  better
organisation  and  form.

Art  has  met,  on  the  whole,  with  more  success
than  science  or  morals.  Beauty  gives  men  the

and  typical  ultimate  good  which  their

of  perfect  experience  as  yet  can  offer;  and  the
activity.  lYiost  lauded  geniuses  have  been  poetsj
as  if  people  felt  that  those  seers,  rather  than  men
of  action  or  thought,  had  lived  ideally  and  known
what  was  wortli  knowing.  That  such  should  he
the  case,  if  the  fact  be  admitted,  would  indeed
prove  the  rudimentary  state  of  human  civilisation.
The  truly  comprehensive  life  should  be  the  states¬
man’s,  for  whom  perception  and  theory  might  be
expressed  and  rewarded  in  action.  Hie  idea^  dig¬
nity  of  art  is  therefore  merely  symbolic  and  vicari¬
ous.  As  some  people  study  character  in  novels,
and  travel  by  reading  tales  of  adventure,  because
real  life  is  not  yet  so  interesting  to  them  as  fiction,
or  because  they  find  it  cheaper  to  make  their  ex¬
periments  in  their  dreams,  so  art  in  general  is  a
rehearsal  of  rational  living,  and  recasts  in  idea  a
world  which  we  have  no  present  means  of  recast¬
ing  in  rdality.  Yet  this  rehearsal  reveals  the
glories  of  a  possible  performance  better  than  do  the


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART  173

miseraMo  experiments  until  now  executed  on  the
reality.

When  we  consider  the  present  distracted  state
of  government  and  religion,  there  is  much  relief
in  turning  from  thmi  to  almost  any  art,  where
what  is  good  is  altogether  and  finally  good,  and
what  is  bac^  is  at  least  not  treacherous.  When  we
consider  further  the  senseless  rivalries,  the  vani¬
ties,  the  ignominy  tliat  reign  in  the  “practical”
world,  how  doubly  blessed  it  becomes  to  find  a
sphere  where  limitation  is  an  excellence,  where
diversity  is  a  beauty,  and  where  every  man’s  am-
•bition  is  consistent  with  every  other  man’s  and
even  favourable  to  it!  It  is  indeed  so  in  art;  for
we  must  not  import  into  its  blameless  labours  the
bickerings  and  jealousies  of  criticism.  Critics
quarrel  with  other  critics,  and  that  is  a  part  of
philosophy.  With  an  artist  no  sane  man  quarrels,
any  more  than  with  the  colour  of  a  child’s  eyes.
As  nature,  being  full  of  seeds,  rises  into  all  sorts  of
crystallisations,  each  having  its  own  ideal  and
potential  life,  each  a  nucleus  of  order  and  a  habi¬
tation  for  the  absolute  self,  so  art,  though  in  a
medium  poorer  than  pregnant  matter,  and  in¬
capable  of  intrinsic  life,  generates  a  semblance  of
all  conceivable  beings.  What  nature  does  with  ex¬
istence,  art  does  with  appearance;  and  while  the
achievement  leaves  us,  unhappily,  much  where  we
were  before  in  all  our  efficacious  relations,  it  en¬
tirely  renews  our  vision  and  breeds  a  afresh  world
in  fancy,  where  all  form  has  the  same  inner  jus-


174


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tification  that  all  life  has  in  the  real  world.  As
no  insect  is  without  its  rights  and  every  cripple
has  his  dream  of  happiness,  so  no  artistic  fact,  no
child  of  imagination,  is  without  its  small  birth¬
right  of  beauty.  In  this  frefir  element,  competi¬
tion  docs  not  exist  and  everything  is  Olympian.
Hungry  goiKTations  do  not  tread  down  the  ideal
but  only  its  spokesmen  or  embodiments,  that  have
cast  in  tlicir  lot  with  other  material  things.  Art
supplies  constantly  to  contemplation  what  nature
seldom  affords  in  concrete  experience — the  union
of  life  and  peace.

The  ideal,  however,  would  not  come  down  from
the  empyrean  and  be  conceived  unless  somebody’s
The  ideal,  thought  Were  absorbed  in  the  concep-
when  incar-  tion.  Art  actually  segregates  classes

subject  to  of  nien  and  masses  of  matter  to  serve
civu  society,  Special  interests.  This  involves  ex¬
pense;  it  impedes  some  possible  activities  and  im¬
poses  others.  On  this  ground,  from  the  earliest
times  until  our  own,  art  has  been  occasionally  at¬
tacked  by  moralists,  who  have  felt  that  it  fostered
idolatry  or  luxury  or  irresponsible  dreams.  Of
these  attacks  the  most  interesting  is  Plato’s,
because  he  was  an  artist  by  tempera¬
tures:  hetx-  ment,  bred  in  the  very  focus  of  artistic
aKKeratesthe  jjfg  discussion,  and  at  the  same

effectof myths.  ..  ,  i  i

time  a  consummate  moral  philosopher.

His  aesthetic  sensibility  was  indeed  so  great  that

it  led  him,’^perhap8,  into  a  relative  error,  in  that

he  overestimated  the  influence  which  art  can  have


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


175


on  character  and  arffairs.  Homers  stories  about
the  gods  can  hardly  have  demoralised  the  youths
who  recited  them.  No  religion  has  ever  given  a
picture  of  deity  which  men  could  have  imitated
without  the  grossest  immorality.  Yet  these  shock¬
ing  representations  have  not  had  a  bad  effect  on
believers.  The  deity  was  opposed  to  their  own
vices;  those  it  might  itself  be  credited  with  offered
no  contagious  example.  In  spite  of  the  theolo¬
gians,  wo  know  by  instinct  that  in  speaking  of  the
gods  we  are  dealing  in  myths  and  symbols.  Some
aspect  of  nature  or  some  law  of  life,  expressed  in
an  attigbute  of  deity,  is  what  we  really  regard,  and
to  regard  such  things,  however  sinister  they  may
be,  cannot  but  chasten  and  moralise  us.  The  per¬
sonal  character  that  such  a  function  would  involve,
if  it  were  exercised  willingly  by  a  responsible  being,
is  something  that  never  enters  our  thoughts.  No
such  painful  image  comes  to  perplex  the  plain
sense  of  instinctive,  poetic  religion.  To  give
moral  importance  to  myths,  as  Plato  tended  to  do,
is  to  take  them  far  too  seriously  and  to  belittle
what  they  stand  for.  Left  to  themselves  they  float
in  an  ineffectual  stratum  of  the  brain.  They  are
understood  and  grow  current  precisely  by  not  being
pressed,  like  an  idiom  or  a  metaphor.  The  same
ajsthetic  sterility  appears  at  the  other  end  of  the
scale,  where  fancy  is  anything  but  sacred.  A
Frenchman  once  saw  in  “  Punch  and  ,Judy  ”  a
shocking  proof  of  British  brutality,  destined  fur¬
ther  to  demoralise  the  nation;  and  yet  the  scandal


176


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


may  pass.  That  black  tragedy  reflects  not  very
pretty  manners^  but  puppets  exercise  no  suasion
over  men.


To  his  supersensitive  censure  of  myths  Plato
added  strictures  upon  musk;  and  the  drama:  to
His  deeper  excite  passions  idly  was  to  enervate  the
moral  objec-  soul.  Only  martial  or  religious  strains
should  be  heard  in  the  ideal  republic.
Furthermore,  art  put  before  us  a  mere  phantom
of  the  good.  True  excellence  was  the  function
things  had  in  use;  the  horseman  knew  the  bridle’s
value  and  essence  better  than  the  artiean  did  who


put  it  together;  but  a  painted  bridle  would  lack
even  this  relation  to  utility.  It  would  rein  in  no
horse,  and  was  an  impertinent  sensuous*  redupli¬
cation  of  what,  even  when  it  had  material  being,
was  only  an  instrument  and  a  means.

This  reasoning  has  been  little  understood,  ^
because  Iflatonists  so  soon  lost  sight  of  their  mas¬
ter’s  Socratic  habit  and  moral  intent.  They  turned
the  good  into  an  existence,  making  it  thereby  un¬
meaning.  Plato’s  dialectic,  if  we  do  not  thus
abolish  the  force  of  its  terms,  is  perfectly  cogent:
representative  art  has  indeed  no  utility,  and,  if
the  good  has  been  identified  with  efficiency  in  a
military  state,  it  can  have  no  justification.  Plato’s
Republic  was  avowedly  a  fallen  state,  a  church
militant,  coming  sadly  short  of  perfection;  and
the  joy  which  Plato  as  much  as  any  one  could  feel
in  sensuous  art  he  postponed,  as  a  man  in  mourn-


JUSTIFICATION  OP  ART  177

ing  might,  until  life  should  he  redeemed  from
baseness.

Never  have  art  and  beauty  received  a  more  glow¬
ing  eulogy  than  is  implied  in  Plato’s  censure.  •  To
Their  right-  him  nothiftg  was  beautiful  that  was  not
ness-  beautiful  to  the  core,  and  he  would  have

thought  to  insult  art — the  remodelling  of  nature
by  reason — if  he  had  given  it  a  narrower  field
than  all  ])ractice.  As  an  architect  who  had  fondly
designed  something  impossible,  or  which  might  not
please  in  execution,  would  at  once  erase  it  from
the  ])lan  and  abandon  it  for  the  love  of  perfect
beautj  and  perfect  art,  so  Plato  wished  to  erase
from  pleasing  appearance  all  that,  when  its  opera¬
tion  was  completed,  would  bring  discord  into  the
world.  This  was  done  in  the  ultimate  interest  of
art  and  beauty,  which  in  a  cultivated  mind  are
inseparable  from  the  vitally  good.  It  is  mere  bar¬
barism  to  feel  that  a  thing  is  aesthetically  good
but  morally  evil,  or  morally  good  but  hateful  to
perception.  Things  partially  evil  or  partially  ugly
may  have  to  be  chosen  under  stress  of  unfavour¬
able  circumstances,  lest  some  worse  thing  come;
but  if  a  thing  were  ugly  it  would  thereby  not  be
wholly  good,  and  if  it  were  altogether  good  it
would  perforce  be  beautiful.

To  criticise  art  on  moral  grounds  is  to  pay  it  a
high  compliment  by  assuming  that  it  aims  to  be
adequate,  and  is  addressed  to  a  comprehensive
mind.  The  only  way  in  which  art  could  disallow


178


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


sucli  criticism  would  be  to  protest  its  irresponsible
infancy,  and  admit  that  it  was  a  more  or  less  ami¬
able  blatancy  in  individuals,  and  not  art  at  all.
Young  animals  often  gambol  in  a  delightful  fash¬
ion,  and  men  also  may,  thoifgh  hardly  when  they
intend  to  do  so.  Sportive  self-expression  can  be
priced  because  human  nature  contaiiis  a  certain
elasticity  and  margin  for  experiment,  in  which
waste  activity  is  inevitable  and  may  be  precious:
for  this  license  may  lead,  amid  a  thousand  failures,
to  some  real  discovery  and  advance.  Art,  like  life,
should  be  free,  since  both  are  experimental.  But
it  is  one  thing  to  make  room  for  genius  '^nd  to
respect  the  sudden  madness  of  poets  through
which,  possibly,  some  god  may  speak,  and  it  is
quite  anolhcr  not  to  judge  the  result  by  rational
standards.  The  earth’s  bowels  are  full  of  all  sorts
of  rumblings;  which  of  the  oracles  drawn  thence  is
true  can  be  judged  only  by  the  light  of  day.  If
an  artist’s  inspiration  has  been  happy,  it  has  been
so  because  his  work  can  sweeten  or  ennoble  the
mind  and  because  its  total  effect  will  be  beneficent.
Art  being  a  part  of  life,  the  criticism  of  art  is  a
part  of  morals.

Maladjustments  in  human  society  are  still  so
scandalous,  they  touch  matters  so  much  more  press-

importance  ^*^8  than  fine  art,  that  maladjustments
of  aesthetic  in  the  latter  are  passed  over  with  a
alternatives.  ag  jf  art  were  at  any  rate  an

irresponsible  miraculous  parasite  that  the  leg¬
islator  had  better  not  meddle  with.  The  day


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


179


may  come,  however^  if  the  state  is  ever  reduced  to
a  tolerable  order,  when  questions  of  art  will  be
the  most  urgent  questions  of  morals,  when  genius
at  last  will  feel  responsible,  and  the  twist  given
to  imagination  will  soem  the  most  crucial  thing  in
life.  Under  a  thin  disguise,  the  momentous  char¬
acter  of  imf^inative  choices  has  already  been  fully
recognised  by  mankind.  Men  have  passionately
loved  their  special  religions,  languages,  and  man¬
ners,  and  preferred  death  to  a  life  flowering  in  any
other  fashion.  In  justifying  this  attachment  for-
ensically,  wiih  arguments  on  the  low  level  of  men’s
hame^  and  consecrated  interests,  people  have  in¬
deed  said,  and  perhaps  come  to  believe,  that  their
iinaginalive  interests  were  material  interests  at
bottom,  thinking  thus  to  give  them  more  weight
and  legitimacy;  whereas  in  truth  material  life
itself  would  be  nothing  worth,  were  it  not,  in  its
essence  and  its  issue,  ideal.

It  was  stupidly  asserted,  however,  that  if  a  man
omitted  the  prescribed  ceremonies  or  had  unau¬
thorised.  dreams  about  the  gods,  he  would  lose  his
battles  in  this  world  and  go  to  hell  in  the  other.
He  'who  runs  can  see  that  these  expectations  are
not  founded  on  any  evidence,  on  any  observation
of  -what  actually  occurs;  they  are  obviously  a
mirage  arising  from  a  direct  ideal  passion,  that
tries  to  justify  itself  by  indirection  and  by  false¬
hoods,  as  it  has  no  need  to  do.  We  all  read  facts
in  the  way  most  congruous  with  our  iVitellectual
habit,  and  when  this  habit  drives  us  to  effulgent


180


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


creations,  absorbing  and  expressing  the  whole  cur¬
rent  of  our  being,  it  not  merely  biasses  our  reading
of  this  world  but  carries  us  into  another  world  al¬
together,  which  we  posit  instead  of  the  real  one,
or  beside  it.

Grotesque  as  the  blunder  may  seem  by  which
w  j  thus  introduce  our  poetic  tropes#into  the  se¬
quence  of  external  events  or  existences,  the  blunder
is  intellectual  only;  morally,  zeal  for  our  special
rhetoric  may  not  be  irrational.  The  lovely
Phoebiis  is  no  fact  for  astronomy,  nor  does  he
stand  behind  the  material  sun,  in  Some  higher
heaven,  physically  superintending  its  movements;
but  Phojbiis  is  a  fact  in  his  own  region,  a  token  of
man’s  joyful  piety  in  the  presence  of  the  forces
that  really  condition  his  welfare.  In  the  region
of  symbols,  in  the  world  of  poetry,  Pheebus  has  his
inalienable  rights.  Forms  of  poetry  are  forms  of
human  life.  Languages  express  national  charac¬
ter  and  enshrine  particular  ways  of  seeing  and
valuing  events.  To  make  substitutions  and  exten¬
sions  in  expression  is  to  give  the  soul,  in  her  in¬
most  substance,  a  somewhat  new  constitution.  A
method  of  apperception  is  a  spontaneous  variation
in  mind,  perhaps  the  origin  of  a  new  moral  species.

The  value  apperceptive  methods  have  is  of  course
largely  representative,  in  that  they  serve  more  or
less  aptly  to  dominate  the  order  of  events  and  to
guide  action;  but  quite  apart  from  this  practical
value,  expressions  possess  a  character  of  their  own,
a  sort  of  vegetative  life,  as  languages  possess


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


181


euphony.  Two  reports  of  the  same  fact  may  be
equally  trustworthy,  equally  useful  as  information,
yet  they  may  embody  two  types  of  mental  rhetoric,
and  this  diversity  in  genius  may  be  of  more,  in¬
trinsic  importance  than  tlic  raw  fact  it  works  upon.
The  non-representative  side  of  human  perception
may  thus  be^the  most  momentous  side  of  it,  because
it  represents,  or  even  constitutes,  the  man.  After
all,  tlie  chief  intci’cst  we  have  in  things  lies  in  what
wc  can  make  of  them  or  what  they  can  make  of
us.  There  is  consequently  nothing  fitted  to  colour
human  hai3piness  more  pervasively  than  art  does,
Uor  to  express  more  deeply  the  mind’s  internal
habit.  In  educating  the  irnaginetion  art  crowns
all  mohil  endeavour,  which  from  the  begin¬
ning  is  a  species  of  art,  and  which  becomes  a
fine  art  more  completely  as  it  works  in  a  freer
medium.


IJow  great  a  portion  of  human  energies  should
be  spent  on  art  and  its  appreciation  is  a  question


The  import¬
ance  of  es¬
thetic  goods
varies  with
tempera¬
ments.


to  be  answered  variously  by  various
persons  and  nations.  There  is  no  ideal
a  priori;  an  ideal  can  but  express,  if
it  is  genuine,  the  balance  of  impulses
and  potentialities  in  a  given  soul.


A  mind  at  once  sensuous  and  mobile  will  find


its  appropriate  perfection  in  studying  and  re¬
constructing  objects  of  sense.  Its  rationality  will
appear  chiefly  on  the  plane  of  perception,  to  ren¬
der  the  circle  of  visions  which  makes  tip  its  life
as  delightful  as  possible.  For  such  a  man  art


182


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


will  bo  the  most  satisfying,  the  most  significant
activity,  and  to  load  him  With  material  riches
or  speculative  truths  or  profound  social  loyalties
will  be  to  impede  and  depress  him.  The  irra¬
tional  is  what  does  not  justify  itself  in  the  end;
and  the  born  artist,  repelled  by  the  soberer  and
bitterer  passions  of  the  world,  may  justly  call
them  irrational.  They  would  not  justify  them¬
selves  in  his  experience;  they  make  grievous  de¬
mands  and  yield  nothing  in  the  end  which  is  in¬
telligible  to  him.  His  picture  of  them,  if  he  be
a  dramatist,  will  hardly  fail  to  be  satirical;  fate,
frailty,  illusion  will  be  his  constant  themes.  If
his  temperament  could  find  political  expression,
he  w'ould  minimise  the  machinery  of  life  and  dep¬
recate  any  calculated  prudence.  He  would  trust
the  heart,  enjoy  nature,  and  not  frown  too  angrily
on  inclination.  Such  a  Bohemia  he  would  regard
as  an  ideal  world  in  which  humanity  might  flourish
congenially.

A  puritan  moralist,  before  condemning  such  an
infantile  paradise,  should  remember  that  a  com-

Theassthetic  butterflies  actually  ex¬

temperament  ists.  It  is  not  any  inherent  wrongness
requires  tute-  such  an  ideal  that  makes  it  unac-

lage.

ceptable,  but  only  the  fact  that  hu¬
man  butterflies  are  not  wholly  mercurial  and
that  even  imperfect  geniuses  are  but  an  extreme
type  in  a  society  whose  guiding  ideal  is  based  upon
a  broader  humanity  than  the  artist  represents.
Men  of  science  or  business  will  accuse  the  poet  of


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


183


folly,  on  the  ver^i  grounds  on  which  he  accuses
them  of  the  same.  Each  will  seem  to  the  other  to
be  obeying  a  barren  obsession.  The  statesman  or
philosopher  who  should  aspire  to  adjust  their  quar¬
rel  could  do  so  only  by  force  of  intelligent  sym¬
pathy  with  both  sides,  and  in  view  of  the  common
conditions  jn  which  they  find  themselves.  What
ought  to  be  done  is  that  which,  when  done,  will
most  nearly  justify  itself  to  all  concerned.  Prac¬
tical  problems  of  morals  are  judicial  and  political
problems.  Justice  can  never  be  pronounced  with¬
out  hearing  the  parties  and  weighing  the  interests
*at  stajeo.

A  circumstance  that  complicates  such  a  calcu¬
lation  Is  this;  lesthetic  and  other  interests  are


A  sthetic  1  separable  units,  to  be  compared  cx-
ues  every-  temally;  they  are  rather  strands  inter-
where  inter-  wovcn  in  the  toxturc  of  everything.

fused.  •  ^

.^Esthetic  sensibility  colours  every
thought,  qualifies  every  allegiance,  and  modifies
every  product  of  human  labour.  Consequently
the  love  of  beauty  has  to  justify  itself  not  merely
intrinsically,  or  as  a  constituent  part  of  life  more
or  less  to  be  insisted  upon;  it  has  to  justify  itself
also  as  an  influence.  A  hostile  influence  is  the


most  odious  of  things.  The  enemy  himself,  the
alien  creature,  lies  in  his  own  camp,  and  in  a  specu¬
lative  moment  we  may  put  ourselves  in  his  place
and  learn  to  think  of  him  charitably;  but  his  spirit
in  our  own  souls  is  like  a  private  tempter,  a  trea¬
sonable  voice  weakening  our  allegiance  to  our  own


184


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


duty.  A  zealot  might  allow  hi?  neighbours  to  be
damned  in  peace,  did  not  a  certain  heretical  odour
emitted  by  them  infect  the  sanctuary  and  disturb
his  own  dogmatic  calm.  In  the  same  way  prac¬
tical  people  might  leave  the  artist  alone  in  his
oasis,  and  even  grant  him  a  pittance  on  which  to
Ir.e,  as  they  feed  the  animals  in  a  zoological  gar¬
den,  did  he  not  intrude  into  their  inmost  conclave
and  vitiate  the  abstract  cogency  of  their  designs.
It  is  not  so  much  art  in  its  own  field  that  men  of
science  look  askance  upon,  as  the  love  of  glitter
and  rhetoric  and  false  finality  trespassing  upon
scientific  ground;  while  men  of  affairs  may  well
deprecate  a  rooted  habit  of  sensuous  absorption
and  of  sudden  transit  to  imaginary  worlds, 'a  habit
which  must  work  havoc  in  their  own  sphere.  In
other  words,  there  is  an  element  of  poetry  inher¬
ent  in  thought,  in  conduct,  in  affection;  and  we
must  ask  ourselves  how  far  this  ingredient  is  an
obstacle  to  their  proper  development.

The  fabled  dove  who  complained,  in  flying,  of
the  resistance  of  the  air,  was  as  wise  as  the  phi-
They  ore  losophcr  who  should  lament  the  pres-
prfanordiaL  gnee  and  influence  of  sense.  Sense  is
the  native  element  and  substance  of  experience;
all  its  refinements  are  still  parts  of  it  existentially;
and  whatever  excellence  belongs  specifically  to
sense  is  a  preliminary  excellence,  a  value  ante¬
cedent  to  any  which  thought  or  action  can  achieve.
Science  and  morals  have  but  representative  au¬
thority;  they  are  principles  of  ideal  synthesis  and


185


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART

1

safe  transition;  they  are  bridges  from  moment  to
moment  of  sentience.  Their  function  is  indeed
universal  and  their  value  overwhelming,  yet  their
office  remains  derivative  or  secondary,  and  what
they  serve  to  put  in  order  has  previously  its  in¬
trinsic  worth.  An  assthetic  bias  is  native  to  sense,
being  indeed^  nothing  but  its  form  and  potency;
and  the  influence  which  aesthetic  habits  exercise  on
thought  and  action  should  not  be  regarded  as. an
intrusion  to  be  resented,  but  rather  as  an  original
interest  to  be  built  upon  and  developed.  Sensi¬
bility  contains  the  distinctions  which  reason  after-
A\^rd  carries  out  and  applies;  it  is  sensibility  that
involves  and  supports  primitive  diversities,  such
as  those  *between  good  and  bad,  here  and  there,
fast  and  slow,  light  and  darkness.  There  are
complications  and  harmonies  inherent  in  these  op-
,  positions,  harmonies  which  aesthetic  faculty  pro¬
ceeds  to  note;  and  from  these  we  may  then  con¬
struct  others,  not  immediately  presentable,  which
we  distinguish  by  attributing  them  to  reason.
Reason  may  well  outflank  and  transform  jesthctic
judgments,  but  can  never  undermine  them.  Its
own  materials  arc  the  perceptions  which  if  full
and  perfect  arc  called  beauties.  Its  function  is  to
endow  the  parts  of  sentience  with  a  consciousness
of  the  system  in  which  they  lie,  so  that  they  may
attain  a  mutual  relevance  and  ideally  support  one
another.  But  what  could  relevance  or  support  be
worth  if  tlie  things  to  be  buttressed  w^e  them¬
selves  worthless?  It  is  not  to  organise  pain,  ugli-


186


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ness,  and  boredom  that  reason  can  be  called  into
the  world.

When  a  practical  or  scientific  man  boasts  that
he  has  laid  aside  aBsthotic  prejudices  and  is  fol¬
lowing  truth  and  utility  with  a  single

To  superpose  ,  -j?  i.  •  •  j-  •

themadven-  he  cau  mean,  if  he  is  judicious,

***  yielded  to  aeslhetic

preference  after  his  problem  was  fixed,
nor  in  an  arbitrary  and  vexatious  fashion.  He  has
not  consulted  taste  when  it  would  have  been  in
bad  taste  to  do  so.  If  he  meant  that  he  had  ren¬
dered  himself  altogether  insensilde  to^sesthetic  val¬
ues,  and  that  he  had  proceeded  to  organise  conduct
or  thought  in  complete  indifference  to  the  beau¬
tiful,  he  would  be  simply  proclaiming  his  inhuman¬
ity  and  incompetence.  A  right  observance  of  aes¬
thetic  demands  does  not  obstruct  utility  nor  logic;
for  utility  and  logic  are  themselves  beautiful,  while,
a  sensuous  beauty  that  ran  counter  to  reason  could
never  be,  in  the  end,  pleasing  to  an  exquisite  sense.
-^Esthetic  vice  is  not  favourable  to  aesthetic  fac¬
ulty:  it  is  an  impediment  to  the  greatest  a^sthetic
satisfactions.  And  so  when  by  yielding  to  a  blind
passion  for  beauty  we  derange  theory  and  practice,
we  cut  ourselves  off  from  those  beauties  which
alone  could  have  satisfied  our  passion.  What  we
drag  in  so  obstinately  will  bring  but  a  cheap  and
unstable  pleasure,  while  a  double  beauty  Avill
thereby  be  lost  or  obscured — first,  the  unlooked-for
beauty  which  a  genuine  and  stable  system  of  things
could  not  but  betray,  and  secondly  the  coveted


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


187


beauty  itself,  which,  •being  imported  here  into  the
wrong  context,  will  be  rendered  meretricious  and


offensive  to  good  taste.  If  a  jewel  worn  on  the
wrong  finger  sends  a  shiver  through  the  flesh,  how
disgusting  must  not  rhetoric  be  in  diplomacy  or
unction  in  metaphysics!

The  poetic^  element  inherent  in  thought,  affec¬
tion,  and  conduct  is  prior  to  their  prosaic  develpp-
They  flow  altogether  legitimate.  Clear,

naturally  well-digested  perception  and  rational
cj^oices  follow  upon  those  primary  crea-
•  ’  live  impulses,  and  carry  out  their  pur¬

pose  s}<}tematically.  At  every  stage  in  this  de¬
velopment  new  and  appropriate  materials  are
offered  for  ajsthetic  contemplation.  {Straightness,
for  instance,  symmetry,  and  rhythm  are  at  first
sensuously  defined;  they  are  characters  arrested  by
*a;sthetic  instinct;  but  they  are  the  materials  of
mathematics.  And  long  after  these  initial  forms
have  disowned  their  sensuous  values,  and  suffered


a  wholly  dialectical  expansion  or  analysis,  mathe¬
matical  objects  again  fall  under  the  aesthetic  eye,
and  surprise  the  senses  by  their  emotional  power.
A  mechanical  system,  such  as  astronomy  in  one
region  has  already  unveiled,  is  an  inexhaustible
field  for  assthctic  wonder.  Similarly,  in  another
sphere,  sensuous  affinity  leads  to  friendship  and
love,  and  makes  us  huddle  up  to  our  fellows  and
feel  their  lieart-beats;  but  when  human  society  has
thereupon  established  a  legal  and  moral  edifice,
this  new  spectacle  yields  new  imaginative  trans-


188


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


ports,  tragic,  lyric,  and  religious.  -^Esthetic  val¬
ues  everywhere  precede  and  accompany  rational
activity,  and  life  is,  in  one  aspect,  always  a  fine
art;  not  by  introducing  inaptly  aesthetic  vetoes  or
aesthetic  flourishes,  but  by  giving  to  everything  a
form  which,  implying  a  structure,  implies  also  an
ideal  and  a  possible  perfection.  THiS  perfection,
being  felt,  is  also  a  beauty,  since  any  process,
though  it  may  have  become  intellectual  or  prac¬
tical,  remains  for  all  that  a  vital  and  sentient  op¬
eration,  with  its  inherent  sensuous  values.  What-
ever  is  to  be  representative  in  import  must  fii;st
be  immediate  in  existence;  whatever  is  transitive
in  operation  must  be  at  the  same  time  actual  in
being.  So  that  an  sesthetic  sanction  sweetens  all
successful  living;  animal  elFiciency  cannot  be
without  grace,  nor  moral  achievement  without  a
sensible  glory.

These  vital  harmonies  are  natural;  they  are
neither  perfect  nor  preordained.  We  often  come
upon  beauties  that  need  to  be  sacrificed,  as  we
come  upon  events  and  practical  necessities  with¬
out  number  that  are  truly  regrettable.  There  are
a  myriad  conflicts  in  practice  and  in  thought,  con¬
flicts  between  rival  possibilities,  knocking  inop¬
portunely  and  in  vain  at  the  door  of  existence.
Owing  to  the  initial  disorganisation  of  things,
some  demands  continually  prove  to  be  incompati¬
ble  witht. others  arising  no  less  naturally.  Reason
in  such  cases  imposes  real  and  irreparable  sacri-
flees,  but  it  brings  a  stable  consolation  if  its  dis-


JUSTIFICATION  OF  ART


189


cipline  is  accepted.  Decay,  for  instance,  is  a
moral  and  aesthetic  evil;  but  being  a  natural  ne-
Evenin-  cessity  it  can  become  the  basis  for
pathetic  and  magnificent  harmonies,
they  fau  into  when  oBce  imagination  is  adjusted  to

yieiTn*ew*^  it.  Thc  hatred  of  change  and  death
beauties.  is  ineradicable  while  life  lasts,  since
it  expresses  that  self-sustaining  organisation  in
a  creature  which  we  call  its  soul;  yet  this  hatred
of  change  and  death  is  not  so  deeply  seated  in  the
nature  of  things  as  are  death  and  change  them¬
selves,  for  thc  flux  is  deeper  than  the  ideal.  Dis¬
cipline  may  attune  our  higher  and  more  adapta¬
ble  part  to  the  harsh  conditions  of  being,  and  the
resulting  sentiment,  being  the  only  one  which  can
be  maintained  successfully,  will  express  the  great¬
est  satisfactions  which  can  be  reached,  though  not
the  greatest  that  might  be  conceived  or  desired.
To  be  interested  in  the  changing  seasons  is,  in
this  middling  zone,  a  happier  state  of  mind  than
to  be  hopelessly  in  love  with  spring.  Wisdom  dis¬
covers  these  possible  accommodations,  as  circum¬
stances  impose  them;  and  education  ought  to
prepare  men  to  accept  them.

It  is  for  want  of  education  and  discipline  that
a  man  so  often  insists  petulantly  on  his  random
tastes,  instead  of  cultivating  those  which  might
find  some  satisfaction  in  the  world  and  might
produce  in  him  some  pertinent  culture.  Untu¬
tored  self-assertion  may  even  lead  him  to  deny
some  fact  that  should  have  been  patent,  and


190


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


plunge  him  into  needless  calamity.  His  Utopias
cheat  him  in  the  end,  if  indeed  the  barbarous
taste  he  has  indulged  in  clinging  to  them  does  not
itself  lapse  before  the  dream  is  half  formed.
So  men  have  feverishly  conceived  a  heaven  only
to  find  it  insipid,  and  a  hell  to  find  it  ridiculous.
Theodicies  that  were  to  demonstrate  an  absolute
cosmic  harmony  have  turned  the  universe  into  a

He  who  loves  lyrannous  nightmare,  from  which  we
beauty  must  arc  glad  to  Rwake  again  in  this  un-
chastenit  intentional  and  somewhat  tractable

world.  Thus  the  fancies  of  effeminate  poets  in
violating  science  are  false  to  the  highest  art,  and
the  products  of  sheer  confusion,  instigated  by
the  love  of  beauty,  turn  out  to  be  hideous,  "A  ra¬
tional  severity  in  respect  to  art  simply  weeds  the
garden ;  it  expresses  a  mature  aBsthetic  choice  and
opens  the  way  to  supreme  artistic  achievements.
To  keep  beauty  in  its  place  is  to  make  all  things
beautiful.


CHATTER  X


'JHB  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


Dogmatism  in  matters  of  taste  has  the  same
status  as  dogmatism  in  other  spheres.  It  is  ini-

Dogmatism  ia  justified  by  Sincerity,  being  a

inevitable  but  s'ystematic  expression  of  a  man’s  pref-
^ybeen-  erencesi  but  it  becomes  absurd  when

lightened?

its  basis  in  a  particular  disposition  is
ignored  and  it  pretends  to  have  an  absolute  or
metaphysical  scope.  Reason,  with  the  order
which  in  every  region  it  imposes  on  life,  is
•  grounded  on  an  animal  nature  and  has  no  other
function  than  to  serve  the  same;  and  it  fails  to
exercise  its  office  quite  as  much  when  it  oversteps
its  bounds  and  forgets  whom  it  is  serving  as  when
it  neglects  some  part  of  its  legitimate  province  and
serves  its  master  imperfectly,  without  considering
all  his  interests.

Dialectic,  logic,  and  morals  lose  their  author¬
ity  and  become  inept  if  they  trespass  upon  the
realm  of  physics  and  try  to  disclose  existences;
while  physics  is  a  mere  idea  in  the  realm  of  poetic
meditation.  So  the  notorious  diversities  which
human  taste  exhibits  do  not  become  conflicts,  and
raise  no  moral  problem,  until  their  basis  or  their
.  191


192


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


function  has  been  forgottpn,  and  each  has
claimed  a  right  to  assert  itself  exclusively.  This
claim  is  altogether  absurd,  and  we  might  fail  to
understand  how  so  preposterous  an  attitude
could  be  assumed  by  anybody  did  we  not  remem¬
ber  that  every  young  animal  thinks  himself  abso-
Jiite,  and  that  dogmatism  in  the  thinker  is  only
the  speculative  side  of  greed  and  courage  in  the
brute.  The  brute  cannot  surrender  his  appetites
nor  abdicate  his  primary  right  to  dominate  his
environment.  What  experience  and  reason  may
teach  him  is  merely  how  to  make  his  self-asser¬
tion  well  balanced  and  successful.  In  the  sante

4

way  taste  is  bound  to  maintain  its  preferences  but
free  to  rationalise  them.  After  a  man  has  com¬
pared  his  feelings  with  the  no  less  legitimate
feelings  of  other  creatures,  he  can  reassert  his
own  with  more  complete  authority,  since  now  he ,
is  aware  of  their  necessary  ground  in  his  nature,
and  of  their  affinities  with  whatever  other  inter¬
ests  his  nature  enables  him  to  recognise  in  others
and  to  co-ordinate  with  his  own.

A  criterion  of  taste  is,  therefore,  nothing  but
taste  itself  in  its  more  deliberate  and  circum-
Taste  {(ains  spect  form.  Reflection  refines  particu-
inaiithority  laj.  sentiments  by  bringing  them  into

AA  It  is  moi  G

and  more  Sympathy  with  all  rational  life.  There
widely  based,  jg  consequently  the  greatest  possible
difference  in  authority  between  taste  and  taste,  and
while  delight  in  drums  and  eaglets  feathers  is
perfectly  genuine  and  has  no  cause  to  blush  for


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


193


itself,  it  cannot  be  compared  in  scope  or  repre¬
sentative  value  with  delight  in  a  symphony  or  an
epic.  The  very  instinct  that  is  satisfied  by
beauty  prefers  one  beauty  to  another;  and  we
have  only  to  question  and  purge  our  sssthetic  feel¬
ings  in  order  to  obtain  our  criterion  of  taste.
This  criteriion  will  be  natural,  personal,  autono¬
mous;  a  circumstance  that  will  give  it  authority
over  our  own  judgment — ^which  is  all  moral  sci¬
ence  is  concerned  about — and  will  extend  its  au¬
thority  over  other  minds  also,  in  so  far  as  their
constitution  is  similar  to  ours.  In  that  measure
what  is  a  genuine  instance  of  reason  in  us,  others
will  recognise  for  a  genuine  expression  of  reason
in  themselves  also.


Esthetic  feeling,  in  different  people,  may
make  up  a  different  fraction  of  life  and  vary

Different  «B-  volume.  The  more  nearly

thetic  endow-  insensible  a  man  is  the  more  incompe-

be^com^red  becomes  to  proclaim  the  val-

in  quantity  or  ues  which  Sensibility  might  have.  To
force.  beauty  men  are  habitually  insensible,

even  while  they  are  awake  and  rationally  active*
Tomes  of  aesthetic  criticism  hang  on  a  few  mo¬
ments  of  real  delight  and  intuition.  It  is  in  rare
and  scattered  instants  that  beauty  smiles  even  on
her  adorers,  who  are  reduced  for  habitual  comfort
to  remembering  her  past  favours.  An  aesthetic
glow  may  pervade  experience,  but  that  circum¬
stance  is  seldom  remarked;  it  figures  only  as  an
influence  working  subterraneously  on  thoughts


194


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  judgments  which  in  thenifeelves  take  a  cog¬
nitive  or  practical  direction.  Only  when  the  aes¬
thetic  ingredient  becomes  predominant  do  we  ex¬
claim,  How  beautiful!  Ordinarily  the  pleasures
which  formal  perception  gives  remain  an  undis¬
tinguished  part  of  our  comfort  or  curiosity.

'i  aste  is  formed  in  those  moments*  when  aes¬
thetic  emotion  is  massive  and  distinct;  prefer¬
ences  then  grown  conscious,  judg-
vital  over  ments  then  put  inio  words,  will
verbal  juds-  xevorbcratc  through  calmer  hours;  they
will  constitute  prtijudlces,  habits  of
apperception,  secret  standards  for  all  other  boaii-
tios.  A  period  of  life  in  which  such  intuitions
have  been  frequent  may  amass  tastes  and  ideals
suflicient  for  the  rest  of  our  days.  Youth  in  these
matters  governs  maturity,  and  while  men  may
develop  their  early  impressions  more  systematic¬
ally  and  find  confirmations  of  them  in  various
quarters,  they  wdl  seldom  look  at  the  world
afresh  or  use  new  cat«;gories  in  deciphering  it.
Half  our  standards  come  from  our  first  masters,
and  the  other  half  from  our  first  loves.  ISTever
being  so  deeply  stirred  again,  we  remain  persuaded
that  no  objects  save  those  we  then  discovered  can
have  a  true  sublimity.  These  high-water  marks
of  sesthetic  life  may  easily  be  reached  under  tute¬
lage.  It  may  be  some  eloquent  appreciations  read
in  a  book,  or  some  preference  expressed  by  a
gifted  friend,  that  may  liave  revealed  unsuspect¬
ed  beauties  in  art  or  nature;  and  then,  since  our


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


195


own  perception  was  vicarious  and  obviously  infe¬
rior  in  volume  to  that  which  our  mentor  possessed^
we  shall  take  his  judgments  for  our  criterion,
since  they  were  the  source  and  exemplar  of  all
our  own.  Thus  the  volume  and  intensity  of  some
appreciations,  especially  when  nothing  of  the
kind  has  preceded,  makes  them  authoritative
over  our  siafcsequent  judgments.  On  those  warm
moments  hang  all  our  cold  systematic  opinipns;
and  while  the  latter  fill  our  days  and  shape  our
careers  it  is  only  the  former  that  are  crucial  and
alive.

^  A  race  which  loves  beauty  holds  the  same  place
in  history  that  a  season  of  love  or  enthusiasm
holds  in  an  individual  life.  Such  a  race  ha«  a
pre-eminent  right  to  pronounce  upon  beauty  and
to  bequeath  its  judgments  to  duller  peoples.  We
may  accordingly  listen  with  reverence  to  a  Greek
judgment  on  that  subject,  expecting  that  what
might  seem  to  us  wrong  about  it  is  the  expres¬
sion  of  knowledge  and  passion  beyond  our  range;
it  will  suffice  that  we  learn  to  live  in  the  world
of  beauty,  instead  of  merely  studying  its  relics,
for  us  to  understand,  for  instance,  that  imitation
is  a  fundamental  principle  in  art,  and  that  any
rational  judgment  on  the  beautiful  must  be  a  moral
and  political  judgment,  enveloping  chance  aes¬
thetic  feelings  and  determining  their  value.
What  most  German  philosophers,  on  the  con¬
trary,  have  written  about  art  and  beauty  has  a
minimal  importance:  it  treats  artificial  problems


196


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


in  a  grammatical  spirit,  seldom  giving  any  proof
of  experience  or  imagination.  •What  painters  say
about  painting  and  poets  about  poetry  is  better
than  lay  opinion;  it  may  reveal,  of  course,  some
petty  jealousy  or  some  partial  incapacity,  because
a  special  gift  often  carries  with  it  complementary
defects  in  apprehension;  yet  what  is  positive  in
such  judgments  is  founded  on  knowledge  and
avoids  the  romancing  into  which  litterateurs  and
sentimentalists  will  gladly  wander.  The  specific
values  of  art  arc  technical  values,  more  perma¬
nent  and  definite  than  the  adventitious  analogies
on  which  a  stray  observer  usually  bases  his  views.,
Only  a  technical  education  can  raise  judg»ients
on  musical  compositions  above  impertinent  auto¬
biography.  The  Japanese  know  the  beauty  of
flowers,  and  tailors  and  dressmakers  have  the
b(*st  sense  for  the  fashions.  We  ask  them  for
suggestions,  and  if  we  do  not  always  take  their
advice,  it  is  not  because  the  fine  effects  they  love
are  not  genuine,  but  because  they  may  not  be
effects  which  we  care  to  produce.

This  touches  a  second  consideration,  besides
Ihe  volume  and  vivacity  of  feeling,  which  enters

into  good  taste.  What  is  voluminous
Tawtes  differ  _  ,  j,  i-  i  j

also  in  purity  may  be  luwardly  confused  or  outward-

orconsis-  ly  confusing.  Excitement,  though  on
**°*^^‘  'the  whole  and  for  the  moment  agree¬
able,  may  verge  on  pain  and  may  be,  when  it  sub¬
sides  a  little,  a  cause  of  bitterness.  A  thing’s
attractions  may  be  partly  at  war  with  its  ideal


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


197


function.  In  such  a  case  what,  in  our  haste,  we
call  a  beauty  becomes  hateful  on  a  second  view,
and  according  to  the  key  of  our  dissatisfaction
wo  pronoiince  that  effect  meretricious,  harsh,  or
affected.  I'hese  discojrds  appear  when  elaborate
things  are  attempted  without  enough  art  and  re¬
finement;  they  arc  essentially  in  bad  taste.  Ru¬
dimentary  cj€ccts,  on  the  contrary,  are  pure,  and
though  we  may  think  them  trivial  when  we  are
expecting  something  richer,  their  defect  is  never
intrinsic;  they  do  not  plunge  us,  as  impure  ex¬
citements  do,  into  a  corrupt  artificial  conflict.
So  wild-flowers,  plain  chant,  or  a  scarlet  uniform
are  h^iutiful  enough;  their  simplicity  is  a  posi¬
tive  mc^it,  while  their  crudity  is  only  relative.
There  is  a  touch  of  sophistication  and  disease  in
not  being  able  to  fall  back  on  such  things  and
enjoy  them  thoroughly,  as  if  a  man  could  no
longer  relish  a  glass  of  water.  Your  true  epicure
will  study  not  to  lose  so  genuine  a  pleasure.  Bet¬
ter  forego  some  artificial  stimulus,  though  that,
too,  has  its  charm,  than  become  insensible  to
natural  joys.  Indeed,  ability  to  revert  to  ele¬
mentary  beauties  is  a  tost  that  judgment  remains
sound.

Vulgarity  is  quite  another  matter.  An  old
woman  in  a  blonde  wig,  a  dirty  hand  covered  with
jewels,  ostentation  without  dignity,  rhetoric  with¬
out  cogency,  all  offend  by  an  inner  contradiction.
To  like  such  things  we  should  have  to.surrender
our  better  intuitions  and  suffer  a  kind  of  dishon-


198


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


our.  Yet  the  elements  offensively  combined  may
be  excellent  in  isolation,  so  fhat  an  untrained  or
torpid  mind  will  be  at  a  loss  to  understand  the
critic’s  displeasure.  Oftentimes  barbaric  art  al¬
most  succeeds,  by  dint  of  splendour,  in  banish¬
ing  the  sense  of  confusion  and  absurdity;  for
#^‘verytliing,  even  reason,  must  bow  to  force.  Yet
the  impression  remains  chaotic,  ahd  wo  must
be  cither  partly  inattentive  or  partly  distressed.
Nothing  could  show  better  than  this  alternative
how  mechanical  barbaric  art  is.  Driven  by  blind
impulse  or  tradition,  the  artist  has  worked  in  the
dark.  He  has  dismissed  his  work  without  having
quite  understood  it  or  really  justiti:  d  it  *lo  his
own  mind.  Tt  is  rather  his  excretion  than  his
product.  Astonished,  very  likely,  at  his  own  fer¬
tility,  he  has  thought  himself  divinely  inspired,
little  knowing  that  clear  reason  is  the  highest  and
truest  of  inspirations.  Other  men,  observing  his
obscure  work,  have  then  honoured  him  for  pro¬
fundity;  and  so  mere  hulk  or  stress  or  cumplex-
it}'^  have  produced  a  mystical  w'onder  by  wliich
generation  after  generation  may  be  enthralled.
Barbaric  art  is  half  necromantic;  its  ascendancy
rests  in  a  certain  measure  on  bewilderment  and
fraud.

To  ])urge  away  these  impurities  nothing  is
needed  but  quickened  intelligence,  a  keener  spir¬
itual  flame.  Where  ])erception  is  adequate,  ex¬
pression  is  so  too,  and  if  a  man  will  only  grow
sensitive  to  the  various  solicitations  which  any-


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


199


thing  monstrous  combines,  he  will  thereby  per¬
ceive  its  monstrosity-  Let  him  but  enact  his
sensations,  let  him  pause  to  make  explicit  the  con¬
fused  hints  that  threaten  to  stupefy  him;  he  .will
find  that  he  can  follow  out  each  of  them  only  by
rejecting  and  forgetting  the  others.  To  free  his
imagination  in  any  direction  he  must  disengage  it
from  the  c.#ntrary  intent,  and  so  he  must  either
purify  his  object  or  leave  it  a  mass  of  confused
promptings.  Promptings  essentially  demand  to
be  carried  out,  and  when  once  an  idea  has  become
articulate  it  is  not  enriched  but  destroyed  if  it  is
^till  identified  with  its  contrary."  Any  complete
expr(^3sion  of  a  barbarous  theme  will,  therefore,
disengage  its  incompatible  elements  and  turn  it
into  a  number  of  rational  beauties.

When  good  taste  has  in  this  way  purified  and

digested  some  turgid  medley,  it  still  has  a  prog-

They  differ,  TOSS  to  make.  Idcas,  like  men.  Jive  in

finally,  in  per-  gocicty.  Not  Only  has  each  a  will  of
finance,  and  .•iii.j.

in  width  of  its  own  and  an  inherent  ideal,  but
appeal.  each  finds  itself  conditioned  for  its
expression  by  a  host  of  other  beings,  on  whose
co-operation  it  depends.  Good  taste,  besides  be¬
ing  inwardly  clear,  has  to  be  outwardly  lit.  A
monstrous  ideal  devours  and  dissolves  itself,  but
even  a  rational  one  docs  not  find  an  immortal  em¬
bodiment  simply  for  being  inwardly  possible  and
free  from  contradiction.  It  needs  a  material  basis,
a  soil  and  situation  propitious  to  i;^s  growth.
This  basis,  as  it  varies,  makes  the  ideal  vary


200


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


which  is  simply  its  expression;  and  therefore  no
ideal  can  be  ultimately  fixed  ift  ignorance  of  the
conditions  that  may  modify  it.  It  subsists,  to  be
sure,  as  an  eternal  possibility,  independently  of
all  further  earthly  revolutions.  Once  expressed,
it  has  revealed  the  inalienable  values  that  attach
to  a  certain  form  of  being,  whenever  that  form  is
actualiscd.  Hut  its  expression  may  haM3  been  only
momentary,  and  that  eternal  ideal  may  have  no
further  relevance  to  the  living  world.  A  crite¬
rion  of  taste,  however,  looks  to  a  social  career  i
it  hopes  to  educate  and  to  judge.  In  grder  to  be
an  applicable  and  a  just  law,  it  must  represent  the^
interests  over  which  it  would  preside.  '
There  are  many  undiscovered  ideals.  ‘There
are  many  beauties  which  nothing  in  this  world
can  embody  or  suggest.  There  are  also  many
once  suggested  or  even  embodied,  which  find  later
their  basis  gone  and  evaporate  into  their  native
heaven.  The  saddest  tragedy  in  the  world  is  the
destruction  of  what  has  within  it  no  inward
ground  of  dissolution,  death  in  youth,  and  the
crushing  out  of  perfection.  Imagination  has  its
bereavements  of  this  kind.  A  complete  mastery
of  existence  achieved  at  one  moment  gives  no
warrant  that  it  will  be  sustained  or  achieved
again  at  the  next.  The  achievement  may  have
been  perfect;  nature  will  not  on  that  account
stop  to  admire  it.  She  will  move  on,  and  the
meaning  which  was  read  so  triumphantly  in  her
momentary  attitude  will  not  fit  her  new  posture.


§


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


201


Like  Polonius^s  cloud,  she  will  always  suggest
some  new  ideal,  because  she  has  none  of  her  own.

In  lieu  of  an  ideal,  however,  nature  has  a  con¬
stitution,  and  this,  which  is  a  necessary  ground
for  ideals,  is  what  it  cioneerns  the  ideal  to  reckon
with.  A  poet,  spokesman  of  his  full  soul  at  a
given  juncture,  cannot  consider  eventualities  or
think  of  anything  but  the  message  he  is  sent  to
deliver,  whether  the  world  can  then  hear  it  or
not.  God,  he  may  feel  oure,  understands  him,
and  in  the  eternal  the  beauty  he  sees  and  loves
immortally  •justifies  his  enthusiasm.  Neverthe¬
less,  critics  must  view  his  momentary  ebullition
from  Snother  side.  They  do  not  come  to  justify
the  poef  in  his  own  eyes ;  he  amply  relieves  them
of  such  a  function.  They  come  only  to  inquire
how  significant  the  poet^s  expressions  arc  for
humanity  at  large  or  for  whatevoi'  public  he  ad¬
dresses.  They  come  to  register  the  social  or  rep¬
resentative  value  of  the  poet’s  soul.  His  inspira¬
tion  may  have  been  an  odd  cerebral  rumbling,  a
perfectly  irrecoverable  and  wasted  intuition;  the
exquisite  quality  it  doubtless  had  to  his  own
sense  is  now  not  to  the  purpose.  A  work  of  art  is
a  public  possession;  it  is  addressed  to  the  world.
By  taking  on  a  material  embodiment,  a  spirit  so¬
licits  attention  and  claims  some  kinship  with  the
prevalent  gods.  Has  it,  critics  should  ask,  the
affinities  needed  for  such  intercourse?  Is  it  hu¬
mane,  is  it  rational,  is  it  representative?  To  its
inherent  incommunicable  charms  it  must  add  a


202


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


1,


kind  of  courtesy.  If  it  wants^other  approval  than
its  own,  it  cannot  afford  to  regard  no  other  aspi¬
ration.

This  scope,  this  representative  faculty  or  wide
appeal,  is  necessary  to  good  taste.  All  authority
is  representative;  force  and  inner  consistency  are
girts  on  which  I  may  well  congratulate  another,
but  they  give  him  no  right  to  speak  for  me.
Either  aesthetic  experience  would  have  remained
a  chaos — which  it  is  not  altogether — or  it  must
have  tended  to  conciliate  certain  general  human
demands  and  ultimately  all  those  interests  which
its  operation  in  any  way  affects.  The  more  coif-
spicuous  and  permanent  a  work  of  art  is,  the  more
is  such  an  adjustment  needed.  A  poet  or  philoso¬
pher  may  be  erratic  and  assure  us  that  he  is  in¬
spired  ;  if  we  cannot  well  gainsay  it,  we  are  at  least
not  obliged  to  read  his  works.  An  architect  or  a
sculptor,  however,  or  a  public  performer  of  any
sort,  that  thrusts  before  us  a  spectacle  justiiicd
only  in  his  inner  consciousness,  makes  himself  a
nuisance.  A  social  standard  of  taste  must  assert
itself  here,  or  else  no  efficacious  and  cumulative
art  can  exist  at  all.  Good  taste  in  such  matters
cannot  abstract  from  tradition,  utility,  and  ihe
temper  of  the  world.  It  must  make  itself  an  in¬
terpreter  of  humanity  and  think  esoteric  dreams
less  beautiful  than  what  the  public  eye  might  con¬
ceivably  admire.

There 'are  various  affinities  by  which  art  may
acquire  a  representative  or  classic  quality.  It


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


203


may  do  so  by  giving  form  to  objects  which  every¬
body  knows,  by  rendering  experiences  that  are
universal  and  primary.  The  human

Art  may  grow  i  x  •

classic  by  figure,  elementary  passions,  common


idealising  the
fazniliart


types  and*  crises  of  fate — ^these  are
facts  whicli  pass  too  constantly  through


apperception  not  to  have  a  normal  aesthetic  value.
The  artist  \Aio  can  catch  that  effect  in  its  fulness


and  simplicity  accordingly  does  immortal  w'ork.
This  sort  of  art  immediately  becomes  popular;
it  passes  into  language  and  convention  so  that
its  aesthetic* charm  is  apparently  worn  down.  The
did  iigages  after  a  while  hardly  stimulate  unless
they  be  presented  in  some  paradoxical  way;  but
in  that  case  attention  will  be  diverted  to  the  ac¬


cidental  extravagance,  and  the  chief  classic  ef¬
fect  will  he  missed.  It  is  the  honourable  fate  or


euthanasia  of  artistic  successes  that  they  pass  from
the  field  of  professional  art  altogether  and  be¬
come  a  portion  of  human  faculty.  Every  man
learns  to  be  to  that  extent  an  artist;  approved  fig¬
ures  and  maxims  pass  current  like  the  words  and
idioms  of  a  mot  her- tongue,  themselves  once  bril¬
liant  inventions.  The  lustre  of  such  successes  is


not  really  dimmed,  however,  when  it  becomes  a
part  of  man’s  daily  light;  a  retrogression  from
that  habitual  style  or  habitual  insight  would  at
once  prove,  by  the  shock  it  caused,  how  precious
those  ingrained  apperceptions  continued  to  be.

Universality  may  also  be  achieved,  hi  a  more
heroic  fashion,  by  art  that  expresses  ultimate


204


THE  LIFE  OP  REASON


truths,  cosmic  laws,  great  human  ideals.  Virgil
and  Dante  are  classic  poets  in  this  sense,  and  a

or  by  report-  quality  belongs  to  Greek  sculp¬

ing  the  ulti-  ture  and  architecture.  They  may
not  cause  enthusiasm  in  everybody;
but  in  the  end  experience  and  reflection  renew
their  charm;  and  their  greatness,  like  that  of
high  mountains,  grows  more  obvious  with  dis¬
tance.  Such  eminence  is  the  reward  of  having
accepted  discipline  and  made  the  mind  a  clear
anagram  of  much  experience.  There  is  a  great
difference  between  the  depth  of  expression  so
gained  and  richness  or  realism  in  details.  su¬
preme  work  presupposes  minute  study,  sympathy
with  varied  passions,  many  experiments  in  ex¬
pression;  but  these  preliminary  things  are  sub¬
merged  in  it  and  are  not  displayed  side  by  side
with  it,  like  the  foot-notes  to  a  learned  work,
so  that  the  ignorant  may  know  they  have  ex¬
isted.

Some  persons,  themselves  inattentive,  imagine,
for  instance,  that  Grec'k  sculpture  is  abstract,  that
it  has  left  out  all  the  detail  and  character  which
they  cannot  find  on  the  surface,  as  they  might  in
a  modern  work.  In  truth  it  contains  those  fea¬
tures,  as  it  were,  in  solution  and  in  the  resultant
which,  when  reduced  to  harmony,  they  would
produce.  It  embodies  a  finished  humanity  which
only  varied  exercises  could  have  attained,  for  as
the  body 'is  the  existent  ground  for  all  possible
actions,  in  which  as  actions  they  exist  only  po-


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


205


tentially,  so  a  pe:^ect  body,  such  as  a  sculptor
might  conceive,  which  ought  to  be  ready  for  all
excellent  activities,  cannot  present  them  all  in
act  but  only  the  readiness  for  them.  The  fea¬
tures  that  might  express  them  severally  must  be
absorbed  and  mastered,  hidden  like  a  sword  in  its
scabbard,  and  reduced  to  a  general  dignity  or
grace.  Though  such  immersed  eloquence  be  at
first  overlooked  and  seldom  explicitly  ackhowl-
edged,  homage  is  nevertheless  rendered  to  it  in
tlie  most  unmistakable  ways.  When  lazy  artists,
backed  by  no  great  technical  or  moral  discipline,
thinjv  they,  too,  can  produce  masterpieces  by  sum-
iriary  ^treatment,  their  failure  shows  how  preg¬
nant  and  supremo  a  thing  simplicity  is.  Every
man,  in  proportion  to  his  experience  and  moral
distinction,  returns  to  the  simple  but  inexhausti¬
ble  work  of  finished  minds,  and  finds  more  and
more  of  his  own  soul  responsive  to  it.

Human  nature,  for  all  its  margin  of  variability,
has  a  substantial  core  which  is  invariable,  as  the
human  body  has  a  structure  which  it  cannot  lose
without  perishing  altogether;  for  as  creatures
grow  more  complex  a  greater  number  of  their  or¬
gans  become  vital  and  indispensable.  Advanced
forms  will  rather  die  than  surrender  a  tittle  of
their  character;  a  fact  which  is  the  physical  basis
for  loyalty  and  martyrdom.  Any  deep  interpre¬
tation  of  oneself,  or  indeed  of  anything,  has  for
that  reason  a  largely  representative  truth.  Other
men,  if  they  look  closely,  will  make  the  same  dis-


206


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


eovery  for  themselves.  Hei^ce  distinction  and
profundity,  in  spite  of  their  rarity,  are  wont  to  be
largely  recognised.  The  best  men  in  all  ages  keep
classic  traditions  alive.  These  men  have  on  their
side  the  weight  of  superior  intelligence,  and,
though  they  are  few,  they  might  even  claim  the
weight  of  numbers,  since  the  few  of  all  ages,
added  together,  may  be  more  than  the  many  who
in  any  one  age  follow  a  temporary  fashion.  Clas¬
sic  work  is  nevertheless  always  national,  or  at
least  characteristic  of  its  period,  as  the  classic
poetry  of  each  people  is  that  in  which  its  lan¬
guage  appears  most  pure  and  free.  To  trai^late*
it  is  impossible;  but  it  is  easy  to  find  that  the
human  nature  so  inimitably  expressed  in  each
masterpiece  is  the  same  that,  under  different
circumstance,  dictates  a  different  performance.
The  deviations  between  races  and  men  are  not


yet  so  great  as  is  the  ignorance  of  self,  the  blind¬
ness  to  the  native  ideal,  which  prevails  in  most  of
them.  Hence  a  groat  man  of  a  remote  epoch
is  more  intelligible  than  a  common  man  of  our
own  time.


Both  elementary  and  ultimate  judgments,
then,  contribute  to  a  standard  of  taste;  yet  hu-


Good  taate
demands  that
art  should  be
rational,  i,e.,
harmonious
with  all  other
interests.


man  life  lies  between  these  limits,  and
an  art  which  is  to  be  truly  adjusted  to
life  should  speak  also  for  the  interme¬
diate  experience.  Good  taste  is  indeed
•nothing  but  a  name  for  those  appre¬


ciations  which  the  swelling  incidents  of  life  recall


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


207


and  reinforce.  Good  taste  is  that  taste  which  is  a
good  possession,  a  friend  to  the  whole  man.  It
must  not  alienate  him  from  anything  excejpt  to
ally  him  to  something  greater  and  more  fertile  in
satisfactions.  It  will  not  suffer  him  to  dote  on
things,  however  seductive,  which  rob  him  of  some
nobler  companionship.  To  have  a  foretaste  of
such  a  lossf  and  to  reject  instinctively  whatever
will  cause  it,  is  the  very  essence  of  refinement.
Good  taste  conies,  therefore,  from  experience,  in
the  best  sense  of  that  word;  it  comes  from  hav¬
ing  united*  in  onc^s  memory  and  character  the
Truit  of  many  diverse  undertakings.  Mere  taste
is  apt  to  be  bad  taste,  since  it  regards  nothing
but  a  cliance  feeling.  Every  man  who  pursues  an
art  may  be  presumed  to  have  some  sensibility;
the  question  is  whether  he  has  breeding,  too,  and
whether  what  he  stops  at  is  not,  in  the  end,  vul¬
gar  and  offensive.  Chance  feeling  needs  to  for¬
tify  itself  with  reasons  and  to  find  its  level  in  the
great  world.  When  it  has  added  fitness  to  its  sin¬
cerity,  beneficence  to  its  passion,  it  will  have  ac¬
quired  a  right  to  live.  Violence  and  self- justifi¬
cation  will  not  pass  muster  in  a  moral  society,  for
vipers  possess  both,  and  must  nevertheless  be
stamped  out.  Citizenship  is  conferred  only  on
creatures  with  human  and  co-operative  instincts.
A  civilised  imagination  has  to  understand  and  to
serve  the  world.

The  great  obstacle  which  art  finds  attempt¬
ing  to  be  rational  is  its  functional  isolation.


208


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


Sense  and  each  of  the  passion^  suffers  from  a  sim¬
ilar  independence.  The  disarraj  of  human  in¬
stincts  lets  every  spontaneous  motion  run  too  far;
life  oscillates  between  constraint  and  unreason.
Morality  too  often  puts  up  with  .being  a  con¬
straint  and  even  imagines  such  a  disgrace  to  be
its  essence.  Art,  on  the  contrary,  as  often  hugs
unreason  for  fear  of  losing  its  inspiration,  and  for¬
gets  that  it  is  itself  a  rational  principle  of  crea¬
tion  and  order.  Morality  is  thus  reduced  to  a
necessary  evil  and  art  to  a  vain  good,  all  for  want
of  harmony  among  human  impulses.  Tf  the  pas¬
sions  arose  in  season,  if  perception  fed  ocjjy  on
those  things  which  action  should  be  adjusted  to,
turning  them,  while  action  proceeded,  into  the
substance  of  ideas — then  all  conduct  would  be
voluntary  and  enlightened,  all  speculation  would
be  practical,  all  ]:)erceptions  beautiful,  and  all  op¬
erations  arts.  The  Life  of  Reason  would  then  be
universal.

To  approach  this  ideal,  so  far  as  art  is  con¬
cerned,  would  involve  diffusing  its  processes  and
no  longer  confining  them  to  a  set  of  dead  and
unproductive  objects  called  works  of  art.

Why  art,  the  most  vital  and  generative  of  activ¬
ities,  should  produce  a  set  of  abstract  images,

,  „  ,  monuments  to  lost  intuitions,  is  a

A  mere  "work  .  _ _  .  .  '  _

of  art”  a  curious  mystery.  Nature  gives  her
products  life,  and  they  are  at  least
equal  to  their  sources  in  dignity.  Why
should  mind,  the  actual  isation  of  nature^s  powers,


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


209


produce  something  so  inferior  to  itself,  reverting
in  its  expression  to  material  being,  so  that  its  wit¬
nesses  seem  so  many  fossils  with  which  it  strews
its  path  ?  What  we  call  museums — mausoleums,
rather,  in  wljich  a  dead  art  heaps  up  its  remains
— are  those  the  places  where  the  Muses  intended
to  dwell  ?  We  do  not  keep  in  show-cases  the  coins
current  in^he  world.  A  living  art  does  not  pro¬
duce  curiosities  to  be  collected  but  spiritual
necessaries  to  be  diffused.

Artificial  art,  made  to  be  exhibited,  is  some¬
thing  gratuitous  and  sophisticated,  and  the  great¬
er  pj.rt  of  men^s  concern  about  it  is  affectation.
There^is  a  genuine  pleasure  in  planning  a  work,
in  modelling  and  painting  it;  there  is  a  pleasure
in  showing  it  to  a  sympathetic  friend,  who  asso¬
ciates  himself  in  this  way  with  the  artistes  tech¬
nical  experiment  and  with  his  interpretation  of
some  human  episode;  and  there  might  be  a  satis¬
faction  in  seeing  the  work  set  up  in  some  appro¬
priate  space  for  which  it  was  designed,  where  iis
decorative  quality  might  enrich  the  scone,  and  the
curious  passer-by  might  stop  to  decipher  it.  The
pleasures  proper  to  an  ingenuous  artist  are  spon¬
taneous  and  human;  but  his  works,  once  deliv¬
ered  to  his  patrons,  are  household  furniture  for
the  state.  Set  up  to-day,  they  are  outworn  and
replaced  to-morrow,  like  trees  in  the  parks  or  of¬
ficers  in  the  government.  A  community  where
art  was  native  and  flourishing  would  hawe  an  unin¬
terrupted  supply  of  such  ornaments,  furnished  by


210


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


its  citizens  in  the  same  modest  and  cheerful  spirit
in  which  they  furnish  other  commodities.  Every
craft  has  its  dignity,  and  the  decorative  and  mon¬
umental  crafts  certainly  have  their  own ;  but  such
art  is  neither  singular  nor  pre-emjnent,  and  a
statesman  or  reformer  who  should  raise  some-


w!iat  the  level  of  thought  or  practice  in  the  state
would  do  an  infinitely  greater  service.

The  joys  of  creating  are  not  confined,  more¬
over,  to  those  who  create  things  without  practical

Human  uses  merely  [esthetic,  like  rhyme

give  to  works  and  fireworks,  is  not  the  only  subject
that  can  engage  a  playful  fancy  or  be
pressionand  planned  with  a  premonition  of  beau-
charm.  tiful  effects.  Architecture  may  be
useful,  sculpture  commemorative,  poetry  refiec-
tive,  even  music,  by  its  expression,  religious  or
martial.  In  a  word,  practical  exigencies,  in  call¬
ing  forth  the  arts,  give  them  moral  functions
which  it  is  a  pleasure  to  see  them  fulfil.  Works
may  not  be  jBsthetie  in  their  purpose,  and  yet
that  fact  may  be  a  ground  for  their  being  doubly
delightful  in  execution  and  doubly  beautiful  in
effect.  A  richer  plexus  of  emotions  is  concerned
in  producing  or  contemplating  something  hu¬
manly  necessary  than  something  idly  conceived.
What  is  very  rightly  called  a  sense  for  fitness  is  a
vital  experience,  involving  ®sthetie  satisfactions
and  aesthetic  shocks.  The  more  numerous  the


rational  harmonies  are  which  are  present  to  the
mind,  the  more  sensible  movements  will  be  going


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


211


on  there  to  give  immediate  delight;  for  the  per¬
ception  or  expectation  of  an  ulterior  good  is  a
present  good  aTso.  Accordingly  nothing  can  so
well  call  forth  or  sustain  attention  as  what  has  a
complex  structure  relating  it  to  many  complex  in¬
terests.  A  work  woven  out  of  precious  threads
has  a  deep  pertinence  and  glory;  the  artist  who
creates  it  dbes  not  need  to  surrender  his  practical
and  moral  sense  in  order  to  indulge  his  imagina¬
tion.

The  truth  is  that  mere  sensation  or  mere  emo¬
tion  is  aif  indignity  to  a  mature  human  being.
•When  we  cat,  we  demand  a  pleasant  vista,  flow¬
ers,  or  conversation,  and  failing  these  we  take  ref¬
uge  in  a  newspaper.  The  monks,  knowing  that
men  should  not  feed  silently  like  stalled  oxen,
appointed  some  one  to  read  aloud  in  the  refec¬
tory;  and  the  Fathers,  obeying  the  same  civilised
instinct,  had  contrived  in  their  theology  intelli¬
gible  points  of  attachment  for  religious  emotion.
A  reflned  mind  finds  as  little  happiness  in  love
without  friendship  as  in  sensuality  without  love;
it  may  succumb  to  both,  but  it  accepts  neither.
What  is  true  of  mere  sensibility  is  no  less  true  of
mere  fancy.  The  Arabian  Nights — futile  enough
in  any  case — would  be  absolutely  intolerable  if
they  contained  no  Oriental  manners,  no  human
passions,  and  no  convinced  epicureanism  behind
their  miracles  and  their  tattle.  Any  absolute
work  of  art  which  serves  no  furthgr  purpose
than  to  stimulate  an  emotion  has  about  it  a  cer-


212


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


tain  luxurious  and  visionary  taint.  We  leave  it
with  a  blank  mind,  and  a  pahg  bubbles  up  from
the  very  fountain  of  pleasures.^  Art,  so  long
as  it  needs  to  be  a  dream,  will  never  cease  to  prove
a  disappointment.  Its  facile  cruelty,  its  narcotic
abstraction,  can  never  sweeten  the  evils  we  return
to  at  home ;  it  can  liberate  half  the  mind  only  by
leaving  the  other  half  in  abeyance.  In  the  mere
artist,  too,  there  is  always  something  that  falls
short  of  the  gentleman  and  that  defeats  the  man.

Surely  it  is  not  the  artistic  impulse  in  itself
that  involves  such  lack  of  equilibrium.  To  im-

Thesadvai-  P^^ss  a  meaning  and  a  rational  form
ues  of  appear-  on  matter  is  one  of  the  most  m^ster-
ance.  actions.  The  trouble  lies  in  the

barren  and  superficial  character  of  this  imposed
form:  fine  art  is  a  play  of  appearance.  Appear¬
ance,  for  a  critical  philosophy,  is  distinguished
from  reality  by  its  separation  from  the  context  of
things,  by  its  immediacy  and  insignificance.  A
play  of  appearance  is  accordingly  some  little
closed  circle  in  experience,  some  dream  in  which
we  lose  ourselves  by  ignoring  most  of  our  inter¬
ests,  and  from  which  we  awake  into  a  world  in
which  that  lost  episode  plays  no  further  part  and
leaves  no  heirs.  Art  as  mankind  has  hitherto
practised  it  falls  largely  under  this  head  and  too
much  resembles  an  opiate  or  a  stimulant.  Life
and  history  are  not  thereby  rendered  better  in
their  principle,  but  a  mere  ideal  is  extracted  out
of  them  and  presented  for  our  delectation  in


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


213


some  cheap  material,  like  words  or  marble.  The
only  precious  materials  are  flesh  and  blood,  for
these  alone  can^ defend  and  propagate  the  ideal
which  has  once  informed  them.

Artistic  creation  shows  at  this  point  a  great  in¬
feriority  to  natural  rejiroduction,  since  its  product
is  dead.  Fine  art  shapes  inert  matter  and  peoples
the  mind  whh  impotent  ghosts.  What  influence
it  has — for  every  event  has  consequences — is  not
pertinent  to  its  inspiration.  The  art  of  the  past  is
powerless  even  to  create  similar  art  in  the  present,
unless  similar  condiiions  recur  independently.  The
moments  snatched  for  art  have  been  generally  inter¬
lude^  in  life  and  its  products  parasites  in  nature,
tht'  bo^y  of  them  being  materially  functionless
and  the  soul  merely  represented.  To  exalt  fine
art  into  a  truly  ideal  activity  we  should  have  to
knit  it  more  closelv  with  other  rational  functions,
so  that  to  beautify  things  might  render  them
more  useful  and  to  represent  them  most  imagina¬
tively  might  be  to  see  them  in  their  tnith.  Some¬
thing  of  the  sort  has  been  actually  attained  by  the
noblest  arts  in  their  noblest  phases.  A  Sophocles
or  a  Leonardo  dominates  his  dreamful  vehicle
and  works  upon  the  real  world  by  its  means.  These
small  centres,  where  inter  functional  harmony  is
attained,  ought  to  expand  and  cover  the  whole
field.  Art,  like  religion,  needs  to  be  absorbed  in
the  Life  of  Reason.

What  might  help  to  bring  about  this  consum¬
mation  would  be,  on  the  one  side,  more  knowl-


214


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


edge;  on  the  other,  better  taste.  When  a  mind  is
filled  with  important  and  trn.e  ideas  and  sees  the

actual  relations  of  things,  it  cannot  rel-
be  made  pro-  ish  pictures  of  the  world  which  wan-
phetic  of  prac-  tonly  misrepresent  it.  Myth  and  meta-

tical  goods,  l  i

phor  remain  beautiful  so  long  as  they
4jre  the  most  adequate  or  graphic  means  availa¬
ble  for  expressing  the  facts,  but  so  spon  as  tb^ey
cease  to  be  needful  and  sincere  they  become  false
finer}\  The  same  thing  happens  in  the  plastic
arts.  Unless  they  spring  from  love  of  their  sub¬
ject,  and  employ  imagination  only  to  penetrate
into  that  subject  and  interpret  it  with  a  more  in¬
ward  sympathy  and  truth,  they  become  co^iven-
tional  and  overgrown  with  mere  ornament.-  They
.then  seem  ridiculous  to  any  man  who  can  truly
conceive  what  they  represent.  So  in  putting  an¬
tique  heroes  on  the  stage  we  nowadays  no  longer
tolerate  a  modern  costume,  because  the  externals
of  ancient  life  are  too  u^ell  known  to  us;  but  in  the
seventeenth  century  people  demanded  in  such
personages  intelligence  and  nobleness,  since  these
were  virtues  which  the  ancients  were  clothed  with
in  their  thought.  A  knowledge  that  should  be
at  once  full  and  appreciative  would  evidently  de¬
mand  fidelity  in  both  matters.  Knowledge,  where
it  exists,  undermines  satisfaction  in  what  does
violence  to  truth,  and  it  renders  such  representa¬
tions  grotesque.  If  knowledge  were  general  and
adequate  the  fine  arts  would  accordingly  be
brought  round  to  expressing  reality.


THE  CRITERION  OF  TASTE


215


At  the  same  time,  if  the  rendering  of  reality
is  to  remain  actisti!,  it  must  still  study  to  satisfy
the  senses:  but  as  this  study  would

whicli  in  turn  **

would  be  8uf-  HOW  accompany  every  activity,  taste

fused  with  would  gro«v  vastly  more  subtle  and  ex¬
acting.  Whatever  any  man  said  or  did
or  made,  ho  would  be  alive  to  its  ajsthetic  qual¬
ity*,  and  be&uty  would  be  a  pervasive  ingredient
in  happiness.  No  work  would  be  called,  in  a  spe¬
cial  sense,  a  work  of  art,  for  all  works  would  be


such  intrinsically;  and  even  instinctive  mimicry
and  reproduction  would  themselves  operate,  not
when  mischief  or  idleness  prompted,  but  when
som<?  human  occasion  and  some  general  utility
made  ilie  exercise  of  such  skill  entirely  deliglilful.
Thus  there  would  need  to  bo  no  division  of  man¬


kind  into  mechanical  blind  workers  and  half-


demented  poets,  and  no  separation  of  useful  from
fine  art,  such  as  people  make  who  have  under¬
stood  neither  the  nature  nor  the  ultimate  reward
of  human  action.  All  arts  would  l>c  practised  to¬
gether  and  merged  in  the  art  of  life,  the  only  one
wholly  useful  or  fine  among  them.


CHAPTER  XI


<


ART  AND  HAPPINESS

The  greatest  enemy  harmony  can  have  is  a  pre¬
mature  settlement  in  which  some  essential  force  is
wholly  disregarded.  This  excluded  ele-
ment  will  rankle  in  the  ll€sh;  it  will
parodies  of  bring  about  no  end  of  disorders  until
real  ones,  finally  rccogniscd  and  adrAitted

into  a  truly  comprehensive  regimen.  Thfe  more
numerous  the  interests  which  a  premature  settle¬
ment  combines  the  greater  inertia  will  it  oppose
to  reform,  and  the  more  self-righteously  will  it
condemn  the  innocent  pariah  that  it  leaves  out¬
side.

Art  has  had  to  suffer  much  Pharisaical  opposi¬
tion  of  this  sort.  Sometimes  political  systems,
sometimes  religious  zeal,  have  excluded  it  from
their  programme,  thereby  making  their  programme
unjust  and  inadequate.  Yet  of  all  premature  set¬
tlements  the  most  premature  is  that  which  the  fine
arts  are  wont  to  establish.  A  harmony  in  appear¬
ance  only,  one  that  touches  the  springs  of  nothing
and  has  no  power  to  propagate  itself,  is  so  partial
and  moufentary  a  good  that  we  may  justly  call  it
an  illusion.  To  gloat  on  rhythms  and  declama-

216


ART  AND  HAPPINESS


217


tions,  to  live  lost  in  imaginary  passions  and  his¬
trionic  woes,  «^n  iftimanly  life,  cut  off  from  prac¬
tical  dominion  and  from  rational  happiness.  A
lov3!y  dream  is  an  excellent  thing  in  itself^  hut
it  leaves  the  world  np  loss  a  chaos  and  makes  it
by  contrast  seem  even  darker  than  it  did.  By
dwelling  in  its  mock  heaven  art  may  inflict  on  men
the  same  Wnd  of  injury  that  any  irresponsible
passion  or  luxurious  vice  might  inflict.  For  this
reason  it  sometimes  passes  for  a  misfortune  in  a
family  i  f  a  son  insists  on  being  a  poet  or  an  actor.
Such  gift^  suggest  too  much  incompetence  and
ftuch  honours  too  much  disrepute.  A  man  does  not
avoiJ real  evils  by  having  visionary  pleasures,  but
beside^  exposing  himself  to  the  real  evils  quite  un¬
protected,  he  probably  adds  fancied  evils  to  them
in  generous  measure.  He  becomes  supersensitive,
envious,  hysterical;  the  world,  which  was  perhaps
carried  away  at  first  by  his  ecstasies,  at  the  next
moment  merely  applauds  his  performance,  then
(Titiciscs  it  superciliously,  and  very  likely  ends  by
forgetting  it  altogether.

Thus  the  fine  arts  are  seldom  an  original  factor
in  human  progress.  If  they  express  moral  and  po¬
litical  greatness,  and  serve  to  enhance  it,  they  ac¬
quire  a  certain  dignity;  but  so  soon  as  this  expres¬
sive  function  is  abandoned  they  grow  meretricious.
The  artist  becomes  an  abstracted  trifler,  and  the
public  is  divided  into  two  camps:  the  dilettanti,
who  dote  on  the  artist’s  affectations,  and  the  rab¬
ble,  who  pay  him  to  grow  coarse.  Both  influences


218


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


degrade  him  and  he  helps  to  foster  both.  An  at¬
mosphere  of  dependence  and*'’ch^atanry  gathers
about  the  artistic  attitude  and  spreads  with  its  in¬
fluence.  Religion,  philosophy,  and  manners^may
in  turn  be  infected  with  this  spirit,, being  reduced
to  a  voluntary  hallucination  or  petty  flattery.  Ro¬
manticism,  ritualism,  aBstheticism,  symbolism  are
names  this  disease  has  borne  at  diffei*ent  timeii  as
it  appeared  in  different  circles  or  touched  a  differ¬
ent  object.  Needless  to  say  that  the  arts  them¬
selves  are  the  first  to  suffer.  That  beauty  which
should  have  been  an  inevitable  smile  bn  the  face
of  society,  an  overflow  of  genuine  happiness  and
power,  has  to  be  imported,  stimulated  artificially,
and  applied  from  without;  so  that  art  becomes  a
'  sickly  ornament  for  an  ugly  existence.

Nevertheless,  aesthetic  harmony,  so  incomplete
in  its  basis  as  to  be  fleeting  and  deceptive,  is  most

T.t  imtotTpn  complete  in  its  form.  Tliis  so  partial
Of  true  perfec-  synthesis  is  a  s3mthosis  indeed,  and  just
bccaese  settlements  made  in  fancy  are
altogether  premature,  and  ignore  almost  every¬
thing  in  the  world,  in  type  they  can  be  the  most
perfect  settlements.  The  artist,  being  a  born  lover
of  the  good,  a  natural  breeder  of  perfections,  clings
to  his  insight.  If  the  world  calls  his  accomplish¬
ments  vain,  he  can,  with  better  reason,  call  vain  the
world’s  cumbrous  instrumentalities,  by  which  noth¬
ing  clearly  good  is  attained.  Appearances,  he  may
justly  unge,  are  alone  actual.  All  forces,  sub¬
stances,  realities,  and  principles  are  inferred  and


ART  AND  HAPPINESS


219


potential  only  and  ^  the  moral  scale  mere  instru¬
ments  to  brf^  pOTect  appearances  about.  To
ha^  grasped  such  an  appearance,  to  have  em¬
bodied  a  form  in  matter,  is  to  have  justified  for  the
first  time  wli^tever  may  underlie  appearance  and
to  have  put  reality  to  some  use.  It  is  to  have  be¬
gun  to  live.  As  the  standard  of  perfection  is  inter-
njfl  and  is*  measured  by  the  satisfaction  felt  in
realising  it,  every  artist  has  tasted,  in  his  activity,
what  activity  essentially  is.  He  has  moulded  exist¬
ence  into  the  likeness  of  thought  and  lost  himself
in  that  ideal  achievement  which,  so  to  speak,  beck-
•ons  all  things  into  being.  Even  if  a  thousand  mis¬
fortunes  await  him  and  a  final  disappointment,
he  has  been  happy  once.  He  may  be  inclined  to
rest  his  case  there  and  challenge  practical  peo¬
ple  to  justify  in  the  same  way  the  faith  that  is
in  them.

That  a  moment  of  the  most  perfect  happiness
should  prove  a  source  of  unhappiness  is  no  para-

Pros  and  cons  observcd  the

of  detached  in-  worl  (1.  A  hope,  a  passion,  a  crime,  is
duigences.  ^  flash  of  Vitality.  It  is  inwardly  con¬
gruous  with  the  will  that  breeds  it,  yet  the  hap¬
piness  it  pictures  is  so  partial  that  even  while  it  is
felt  it  may  be  overshadowed  by  sinister  forebodings.
A  certain  unrest  and  insecurity  may  consciously
harass  it.  With  time,  or  by  a  slight  widening  in  the
field  of  interest,  this  submerged  unhappiness  may
rise  to  the  surface.  If,  as  is  probable,  it* is  caused
or  increased  by  the  indulgence  which  preceded,


220


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


then  the  only  moment  in  whic^ji  a  good  was  tasted,
the  only  vista  that  had  openefl  congenially  before
the  mind,  will  prove  a  new  and  permanent  curse.
In  this  way  love  often  misleads  individuals,  aiSbi-
tion  cities,  and  religion  whole  races  ^f  men.  That
art,  also,  should  often  be  an  indulgence,  a  blind
that  hides  reality  from  ill-balanced  minds  and  ul¬
timately  increases  their  confusion,  is  by  no  means
incompatible  with  art’s  ideal  essence.  On  the  con¬
trary,  such  a  result  is  inevitable  when  ideality  is
carried  at  all  far  upon  a  narrow  basis.  The  more
genuine  and  excellent  the  vision  the  greater  havoc
it  makes  if,  being  inadequate,  it  establishes  itself
authoritatively  in  the  soul.  Art,  in  the  better
sense,  is  a  condition  of  happiness  for  a  practical  and
■  labouring  creature,  since  without  art  he  remains  a
slave;  hut  it  is  one  more  source  of  unhappiness  for
him  so  long  as  it  is  not  squared  with  his  necessary
labours  and  merely  interrupts  them.  It  then
alienates  him  from  his  world  without  being  able
to  carry  him  effectually  into  a  better  one.

The  artist  is  in  many  ways  like  a  child.  He
seems  happy,  because  his  life  is  spontaneous,  yet
The  ha  ^^6  is  iiot  Competent  to  secure  his  own
imagination  is  good.  To  be  truly  happy  he  must  be
one  initiaUy  in  bred,  reared  from  the  cradle,  as  it

were,  under  propitious  influences,  so
that  he  may  have  learned  to  love  what  conduces  to
his  development.  In  that  rare  case  his  art  will
expand  *s  his  understanding  ripens;  he  will  not
need  to  repent  and  begin  again  on  a  lower  key.


ART  AND  HAPPINESS


221


The  ideal  artist,  like  the  ideal  philosopher,  has  all
time  and  alim^istc^ce  for  his  virtual  theme.  Fed
bv  the  world  he  can  help  to  mould  it,  and  his  in-
sigiy:  is  a  kind  of  wisdom,  preparing  him  as  sci¬
ence  might  for  using  the  world  well  and  making
it  more  fruitful.  He  can  then  be  happy,  not
merely  in  the  sense  of  having  now  and  then  an
ecstatic  nft)mcnt,  but  happy  in  having  light  and
resource  enough  within  him  to  cope  steadily  with
real  things  and  to  leave  upon  them  the  vestige  of
his  mind.

One  effect  of  growing  experience  is  to  render
what  is  unreal  uninteresting.  Momentous  alter¬
natives  in  life  are  so  numerous  and  the

End  bspught

always  closer  possibilities  they  open  up  so  varied  tlmt
to  them  by  imagination  finds  enough  employment

of  a  historic  and  practical  sort  in  trying
to  seize  them.  A  child  plants  Towers  of  Babel;  a
mature  architect,  in  planning,  would  lose  all  in¬
terest  if  be  were  hidden  to  disregard  gravity  and
economy.  The  conditions  of  existence,  after  they
are  known  and  accepted,  become  conditions  for
the  only  pertinent  beauty.  In  each  place,  for  each
situation,  the  plastic  mind  finds  an  appropriate
ideal.  It  need  not  go  afield  to  import  something
exotic.  It  need  make  no  sacrifices  to  whim  and  to


personal  memories.  It  rather  breeds  out  of  the
given  problem  a  new  and  singular  solution,  there¬
by  exercising  greater  invention  than  would  be
requisite  for  framing  an  arbitrary  ideal  and
ing  it  at  all  costs  on  every  occasion.


222


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


In  other  words,  a  happy  result  can  be  secured  -in
art,  as  in  life,  only  by  intelli^nce^i- Intelligence

Reason  is  the  consists  in  having  reaothe  heart  and
principle  of  deciphered  the  promptings  latent  tjl^re,
haroi^*°^  and  then  in  readirjg  the  world  and  deci¬
phering  its  law  and  constitution,  to  see
1'  >w  and  where  the  heart’s  ideal  may  be  embodied.
Our  troubles  come  from  the  colossai  blunders
made  by  our  ancestors  (who  had  worse  ancestors
of  their  own)  in  both  these  interpretations,  blun¬
ders  which  have  come  down  to  us  in  our  blood  and
in  our  institutions.  The  vices  thus  tonsmittcd
cloud  our  intelligence.  We  fail  in  practical  affairs
when  we  ignore  the  conditions  of  a(*tion  and*  we
fail  in  works  of  imagination  when  we  concoct Vhat
is  fantastic  and  without  roots  in  the  world.

The  value  of  art  lies  in  making  people  happy,
first  in  practising  the  art  and  then  in  possessing
its  product.  This  observation  might  seem  need¬
less,  and  ought  to  be  so;  but  if  we  compare  it  with
what  is  commonly  said  on  these  subjects,  we  must
confess  that  it  may  often  be  denied  and  more  often,
perhaps,  may  not  be  understood.  Happiness  is
something  men  ought  to  pursue,  although  they  sel¬
dom  do  so;  they  are  drawn  away  from  it  at  first  by
foolish  impulses  and  afterwards  by  perverse  laws.
To  secure  happiness  conduct  would  have  to  remain
spontaneous  while  it  learned  not  to  be  criminal;
but  the  fanatical  attachment  of  men,  now  to  a
fierce  liberty,  now  to  a  false  regimen,  keeps
them  barbarous  and  wretched.  A  rational  pur-


ART  AND  HAPPINESS


223


suit  of  happiness-^which  is  one  thing  with  prog¬
ress  or  witl^^e  Mfe  of  Reason — would  embody
^t^t  natural  piety  which  leaves  to  the  episodes
oJ^ife  their  inherent  values,  mourning  death,
celebrating  Jove,  sanctifying  civic  traditions,  en¬
joying  and  correcting  nature^s  ways.  To  dis¬
criminate  happiness  is  therefore  the  very  soul  of
a»t,  whiclf  expresses  experience  without  distort¬
ing  it,  as  those  political  or  metaphysical  tyrannies
distort  it  which  sanctify  unhappiness.  A  free
mind,  like  a  creative  imagination,  rejoices  at  the
harmonies  it  can  find  or  make  between  man  and
nature ;  and,  where  it  finds  none,  it  solves  the  con-
flic?  so  far  as  it  may  and  then  notes  and  endures
it  wifli  a  shudder.

A  morality  organised  about  the  human  lieart  in
an  ingenuous  and  sincere  fashion  would  involve
every  fine  art  and  would  render  the  world  perva¬
sively  beautiful — ^l^cautiful  in  its  artificial  prod¬
ucts  and  beautiful  in  its  underlying  natural  terrors.
The  closer  we  keep  to  elementary  human  needs  and
to  the  natural  agencies  that  may  satisfy  them,  the
closer  we  are  to  beauty.  Industry,  sport,  and
science,  with  tlic  perennial  intercourse  and  pas¬
sions  of  men,  swarm  with  incentives  to  ex¬
pression,  because  they  are  everywhere  creating
new  moulds  of  being  and  compelling  the  eye  to
observe  those  forms  and  to  recast  them  ideally.
Art  is  simply  an  adequate  industry;  it  arises  when
industry  is  carried  out  to  the  satisfacliion  of  all
human  demands,  even  of  those  incidental  sen-


224


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


suous  demands  which  we  call  esthetic  and  which
a  brutal  industry,  in  its  has«e,  despise  or
ignore.

Arts  responsive  in  this  way  to  all  human  nsi^re
would  be  beautiful  accordingcto  reasorp  and  might
remain  beautiful  long.  Poetic  beauty  touches  the
world  whenever  it  attains  some  unfeigned  harmony
either  with  sense  or  with  reason;  and  tlite  more  ua-
feignedly  human  happiness  was  made  the  test  of  all
institutions  and  pursuits,  the  more  beautiful  they
would  be,  having  more  numerous  points  of  fusion
with  the  mind,  and  fusing  Avith  it  more  profoundly.
To  distinguish  and  to  create  beauty  would  then  be  ’
no  art  relegated  to  a  few  abstracted  spirits,  play¬
ing  with  casual  fancies;  it  would  be  a  habit  insep¬
arable  from  j)ractical  elhciency.  All  operations,
all  affairs,  Avould  then  he  viewed  in  the  light  of
ultimate  interests,  and  in  their  deep  relation  to
human  good.  The  arts  would  thus  recover  their
Plomeric  glory;  touching  human  fate  as  they
clearly  would,  they  would  borrow  something  of  its
grandeur  and  pathos,  and  yet  the  interest  that
worked  in  them  would  be  warm,  because  it  would


remain  unmistakably  animal  and  sincere.

The  principle  that  all  institutions  should  sub¬
serve  happiness  runs  deeper  than  any  cult  for  art


Oal7  a  rational
society  can


and  lays  the  foundation  on  which  the
latter  might  rest  safely.  If  social


have  sure  and  structure  wcre  rational  its  free  expres-

perfect  Arts*

•  si  on  would  be  so  too.  Many  observers


with  no  particular  philosophy  to  adduce,  feel  that


ART  AND  HAPPINESS


225


the  arts  among  us  are  somehow  impotent,  and
they  look  fffr  4  better  inspiration,  now  to  ancient
^ijjmdels,  now  to  the  raw  phenomena  of  life.
A^ilettante  may,  indeed,  summon  inspiration
whence  he^will  ;  and  a  virtuoso  will  never  lack
some  material  to  keep  him  busy;  but  if  what
is  hoped  for  is  a  genuine,  native,  inevitable  art,
great  revolution  would  first  have  to  be  worked
in  society.  We  should  have  io  abandon  our
vested  illusions,  our  irrational  religions  and
patriotisms  and  schools  of  art,  and  to  discover
instead  our  genuine  needs,  the  forms  of  our  pos-
si^e  happiness.  To  call  for  such  self-examina¬
tion^  seems  revolutionary  only  because  we  start
from  a  so})hi8ticatcd  system,  a  system  resting  on
traditional  fashions  and  superstitions,  by  which
the  will  of  the  living  generation  is  misinterpreted
and  betrayed.  To  shake  off  that  system  would
not  subvert  order  but  rather  institute  order  for
the  first  time;  it  would  he  an  Instauraiio  Magna,
a  setting  things  again  on  their  feet.

We  in  Christendom  are  so  accustomed  to  arti¬
ficial  ideals  and  to  artificial  institutions,  kept  up
to  express  them,  that  we  hardly  conceive  how
anomalous  our  situation  is,  sorely  as  we  may
suffer  from  it.  We  found  academies  and  mu¬
seums,  as  we  found  missions,  to  fan  a  flame  that
constantly  threatens  to  die  out  for  lack  of  natural
fuel.  Our  overt  ideals  are  parasites  in  the  body
politic,  while  the  ideals  native  to»  the  body
politic,  those  involved  in  our  natural  struc-


226


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


turc  and  situation,  are  eitlicr  stilled  by  that
alien  incubus,  leaving  civic  lifir  barbafOus,  or  else
force  their  way  up,  unremarked  or  not
honoured  as  ideals.  Industry  and  science  ^mcl
social  amenities,  with  all  the  »congruoiis  comforts
and  appurtenances  of  contemporary  life,  march
on  their  way,  as  if  they  had  no  tiling  to  say
to  the  spirit,  which  remains  entangled  iif  a  cob  we  B
of  dead  traditions.  An  idle  pottering  of  the  fancy
over  obsolete  forms — theological,  dramatic,  or  plas¬
tic — makes  that  by-play  to  the  sober  business  of
life  which  men  call  their  art  or  their  religion;  and
the  more  functionless  and  gratuitous  this  by-p]^ay
is  the  more  those  who  indulge  in  it  tliink  they  are
idealists.  They  feel  they  are  champions  of  what
is  most  precious  in  the  world,  as  a  sentimental  lady
might  fancy  herself  a  lover  of  flowers  when  she
pressed  them  in  a  book  instead  of  planting  their
seeds  in  the  garden.

It  is  clear  that  gratuitous  and  functionless  hab¬
its  cannot  bring  happiness;  they  do  not  constitute
Why  art  la  ^  activity  at  once  spontaneous  and
now  empty  beneficent,  such  as  noble  art  is  an
and  unstable,  Those  habits  may  indeed

give  pleasure;  they  may  bring  extreme  excitement,
as  madness  notably  does,  though  it  is  in  the  high¬
est  degree  fnnctionlcss  and  gratuitous.  Nor  is
such  by-play  without  consequences,  some  of  which
might  conceivably  be  fortunate.  What  is  function¬
less  is  so  called  for  being  worthless  from  some  ideal
point  of  view,  and  not  conducing  to  the  particu-


ART  AND  HAPPINESS


227


lar  life  considered.  But  nothing  real  is  dissociated
from  the  ui^Jversal^ux;  everything — ^madness  and
all  unmeaning  cross-currents  in  being — count  in
tlH^gcneral  process  and  discharge  somewhere,  not
without  effect,  the  substance  they  have  drawn  for
a  moment  ijfto  their^ittlc  vortex.  So  our  vain  arts
and  unnecessary  religions  are  not  without  real  ef¬
fects  andjnot  without  a  certain  internal  vitality.
AVhen  life  is  profoundly  disorganised  it  may  well
happen  that  only  in  deta^’lied  ejji^odos,  only  in  mo¬
ments  snatched  for  dreaming  in,  can  nien  sec  the
blue  or  catch  a  glimpse  of  something  like  the  ideal.
In  that  case  their  esteem  for  their  irrelevant  vis-
ioiiR  maj'  be  w’^oll  grounded,  and  their  thin  art  and
far-fetched  religion  may  really  constitute  what  is
best  in  their  experience.  In  a  pathetic  way  these
poor  enthusiasms  may  be  justified,  but  only  be¬
cause  the  very  conception  of  a  rational  life  lies
entirely  beyond  the  horizon.

It  is  no  marveh  wlien  art  is  a  brief  truancy  from
rational  practice,  that  the  artist  himself  should  be
a  vagrant,  and  at  best,  as  it  were,  an  infant  prodi¬
gy.  The  wings  of  genius  servo  him  only  for  an
escapade,  enabling  him  to  skirt  the  perilous  edge
of  madness  and  of  mystical  abysses.  But  such  an
erratic  workman  does  not  deserve  the  name  of  ar-


Anomalous
character  of


tist  or  master;  he  has  burst  convention
only  to  break  it,  not  to  create  a  new


the  irrational  convention  more  in  harmony  wdth  na-
ture.  His  originality,  though  it  may
astonish  for  a  moment,  will  in  the  end  be  despised


228


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON  tt


and  will  find  no  thoroughfare.  He  will  meant! pie
he  wretched  himself,  torn  from  the  roots  of  his
being  by  that  cruel,  unmeaning  inspiration;  or,  if
too  rapt  to  see  his  own  plight,  he  will  be  all
more  pitied  by  practical  men,  who  cannot  thinTt  it
a  real  blessing  to  be  lost  in  joys  that  do  not
strengthen  the  character  and  yield  nothing  for


posterity.

Art,  in  its  nobler  acceptation,  is  an  achievement.


not  an  indulgence.  It  prepares  the  world  in  some


sense  to  receive  the  soul,  and  the  soul  to  master  the


world;  it  disentangles  those  threads  in  each  that
can  be  woven  into  the  other.  That  the  artist


should  be  eccentric,  homeless,  dreamful  may  almost
seem  a  natural  law,  but  it  is  none  the  less  a  scan¬
dal.  An  artist’s  business  is  not  really  to  cut  fan¬
tastical  capers  or  be  licensed  to  play  the  fool.  His
business  is  simply  that  of  every  keen  soul  to  build
well  when  it  builds,  and  to  speak  well  when  it
speaks,  giving  practice  everywhere  the  gr^^atest
possible  affinity  to  the  situation,  the  most  delicate
adjustment  to  every  faculty  it  affects.  The  wonder
of  an  artist’s  performance  grows  with  the  range  of
his  penetration,  with  the  instinctive  sympathy  that
makes  him,  in  his  mortal  isolation,  considerate  of
other  men’s  fate  and  a  great  diviner  of  their  se¬
cret,  so  that  his  work  speaks  to  them  kindly,  with
a  deeper  assurance  than  they  could  have  spoken
with  to  themselves.  And  the  joy  of  his  great
sanity,  the  power  of  his  adequate  vision,  is  not
the  less  iii tense  because  he  can  lend  it  to  others


AKT  AND  HAPPINESS  229

I

^  aii(^  has  borrowed  it  from  a  faithful  study  of  the
world.  ^  ^

If  happiness  is  the  ultimate  sanction  of  art,  art
is  the  best  instrument  of  happiness.  In  art
iriorc  directly  than  in  other  activities

True  art  meas-  »  ,  i

ures  and  com-  man  s  self-cxprcssion  IS  cumulative  and
pietes  happi-  finds  an  immediate  reward:  for  it  alters
^  ’  ^the  material  conditions  of  sentience  so
that  sentience  becomes  at  onco  more  delightful  and
more  significant.  In  industry  man  is  still  servile,
preparing  the  materials  he  is  to  use  in  action.  In
action  itself,  though  he  is  free,  he  exerts  his  in-
.  fl  lienee  on  a  living  and  treacherous  medium  and
sesp  the  issue  at  each  moment  drift  farther  and
fartli^er  from  his  intent.  In  science  he  is  an  oh-
sorver, preparing  himself  for  action  in  another  way,
l)y  studying  j!^s  results  and  conditions.  But  in  art
he  is  at  once  impotent  and  free;  he  is  creative,
lie  is  not  troubled  by  his  materials,  because  he  has
assimilated  them  and  may  take  them  for  granted ;
nor  is  he  concerned  with  the  chance  complexion  of
affairs  in  the  actual  world,  because  he  is  making  the
world  over,  not  merely  considering  how  it  grew  or
how  it  will  consent  to  grow  in  future.  Nothing,
accordingly,  could  he  more  delightful  than  genuine
art,  nor  more  free  from  remorse  and  the  sting  of
vanity.  Art  springs  so  completely  from  the  heart
of  man  that  it  makes  everything  speak  to  him  in
his  own  language;  it  reaches,  nevertheless,  so  truly
to  the  heart  of  nature  that  it  co-operates  with  her,
becomes  a  parcel  of  her  creative  material  energy,


230


THE  LIFE  OF  REASON


and  builds  by  her  instinctive  hand.  If  the  varfbus
formative  impulses  afoot  in  Ijke  world  never  op¬
posed  stress  to  stress  and  made  no  havoc  with  or^
another,  nature  might  be  called  an  imconsqilns
artist.  In  fact,  just  where  such  a  formative  im-

C  O

pule  finds  support  from  the  environment,  a  con¬
sciousness  supervenes.  If  that  consciousness  is
adequate  enough  to  ue  prophetic,  an  .art  arises.
Thus  the  emergence  of  arts  out  of  instincts  is  the
token  and  exact  measure  of  nature^s  success  and
of  mortal  happiness.
