Language (Edward Sapir, 1921)
==========================================================
The classic introduction to linguistics; the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis begins here. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (in.ernet.dli.2015.30956).









LANGUAGE 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY 
OF SPEECH 


EDWARD SAPIR 


NEW YORK 

HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY 



COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY 

^tAECOtJET, BRACE AIS'D COMPANY, INC. 


Mintkd in the U. S. a. 



PREFACE 


This little book aims to give a certain perspective on 
the subject of language rather than to assemble facts 
about it. It has little to say of the ultimate psychologi- 
cal basis of speech and gives only enough of the actual 
descriptive or historical facts of particular languages to 
illustrate principles. Its main purpose is to show what 
I conceive language to be, what is its variability in place 
and time, and what are its relations to other fundamen- 
tal human interests — the problem of thought, the nature 
of the historical process, race, culture, art. 

The perspective thus gained will be useful, I hope, 
both to linguistic students and to the outside public that 
is half inclined to dismiss linguistic notions as the pri- 
vate pedantries of essentially idle minds. Knowledge 
of the wider relations of their science is essential to 
professional students of language if they are to be saved 
from a sterile and purely technical attitude. Among 
contemporary writers of influence on liberal thought 
Croce is one of the very few who have gained an under- 
standing of the fundamental significance of language. 
He has pointed out its close relation to the problem of 
art. I am deeply indebted to him for this insight. 
Quite aside from their intrinsic interest, linguistic forms 
and historical processes have the greatest possible diag- 
nostic value for the understanding of some of the more 
difficult and elusive problems in the psychology of 
thought and in the strange, cumulative drift in the life 
of the human spirit that we call history or progress or 



IV 


PREFACE 


evolution. This value depends chiefly on the uncon- 
scious and unrationalized nature of linguistic structure. 

I have avoided most of the technical terms and all 
of the technical symbols of the linguistic academy. 
There is not a single diacritical mark in the book. 
Where possible, the discussion is based on English ma- 
terial. It was necessary, however, for the scheme of 
the book, which includes a consideration of the protean 
forms in which human thought has found expression, 
to quote some exotic instances. For these no apology 
seems necessary. Owing to limitations of space I have 
had to leave out many ideas or principles that I should 
have liked to touch upon. Other points have had to be 
barely hinted at in a sentence or flying phrase. Never- 
theless, I trust that enough has here been brought to- 
gether to serve as a stimulus for the more fundamental 
study of a neglected field. 

I desire to express my cordial appreciation of the 
friendly advice and helpful suggestions of a number of 
friends w^ho have read the work in manuscript, notably 
Profs. A. L. Kroeber and R. H. Lowie of the University 
of California, Prof. W. D. Wallis of Reed College, and 
Prof. J. Zeitlin of the University of Illinois. 

Edward Sapir. 

Ottawa, Ont., 

April 8, 1V21, 



CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Peeface iii 

CHAPTER 

I. Introductory: Language Defined .... 1 


Language a cultural, not a biologically inherited, 
function. Futility of interjectional and sound- 
imitative theories of the origin of speech. Defini- 
tion of language. The psycho-physical basis of 
speech. Concepts and language. Is thought possi- 
ble without language? Abbreviations and transfers 
of the speech process. The universality of lan- 
guage. 

II, The Elements of Speech 24 

Sounds not properly elements of speech. Words 
and significant parts of words (radical elements, 
grammatical elements ) . Types of words. The word 
a formal, not a functional unit. Tlie word has a 
real psychological existence. The sentence. The 
cognitive, volitional, and emotional aspects of 
speech. Feeling-tones of words. 

III. The Sounds of Language 43 

The vast number of possible sounds. The articu- 
lating organs and their share in the production of 
speech sounds: lungs, glottal cords, nose, mouth 
and its parts. Vowel articulations. How and 
where consonants are articulated. The phonetic 
habits of a language. The “values'" of sounds. 
Phonetic patterns. 

IV. Form in Language: Grajvimatical Processes . 50 

Formal processes as distinct from grammatical 
functions. Intercrossing of the two points of view. 

Six main types of grammatical process. Word 
sequence as a method. Compounding of radical 
elements. Affixing: prefixes and suffixes; infixes. 
Internal vocalic change; consonantal change. Re- 
duplication. Functional variations of stress; of 
pitch. 


V 



CONTENTS 


vi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

V. Form in Language: Grammatical Concepts . . 86 

Analysis of a typical English sentence. Types of 
concepts illustrated by it. Inconsistent expression 
of analogous concepts. How the same sentence may 
be expressed in other languages with striking dif- 
ferences in the selection and grouping of concepts. 
Essential and non-essential concepts. The mixing 
of essential relational concepts with secondary ones 
of more concrete order. Form for form’s sake. 
Classification of linguistic concepts: basic or con- 
crete, derivational, concrete relational, pure rela- 
tional. Tendency for these types of concepts to flow 
into each other. Categories expressed in various 
grammatical systems. Order and stress as relating 
principles in the sentence. Concord. Parts of 
speech: no absolute classification possible; noun 
and verb. 

VI. Types of Linguistic Structure 127 

Tlie possibility of classifying languages. Difficul- 
ties. Classification into form-languages and form- 
less languages not valid. Classification according 
to formal processes used not practicable. Classifi- 
cation according to degree of synthesis. “Inflec- 
tive” and “agglutinative.” Fusion and symbolism 
as linguistic techniques. Agglutination. “Inflec- 
tive” a confused term. Threefold classification sug- 
gested: what types of concepts are expressed? 
what is the prevailing technique? what is the de- 
gree of synthesis? Four fundamental conceptual 
types. Examples tabulated. Historical test of the 
validity of the suggested conceptual classification. 

VII. Language as a Historical Product: Drift . . 157 

VariabiTity of language. Individual and dialectic 
variations. Time variation or “drift.” How dia- 
lects arise. Linguistic stocks. Direction or 
“slope” of linguistic drift. Tendencies illustrated 
in an English sentence. Hesitations of usage as 
symptomatic of the direction of drift. Leveling 
tendencies in English. Weakening of case elements. 
Tendency to fixed position in the sentence. Drift 
toward the invariable word. 

VITT. Language as a Historical Product: Phonetic Law 183 

Parallels in drift in related languages. Phonetic 
law as illustrated in the history of certain English 
and German vowels and consonants. Regularity of 



CHAPTER 


CONTENTS 


Vll 

PAGE 


phonetic law. Shifting of sounds without destruc- 
tion of phonetic pattern. Difficulty of explaining 
the nature of phonetic drifts. Vowel mutation in 
English and German. Morphological influence on 
phonetic change. Analogical levelings to oflTset 
irregularities produced by phonetic laws. New 
morphological features due to phonetic change. 

IX. How Languages Influence Each Other . . . 20.) 

Linguistic influences due to cultural contact. Bor- 
rowing of words. Resistances to borrowing. Pho- 
netic modification of borrowed words. Phonetic 
interinfluencings of neighboring languages. Mor- 
phological borrowings. Morphological resemblances 
as vestiges of genetic relationship. 

X. Language, Race, and Culture 221 

Naive tendency to consider linguistic, racial, and 
cultural grou})ings as congruent. Race and lan- 
guage need not correspond. Cultural and linguistic 
boundaries not identical. Coincidences between lin- 
guistic cleavages and those of language and culture 
due to historical, not intrinsic psycliological, 
causes. Language does not in any deep sense ‘‘re- 
flect’ culture, 

XI. Language and Literature 236 

Language as the material or medium of literature. 
Literature may move on the generalized linguistic 
plane or may be inseparable from specific linguistic 
conditions. Language as a collective art. Neces- 
sary esthetic advantages or limitations in any lan- 
guage, Style as conditioned by inherent features 
of the language. Prosody as conditioned by the 
phonetic dynamics of a language. 


Index 


249 




LANGUAGE, 

AN INTEODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF SPEECH 

I 

INTRODUCTOEY: LANGUAGE DEFINED 

Speecpi is so familiar a feature of daily life that we 
rarely pause to define it. It seems as natural to man 
as walking, and only less so than breathing. Yet it 
needs but a moment’s reflection to convince us that this 
naturalness of speech is but an illusory feeling. The 
process of acquiring speech is, in sober fact, an utterly 
different sort of thing from the process of learning to 
walk. In the case of the latter function, culture, in 
other words, the traditional body of social usage, is not 
seriously biunght into play. The child is individually 
equipped, by the complex set of factors that we term 
biological heredity, to make all the needed muscular and 
nervous adjustments that result in walking. Indeed, 
the very conformation of these muscles and of the ap- 
propriate parts of the nervous systeiu, may be said to 
be primarily adapted to the movements made in walking 
and in similar activities. In a very real sense the nor- 
mal human being is predestined to Avalk, not because 
his elders will assist him to learn the art, but because 
his organism is prepared from birth, or even from 
the moment of conception, to take on all those expendi- 

1 



2 


LANGUAGE 


tures of nervous energy and all those muscular adap- 
tations that result in walking. To put it concisely, 
walking is an inherent, biological function of man. " 

Not so language. It is of course true that in a cer- 
tain sense the individual is predestined to talk, but 
that is due entirely to the circumstance that he is born 
not merely in nature, but in the lap of a society that 
is certain, reasonably certain, to lead him to its tradi- 
tions Eliminate society and there is every reason to 
believe that he will learn to walk, if, indeed, he survives 
at all. But it is just as certain that he will never learn 
to talk, that is, to communicate ideas according to the 
traditional system of a particular society. Or, again, 
remove the new-born individual from the social envi- 
ronment into which he has come and transplant him 
to an utterly alien one. He will develop the art of 
walking in his new environment very much as he would 
have developed it in the old. But his speech will be 
completely at variance with the speech of his native 
environment. Walking, then, is a general human ac- 
tivity that varies only within circumscribed limits as 
we pass from individual to individual. Its variability 
is involuntary and purposeless. Speech is a human 
activity that varies without assignable limit as we pass 
from social group to social group, because it is a purely 
historical heritage of the group, the product of long- 
continued social usage. It varies as all creative effort 
varies — not as consciously, perhaps, but none the less 
as truly as do the religions, the beliefs, the customs, 
and the arts of dilferent peoples. Walking is an or- 
ganic, an instinctive, function (not, of course, itself 
an instinct) ; speech is a non-instinctive, acquired, “cul- 
turaP’ function. 

There is one fact that has frequently tended to pre- 



INTRODUCTORY 


3 


vent the recognition of language as a merely conven- 
tional system of sound symbols, that has seduced the 
^pular mind into attributing to it an instinctive basis 
that it does not really possess. This is the well-known 
observation that under the stress of emotion, say of a 
sudden twinge of pain or of unbridled joy, we do in- 
voluntarily give utterance to sounds that the hearer in- 
terprets as indicative of the emotion itself. But there 
is all the difference in the world between such invol- 
untary expression of feeling and the normal type of 
communication of ideas that is speech. The former 
kind of utterance is indeed instinctive, but it is non- 
symbolic; in other words, the sound of pain or the 
sound of joy does not, as such, indicate the emotion, 
it does not stand aloof, as it were, and announce that 
such and such an emotion is being felt. What it does 
is to serve as a more or less automatic overflow of the 
emotional energy; in a sense, it is part and parcel of 
the emotion itself. Moreover, such instinctive cries 
hardly constitute communication in any strict sense. 
They are not addressed to any one, they are merely 
overheard, if heard at all, as the bark of a dog, the 
sound of approaching footsteps, or the rustling of the 
wind is heard. If they convey certain ideas to the 
hearer, it is only in the very general sense in which 
any and every sound or even any phenomenon in our 
environment may be said to convey an idea to the per- 
ceiving mind. If the involuntary cry of pain which 
is conventionally represented by ‘‘Oh!’' be looked upon 
as a true speech symbol equivalent to some such idea 
as “I am in great pain/’ it is just as allowable to in- 
terpret the appearance of clouds as an equivalent sym- 
bol that carries the definite message “It is likely to 
rain.” A definition of language, however, that is so 



4 LANGUAGE 

extended as to cover every type of inference becomes ut- 
terly meaningless. 

The mistake must not be made of identifying ouj: 
conventional interjections (our oh! and ah! and sh!) 
with the instinctive cries themselves. These interjec- 
tions are merely conventional fixations of the natural 
sounds. They therefore differ widely in various lan- 
guages in accordance with the specific phonetic genius 
of each of these. As such they may be considered an 
integral portion of speech, in the properly cultural sense 
of the term, being no more identical with the instinctive 
cries themselves than such words as cuckoo’^ and kill- 
deer’’ are identical with the cries of the birds they 
denote or than Eossini’s treatment of a storm in the 
overture to '^William Tell” is in fact a storm. In other 
wmrds, the interjections and sound-imdtative words of 
normal speech are related to their natural prototypes 
as is art, a purely social or cultural thing, to nature. 
It may be objected that, though the interjections differ 
somewhat as we pass from language to language, they 
do nevertheless offer striking family resemblances and 
may therefore be looked upon as having grown up 
out of a common instinctive base. But their case is 
nowise different from that, say, of the varying national 
modes of pictorial representation. A Japanese picture 
of a hill both differs from and resembles a typical mod- 
ern European painting of the same kind of hill. Both 
are suggested by and both ''imitate” the same natural 
feature. Neither the one nor the other is the same 
thing as, or, in any intelligible sense, a direct outgrowth 
of, this natural feature. The two modes of representa- 
tion are not identical because they proceed from differ- 
ing historical traditions, are executed with differing 
pictorial techniques. The interjections of Japanese and 



INTRODUCTORY 


5 


English are, just so, suggested by a common natural 
prototype, the instinctive cries, and are thus unavoid- 
ably suggestive of each other. They differ, now greatly, 
n^w but little, because they are builded out of histori- 
cally diverse materials or techniques, the respective 
linguistic traditions, phonetic systems, speech habits of 
the two peoples. Yet the instinctive cries as such are 
practically identical for all humanity, just as the hu- 
man skeleton or nervous system is to all intents and 
purposes a ‘ ' fixed, ’ ' that is, an only slightly and ‘ ^ acci- 
dentally’’ variable, feature of man’s organism. 

Interjections are among the least important of speech 
elements. Their discussion is valuable mainly because 
it can be shown that even they, avowedly the nearest 
of all language sounds to instinctive utterance, are only 
superficially of an instinctive nature. Were it there- 
fore possible to demonstrate that the whole of lan- 
guage is traceable, in its ultimate historical and psycho- 
logical foundations, to the interjections, it would still 
not follow that language is an instinctive activity. But, 
as a matter of fact, all attempts so to explain the origin 
of speech have been fruitless. There is no tangible evi- 
dence, historical or otherwise, tending to show that 
the mass of speech elements and speech processes has 
evolved out of the interjections. These are a very small 
and functionally insignificant proportion of the vocabu- 
lary of language ; at no time and in no linguistic prov- 
ince that we have record of do we see a noticeable tend- 
ency towards their elaboration into the primary warp 
and woof of language. They are never more, at best, 
than a decorative edging to the ample, complex fabric. 

What applies to the interjections applies with even 
greater force to the sound-imitative words. Such words 
as ‘‘whippoorwill,” “to mew,” “to caw” are in no sense 



6 


LANGUAGE 


natural sounds that man has instinctively or automati- 
cally reproduced. They are just as truly creations of 
the human mind, flights of the human fancy, as any- 
thing else in language. They do not directly grow o1it 
of nature, they are suggested by it and play with it. 
Hence the onomatopoetic theory of the origin of speech, 
the theory that would explain all speech as a gradual 
evolution from sounds of an imitative character, really 
brings us no nearer to the instinctive level than is 
language as we know it to-day. As to the theory itself, 
it is scarcely more credible than its interjectional coun- 
terpart. It is true that a number of words which we do 
not now feel to have a sound-imitative value can be 
shown to have once had a phonetic form that strongly 
suggests their origin as imitations of natural sounds. 
Such is the English word ^'to laugh. For all that, 
it is quite impossible to show, nor does it seem intrinsi- 
cally reasonable to suppose, that more than a negligible 
proportion of the elements of speech or anything at 
all of its formal apparatus is derivable from an onomato- 
poetic source. However much we may be disposed 
on general principles to assign a fundamental impor- 
tance in the languages of primitive peoples to the imi- 
tation of natural sounds, the actual fact of the matter 
is that these languages show no particular preference 
for imitative words. Among the most primitive peoples 
of aboriginal America, the Athabaskan tribes of the Mac- 
kenzie River speak languages in which such words seem 
to be nearly or entirely absent, while they are used 
freely enough in languages as sophisticated as English 
and German. Such an instance shows how little the 
essential nature of speech is concerned with the mere 
imitation of things. 

The way is now cleared for a serviceable deflnition 



INTRODUCTORY 


7 


of language. Language is a purely human and non- 
instinctive method of communicating ideas, emotions, and 
desires by means of a system of voluntarily produced 
^nbols. These symbols are, in the first instance, audi- 
tory and they are produced by the so-called ^‘organs 
of speech.’’ There is no discernible instinctive basis in 
human speech as such, however much instinctive ex- 
pressions and the natural environment may serve a 
stimulus for the development of certain elements of 
speech, however much instinctive tendencies, motor and 
other, may give a predetermined range or mold to lin- 
guistic expression. Such human or animal communica- 
tion, if communication” it may be called, as is brought 
about by involuntary, instinctive cries is not, in our 
sense, language at all. 

I have just referred to the organs of speech,” and 
it would seem at first blush that this is tantamount 
to an admission that speech itself is an instinctive, bio- 
logically predetermined activity. "We must not be mis- 
led by the mere term. There are, properly speaking, 
no organs of speech; there are only organs that are 
incidentally useful in the production of speech sounds. 
The lungs, the larynx, the palate, the nose, the tongue, 
the teeth, and the lips, are all so utilized, but they are 
no more to be thought of as primary organs of speech 
than are the fingers to be considered as essentially or- 
gans of piano-playing or the knees as organs of prayer. 
Speech is not a simple activity that is carried on by 
one or more organs biologically adapted to the purpose. 
It is an extremely complex and ever-shifting network 
of adjustments — in the brain, in the nervous system, 
and in the articulating and auditory organs — tending 
towards the desired end of communication. The lungs 
developed, roughly speaking, in connection with the 



8 


LANGUAGE 


necessary biological function known as breathing; the 
nose, as an organ of smell; the teeth, as organs useful 
in breaking up food before it was ready for digestion. 
If, then, these and other organs are being constairTiy 
utilized in speech, it is only because any organ, once 
existent and in so far as it is subject to voluntary con- 
trol, can be utilized by man for secondary purposes. 
Physiologically, speech is an overlaid function, or, to be 
more precise, a group of overlaid functions. It gets 
what service it can out of organs and functions, nerv- 
ous and muscular, that have come into being and are 
maintained for very dilferent ends than its own. 

It is true that physiological psychologists speak of 
the localization of speech in the brain. This can only 
mean that the sounds of speech are localized in the audi- 
tory tract of the brain, or in some circumscribed por- 
tion of it, precisely as other classes of sounds are lo- 
calized; and that the motor processes involved in speech 
(such as the movements of the glottal cords in the 
larynx, the movements of the tongue required to pro- 
nounce the vowels, lip movements required to articulate 
certain consonants, and numerous others) are localized 
in the motor tract precisely as are all other impulses 
to special motor activities. In the same way control 
is lodged in the visual tract of the brain over all those 
processes of visual recognition involved in reading. Nat- 
urally the particular points or clusters of points of 
localization in the several tracts that refer to any ele- 
ment of language are connected in the brain by paths 
of association, so that the outward, or psycho-physical, 
aspect of language, is of a vast network of associated 
localizations in the brain and lower nervous tracts, the 
auditory localizations being without doubt the most 
fundamental of all for speech. However, a speech- 



INTRODUCTORY 


d 


sound localized in the brain, even when associated with 
the particular movements of the ‘'speech organs'' that 
^ required to produce it, is very far from being an 
element of language. It must be further associated 
with some element or group of elements of experience, 
say a visual image or a class of visual images or a feel- 
ing of relation, before it has even rudimentary linguistic 
significance. This “element" of experience is the con- 
tent or “meaning" of the linguistic unit; the associated 
auditory, motor, and other cerebral processes that lie 
immediately back of the act of speaking and the act 
of hearing speech are merely a complicated symbol 
of or signal for these “meanings," of which more anon. 
We see therefore at once that language as such is not 
and cannot be definitely localized, for it consists of a 
peculiar symbolic relation — physiologically an arbitrary 
one — between all possible elements of consciousness 
on the one hand and certain selected elements local- 
ized in the auditory, motor, and other cerebral and 
nervous tracts on the other. If language can be said 
to be definitely “localized" in the brain, it is only in 
that general and rather useless sense in which all as- 
pects of consciousness, all human interest and activity, 
may be said to be “in the brain." Hence, we have no 
recourse but to accept language as a fully formed func- 
tional system within man's psychic or “spiritual" con- 
stitution. We cannot define it as an entity in psycho- 
physical terms alone, however much the psycho-physical 
basis is essential to its functioning in the individual. 

Prom the physiologist's or psychologist’s point of view 
we may seem to be making an unwarrantable abstrac- 
tion in desiring to handle the subject of speech without 
constant and explicit reference to that basis. However, 
such an abstraction is justifiable. We can profitably dis- 



10 


LANGUAGE 


cuss the intention, the form, and the history of speech, 
precisely as we discuss the nature of any other phase of 
human culture — say art or religion — as an institutioipl 
or cultural entity, leaving the organic and psychologi- 
cal mechanisms back of it as something to be taken for 
granted. Accordingly, it must be clearly understood 
that this introduction to the study of speech is not con- 
cerned with those aspects of physiology and of physio- 
logical psychology that underlie speech. Our study 
of language is not to be one of the genesis and opera- 
tion of a concrete mechanism; it is, rather, to be an in- 
quiry into the function and form of the arbitrary sys- 
tems of symbolism that we term languages. 

I have already pointed out that the essence of lan- 
guage consists in the assigning of conventional, volun- 
tarily articulated, sounds, or of their equivalents, to the 
diverse elements of experience. The word ‘ ‘ house is 
not a linguistic fact if by it is meant merely the acoustic 
effect produced on the ear by its constituent consonants 
and vowels, pronounced in a certain order; nor the 
motor processes and tactile feelings which make up the 
articulation of the word; nor the visual perception on 
the part of the hearer of this articulation ; nor the visual 
perception of the word house on the written or 
printed page; nor the motor processes and tactile feel- 
ings which enter into the writing of the word ; nor the 
memory of any or all of these experiences. It is only 
when these, and possibly still other, associated experi- 
ences are automatically associated with the image of a 
house that they begin to take on the nature of a symbol, 
a word, an element of language. But the mere fact of 
such an association is not enough. One might have heard 
a particular word spoken in an individual house under 
such impressive circumstances that neither the word 



INTRODUCTORY 


11 


nor the image of the house ever recur in consciousness 
without the other becoming present at the same time. 
This type of association does not constitute speech. The 
association must be a purely symbolic one; in other 
words, the word must denote, tag off, the image, must 
have no other significance than to serv^,' as a counter to 
refer to it whenever it is necessary or convenient to do 
so. Such an association, voluntary and, in a sense, arbi- 
trary as it is, demands a considerable exercise of self- 
conscious attention. At least to begin with, for habit 
soon makes the association nearly as automatic as any 
and more rapid than most. 

But we have traveled a little too fast. Were the sym- 
bol ''house'’ — whether an auditory, motor, or visual ex- 
perience or image — attached but to the single image of 
a particular, house once seen, it might perhaps, by an 
indulgent criticism, be termed an element of speech, yet 
it is obvious at the outset that speech so constituted 
would have little or no value for purposes of commu- 
nication. The world of our experiences must be enoi’- 
mously simplified and generalized before it is possible 
to make a symbolic inventory of all our experiences of 
things and relations; and this inventory is imperative 
before we can convey ideas. The elements of language, 
the symbols that ticket off experience, must therefore 
be associated with whole groups, delimited classes, of 
experience rather than with the single experiences them- 
selves. Only so is communication possible, for the single 
experience lodges in an individual consciousness and is, 
strictly speaking, incommunicable. To be communicated 
it needs to be referred to a class which is tacitly accepted 
by the community as an identity. Thus, the single im- 
pression which T have had of a particular house must 
be identified with all my other impressions of it. Fur- 



14 


LANGUAGE 


of view of language, thought may be defined as the high- 
est latent or potential content of speech, the content that 
is obtained by interpreting each of the elements in the 
flow of language as possessed of its very fullest concep- 
tual value. From this it follows at once that language 
and thought are not strictly coterminous. At best lan- 
guage can but be the outward facet of thought on the 
highest, most generalized, level of symbolic expression. 
To put our viewpoint somewhat differently, language is 
primarily a pre-rational function. It humbly works up 
to the thought that is latent in, that may eventually be 
read into, its classifications and its forms; it is not, as 
is generally but naively assumed, the final label put upon 
the finished thought. 

Most people, asked if they can think without speech, 
would probably answer, ‘‘Yes, but it is not easy for me 
to do so. Still I know it can be done.^’ Language is 
but a garment! But what if language is not so much 
a garment as a prepared road or groove ? It is, indeed, 
in the highest degree likely that language is an instru- 
ment originally put to uses lower than the conceptual 
plane and that thought arises as a refined interpretation 
of its content. The product grows, in other words, with 
the instrument, and thought may be no more conceivable, 
in its genesis and daily practice, without speech than is 
mathematical reasoning practicable without the lever of 
an appropriate mathematical symbolism. No one be- 
lieves that even the most difficult mathematical proposi- 
tion is inherently dependent on an arbitrary set of sym- 
bols, but it is impossible to suppose that the human mind 
is capable of arriving at or holding such a proposition 
without the s3anbolism. The writer, for one, is strongly 
of the opinion that the feeling entertained by so many 
that they can think, or even reason, without language 



INTRODUCTORY 


15 


is an illusion. The illusion seems to be due to a number 
of factors. The simplest of these is the failure to dis- 
tinguish between imagery and thought. As a matter of 
fact, no sooner do we try to put an image into con- 
scious relation with another than we find ourselves slip- 
ping into a silent flow of words. Thought may be a 
natural domain apart from the artificial one of speech, 
but speech would seem to be the only road we know 
of that leads to it. A still more fruitful source of the 
illusive feeling that language may be dispensed with 
in thought is the common failure to realize that lan- 
guage is not identical with its auditory symbolism. The 
auditory symbolism may be replaced, point for point, 
by a motor or by a visual symbolism (many people can 
read, for instance, in a purely visual sense, that is, with- 
out the intermediating link of an inner flow of the audi- 
tory images that correspond to the printed or written 
words) or by still other, more subtle and elusive, types 
of transfer that are not so easy to define. Hence the 
contention that one thinks without language merely be- 
cause he is not aware of a coexisting auditory imagery is 
very far indeed from being a valid one. One may go 
so far as to suspect that the symbolic expression of 
thought may in some cases run along outside the fringe 
of the conscious mind, so that the feeling of a free, non- 
linguistic stream of thought is for minds of a certain 
type a relatively, but only a relatively, justified one. 
Psycho-physically, this would mean that the auditory or 
equivalent visual or motor centers in the brain, to- 
gether with the appropriate paths of association, that 
are the cerebral equivalent of speech, are touched off 
so lightly during the process of thought as not to rise 
into consciousness at all. This would be a limiting case — 
thought riding lightly on the submerged crests of speech, 



16 


LANGUAGE 


instead of jogging along with it, hand in hand. The 
modern psychology has shown us how powerfully sym- 
bolism is at work in the unconscious mind. It is there- 
fore easier to understand at the present time than it 
would have been twenty years ago that the most rarefied 
thought may be but the conscious counterpart of an 
unconscious linguistic sj^mbolism. 

One word more as to the relation between language 
and thought. The point of view that we have developed 
does not by any means preclude the possibility^ of the 
growth of speech being in a high degree dependent on 
the development of thought. We may assume that lan- 
guage arose pre-rationally — just how and on what pre- 
cise level of mental activity we do not know — but we 
must not imagine that a highly developed system of 
speech symbols worked itself out before the genesis of 
distinct concepts and of thinking, the handling of con- 
cepts. We must rather imagine that thought processes 
set in, as a kind of psychic overflow, almost at the be- 
ginning of linguistic expression; further, that the con- 
cept, once defined, necessarily reacted on the .life of 
its linguistic symbol, encouraging further linguistic 
growth. We see this complex process of the interaction 
of language and thought actually taking place under 
our eyes. The instrument makes possible the product, 
the product refines the instrument. The birth of a new 
concept is invariably foreshadowed by a more or less 
strained or extended use of old linguistic material; the 
concept does not attain to individual and independent 
life until it has found a distinctive linguistic embodi- 
ment, In most cases the new symbol is but a thing 
wrought from linguistic material already in existence 
in ways mapped out by crushingly despotic precedents. 
As soon as the word is at hand, we instinctively feel, 



INTRODUCTORY 


17 


with something of a sigh of relief, that the concept is 
ours for the handli: g. Not until we own the symbol 
do we feel that we hold a key to the immediate knowl- 
edge or understanding of the concept. Would we be so 
ready to die for ‘‘liberty/’ to struggle for “ideals,” 
if the words themselves were not ringing within us? 
And the word, as we know, is not only a key ; it may also 
be a fetter. 

Language is primarily an auditory system of sym- 
bols. In so far as it is articulated it is also a motor 
system, but the motor aspect of speech is clearly sec- 
ondary to the auditory. In normal individuals the im- 
pulse to speech first takes effect in the sphere of auditory 
imagery and is then transmitted to the motor nerves that 
control the organs of speech. The motor processes and 
the accompanying motor feelings are not, however, the 
end, the final resting point. They arc merely a means 
and a control leading to auditory perception in both 
speaker and hearer. Communication, which is the very 
object of speech, is successfully effected only when the 
hearer’s auditory perceptions are translated into the 
appropriate and intended flow of imagery or thought or 
both combined. Hence the cycle of speech, in so far as 
W'e may look upon it as a purely external instrument, 
begins and ends in the realm of sounds. The concordance 
between the initial auditory imagery and the final audi- 
tory perceptions is the social seal or warrant of the 
successful issue of the process. As we have already seen, 
the typical course of this process may undergo endless 
modifications or transfers into equivalent systems with- 
out thereby losing its essential formal characteristics. 

The most important of these modifications is the ab- 
breviation of the speech process involved in thinking. 
This has doubtless many forms, according to the struc- 



18 


LANGUAGE 


tural or functional peculiarities of the individual mind. 
The least modified form is that known as ''talking to 
one’s self” or "thinking aloud.” Here the speaker 
and the hearer are identified in a single person, who 
may be said to communicate with himself. More signifi- 
cant is the still further abbreviated form in which the 
sounds of speech are not articulated at all. To this 
belong all the varieties of silent speech and of normal 
thinking. The auditory centers alone may be excited; 
or the impulse to linguistic expression may be communi- 
cated as well to the motor nerves that communicate with 
the organs of speech but be inhibited either in the mus- 
cles of these organs or at some point in the motor nerves 
themselves; or, possibly, the auditory centers may be 
only slightly, if at all, affected, the speech process mani- 
festing itself directly in the motor sphere. There must 
be still other types of abbreviation. How common is 
the excitation of the motor nerves in silent speech, in 
which no audible or visible articulations result, is shown 
by the frequent experience of fatigue in the speech or- 
gans, particularly in the larynx, after unusually stimu- 
lating reading or intensive thinking. 

All the modifications so far considered are directly 
patterned on the typical process of normal speech. Of 
very great interest and importance is the possibility of 
transferring the whole system of speech symbolism into 
other terms than those that are involved in the typical 
process. This process, as we have seen, is a matter of 
sounds and of movements intended to produce these 
sounds. The sense of vision is not brought into play. 
But let us suppose that one not only hears the articu- 
lated sounds but sees the articulations themselves as they 
are being executed by the speaker. Clearly, if one can 
only gain a sufficiently high degree of adroitness in 



INTRODUCTORY 


19 


perceiving these movements of the speech organs, the 
way is opened for a new type of speech symbolism — that 
in which the sound is replaced by the visual image of 
the articulations that correspond to the sound. This 
sort of system has no great value for most of us be- 
cause w^e are already possessed of the auditory-motor sys- 
tem of Avhich it is at best but an imperfect translation, 
not all the articulations being visible to the eye. How- 
ever, it is well known what excellent use deaf-mutes can 
make of '^reading from the lips” as a subsidiary method 
of apprehending speech. The most important of all 
visual speech symbolisms is, of course, that of the writ- 
ten or i)rinted wmrd, to wdiich, on the motor side, corre- 
sponds the s3^stem of delicately adjusted movements 
which result in the writing or typewriting or other 
graphic method of recording speech. The significant 
feature for our recognition in these new^ types of sym- 
bolism, apart from the fact that they are no longer 
a by-product of normal speech itself, is that each ele- 
ment (letter or written word) in the system corresponds 
to a specific element (sound or sound-group or spoken 
word) in the primary system. Written language is thus 
a point-to-point equivalence, to borrow a mathematical 
phrase, to its spoken counterpart. The written forms 
are secondary symbols of the spuken ones — symbols of 
symbols — yet so close is the correspondence that they 
may, not only in theory but in the actual practice of cer- 
tain eye-readers and, possibly, in certain types of think- 
ing, be entirely substituted for the spoken ones. Yet the 
auditory-motor associations are probably always latent 
at the least, that is, they are unconsciously brought into 
play. Even those w^ho read and think without the slight- 
est use of sound imagery are, at last analysis, dependent 
on it. They are merely handling the circulating medium, 



20 


LANGUAGE 


the money, of visual symbols as a convenient substitute 
for the economic goods and services of the fundamental 
auditory symbols. 

The possibilities of linguistic transfer are practically 
unlimited. A familiar example is the Morse telegraph 
code, in which the letters of written speech are repre- 
sented by a conventionally fixed sequence of longer or 
shorter ticks. Here the transfer takes place from the 
written word rather than directly from the sounds of 
spoken speech. The letter of the telegraph code is thus 
a symbol of a symbol of a symbol. It does not, of course, 
in the least follow that the skilled operator, in order to 
arrive at an understanding of a telegraphic message, 
needs to transpose the individual sequence of ticks into 
a visual image of the word before he experiences its 
normal auditory image. The precise method of reading 
off speech from the telegraphic communication undoubt- 
edly varies widely with the individual. It is even con- 
ceivable, if not exactly likely, that certain operators may 
have learned to think directly, so far as the purely con- 
scious part of the process of thought is concerned, in 
terms of the tick-auditory symbolism or, if they happen 
to have a strong natural bent toward motor symbolism, 
in terms of the correlated tactile-motor symbolism de- 
veloped in the sending of telegraphic messages. 

Still another interesting group of transfers are the 
different gesture languages, developed for the use of 
deaf-mutes, of Trappist monks vowed to perpetual si- 
lence, or of communicating parties that are within see- 
ing distance of each other but are out of earshot. Some of 
these systems are one-to-one equivalences of the normal 
system of speech ; others, like military gesture-symbolism 
or the gesture language of the Plains Indians of North 
America (understood by tribes of mutually unintelligible 



INTRODUCTORY 


21 


forms of speech) are imperfect transfers, limiting them- 
selves to the rendering of such grosser speech elements 
as are an imperative minimum under difficult circum- 
stances. In these latter systems, as in such still more im- 
perfect symbolisms as those used at sea or in the woods, 
it may he contended that language no longer properly 
plays a part but that the ideas are directly conveyed by 
an utterly unrelated symbolic process or by a quasi- 
instinctive imitativeness. Such an interpretation would 
be erroneous. The intelligibility of these vaguer sym- 
bolisms can hardly be due to anything but their auto- 
matic and silent translation into the terms of a fuller 
flow of speech. 

We shall no doubt conclude that all voluntary com- 
munication of ideas, aside from normal speech, is either 
a transfer, direct or indirect, from the typical sym- 
bolism of language as spoken and heard or, at the least, 
involves the intermediary of truly linguistic symbolism. 
This is a fact of the highest importance. Auditory image- 
ry and the correlated motor imagery leading to articu- 
lation are, by whatever devious ways we follow the pro- 
cess, the historic fountain-head of all speech and of all 
thinking. One other point is of still greater importance. 
The ease with which speech symbolism can be transferred 
from one sense to another, from technique to technique, 
itself indicates that the mere sounds of speech are not 
the essential fact of language, which lies rather in the 
classification, in the formal patterning, and in the relat- 
ing of concepts. Once more, language, as a structure, is 
on its inner face the mold of thought. It is this ab- 
stracted language, rather more than the physical facts 
of speech, that is to concern us in our inquiry. 

There is no more striking general fact about language 
than its universality. One may argue as to whether a 



22 


LANGUAGE 


particular tribe engages in activities tliat are worthy 
of the name of religion or of art, but we know of no 
people that is not possessed of a fully developed lan- 
guage. The lowliest South African Bushman speaks in 
the forms of a rich symbolic system that is in essence 
perfectly comparable to the speech of the cultivated 
Frenchman. It goes without saying that the more ab- 
stract concepts are not nearly so plentifully represented 
in the language of the savage, nor is there the rich ter- 
minology and the finer definition of nuances that reflect 
the higher culture. Yet the sort of linguistic development 
that parallels the historic growth of culture and which, 
in its later stages, we associate with literature is, at best, 
but a superficial thing. The fundamental groundwork 
of language — the development of a clear-cut phonetic 
system, the specific association of speech elements with 
concepts, and the delicate provision for the formal ex- 
pression of all manner of relations — all this meets us 
rigidly perfected and systematized in every language 
known to us. Many primitive languages have a formal 
richness, a latent luxuriance of expression, that eclipses 
anything known to the languages of modern civilization. 
Even in the mere matter of the inventory of speech the 
layman must be prepared for strange surprises. Popular 
statements as to the extreme poverty of expression to 
which primitive languages are doomed are simply myths. 
Scarcely less impressive than the universality of speech 
is its almost incredible diversity. Those of us that have 
studied French or German, or, better yet, Latin or Greek, 
know in what varied forms a thought may run. The 
formal divergences between the English plan and the 
Latin plan, however, are comparatively slight in the per- 
spective of what we know of more exotic linguistic 
patterns. The universality and the diversity of speech 



INTRODUCTORY 


23 


lead to a significant inference. We are forced to be- 
lieve that language is an immensely ancient heritage of 
the human race, whether or not all forms of speech are 
the historical outgrowth of a single pristine form. It 
is doubtful if any other cultural asset of man, be it 
the art of drilling for fire or of chipping stone, may 
lay claim to a greater age. I am inclined to believe that 
it antedated even the lowliest developments of mate- 
rial culture, that these developments, in fact, were not 
strictly possible until language, the tool of significant 
expression, had itself taken shape. 



II 


THE ELEMENTS OP SPEECH 

We have more than once referred to the ^'elements of 
speech/’ by which we understood, roughly speaking, 
what are ordinarily called “words.’' We must now 
look more closely at these elements and acquaint our- 
selves with the stuff of language. The very simplest 
element of speech — and by “speech” we shall hence- 
forth mean the auditory system of speech symbolism, the 
flow of spoken words — is the individual sound, though, 
as we shall see later on, the sound is not itself a simple 
structure but the resultant of a series of independent, yet 
closely correlated, adjustments in the organs of speech. 
And yet the individual sound is not, properly consid- 
ered, an element of speech at all, for speech is a signifi- 
cant function and the sound as such has no significance. 
It happens occasionally that the single sound is an inde- 
pendently significant element (such as French a ^'has” 
and d “to” or Latin i “go!”), but such cases are for- 
tuitous coincidences between individual sound and sig- 
nificant word. The coincidence is apt to be fortuitous 
not only in theory but in point of actual historic fact; 
thus, the instances cited are merely reduced forms of 
originally fuller phonetic groups — Latin Jiahet and ad 
and Indo-European ei respectively. If language is a 
structure and if the significant elements of language are 
the bricks of the structure, then the sounds of speech can 
only be compared to the unformed and unburnt clay of 

24 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 


25 


which the bricks are fashioned. In this chapter we shall 
have nothing further to do with sounds as sounds. 

The true, significant elements of language are gener- 
ally sequences of sounds that are either words, significant 
parts of words, or word groupings. What distinguishes 
each of these elements is that it is the outward sign of 
a specific idea, whether of a single concept or image or 
of a number of such concepts or images definitely con- 
nected into a whole. The single word may or may not 
be the simplest significant element we have to deal. with. 
The English words sing, sings, singing, singer each con- 
veys a perfectly definite and intelligible idea, though 
the idea is disconnected and is therefore functionally 
of no practical value. We recognize immediately that 
these words are of two sorts. The first word, sing, is an 
indivisible phonetic entity conveying the notion of a 
certain specific activity. The other words all involve 
the same fundamental notion but, owing to the addition 
of other phonetic elements, this notion is given a par- 
ticular twist that modifies or more closely defines it. 
They represent, in a sense, compounded concepts that 
have flowered from the fundamental one. We may, 
therefore, analyze the words sings, singing, and singer 
as binary expressions involving a fundamental concept, 
a concept of subject matter {sing), and a further con- 
cept of more abstract order — one of person, number, 
time, condition, function, or of several of these com- 
bined. 

If we symbolize such a term as sing by the algebraic 
formula A, we shall have to symbolize such terms as 
sings and singer by the formula A + The element A 
may be either a complete and independent word {sing) 
or the fundamental substance, the so-called root or 

iWe shall reserve capitals for radical elements. 



26 


LANGUAGE 


stem ^ or radical element’’ (sing-) of a word. The ele- 
ment h {-s, -ing, -er) is the indicator of a subsidiary and, 
as a rule, a more abstract concept; in the widest sense 
of the word ‘"form,” it puts upon the fundamental con- 
cept a formal limitation. We may term it a ‘'grammati- 
cal element ’ ’ or affix. As we shall see later on, the gram- 
matical element or the grammatical increment, as we had 
better put it, need not be suffixed to the radical ele- 
ment. It may be a prefixed element (like the uiir- of 
unsingahle), it may be inserted into the very body of 
the stem (like the n of the Latin vinco “I conquer” as 
contrasted with its absence in vici “I have conquered”), 
it may be the complete or partial repetition of the stem, 
or it may consist of some modification of the inner form 
of the stem (change of vowel, as in sung and song; 
change of consonant as in dead and death; change of 
accent, actual abbreviation). Each and every one of 
these types of grammatical element or modification has 
this peculiarity, that it may not, in the vast majority 
of cases, be used independently but needs to be somehow 
attached to or welded with a radical element in order to 
convey an intelligible notion. We had better, there- 
fore, modify our formula, A h, to A (b) , the round 
brackets symbolizing the incapacity of an element to 
stand alone. The grammatical element, moreover, is not 
only non-existent except as associated with a radical one, 
it does not even, as a rule, obtain its measure of signifi- 
cance unless it is associated with a particular class of 
radical elements. Thus, the -s of English he hits sym- 
bolizes an utterly different notion from the -s of books y 
merely because hit and book are differently classified as 
to function. We must hasten to observe, however, that 
while the radical element may, on occasion, be identical 
2 These words are not here used in a narrowly technical sense 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 21 

with the word, it does not follow that it may always, or 
even customarily, be used as a word. Thus, the IwrU 
‘‘garden’’ of such Latin forms as Jiortus, horti, and liorto 
is as much of an abstraction, though one yielding a more 
easily apprehended significance, than the -ing of singing. 
Neither exists as an independently intelligible and sat- 
isfying element of speech. Both the radical element, as 
such, and the grammatical element, therefore, are 
reached only by a process of abstraction. It seemed 
proper to symbolize sing-er as A + (h) ; liort-us must be 
symbolized as (A) (b). 

So far, the first speech element that we have found 
which we can say actually “exists” is the word. Before 
defining the word, however, we must look a little more 
closely at the type of word that is illustrated by sing. 
Are we, after all, justified in identifying it with a 
radical element ? Does it represent a simple correspond- 
ence between concept and linguistic expression? Is the 
element sing-, that we have abstracted from sings, sing- 
ing, and singer and to which we may justly ascribe a 
general unmodified conceptual value, actually the same 
linguistic fact as the word sing? It would almost seem 
absurd to doubt it, yet a little reflection only is needed 
to convince us that the doubt is entirely legitimate. The 
word sing cannot, as a matter of fact, be freely used to 
refer to its own conceptual content. The existence of 
such evidently related forms as sang and sting at once 
shows that it cannot refer to past time, but that, for 
at least an important part of its range of usage, it is lim- 
ited to the present. On the other hand, the use of sing 
as an “infinitive” (in such locutions as to sing and he 
will sing) does indicate that there is a fairly strong 
tendency for the word sing to represent the full, untram- 
meled amplitude of a specific concept. Yet if sing were, 



2S 


LANGUAGE 


in any adequate sense, the fixed expression of the un- 
modified concept, there should be no room for such vo- 
calic aberrations as we find in sang and sung and song, 
nor should we find sing specifically used to indicate pres- 
ent time for all persons but one (third person singular 
smgs ) . 

The truth of the matter is that smg is a kind of twi- 
light word, trembling between the status of a true radical 
element and that of a modified word of the type of sing- 
ing. Though it has no outward sign to indicate that it 
conveys more than a generalized idea, we do feel that 
there hangs about it a variable mist of added value. 
The formula A does not seem to represent it so well as 
A+ (0). We might suspect sing of belonging to the 
A +' (Z?) type, with the reservation that the (h) had 
vanished. This report of the ^'feeU^ of the word is far 
from fanciful, for historical evidence does, in all earnest, 
show that sing is in origin a number of quite distinct 
words, of type A (h), that have pooled their separate 
values. The (h) of each of these has gone as a tangible 
phonetic element ; its force, however, lingers on in weak- 
ened measure. The sing of / sing is the correspondent of 
the Anglo-Saxon singe; the infinitive sing, of singan; 
the imperative sing of sing. Ever since the breakdown 
of English forms that set in about the time of the 
Norman Conquest, our language has been straining 
towards the creation of simple concept-words, unalloyed 
by formal connotations, but it has not yet succeeded 
in this, apart, possibly, from isolated adverbs and other 
elements of that sort. Were the typical unanalyzable 
word of the language truly a pure concept-word (type 
A) instead of being of a strangely tri^nsitional type 
(type A-\- [0] ), our sing and work and house and thoU" 
sands of others would compare with the genuine radical* 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 


29 


words of numerous other languages.^ Such a radical- 
word, to take a random example, is the Nootka^ word 
hamot '‘bone/' Our English correspondent is only su- 
perficially comparable. Hamot means ' ' bone " in a quite 
indefinite sense ; to our English word clings the notion 
of singularity. The Nootka Indian can convey the idea 
of plurality, in one of several ways, if he so desires, but 
he does not need to ; hamot may do for either singular 
or plural, should no interest happen to attach to the dis- 
tinction. As soon as we say “bone" (aside from its 
secondary usage to indicate material), we not merely 
specify the nature of the object but we imply, whether 
we will or no, that there is but one of these objects to 
be considered. And this increment of value makes all 
the difference. 

We now kfiow of four distinct formal types of word: 
A (Nootka hamot) ; A +' (0) {sing, hone) ; A + {b) 
{singing) ; (A) + {h) (Latin hortus) , There is but 
one other type that is fundamentally possible : A 
the union of two (or more) independently occurring 
radical elements into a single term. Such a word is the 
compound fire-engine or a Sioux form equivalent to 
eat-stand (i.e., "to eat while standing’'). It frequently 
happens, however, that one of the radical elements be- 
comes functionally so subordinated to the other that it 
takes on the character of a grammatical element. We 
may symbolize this by A + 6, a type that may gradually, 
by loss of external connection between the subordinated 
element h and its independent counterpart B merge 
with the commoner type A +' (b). A word like heauti- 

3 It is not a question of the general isolating character of such 
languages as Chinese (see Chapter VI). Radical-words may and 
do occur in languages of all varieties, many of them of a high 
degree of complexity. 

4 Spoken by a group of Indian tribes in Vancouver Island. 



30 


LANGUAGE 


ful is an example of A + the -ful barely preserving 
the impress of its lineage. A word like homely, on the 
other hand, is clearly of the type A +' (^)> fo^ one 
but a linguistic student is aware of the connection be- 
tween the -ly and the independent word like. 

In actual use, of course, these five (or six) funda- 
mental types may be indefinitely complicated in a num- 
ber of ways. The (0) may have a multiple value; in 
other words, the inherent formal modification of the 
basic notion of the word may affect more than one cate- 
gory. In such a Latin word as cor '' heart, for in- 
stance, not only is a concrete concept conveyed, but there 
cling to the form, which is actually shorter than its own 
radical element (cord-), the three distinct, yet inter- 
twined, formal concepts of singularity, gender classifica- 
tion (neuter), and case (subjective-objective). The 
complete grammatical formula for cor is, then, A -f (0) 
^+'(^) + (0)^ though the merely external, phonetic 
formula would be (A) —, (A) indicating the abstracted 
^^stem^’ cord-, the minus sign a loss of material. The 
significant thing about such a word as cor is that the 
three conceptual limitations are not merely expressed by 
implication as the word sinks into place in a sentence; 
they are tied up, for good and all, within the very vitals 
of the word and cannot be eliminated by any possibility 
of usage. 

Other complications result from a manifolding of 
parts. In a given Avord there may be several elements 
of the order A (we have already symbolized this by the 
type A-\- B), of the order (A), of the order b, and of 
the order (h). Finally, the various types may be com- 
bined among themselves in endless Avays. A compara- 
tively simple language like English, or even Latin, illus- 
trates but a modest proportion of these theoretical possi- 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 


31 


bilities. But if we take our examples freely from the 
vast storehouse of language, from languages exotic as 
well as from those that we are more familiar with, 
we shall find that there is hardly a possibility that is 
not realized in actual usage. One example will do for 
thousands, one complex type for hundreds of possible 
types. I select it from Paiute, the language of the In- 
dians of the arid plateaus of southwestern Utah. The 
word wn-to-kucJium-punku-rugam-yugwi-va-ntu-m(u) ® 
is of unusual length even for its own language, but it is 
no psychological monster for all that. It means ''they 
who are going to sit and cut up with a knife a black cow 
(or bull),’’ or, in the order of the Indian elements, 
"knife-black-buffalo-pet-cut up-sit(plur.) - future -parti- 
ciple-animate plur.’’ The formula for this word, in ac- 
cordance with our symbolism, would be (F (E) -f C 

d A B (g) -|- (h) -f-' (i) -|- (0) . It is the 
plural of the future participle of a compound verb "to 
sit and cut up” — A B, The elements (g) — which 
denotes futurity — , (Ji) — a participial suffix — , and (i) 
— indicating the animate plural — are grammatical ele- 
ments which convey nothing when detached. The 
formula (0) is intended to imply that the finished word 
conveys, in addition to what is definitely expressed, a 
further relational idea, that of subjectivity; in other 
words, the form can only be used as the subject of a 
sentence, not in an objective or other syntactic relation. 
The radical element A ("to cut up”), before entering 
into combination with the coordinate element B ("to 
sit”), is itself compounded with two nominal elements 
or element-groups — an instrumentally used stem (F) 

6 In this and other examples taken from exotic languages 1 am 
forced by practical considerations to simplify the actual phonetic 
forms. This should not matter perceptibly, as we are concerned 
with form as such, not with phonetic content. 



32 


LANGUAGE 


‘ knife ’0, which may be freely used as the radical 
element of noun forms but cannot be employed as an 
absolute noun in its given form, and an objectively used 
group — (''black cow or bulF'). This 
group in turn consists of an adjectival radical element 
{E) (" black’ 0? which cannot be independently em- 
ployed (the absolute notion of "black” can be rendered 
only as the participle of a verb: "black-be-ing”), and 
the compound noun (7 + d ("bulfalo-pet”). The radi- 
cal element C properly means ^‘buffalo,” but the ele- 
ment properly an independently occurring noun mean- 
ing "horse” (originally "dog” or "domesticated ani- 
mal” in general), is regularly used as a quasi-subordi- 
nate element indicating that the animal denoted by the 
stem to which it is affixed is owned by a human being. 
It will be observed that the whole complex {F) + {E) 
C d A B is functionally no more than a verbal 
base, corresponding to the sing- of an English form like 
singing; that this complex remains verbal in force on 
the addition of the temporal element {g ) — this {g), by 
the way, must not be understood as appended to B 
alone, but to the whole basic complex as a unit — ; and 
that the elements (Ji) +' (i) + (0) transform the verbal 
expression into a formally well-defined noun. 

It is high time that we decided just what is meant by 
a word. Our first impulse, no doubt, would have been 
to define the word as the symbolic, linguistic counterpart 
of a single concept. We now know that such a defini- 
tion is impossible. In truth it is impossible to define 
the word from a functional standpoint at all, for the 
word may be anything from the expression of a single 
concept— concrete or abstract or purely relational (as 
in of or hy or and ) — ^to the expression of a complete 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 33 

thought (as in Latin dico ‘"I say’’ or, with greater elabo- 
rateness of form, in a Nootka verb form denoting “I 
have been accustomed to eat twenty round objects [e.g., 
apples] while engaged in [doing so and so]”). In the 
latter case the word becomes identical with the sentence. 
The word is merely a form, a definitely molded entity 
that takes in as much or as little of the conceptual mate- 
rial of the whole thought as the genius of the language 
cares to allow. Thus it is that while the single radical 
elements and grammatical elements, the carriers of iso- 
lated concepts, are comparable as we pass from language 
to language, the finished words are not. Radical (or 
grammatical) element and sentence — these are the pri- 
mary functional units of speech, ther former as an ab- 
stracted minimum, the latter as the esthetically satisfy- 
ing embodiment of a unified thought. The actual formal 
units of speech, the words, may on occasion identify 
themselves with either of the two functional units ; more 
often they mediate between the two extremes, embody- 
ing one or more radical notions and also one or more 
subsidiary ones. We may put the whole matter in a 
nutshell by saying that the radical and grammatical 
elements of language, abstracted as they are from the 
realities of speech, respond to the conceptual world of 
science, abstracted as it is from the realities of experi- 
ence, and that the word, the existent unit of living 
speech, responds to the unit of actually apprehended ex- 
perience, of history, of art. The sentence is the logical 
counterpart of the complete thought only if it be felt as 
made up of the radical and grammatical elements that 
lurk in the recesses of its words. It is the psychological 
counterpart of experience, of art, when it is felt, as in- 
deed it normally is, as the finished play of word with 



34 


LANGUAGE 


word. As the necessity of defining thought solely and 
exclusively for its own sake becomes more urgent, the 
word becomes increasingly irrelevant as a means. We 
can therefore easily understand why the mathematician 
and the symbolic logician are driven to discard the 
word and to build up their thought with the help of sym- 
bols which have, each of them, a rigidly unitary value. 

But is not the word, one may object, as much of an 
abstraction as the radical element? Is it not as arbi- 
trarily lifted out of the living sentence as is the mini- 
mum conceptual element out of the word? Some stu- 
dents of language have, indeed, looked upon the word 
as such an abstraction, though with very doubtful war- 
rant, it seems to me. It is true that in particular cases, 
especially in some of the highly synthetic languages of 
aboriginal America, it is not always easy to say whether 
a particular element of language is to be interpreted as 
an independent word or as part of a larger word. These 
transitional cases, puzzling as they may be on occasion, 
do not, however, materially weaken the case for the psy- 
chological validity of the word. Linguistic experience, 
both as expressed in standardized, written form and as 
tested in daily usage, indicates overwhelmingly that 
there is not, as a rule, the slightest difficulty in bringing 
the word to consciousness as a psychological reality. No 
more convincing test could be desired than this, that 
the naive Indian, quite unaccustomed to the concept of 
the written word, has nevertheless no serious difficulty 
in dictating a text to a linguistic student word by word ; 
he tends, of course, to run his words together as in actual 
speech, but if he is called to a halt and is made to under- 
stand what is desired, he can readily isolate the words 
as such, repeating them as units. He regularly refuses, 
on the other hand, to isolate the radical or grammatical 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 


35 


element, on the ground that it ‘ ‘ makes no sense. ’ ' ® What, 
then, is the objective criterion of the word? The speaker 
and hearer feel the word, let us grant, but how shall 
we justify their feeling? If function is not the ulti- 
mate criterion of the word, what is? 

It is easier to ask the question than to answer it. The 
best that we can do is to say that the word is one of the 
smallest, completely satisfying bits of isolated ''mean- 
ing’’ into which the sentence resolves itself. It cannot 
be cut into without a disturbance of meaning, one or the 
other or both of the severed parts remaining as a help- 
less waif on our hands. In practice this unpretentious 
criterion does better service than might be supposed. 
In such a sentence as It is untlimkahle, it is simply im- 
possible to group the elements into any other and smaller 
"words” than the three indicated. Think or thinkable 
might be isolated, but as neither un- nor -able nor is-un 
yields a measurable satisfaction, we are compelled to 
leave unthinkable as an integral whole, a miniature bit 
of art. Added to the ' ' feel ’ ’ of the word are frequently, 
but by no means invariably, certain external phonetic 


6 These oral experiences, whch I have had time and again as 
a field student of American Indian languages, are very neatly 
confirmed by personal experiences of another sort. Twice I have 
taught intelligent young Indians to write their own languages 
according to the phonetic system which I employ. They were 
taught merely how to render accurately the sounds as such. Both 
had some difficulty in learning to break up a word into its con- 
stituent sounds, but none whatever in determining the words. This 
they both did with spontaneous and complete accuracy. In the 
hundreds of pages of manuscript Nootka text that I have ob- 
tained from one of these young Indians the words, whether ab- 
stract relational entities like English that and hut or complex 
sentence- words like the Nootka example quoted above, are, prac- 
tically without exception, isolated precisely as I or any other 
student would have isolated them. Such experiences with naiVe 
speakers and recorders do more to convince one of the definitely 
plastic unity of the word than any amount of purely theoretical 
argument. 



36 


LANGUAGE 


characteristics. Chief of these is accent. In many, per- 
haps in most, languages the single word is marked by 
a unifying accent, an emphasis on one of the syllables, 
to which the rest are subordinated. The particular sylla- 
ble that is to be so distinguished is dependent, needless 
to say, on the special genius of the language. The im- 
portance of accent as a unifying feature of the word is 
obvious in such English examples as unthinkable ^ char- 
acterizing, The long Paiute word that we have analyzed 
is marked as a rigid phonetic unit by several features, 
chief of which are the accent on its second syllable {ivii'- 
knife'’) and the slurring unvoicing," to use the 
technical phonetic term) of its final vowel {-mil, animate 
plural) . Such features as accent, cadence, and the treat- 
ment of consonants and vowels within the body of a word 
are often useful as aids in the external demarcation of 
the word, but they must by no means be interpreted, as 
is sometimes done, as themselves responsible for its psy- 
chological existence. They at best but strengthen a feel- 
ing of unity that is already present on other grounds. 

We have already seen that the major functional unit 
of speech, the sentence, has, like the word, a psychologi- 
cal as well as a merely logical or abstracted existence. 
Its definition is» not difficult. It is the linguistic ex- 
pression of a proposition. It combines a subject of dis- 
course with a statement in regard to this subject. Sub- 
ject and ''predicate" may be combined in a single word, 
as in Latin dico; each may be expressed independently, 
as in the English equivalent, 1 say; each or either may 
be so qualified as to lead to complex propositions of many 
sorts. No matter how many of these qualifying elements 
(words or functional parts of words) are introduced, the 
sentence does not lose its feeling of unity so long as each 
and every one of them falls in place as contributory 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 37 

to the definition of either the subject of discourse or the 
core of the predicate.’^ Such a sentence as The mayor of 
New York is going to deliver a speech of welcome 
French is readily felt as a unified statement, incapable 
of reduction by the transfer of certain of its elements, 
in their given form, to the preceding or following sen- 
tences. The contributory ideas of of New York, of weU 
come, and in French may be eliminated without hurting 
the idiomatic flow of the sentence. The mayor is going 
to deliver a speech is a perfectly intelligible proposition. 
But further than this we cannot go in the process of re- 
duction. We cannot say, for instance, Mayor is going to 
deliver.^ The reduced sentence resolves itself into the 
subject of discourse — the mayor — and the predicate — is 
going to deliver a speech. It is customary to say that 
the true subject of such a sentence is mayor, the true 
predicate is going or even is, the other elements being 
strictly subordinate. Such an analysis, however, is 
purely schematic and is without psychological value. It 
is much better frankly to recognize the fact that either 
or both of the two terms of the sentence-proposition 
may be incapable of expression in the form of single 
words. There are languages that can convey all that 
is conveyed by The-mayor is-going-to-deliver-a-speech in 
two words, a subject word and a predicate word, but 
English is not so highly synthetic. The point that we 
are really making here is that underlying the finished 

7 “Cocndinate sentences” like I shall remain hut you may go may 
only doubtfully be consi ered as truly unified predications, as true 
sentences. They are sentences in a stylistic sense rather than 
from the strictly formal linguistic standpoint. The orthography 
I shall remain. But you may go is as intrinsically justified as 
I shall remain. Now you may go. The closer connection in senti- 
ment between the first two propositions has led to a conventional 
visual representation that must not deceive the analytic spirit. 

8 Except, possibly, in a newspaper headline. Such headlines, 
however, are language only in a derived sense. 



38 


LANGUAGE 


sentence is a living sentence type, of fixed formal char- 
acteristics. These fixed types or actual sentence-ground- 
works may be freely overlaid by such additional matter 
as the speaker or writer cares to put on, but they are 
themselves as rigidly given’’ by tradition as are the 
radical and grammatical elements abstracted from the 
finished word. New words may be consciously created 
from these fundamental elements on the analogy of old 
ones, but hardly new types of words. In the same way 
new sentences are being constantly created, but always 
on strictly traditional lines. The enlarged sentence, how- 
ever, allows as a rule of considerable freedom in the 
handling of what may be called ' ' unessential ’ ’ parts. It 
is this margin of freedom which gives us the opportunity 
of individual style. 

The habitual association of radical elements, gram- 
matical elements, words, and sentences with concepts 
or groups of concepts related into wholes is the fact 
itself of language. It is important to note that there 
is in all languages a certain randomness of association. 
Thus, the idea of ^^hide” may be also expressed by the 
word ^‘conceal,” the notion of three times” also by 
* thrice. ” The multiple expression of a single concept 
is universally felt as a source of linguistic strength and 
variety, not as a needless extravagance. More irksome 
is a random correspondence between idea and linguistic 
expression in the field of abstract and relational con- 
cepts, particularly when the concept is embodied in a 
grammatical element. Thus, the randomness of the 
expression of plurality in such words as hooks, oxen, 
sheep, and geese is felt to be rather more, I fancy, an 
unavoidable and traditional predicament than a welcome 
luxuriance. It is obvious that a language cannot go 
beyond a certain point in this randomness. Many Ian- 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 39 

guages go incredibly far in this respect, it is true, but 
linguistic history shows conclusively that sooner or later 
the less frequently occurring associations are ironed out 
at the expense of the more vital ones. In other words, 
all languages have an inherent tendency to economy of 
expression. Were this tendency entirely inoperative, 
there would be no grammar. The fact of grammar, a 
universal trait of language, is simply a generalized ex- 
pression of the feeling that analogous concepts and rela- 
tions are most conveniently symbolized in analogous 
forms. Were a language ever completely ''grammati- 
cal, ’ ^ it would be a perfect engine of conceptual expres- 
sion. Unfortunately, or luckily, no language is tyranni- 
cally consistent. All grammars leak. 

Up to the present we have been assuming that the 
material of lahguage reflects merely the world of con- 
cepts and, on what I have ventured to call the "pre- 
rationaU’ plane, of images, which are the raw mate- 
rial of concepts. We have, in other words, been assum- 
ing that language moves entirely in the ideational or 
cognitive sphere. It is time that we amplified the pic- 
ture. The volitional aspect of consciousness also is 
to some extent explicitly provided for in language. 
Nearly all languages have special means for the expres- 
sion of commands (in the imperative forms of the verb, 
for example) and of desires, unattained or unattainable 
{Would he might cornel or Would he were here!) The 
emotions, on the whole, seem to be given a less adequate 
outlet. Emotion, indeed, is proverbially inclined to 
speechlessness. Most, if not alL the interjections are 
to be put to the credit of emotional expression, also, it 
may be, a number of linguistic elements expressing cer- 
tain modalities, such as dubitative or potential forms, 
which may be interpreted as reflecting the emotional 



40 


LANGUAGE 


states of hesitation or doubt — attenuated fear. On the 
whole, it must be admitted that ideation reigns supreme 
in language, that volition and emotion come in as dis- 
tinctly secondary factors. This, after all, is perfectly 
intelligible. The world of image and concept, the end- 
less and ever-shifting picture of objective reality, is the 
unavoidable subject-matter of human communication, 
for it is only, or mainly, in terms of this world that 
effective action is possible. Desire, purpose, emotion are 
the personal color of the objective world; they are ap- 
plied privately by the individual soul and are of rela- 
tively little importance to the neighboring one. All 
this does not mean that volition and emotion are not 
expressed. They are, strictly speaking, never absent 
from normal speech, but their expression is not of a 
truly linguistic nature. The nuances of emphasis, tone, 
and phrasing, the varying speed and continuity of utter- 
ance, the accompanying bodily movements, all these 
express something of the inner life of impulse and 
feeling, but as these means of expression are, at last 
analysis, but modified forms of the instinctive utterance 
that man shares with the lower animals, they cannot 
be considered as forming part of the essential cultural 
conception of language, however much they may be in- 
separable from its actual life. And this instinctive ex- 
pression of volition and emotion is, for the most part, 
sufficient, often more than sufficient, for the purposes 
of communication. 

There are, it is true, certain writers on the psychology 
of language ^ who deny its prevailingly cognitive char- 
acter but attempt, on the contrary, to demonstrate the 
origin of most linguistic elements within the domain 
of feeling. I confess that I am utterly unable to follow 

» E.g., the brilliant Dutch writer, Jac van Ginneken, 



THE ELEMENTS OF SPEECH 


41 


them. What there is of truth in their contentions may 
be summed up, it seems to me, by saying that most words, 
like practically all elements of consciousness, have an 
associated feeling-tone, a mild, yet none the less real 
and at times insidiously powerful, derivative of pleas- 
ure or pain. This feeling-tone, however, is not as a rule 
an inherent value in the word itself ; it is rather a senti- 
mental growth on the word ’s true body, on its conceptual 
kernel. Not only may the feeling-tone change from one 
age to another (this, of course, is true of the conceptual 
content as well), but it varies remarkably from indi- 
vidual to individual according to the personal associa- 
tions of each, varies, indeed, from time to time in a 
single individual ’s consciousness as his experiences mold 
him and his moods change. To be sure, there are so- 
cially accepted feeling-tones, or ranges of feeling-tone, 
for many words over and above the force of individual 
association, but they are exceedingly variable and elusive 
things at best. They rarely have the rigidity of the 
central, primary fact. We all grant, for instance, that 
storm, tempest, and hurricane, quite aside from their 
slight differences of actual meaning, have distinct feel- 
ing-tones, tones that are felt by all sensitive speakers and 
readers of English in a roughly equivalent fashion. 
Storm, we feel, is a more general and a decidedly less 
^‘magnificent’’ word than the other two; tempest is not 
only associated with the sea but is likely, in the minds 
of many, to have obtained a softened glamour from a 
specific association with Shakespeare’s great play; hur- 
ricane has a greater forthrightness, a directer ruthless- 
ness than its synonyms. Yet the individual’s feeling- 
tones for these words are likely to vary enormously. To 
some tempest and hurricane may seem “soft,” literary 
words, the simpler storm having a fresh, rugged value 



42 


LANGUAGE 


which the others do not possess (think of storm and 
stress). If we have browsed much in our childhood 
days in books of the Spanish Main, hurricane is likely 
to have a pleasurably bracing tone ; if we have had the 
misfortune to be caught in one, we are not unlikely to 
feel the word as cold, cheerless, sinister. 

The feeling-tones of words are of no use, strictly 
speaking, to science; the philosopher, if he desires to 
arrive at truth rather than merely to persuade, finds 
them his most insidious enemies. But man is rarely en- 
gaged in pure science, in solid thinking. Generally his 
mental activities are bathed in a warm current of feel- 
ing and he seizes upon the feeling-tones of words as 
gentle aids to the desired excitation. They are natu- 
rally of great value to the literary artist. It is inter- 
esting to note, however, that even to the artist they are 
a danger, A word whose customary feeling-tone is too 
unquestioningly accepted becomes a plushy bit of fur- 
niture, a cliche. Every now and then the artist has to 
fight the feeling-tone, to get the word to mean what it 
nakedly and conceptually should mean, depending for 
the effect of feeling on the creative power of an indi- 
vidual juxtaposition of concepts or images. 



Ill 


THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 

We have seen that the mere phonetic framework of 
speech does not constitute the inner fact of language 
and that the single sound of articulated speech is not, 
as such, a linguistic element at all. For all that, speech 
is so inevitably bound up with sounds and their articu- 
lation that we can hardly avoid giving the subject of 
phonetics some general consideration. Experience has 
shown that neither the purely formal aspects of a 
language nor the course of its history can be fully 
understood without reference to the sounds in which 
this form and this history are embodied. A detailed 
survey of phonetics would be both too technical for 
the general reader and too loosely related to our main 
theme to warrant the needed space, but we can well 
afford to consider a few outstanding facts and ideas con- 
nected with the sounds of language. 

The feeling that the average speaker has of his lan- 
guage is that it is built up, acoustically speaking, of 
a comparatively small number of distinct sounds, each 
of which is rather accurately provided for in the current 
alphabet by one letter or, in a few cases, by two or ijiore 
alternative letters. As for the languages of foreigners, 
he generally feels that, aside from a few striking dif- 
ferences that cannot escape even the uncritical ear, the 
sounds they use are the same as those he is familiar with 
but that there is a mysterious accent^’ to these foreign 
languages, a certain unanalyzed phonetic character, apart 

43 



M 


LANGUAGE 


from the sounds as such, that gives them their air of 
strangeness. This naive feeling is largely illusory on 
both scores. Phonetic analysis convinces one that the 
number of clearly distinguishable sounds and nuances 
of sounds that are habitually employed by the speakers 
of a language is far greater than they themselves recog- 
nize. Probably not one English speaker out of a hun- 
dred has the remotest idea that the ^ of a word like sting 
is not at all the same sound as the t of teem, the latter 
t having a fullness of ‘ ‘ breath release ’ ’ that is inhibited 
in the former case by the preceding s; that the ea of 
meat is of perceptibly shorter duration than the ea of 
mead; or that the final s of a word like heads is not the 
full, buzzing z sound of the s in such a word as please. 
It is the frequent failure of foreigners, who have ac- 
quired a practical mastery of English and who have 
eliminated all the cruder phonetic shortcomings of their 
less careful brethren, to observe such minor distinctions 
that helps to give their English pronunciation the curi- 
ously elusive accent’^ that we all vaguely feel. We 
do not diagnose the accent as the total acoustic effect 
produced by a series of slight but specific phonetic er- 
rors for the very good reason that we have never 
made clear to ourselves our own phonetic stock in 
trade. If two languages taken at random, say Eng- 
lish and Eussian, are compared as to their phonetic 
systems, we are more apt than not to find that very 
few of the phonetic elements of the one find an exact 
analogue in the other. Thus, the f of a Eussian word 
like tarn ‘ ' there is neither the English t of sting nor 
the English t of teem. It differs from both in its ‘‘den- 
taP’ articulation, in other words, in being produced by 
contact of the tip of the tongue with the upper teeth, 
not, as in English, by contact of the tongue back of the 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 


45 


tip with the gum ridge above the teeth; moreover, it 
differs from the t of teem also in the absence of a marked 
‘'breath release before the following vowel is attached, 
so that its acoustic effect is of a more precise, “metallic’’ 
nature than in English. Again, the English I is un- 
known in Russian, which possesses, on the other hand, 
two distinct Z-sounds that the normal English speaker 
would find it difficult exactly to reproduce — a “hollow,” 
guttural-like I and a “soft,” palatalized Z-sound that is 
only very approximately rendered, in English terms, as 
ly. Even so simple and, one would imagine, so invaria- 
ble a sound as m differs in the two languages. In a Rus- 
sian word like most “bridge” the m is not the same as 
the m of the English word most; the lips are more fully 
rounded during its articulation, so that it makes a heav- 
ier, more resonant impression on the ear. The vowels, 
needless to say, differ completely in English and Rus- 
sian, hardly any two of them being quite the same. 

I have gone into these illustrative details, which are 
of little or no specific interest for us, merely in order 
to provide something of an experimental basis to con- 
vince ourselves of the tremendous variability of speech 
sounds. Yet a complete inventory of the acoustic re- 
sources of all the European languages, the languages 
nearer home, while unexpectedly large, would still fall 
far short of conveying a just idea of the true range 
of human articulation. In many of the languages of 
Asia, Africa, and aboriginal America there are whole 
classes of sounds that most of us have no knowledge 
of. They are not necessarily more difficult of enuncia- 
tion than sounds more familiar to our ears ; they merely 
involve such muscular adjustments of the organs of 
speech as we have never habituated ourselves to. It 
may be safely said that the total number of possible 



46 


LANGUAGE 


sounds is greatly in excess of those actually in use. In- 
deed, an experienced phonetician should have no diffi- 
culty in inventing sounds that are unknown to objective 
investigation. One reason why we find it difficult to 
believe that the range of possible speech sounds is indefi- 
nitely large is our habit of conceiving the sound as a 
simple, unanalyzable impression instead of as the re- 
sultant of a number of distinct muscular adjustments 
that take place simultaneously. A slight change in any 
one of these adjustments gives us a new sound which is 
akin to the old one, because of the continuance of the 
other adjustments, but which is acoustically distinct 
from it, so sensitive has the human ear become to the 
nuanced play of the vocal mechanism. Another reason 
for our lack of phonetic imagination is the fact that, 
while our ear is delicately responsive to the sounds of 
speech, the muscles of our speech organs have early in 
life become exclusively accustomed to the particular ad- 
justments and systems of adjustment that are required 
to produce the traditional sounds of the language. All 
or nearly all other adjustments have become perma- 
nently inhibited, whether through inexperience or 
through gradual elimination. Of course the power to 
produce these inhibited adjustments is not entirely lost, 
but the extreme difficulty we experience in learning the 
new sounds of foreign languages is sufficient evidence of 
the strange rigidity that has set in for most people in the 
voluntary control of the speech organs. The point may 
be brought home by contrasting the comparative lack of 
freedom of voluntary speech movements with the all but 
perfect freedom of voluntary gesture.’^ Our rigidity in 

1 Observe the “voluntary.” When we shout or grunt or other- 
wise allow our voices to take care of themselves, as we are likely to 
do when alone in the country on a fine spring day, we are no longer 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 47 

articulation is the price we have had to pay for easy 
mastery of a highly necessary symbolism. One cannot 
be both splendidly free in the random choice of move- 
ments and selective with deadly certainty.^ 

There are, then, an indefinitely large number of ar- 
ticulated sounds available for the mechanics of speech; 
any given language makes use of an explicit, rigidly 
economical selection of these rich resources; and each 
of the many possible sounds of speech is conditioned by 
a number of independent muscular adjustments that 
work together simultaneously towards its production. A 
full account of the activity of each of the organs of 
speech — in so far as its activity has a bearing on lan- 
guage — is impossible here, nor can we concern ourselves 
in a systematic way with the classification of sounds on 
the basis of their mechanics.^ A few bold outlines are 
all that we can attempt. The organs of speech are the 

fixing vocal adjustments by voluntary control. Under these cir- 
cumstances we are almost certain to hit on speech sounds that 
we could never learn to control in actual speech. 

2 If speech, in its acoustic and articulatory aspect, is indeed 
a rigid system, how comes it, one may plausibly object, that no 
two people speak alike? The answer is simple. All that part of 
speech which falls out of the rigid articulatory framework is not 
speech in idea, but is merely a superadded, more or less instinc- 
tively determined vocal complication inseparable from speech in 
practice. All the individual color of speech — personal emphasis, 
speed, personal cadence, pt'rsonal pitch — is a non-linguistic fact, 
just as the incidental expression of desire and emotion are, for 
the most part, alien to linguistic expression. Speech, like all 
elements of culture, demands conceptual selection, inhibition of 
the randomness of instinctive behavior. That its “idea” is never 
realized as such in practice, its carriers being instinctively ani- 
mated organisms, is of course true of each and every aspect of 
culture. 

3 Purely acoustic classifications, such as more easily suggest 
themselves to a first attempt at analysis, are now in less favor 
among students of phonetics than organic classifications. The 
latter have the advaiitage of being more objective. INToreover, 
the acoustic quality of a sound is dependent on the articulation, 
even though in linguistic consciousness this quality is the primary, 
not the secondary, fact. 



48 


LANGUAGE 


lungs and bronchial tubes; the throat, particularly that 
part of it which is known as the larynx or, in popular 
parlance, the Adames apple^^; the nose; the uvula, 
which is the soft, pointed, and easily movable organ that 
depends from the rear of the palate; the palate, which 
is divided into a posterior, movable ''soft palate’’ or 
velum and a ' ' hard palate ’ ’ ; the tongue ; the teeth ; and 
the lips. The palate, lower palate, tongue, teeth, and 
lips may be looked upon as a combined resonance cham- 
ber, whose constantly varying shape, chiefly due to the 
extreme mobility of the tongue, is the main factor in 
giving the outgoing breath its precise quality ^ of sound. 

The lungs and bronchial tubes are organs of speech 
only in so far as they supply and conduct the current 
of outgoing air without which audible articulation is 
impossible. They are not responsible for any specific 
sound or acoustic feature of sounds except, possibly, 
accent or stress. It may be that differences of stress 
are due to slight differences in the contracting force 
of the lung muscles, but even this influence of the lungs 
is denied by some students, who explain the fluctuations 
of stress that do so much to color speech by reference 
to the more delicate activity of the glottal cords. These 
glottal cords are two small, nearly horizontal, and highly 
sensitive membranes within the larynx, which consists, 
for the most part, of two large and several smaller car- 
tilages and of a number of small muscles that control 
the action of the cords. 

The cords, which are attached to the cartilages, are 
to the human speech organs what the two vibrating reeds 

4 By “quality” is here meant the inherent nature and resonance 
of the sound as such. The general “quality” of the individual’s 
voice is another matter altogether. This is chiefly determined 
by the individual anatomical characteristics of the larynx and is 
of no linguistic interest whatever. 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 49 

are to a clarinet or the strings to a violin. They are ca-. 
pable of at least three distinct types of movement, each 
of which is of the greatest importance for speech. They 
may be drawn towards or away from each other, they 
may vibrate like reeds or strings, and they may be- 
come lax or tense in the direction of their length. The 
last class of these movements allows the cords to vibrate 
at different '‘lengths’’ or degrees of tenseness and is 
responsible for the variations in pitch which are present 
not only in song but in the more elusive modulations of 
ordinary speech. The two other types of glottal action 
determine the nature of the voice, "voice” being a con- 
venient term for breath as utilized in speech. If the 
cords are Avell apart, allowing the breath to escape in un- 
modified form, we have the condition technically known 
as "voicelessness.” All sounds produced under these 
circumstances are ' ' voiceless ’ ’ sounds. Such are the sim- 
ple, unmodified breath as it passes into the mouth, which 
is, at least approximately, the same as the sound that 
we v/rite 7i, also a large number of special articulations 
in the mouth chamber, like p and s. On the other hand, 
the glottal cords may be brought tight together, without 
vibrating. When this happens, the current of breath 
is checked for the time being. The slight choke or 
"arrested cough” that is thus made audible is not rec- 
ognized in English as a definite sound but occurs never- 
theless not infrequently.^ This momentary check, tech- 
nically known as a "glottal stop,” is an integral element 
of speech in many languages, as Danish, Lettish, certain 
Chinese dialects, and nearly all American Indian lan- 
guages. Between the two extremes of voicelessness, that 

5 As at the end of the snappily pronounced no ! ( sometimes 
written nope!) or in the over-carefuUy pronounced at all, where 
one may hear a slight check between the t and the a. 



50 


LANGUAGE 


of completely open breath and that of checked breath, 
lies the position of true voice. In this position the cords 
are close together, but not so tightly as to prevent the 
air from streaming through ; the cords are set vibrating 
and a musical tone of varying pitch results. A tone so 
produced is known as a ‘‘voiced sound. It may have 
an indefinite number of qualities according to the precise 
position of the upper organs of speech. Our vowels, 
nasals (such as m and n), and such sounds as b, z, and 
I are all voiced sounds. The most convenient test of a 
voiced sound is the possibility of pronouncing it on any 
given pitch, in other words, of singing on it.® The 
voiced sounds are the most clearly audible elements of 
speech. As such they are the carriers of practically all 
significant differences in stress, pitch, and syllabification. 
The voiceless sounds are articulated noises that break up 
the stream of voice with fleeting moments of silence. 
Acoustically intermediate between the freely unvoiced 
and the voiced sounds are a number of other character- 
istic types of voicing, such as murmuring and whisper.'^ 
These and still other types of voice are relatively unim- 
portant in English and most other European languages, 
but there are languages in which they rise to some 
prominence in the normal flow of speech. 

The nose is not an active organ of speech, but it is 
highly important as a resonance chamber. It may be 

6 “Singing” is here used in a wide sense. One cannot sing 
continuously on such a sound as h or d, but one may easily 
outline a tune on a series of b’s or d’s in tlie manner of the 
plucked “pizzicato” on stringed instruments. A series of tones 
executed on continuant consonants, like w, z, or ?, gives the effect 
of humming, droning, or buzzing. The sound of “humming,” in- 
deed, is nothing but a continuous voiced nasal, held on one pitch 
or varying in pitch, as desired. 

7 The whisper of ordinary speech is a combination of unvoiced 
sounds and “whispered” sounds, as the term is understood in 
phonetics. 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 


51 


disconnected from the mouth, which is the other great 
resonance chamber, by the lifting of the movable part of 
the soft palate so as to shut off the passage of the breath 
into the nasal cavity ; or, if the soft palate is allowed to 
hang down freely and unobstructively, so that the breath 
passes into both the nose and the mouth, these make a 
combined resonance chamber. Such sounds as b and a 
(as in father) are voiced '^oraU^ sounds, that is, the 
voiced breath does not receive a nasal resonance. As 
soon as the soft x)alate is lowered, however, and the nose 
added as a participating resonance chamber, the sounds 
b and a take on a peculiar ‘^nasaU^ quality and become, 
respectively, m and the nasalized vowel written an in 
French (e.g., sang, taut). The only English sounds® 
that normally receive a nasal resonance are m, and the 
ng sound of shig. Practically all sounds, however, may 
be nasalized, not only the vowels — nasalized vowels are 
common in all parts of the world — but such sounds as I 
or z. Voiceless nasals are perfectly possible. They oc- 
cur, for instance, in Welsh and in quite a number of 
American Indian languages. 

The organs that make up the oral resonance chamber 
may articulate in two ways. The breath, voiced or un- 
voiced, nasalized or unnasalized, may be allowed to pass 
through the mouth without being checked or impeded 
at any point; or it may be either momentarily checked 
or allowed to stream through a greatly narrowed pas- 
sage with resulting air friction. There are also tran- 
sitions between the two latter types of articulation. The 
unimpeded breath takes on a particular color or quality 
in accordance with the varying shape of the oral reso- 
nance chamber. This shape is chiefly determined by the 

® Aside from the involuntary nasalizing of all voiced sounds 
in the speech of those that talk with a “nasal twang/’ 



52 


LANGUAGE 


position of the movable parts — the tongue and the lips. 
As the tongue is raised or lowered, retracted or brought 
forward, held tense or lax, and as the lips are pursed 
Unrounded’’) in varying degree or allowed to keep their 
position of rest, a large number of distinct qualities 
result. These oral qualities are the vowels. In theory 
their number is infinite, in practice the ear can dif- 
ferentiate only a limited, yet a surprisingly large, num- 
ber of resonance positions. Vowels, whether nasalized 
or not, are normally voiced sounds; in not a few lan- 
guages, however, 'Woiceless vowels’'® also occur. 

The remaining oral sounds are generally grouped to- 
gether as ^'consonants.” In them the stream of breath 
is interfered with in some way, so that a lesser reso- 
nance results, and a sharper, more incisive quality of 
tone. There are four main types of articulation 
generally recognized within the consonantal group 
of sounds. The breath may be completely stopped for 
a moment at some definite point in the oral cavity. 
Sounds so produced, like t or d or p, are known as 
' ' stops ” or " explosives. ” Or the breath may be con- 
tinuously obstructed through a narrow passage, not en- 
tirely checked. Examples of such "spirants” or "frica- 
tives, ’ ’ as they are called, are s and z and y. The third 
class of consonants, the "laterals,” are semi-stopped. 
There is a true stoppage at the central point of articu- 
lation, but the breath is allowed to escape through the 
two side passages or through one of them. Our English 
d, for instance, may be readily transformed into I, 

9 These may be also defined as free unvoiced breath with vary- 
ing vocalic timbres. In the long Paiute word quoted on page 31 
the first u and the final ii are pronounced without voice. 

10 Nasalized stops, say m or n, can jiaturally not be truly 
“stopped,’^ as there is no way of checking the stream of breath 
in the nose by a definite articulation. 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 53 

which has the voicing and the position of d, merely by 
depressing the sides of the tongne on either side of the 
point of contact sufficiently to allow the breath to come 
through. Laterals are possible in many distinct posi- 
tions. They may be unvoiced (the Welsh ll is an ex- 
ample) as well as voiced. Finally, the stoppage of the 
breath may be rapidly intermittent; in other words, the 
active organ of contact — generally the point of the 
tongue, less often the uvula — may be made to vibrate 
against or near the point of contact. These sounds are 
the ' drills’’ or ‘‘rolled consonants,” of which the normal 
English r is a none too typical example. They are well 
developed in many languages, however, generally in voiced 
form, sometimes, as in Welsh and Paiute, in unvoiced 
form as well. 

The oral manner of articulation is naturally not suf- 
ficient to define a consonant. The place of articulation 
must also be considered. Contacts may be formed at a 
large number of points, from the root of the tongue to 
the lips. It is not necessary here to go at length into 
this somewhat complicated matter. The contact is either 
between the root of the tongue and the throat,^^ some 
part of the tongue and a point on the palate (as in A: or 
ch or 1), some part of the tongue and the teeth (as in 
the English th of thick and then), the teeth and one of 
the lips (practically always the upper teeth and lower 
lip, as in /), or the two lips (as in p or English w). 
The tongue articulations are the most complicated of all, 
as the mobility of the tongue allows various points on 
its surface, say the tip, to articulate against a number of 
opposed points of contact. Hence arise many positions 

The lips also may theoretically so articulate. “Labial trilla.*^ 
however, are certainly rare in natural speech. 

12 This position, known as “faucal,” is not common. 



54 


LANGUAGE 


of articulation that we are not familiar with, such as 
the typical ‘‘dentaU’ position of Eussian or Italian t 
and d; or the ‘^cerebrar^ position of Sanskrit and other 
languages of India, in which the tip of the tongue articu- 
lates against the hard palate. As there is no break 
at any point between the rims of the teeth back to the 
uvula nor from the tip of the tongue back to its root, 
it is evident that all the articulations that involve the 
tongue form a continuous organic (and acoustic) series. 
The positions grade into each other, but each language 
selects a limited number of clearly defined positions as 
characteristic of its consonantal system, ignoring transi- 
tional or extreme positions. Frequently a language al- 
lows a certain latitude in the fixing of the required posi- 
tion. This is true, for instance, of the English it-sound, 
which is articulated much further to the front in a word 
like kin than in cool. We ignore this difference, psycho- 
logically, as a non-essential, mechanical one. Another 
language might well recognize the difference, or only 
a slightly greater one, as significant, as paralleling the 
distinction in position between the k of kin and the t 
of tin. 

The organic classification of speech sounds is a simple 
matter after what we have learned of their production. 
Any such sound may be put into its proper place by 
the appropriate answer to four main questions: — What 
is the position of the glottal cords during its articula- 
tion? Does the breath pass into the mouth alone or is 
it also allowed to stream into the nose ? Does the breath 
pass freely through the mouth or is it impeded at some 
point and, if so, in what manner? What are the pre- 
cise points of articulation in the mouth ?^^ This four- 

13 “Points of articulation” must be understood to include tongue 
and lip positions of the vowels. 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 


55 


fold classification of sounds, worked out in all its de- 
tailed ramifications,^* is sufficient to account for all, or 
practically all, the sounds of language.^® 

The phonetic habits of a given language are not ex- 
haustively defined by stating that it makes use of such 
and such particular sounds out of the all but endless 
gamut that we have briefly surveyed. There remains 
the important question of the dynamics of these phonetic 
elements. Two languages may, theoretically, be built 
up of precisely the same series of consonants and vowels 
and yet produce utterly different acoustic effects. One 
of them may not recognize striking variations in the 
lengths or quantities’’ of the phonetic elements, the 
other may note such variations most punctiliously (in 
probably the majority of languages long and short vow- 
els are distinguished; in many, as in Italian or Swedish 
or Ojibwa, long consonants are recognized as distinct 
from short ones). Or the one, say English, may be 
very sensitive to relative stresses, while in the other, 
say French, stress is a very minor consideration. Or, 
again, the pitch differences which are inseparable from 
the actual practice of language may not affect the word 
as such, but, as in English, may be a more or less ran- 
dom or, at best, but a rhetorical phenomenon, while 
in other languages, as in Swedish, Lithuanian, Chinese, 
Siamese, and the majority of African languages, they 
may be more finely graduated and felt as integral 
characteristics of the words themselves. Varying meth- 

14 Including, under the fourth category, a number of special 
resonance adjustments that we have not been able to take up 
specifically. 

15 In so far, it should be added, as these sounds are expiratory, 
i.e., pronounced with the outgoing breath. Certain languages, 
like the South African Hottentot and Bushman, have also a num- 
ber of inspiratory sounds, pronounced by sucking in the breath 
at various points of oral contact. These are the so-called ‘‘clicks.’’ 



54 


LANGUAGE 


of articulation that we are not familiar with, such as 
the typical '' dental’ ' position of Russian or Italian t 
and d; or the ‘‘cerebral” position of Sanskrit and other 
languages of India, in which the tip of the tongue articu- 
lates against the hard palate. As there is no break 
at any point between the rims of the teeth back to the 
uvula nor from the tip of the tongue back to its root, 
it is evident that all the articulations that involve the 
tongue form a continuous organic (and acoustic) series. 
The positions grade into each other, but each language 
selects a limited number of clearly defined positions as 
characteristic of its consonantal system, ignoring transi- 
tional or extreme positions. Frequently a language al- 
lows a certain latitude in the fixing of the required posi- 
tion. This is true, for instance, of the English fc-sound, 
which is articulated much further to the front in a word 
like kin than in cool. We ignore this difference, psycho- 
logically, as a non-essential, mechanical one. Another 
language might well recognize the difference, or only 
a slightly greater one, as significant, as paralleling the 
distinction in position between the k of kin and the t 
of tin. 

The organic classification of speech sounds is a simple 
matter after what we have learned of their production. 
Any such sound may be put into its proper place by 
the appropriate answer to four main questions: — ^What 
is the position of the glottal cords during its articula- 
tion? Does the breath pass into the mouth alone or is 
it also allowed to stream into the nose ? Does the breath 
pass freely through the mouth or is it impeded at some 
point and, if so, in what manner? What are the pre- 
cise points of articulation in the mouth ? This f our- 

“Points of articulation” must be understood to include tongue 
and lip positions of the vowels. 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 


55 


fold classification of sounds, worked out in all its de- 
tailed ramifications,^^ is sufficient to account for all, or 
practically all, the sounds of language.^^ 

The phonetic habits of a given language are not ex- 
haustively defined by stating that it makes use of such 
and such particular sounds out of the all but endless 
gamut that we have briefly surveyed. There remains 
the important question of the dynamics of these phonetic 
elements. Two languages may, theoretically, be built 
up of precisely the same series of consonants and vowels 
and yet produce utterly different acoustic effects. One 
of them may not recognize striking variations in the 
lengths or quantities of the phonetic elements, the 
other may note such variations most punctiliously (in 
probably the majority of languages long and short vow- 
els are distinguished; in many, as in Italian or Swedish 
or Ojibwa, long consonants are recognized as distinct 
from short ones). Or the one, say English, may be 
very sensitive to relative stresses, while in the other, 
say French, stress is a very minor consideration. Or, 
again, the pitch differences which are inseparable from 
the actual practice of language may not affect the word 
as such, but, as in English, may be a more or less ran- 
dom or, at best, but a rhetorical phenomenon, while 
in other languages, as in Swedish, Lithuanian, Chinese, 
Siamese, and the majority of African languages, they 
may be more finely graduated and felt as integral 
characteristics of the words themselves. Varying meth- 

Including, under the fourth category, a number of special 
resonance adjustments that we have not been able to take up 
specifically. 

15 In so far, it should be added, as these sounds are expiratory, 
i.e., pronounced with the outgoing breath. Certain languages, 
like the South African Hottentot and Bushman, have also a num- 
ber of inspiratory sounds, pronounced by sucking in the breath 
at various points of oral contact. These are the so-called “clicks.” 



56 


LANGUAGE 


ods of syllabifying are also responsible for noteworthy 
acoustic differences. Most important of all, perhaps, 
are the very different possibilities of combining the 
phonetic elements. Each language has its peculiarities. 
The is combination, for instance, is found in both Eng- 
lish and German, but in English it can only occur at 
the end of a word (as in hats), while it occurs freely 
in German as the psychological equivalent of a single 
sound (as in Zeit, Katze), Some languages allow of 
great heapings of consonants or of vocalic groups (diph- 
thongs), in others no two consonants or no two vowels 
may ever come together. Frequently a sound occurs 
only in a special position or under special phonetic cir- 
cumstances. In English, for instance, the 2:-sound of 
azure cannot occur initially, while the peculiar quality 
of the t of sting is dependent on its being preceded by the 
s. These dynamic factors, in their totality, are as im- 
portant for the proper understanding of the phonetic 
genius of a language as the sound system itself, often 
far more so. 

We have already seen, in an incidental way, that 
phonetic elements or such dynamic features as quantity 
and stress have varying psychological values. The 
English ts of hats is merely a t followed by a func- 
tionally independent s, the is of the German word Zeit 
has an integral value equivalent, say, to the t of the 
English word tide. Again, the t of time is indeed no- 
ticeably distinct from that of sting, but the difference, 
to the consciousness of an English-speaking person, is 
quite irrelevant. It has no ‘Walue.^’ If we compare 
the t-sounds of Haida, the Indian language spoken in 
the Queen Charlotte Islands, we find that precisely the 
same difference of articulation has a real value. In such 
a word as sting '^two/^ the t is pronounced precisely 



THE SOUNDS OF LANGUAGE 57 

as in English, but in sta ''from’’ the t is clearly "aspi- 
rated,^^ like that of time. In other words, an objective 
difference that is irrelevant in English is of functional 
value in Haida; from its own psychological standpoint 
the t of sting is as different from that of sta as, from 
our standpoint, is the t of time from the d of divine. 
Further investigation would yield the interesting result 
that the Haida ear finds the difference between the Eng- 
lish t of sting and the d of divine as irrelevant as the 
naive English ear finds that of the ^sounds of sting and 
time. The objective comparison of sounds in two or 
more languages is, then, of no psychological or historical 
significance unless these sounds are first ' ' weighted, ’ ’ un- 
less their phonetic "values^' are determined. These val- 
ues, in turn, flow from the general behavior and func- 
tioning of the sounds in actual speech. 

These considerations as to phonetic value lead to an 
important conception. Back of the purely objective sys- 
tem of sounds that is peculiar to a language and which 
can be arrived at only by a painstaking phonetic analy- 
sis, there is a more restricted "inner” or "ideal” system 
which, while perhaps equally unconscious as a system to 
the naive speaker, can far more readily than the other 
be brought to his consciousness as a finished pattern, a 
psychological mechanism. The inner sound-system, over- 
laid though it may be by the mechanical or the irrelevant, 
is a real and an immensely impoi'tant principle in the 
life of a language. It may persist as a pattern, in- 
volving number, relation, and functioning of phonetic 
elements, long after its phonetic content is changed. Two 
historically related languages or dialects may not have 
a sound in common, but their ideal sound-systems may 
be identical patterns. I would not for a moment wish 
to imply that this pattern may not change. It may 



58 


LANGUAGE 


shrink or expand or change its functional complexion, 
but its rate of change is infinitely less rapid than that of 
the sounds as such. Every language, then, is character- 
ized as much by its ideal system of sounds and by the 
underlying phonetic pattern (system, one might term it, 
of symbolic atoms) as by a definite grammatical struc- 
ture. Both the phonetic and conceptual structures show 
the instinctive feeling of language for form.^® 

16 The conception of the ideal phonetic system, the phonetic 
pattern, of a language is not as well understood by linguistic 
students as it should Ije. In this respect the unschooled recorder 
of language, provided he has a good ear and a genuine instinct 
for language, is often at a great advantage as compared with the 
minute phonetician, who is apt to be swamped by his mass of 
observations, I have already employed my experience in teach- 
ing Indians to write their own language for its testing value in 
another connection. It yields equally valuable evidence here. 
I found that it was difficult or impossible to teach an Indian 
to make phonetic distinctions that did not correspond to “points 
in the pattern of his language,” however these differences might 
strike our objective ear, but that subtle, barely audible, phonetic 
differences, if only they hit the “points in the pattern,” were 
easily and voluntarily expressed in writing. In watching my 
Nootka interpreter write his language, I often had the curious 
feeling that he was transcribing an i(ieal flow of phonetic ele- 
ments which he heard, inadequately from a purely objective 
standpoint, as the intention of the actual rumble cf speech. 



IV 


FORM IN LANGUAGE: GRAMMATICAL 
PROCESSES 

The question of form in language presents itself under 
two aspects. We may either consider the forma] meth- 
ods employed by a language, its '^grammatical proc- 
esses,” or we may ascertain the distribution of concepts 
with reference to formal expression. What are the for- 
mal patterns of the language? And what types of con- 
cepts make up the content of these formal patterns? The 
two points of view are quite distinct. The English word 
unthinkingly is, broadly speaking, formally parallel to 
the word reformersy each being built up on a radical ele- 
ment which may occur as an independent verb {thinky 
form), this radical element being preceded by an ele- 
ment {un-y re-) that conveys a definite and fairly con- 
crete significance but that cannot be used independently, 
and followed by two elements (-ing, -ly; -er, -s) that limit 
the application of the radical concept in a relational 
sense. This formal pattern — (b) A (c) -f {d) ^ — 
is a characteristic feature of the language. A countless 
number of functions may be expressed by it; in other 
words, all the possible ideas conveyed by such prefixed 
and suffixed elements, while tending to fall into minor 
groups, do not necessarily form natural, functional sys- 
tems. There is no logical reason, for instance, why the 
numeral function of -s should be formally expressed in 

iFor the symbolism, see chapter II. 

59 



60 


LANGUAGE 


a manner that is analogous to the expression of the idea 
conveyed by 4y, It is perfectly conceivable that in an- 
other language the concept of manner {-ly) may be 
treated according to an entirely different pattern from 
that of plurality. The former might have to be ex- 
pressed by an independent word (say, thus unthinking), 
the latter by a prefixed element (say, plural --reform-er ) . 
There are, of course, an unlimited number of other pos- 
sibilities. Even within the confines of English alone 
the relative independence of form and function can be 
made obvious. Thus, the negative idea conveyed by un- 
can be just as adequately expressed by a suffixed element 
(-less) in such a word as thoughtlessly , Such a twofold 
formal expression of the negative function would be in- 
conceivable in certain languages, say Eskimo, where a 
suffixed element would alone be possible. Again, the 
plural notion conveyed by the -s of reformers is just as 
definitely expressed in the word geese, where an utterly 
distinct method is employed. Furthermore, the prin- 
ciple of vocalic change (goose — geese) is by no means 
confined to the expression of the idea of plurality; it 
may also function as an indicator of difference of time 
(e.g., sing — sang, throw — threw). But the expression 
in English of past time is not by any means always 
bound up with a change of vowel. In the great ma- 
jority of cases the same idea is expressed by means of 
a distinct suffix (die-d, work-ed). Functionally, died 
and sang are analogous; so are reformers and geese. 
Formally, we must arrange these words quite otherwise. 
Both die-d and re-fornb-er-s employ the method of suffix- 
ing grammatical elements; both sang and geese have 
grammatical form by virtue of the fact that their vowels 
differ from the vowels of other words with which they 

2 ‘^Plural” is here a symbol for any prefix indicating plurality. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 61 

are closely related in form and meaning {goose; sing, 
sung). 

Every language possesses one or more formal methods 
for indicating the relation of a secondary concept to 
the main concept of the radical element. Some of these 
grammatical processes, like suffixing, are exceedingly 
wide-spread; others, like vocalic change, are less com- 
mon but far from rare ; still others, like accent and con- 
sonantal change, are somewhat exceptional as functional 
processes. Not all languages are as irregular as Eng- 
lish in the assignment of functions to its stock of gram- 
matical processes. As a rule, such basic concepts as 
those of plurality and time are rendered by means of 
one or other method alone, but the rule has so many 
exceptions that we cannot safely lay it down as a prin- 
ciple. Wherever we go we are impressed by the fact 
that pattern is one thing, the utilization of pattern quite 
another. A few further examples of the multiple ex- 
pression of identical functions in other languages than 
English may help to make still more vivid this idea of 
the relative independence of form and function. 

In Hebrew, as in other Semitic languages, the verbal 
idea as such is expressed by three, less often by two 
or four, characteristic consonants. Thus, the group 
sh-m-r expresses the idea of guarding,’^ the group g-n-h 
that of '‘stealing,'^ n4-n that of ‘'giving.'' Naturally 
these consonantal sequences are merely abstracted from 
the actual forms. The consonants are held together in 
different forms by characteristic vowels that vary ac- 
cording to the idea that it is desired to express. Pre- 
fixed and suffixed elements are also frequently used. The 
method of internal vocalic change is exemplified in 
sJiamar ‘ ‘ he has guarded, ' ' shomer ‘ ‘ guarding, ' ' sJiamur 
" ‘ being guarded, ' ' shmor “ ( to ) guard. ' ' Analogously, 



62 


LANGUAGE 


ganah has stolen,’’ goneh stealing,” ganub being 
stolen,” gnoh “(to) steal.” But not all infinitives are 
formed according to the type of sJimor and gmh or of 
other types of internal vowel change. Certain verbs 
suffix a ^-element for the infinitive, e.g., ten-eth ‘Ho 
give,” Jieyo-tli “to be.” Again, the pronominal ideas 
may be expressed by independent worck (e.g., anoki 
“I”), by prefixed elements (e.g., e-shmor “I shall 
guard”), or by suffixed elements (e.g., sliamar-ii “I 
have guarded”). In Nass, an Indian language of Brit- 
ish Columbia, plurals are formed by four distinct meth- 
ods. Most nouns (and verbs) are reduplicated in the 
plural, that is, part of the radical element is repeated, 
e.g., gyat “person,” gyigyat “people.” A second 
method is the use of certain characteristic prefixes, e.g., 
an^on “hand,” ka-an^on “hands”; wai “one paddles,” 
lu-wai “several paddle.” Still other plurals are formed 
by means of internal vowel change, e.g., gwula “cloak,” 
gwila “cloaks.” Finally, a fourth class of plurals is 
constituted by such nouns as suffix a grammatical ele- 
ment, e.g., waky “brother,” ivakykw “brothers.” 

From such groups of examples as these — and they 
might be multiplied ad nauseam — we cannot but con- 
clude that linguistic form may and should be studied as 
types of patterning, apart from the associated functions. 
We are the more justified in this procedure as all lan- 
guages evince a curious instinct for the development of 
one or more particular grammatical processes at the ex- 
pense of others, tending always to lose sight of any ex- 
plicit functional value that the process may have had in 
the first instance, delighting, it would seem, in the sheer 
play of its means of expression. It does not matter that 
in such a case as the English goose — geese, foul — defile, 
sing — sang — sung we can prove that we are dealing with 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


63 


historically distinct processes, that the vocalic alternation 
of sing and sang, for instance, is centuries older as a 
specific type of grammatical process than the outwardly 
parallel one of goose and geese. It remains true that 
there is (or was) an inherent tendency in English, at 
the time such forms as geese came into being, for the 
utilization of vocalic change as a significant linguistic 
method. Failing the precedent set by such already ex- 
isting types of vocalic alternation as sing — sang — sung, 
it is highly doubtful if the detailed conditions that 
brought about the evolution of forms like teeth and geese 
from tooth and goose would have been potent enough to 
allow the native linguistic feeling to win through to an 
acceptance of these new types of plural formation as 
psychologically possible. This feeling for form as such, 
freely expanding along predetermined lines and greatly 
inhibited in certain directions by the lack of controlling 
types of patterning, should be more clearly understood 
than it seems to be. A general survey of many diverse 
types of languages is needed to give us the proper per- 
spective on this point. We saw in the preceding chap- 
ter that every language has an inner phonetic system 
of definite pattern. We now learn that it has also a 
definite feeling for patterning on the level of gram- 
matical formation. Both of these submerged and pow- 
erfully controlling impulses to definite form operate 
as such, regardless of the need for expressing particular 
concepts or of giving consistent external shape to par- 
ticular groups of concepts. It goes without saying that 
these impulses can find realization only in concrete func- 
tional expression. We must say something to be able 
to say it in a certain manner. 

Let us now take up a little more systematically, how- 
ever briefly, the various grammatical processes that lin- 



64 


LANGUAGE 


guistic research has established. They may be grouped 
into six main types : word order ; composition ; affixation, 
including the use of prefixes, suffixes, and infixes ; inter- 
nal modification of the radical or grammatical element, 
whether this affects a vowel or a consonant; reduplica- 
tion; and accentual differences, whether dynamic (stress) 
or tonal (pitch). There are also special quantitative 
processes, like vocalic lengthening or shortening and con- 
sonantal doubling, but these may be looked upon as par- 
ticular sub-types of the process of internal modification. 
Possibly still other formal types exist, but they are not 
likely to be of importance in a general survey. It is 
important to bear in mind that a linguistic phenomenon 
cannot be looked upon as illustrating a definite proc- 
ess^’ unless it has an inherent functional value. The 
consonantal change in English, for instance, of hooks 
and bags (s in the former, z in the latter) is of no func- 
tional significance. It is a purely external, mechanical 
change induced by the presence of a preceding voiceless 
consonant, k, in the former case, of a voiced consonant, 
g^ in the latter. This mechanical alternation is objec- 
tively the same as that between the noun hoicse and the 
verb to Jiouse. In the latter case, however, it has an im- 
portant grammatical function, that of transforming a 
noun into a verb. The two alternations belong, then, to 
entirely different psychological categories. Only the 
latter is a true illustration of consonantal modification 
as a grammatical process. 

The simplest, at least the most economical, method of 
conveying some sort of grammatical notion is to juxta- 
pose two or more words in a definite sequence without 
making any attempt by inherent modification of these 
words to establish a connection between them. Let us 
put down two simple English words at random, say 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 65 

sing praise. This conveys no finished thought in Eng- 
lish, nor does it clearly establish a relation between the 
idea of singing and that of praising. Nevertheless, it 
is psychological!}" impossible to hear or see the two words 
juxtaposed without straining to give them some measure 
of coherent significance. The attempt is not likely to 
yield an entirely satisfactory result, but what is signifi- 
cant is that as soon as two or more radical concepts are 
put before the human mind in immediate sequence it 
strives to bind them together with connecting values of 
some sort. In the case of sing praise different individ- 
uals are likely to arrive at different provisional results. 
Some of the latent possibilities of the juxtaposition, 
expressed in currently satisfying form, are: sing praise 
{to him)! or sjnging praise, praise expressed in a song 
or to sing and praise or one who sings a song of praise 
(compare such English compounds as killjoy, i.e., one 
who kills joy) or he sings a song of praise {to him ) . The 
theoretical possibilities in the way of rounding out these 
two concepts into a significant group of concepts or 
even into a finished thought are indefinitely numerous. 
None of them will quite work in English, but there are 
numerous languages where one or other of these amplify- 
ing processes is habitual. It depends entirely on the 
genius of the particular language what function is in- 
herently involved in a given sequence of words. 

Some languages, like Latin, express practically all 
relations by means of modifications within the body of 
the word itself. In these, sequence is apt to be a rheto- 
rical rather than a strictly grammatical principle. 
Whether I say in Latin hominem femina videt or femina 
hominem videt or hominem videt femina or videt femina 
hominem makes little or no difference beyond, possibly, 
a rhetorical or •stylistic one. The woman sees the man 



66 


LANGUAGE 


is the identical significance of each of these sentences. 
In Chinook, an Indian language of the Columbia River, 
one can be equally free, for the relation between the verb 
and the two nouns is as inherently fixed as in Latin. 
The difference between the two languages is that, while 
Latin allows the nouns to establish their relation to 
each other and to the verb, Chinook lays the formal 
burden entirely on the verb, the full content of which 
is more or less adequately rendered by slie-hmi-sees. 
Eliminate the Latin case suffixes (-a and -em) and the 
Chinook pronominal prefixes {she-him-) and we cannot 
afford to be so indifferent to our word order. We need 
to husband our resources. In other words, word order 
takes on a real functional value. Latin and Chinook 
are at one extreme. Such languages as Chinese, Siam- 
ese, and Annamite, in which each and every word, if it 
is to function properly, falls into its assigned place, are 
at the other extreme. But the majority of languages 
fall between these two extremes. In English, for in- 
stance, it may make little grammatical difference whether 
I say yesterday the man saw the dog or the man saw the 
dog yesterday^ but it is not a matter of indifference 
whether I say yesterday the man saw the dog or yester- 
day the dog saw the man or whether I say he is here or 
is he here? In the one case, of the latter group of ex- 
amples, the vital distinction of subject and object de- 
pends entirely on the placing of certain words of the 
sentence, in the latter a slight difference of sequence 
makes all the difference between statement and ques- 
tion. It goes without saying that in these cases the Eng- 
lish principle of word order is as potent a means of 
expression as is the Latin use of case suffixes or of an in- 
terrogative particle. There is here no question of func- 
tional poverty, but of formal economy. 



rORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


67 


We have already seen something of the process of 
composition, the uniting into a single word of two or 
more radical elements. Psychologically this process is 
closely allied to that of word order in so far as the 
relation between the elements is implied, not explicitly 
stated. It differs from the mere juxtaposition of words 
in the sentence in that the compounded elements are felt 
as constituting but parts of a single word-organism. Such 
languages as Chinese and English, in which the principle 
of rigid sequence is well developed, tend not infrequently 
also to the development of compound words. It is but 
a step from such a Chinese word sequence as jin tak 
^‘man virtue,” i.e., ^Hhe virtue of men,” to such more 
conventionalized and psychologically unified juxtaposi- 
tions as t^ien isz ^‘heaven son,” i.e., ^‘emperor,”, or 
shui fu ‘‘water man,” i.e., “water carrier.” In the 
latter case we may as well frankly write shui-fu as a 
single word, the meaning of the compound as a w^hole 
being as divergent from the precise etymological val- 
ues of its component elements as is that of our English 
word typewriter from the merely combined values of 
type and writer. In English the unity of the word 
typewriter is further safeguarded by a predominant ac- 
cent on the first syllable and by the possibility of adding 
such a suffixed element as the plural -s to the whole 
word. Chinese also unifies its compounds by means of 
stress. However, then, in its ultimate origins the pro- 
cess of composition may go back to typical sequences of 
words in the sentence, it is now, for the most part, a 
specialized method of expressing relations. French has 
as rigid a word order as English but does not possess 
anything like its power of compounding words into more 
complex units. On the other hand, classical Greek, in 
spite of its relative freedom in the placing of wordii 



68 LANGUAGE 

has a very considerable bent for the formation of com- 
pound terms. 

It is curious to observe how greatly languages differ 
in their ability to make use of the process of composi- 
tion. One would have thought on general principles 
that so simple a device as gives us our typewriter and 
blackbird and hosts of other words would be an all but 
universal grammatical process. Such is not the case. 
There are a great many languages, like Eskimo and 
Nootka and, aside from paltry exceptions, the Semitic 
languages, that cannot compound radical elements. 
What is even stranger is the fact that many of these 
languages are not in the least averse to complex word- 
formations, but may on the contrary effect a synthesis 
that far surpasses the utmost that Greek and Sanskrit 
are capable of. Such a Nootka word, for instance, as 
‘'when, as they say, he had been absent for four days'’ 
might be expected to embody at least three radical ele- 
ments corresponding to the concepts of "absent," 
"four," and "day." As a matter of fact the Nootka 
word is utterly incapable of composition in our sense. 
It is invariably built up out of a single radical element 
and a greater or less number of suffixed elements, some 
of which may have as concrete a significance as the 
radical element itself. In the particular case we have 
cited the radical element conveys the idea of "four," 
the notions of "day" and "absent" being expressed by 
suffixes that are as inseparable from the radical nucleus 
of the word as is an English element like -er from the 
sing or hunt of such words as singer and hunter. The 
tendency to word synthesis is, then, by no means the 
same thing as the tendency to compounding radical ele- 
ments, though the latter is not infrequently a ready 
means for the synthetic tendency to work with. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


69 


There is a bewildering variety of types of composi- 
tion. These types vary according to function, the 
nature of the compounded elements, and order. In a 
great many languages composition is confined to what 
we may call the delimiting function, that is, of the 
two or more compounded elements one is given a more 
precisely qualified significance by the others, which con- 
tribute nothing to the formal build of the sentence. In 
English, for instance, such compounded elements as red 
in redcoat or over in overlook merely modify the signifi- 
cance of the dominant coat or look without in any way 
sharing, as such, in the predication that is expressed by 
the sentence. Some languages, however, such as Iro- 
quois and Nahuatl,^ employ the method of composition 
for much heavier work than this. In Iroquois, for in- 
stance, the composition of a noun, in its radical form, 
with a following verb is a typical method of expressing 
case relations, particularly of the subject or object. /- 
meat-eaty for instance, is the regular Iroquois method 
of expressing the sentence / am eating meat. In other 
languages similar forms may express local or instru- 
mental or still other relations. Such English forms as 
killjoy and marplot also illustrate the compounding of 
a verb and a noun, but the resulting word has a strictly 
nominal, not a verbal, function. We cannot say he 
marplots. Some languages allow the composition of all 
or nearly all types of elements. Paiute, for instance, 
may compound noun with noun, adjective with noun, 
verb with noun to make a noun, noun with verb to make 
a verb, adverb with verb, verb with verb. Yana, an 
Indian language of California, can freely compound noun 
with noun and verb with noun, but not verb with verb. 

language of the Aztecs, still spoken in large parts of 

Mexico. 



70 


LANGUAGE 


On the other hand, Iroquois can compound only noun 
with verb, never noun and noun as in English or verb 
and verb as in so many other languages. Finally, each 
language has its characteristic types of order of com- 
position. In English the qualifying element regularly 
precedes; in certain other languages it follows. Some- 
times both types are used in the same language, as in 
Yana, where “beef” is “ bitter- venison ” but “deer- 
liver” is expressed by “liver-deer.” The compounded 
object of a verb precedes the verbal element in Paiute, 
Nahuatl, and Iroquois, follows it in Yana, Tsimshian,^ 
and the Algonkin languages. 

Of all grammatical processes affixing is incomparably 
the most frequently employed. There are languages, 
like Chinese and Siamese, that make no grammatical use 
of elements that do not at the same time possess an 
independent value as radical elements, but such lan- 
guages are uncommon. Of the three types of affixing — 
the use of prefixes, suffixes, and infixes — suffixing is 
much the commonest. Indeed, it is a fair guess that 
suffixes do more of the formative work of language 
than all other methods combined. It is worth noting 
that there are not a few affixing languages that make 
absolutely no use of prefixed elements but possess a 
complex apparatus of suffixes. Such are Turkish, Hot- 
tentot, Eskimo, Nootka, and Yana. Some of these, like 
the three last mentioned, have hundreds of suffixed ele- 
ments, many of them of a concreteness of significance 
that would demand expression in the vast majority 
of languages by means of radical elements. The reverse 
case, the use of prefixed elements to the complete exclu- 
sion of suffixes, is far less common. A good example is 

4 An Indian lanirnaore of British Columbia closely related to 
the Nass already cited. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 71 

Khmer (or Cambodgian), spoken in French Cochin- 
China, though even here there are obscure traces of old 
suffixes that have ceased to function as such and are now 
felt to form part of the radical element. 

A considerable majority of known languages are 
prefixing and suffixing at one and the same time, 
but the relative importance of the two groups of affixed 
elements naturally varies enormously. In some lan- 
guages, such as Latin and Russian, the suffixes alone re- 
late the word to the rest of the sentence, the prefixes be- 
ing confined to the expression of such ideas as delimit 
the concrete significance of the radical element without 
influencing its beari?ig in the proposition. A Latin form 
like remitt eb ant iir ''they were being sent back'^ may 
serve as an illustration of this type of distribution of 
elements. The prefixed element re- "back’’ merely qual- 
ifies to a certain extent the inherent significance of the 
radical element mitt- "send,” while the suffixes -eba-, 
-nt-, and -ur convey the less concrete, more strictly for- 
mal, notions of time, person, plurality, and passivity. 

On the other hand, there are languages, like the 
Bantu group of Africa or the Athabaskan languages ® 
of North America, in which the grammatical!}" signifi- 
cant elements precede, those that follow the radical ele- 
ment forming a relatively dispensable class. The Hupa 
word te-s-e-ya-te "I will go,” for example, consists of a 
radical element -ya- "to go,” three essential prefixes and 
a formally subsidiary suffix. The element te- indicates 
that the act takes place here and there in space or con- 
tinuously over space ; practically, it has no clear-cut sig- 
nificance apart from such verb stems as it is customary 
to connect it with. The second prefixed element, -5-, is 

TnoliidiTi" such languages as Navaho, Apache, Hupa, Carrier 
Chipewyan, Loucheux. 



72 


LANGUAGE 


even less easy to define. All we can say is that it is 
used in verb forms of ' ' definite ' ' time and that it marks 
action as in progress rather than as beginning or coming 
to an end. The third prefix, -e-, is a pronominal ele- 
ment, ‘‘I,” which can be used only in “definite’’ tenses. 
It is highly important to understand that the use of -e- 
is conditional on that of -s- or of certain alternative pre- 
fixes and that tc- also is in practice linked with -s-. The 
group te-s-e-ya is a firmly knit grammatical unit. The 
suffix which indicates the future, is no more necessary 
to its formal balance than is the prefixed rc- of the Latin 
word; it is not an element that is capable of standing 
alone but its function is materially delimiting rather 
than strictly formal.^ 

It is not always, however, that we can clearly set off 
the suffixes of a language as a group against its pre- 
fixes. In probably the majority of languages that use 
both types of affixes each group has both delimiting and 
formal or relational functions. The most that we can 
say is that a language tends to express similar functions 
in either the one or the other manner. If a certain 
verb expresses a certain tense by suffixing, the probability 
is strong that it expresses its other tenses in an analogous 
fashion and that, indeed, all verbs have suffixed tense ele- 
ments. Similarly, we normally expect to find the pro- 
nominal elements, so far as they are included in the 
verb at all, either consistently prefixed or suffixed. But 

6 This may seem surprising to an English reader. We generally 
think of time as a function that is appropriately expressed 
ill a purely formal manner. This notion is due to the bias 
that Latin grammar has given us. As a matter of fact the 
English future (/ shall go) is not expressed by affixing at 
all; moreover, it may be expressed by the present, as in to-morrow 
I leave this place, where the temporal function is inherent in the 
independent adverb. Though in lesser degree, the Hupa -te is as 
irrevelant to the vital word as is to-morrow to the grammatical 
‘TeeT" of I leave. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 73 

these rules are far from absolute. We have already 
seen that Hebrew prefixes its pronominal elements in 
certain cases, suffixes them in others. In Chimariko, an 
Indian language of California, the position of the pro- 
nominal affixes depends on the verb; they are prefixed 
for certain verbs, suffixed for others. 

It will not be necessary to give many further examples 
of prefixing and suffixing. One of each category will 
suffice to illustrate their formative possibilities. The 
idea expressed in English by the sentence 1 came to give 
it to her is rendered in Chinook ^ by i-n-i-a-l-u-d-am. 
This word — and it is a thoroughly unified word with a 
clear-cut accent on the first a — consists of a radical ele- 
ment, -d- ^‘to give,’^ six functionally distinct, if phoneti- 
cally frail, prefixed elements, and a suffix. Of the pre- 
fixes, i- indicates recently past time; n-, the pronominal 
subject “I”; -i-y the pronominal object ''it”;® -a-, the 
second pronominal object '‘her”; -Z-, a prepositional ele- 
ment indicating that the preceding pronominal prefix 
is to be understood as an indirect object {-lier-to-, i.e., 
"to her”) ; and -u-, an element that it is not easy to 
define satisfactorily but which, on the whole, indicates 
movement away from the speaker. The suffixed -am 
modifies the verbal content in a local sense; it adds to 
the notion conveyed by the radical element that of "ar- 
riving” or "going (or coming) for that particular pur- 
pose.” It is obvious that in Chinook, as in Hupa, the 
greater part of the grammatical machinery resides in the 
prefixes rather than in the suffixes. 

A reverse case, one in which the grammatically signifi- 
cant elements cluster, as in Latin, at the end of the word 

Wishram dialect. 

8 Really “him/"’ but Chinook, like Latin or French, possesses 
grammatical gender. An object may be referred to as “he,” “she,'' 
or “it,” according to the characteristic form of its noun. 



74 


LANGUAGE 


is yielded by Pox, one of the better known Algonkin lan- 
guages of the Mississippi Valley. We may take the form 
eh-kiwi-n-a-m-olit-ati-wa-ch{i) ‘‘then they together kept 
(him) in flight from them.’’ The radical element here 
is kiwi-, a verb stem indicating the general notion of 
“indefinite movement round about, here and there.” 
The prefixed element eh- is hardly more than an ad- 
verbial particle indicating temporal subordination; it 
may be conveniently rendered as “then.” Of the seven 
suffixes included in this highly-wrought word, -n- seems 
to be merely a phonetic element serving to connect the 
verb stem with the following -a-;^ -a- is a “secondary 
stem”^^ denoting the idea of “flight, to flee”; -m- de- 
notes causality with reference to an animate object 
-o(ht)- indicates activity done for the subject (the so- 
called “middle” or “medio-passive” voice of Greek) ; 
-{a)ti- is a reciprocal element, “one another”; -wa-ch{i) 
is the third person animate plural {-wa-, plural; -chi, 
more properly personal) of so-called “conjunctive” 
forms. The word may be translated more literally (and 
yet only approximately as to grammatical feeling) as 
“then they (animate) caused some animate being to 
wander about in flight from one another of themselves.” 
Eskimo, Nootka, Yana, and other languages have simi- 
larly complex arrays of suffixed elements, though the 

9 This analysis is doubtful. It is likely that -n- possesses a 
function that still remains to be ascertained. The Algonkin lan- 
guages are unusually complex and present i any unsolved prob- 
lems of detail. 

10 “Secondary stems” are elements which are suffixes from a 
formal point of view, never appearing without the support of a 
true radical element, but whose function is as concrete, to all 
intents and purposes, as that of the radical element itself. Sec- 
ondary verb stems of this type are characteristic of the Algonkin 
languages and of Yana. 

11 In the Algonkin languages all persons and things are con- 
ceived of as either animate or inanimate, just as in Latin or 
German they are conceived of as masculine, feminine, or neuter. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 75 

functions performed by them and their principles of 
combination differ widely. 

We have reserved the very curious type of af- 
fixation known as ''infixing’’ for separate illustra- 
tion. It is utterly unknown in English, unless we 
consider the -n- of stand (contrast stood) as an in- 
fixed element. The earlier Indo-European languages, 
such as Latin, Greek and Sanskrit, made a fairly 
considerable use of infixed nasals to differentiate the 
present tense of a certain class of verbs from other forms 
(contrast Latin vinc-o ''I conquer” with vic-i con- 
quered”; Greek lamh-an-o "I take” with edah-on "I 
took”). There arc, however, more striking examples of 
the process, examples in which it has assumed a more 
clearly defined, function than in these Latin and Greek 
cases. It is particularly prevalent in many languages of 
southeastern Asia and of the Malay archipelago. Good 
examples from Khmer (Cambodgian) are tmeu "one 
who walks” and daneu "walking” (verbal noun), both 
derived from dcit "to walk.” Further examples may be 
quoted from Bontoc Igorot, a Filipino language. Thus, 
an infixed -in- conveys the idea of the product of an 
accomplished action, e.g., kayu "wood,” kinai/u "gath- 
ered wood.” Infixes are also freely used in the Bontoc 
Igorot verb. Thus, an infixed -urn- is characteristic of 
many intransitive verbs with personal pronominal suf- 
fixes, e.g., sad- "to wait,” sumid-ak "I wait”; kineg 
"silent,” kuminek-ak "I am silent.” In other verbs 
it indicates futurity, e.g., tengao- "to celebrate a holi- 
day,” tumengao-ak "I shall have a holiday.” The past 
tense is frequently indicated by an infixed -in-; if there 
is already an infixed -vm-, the two elements combine to 
-in-m-, e.g., kinwinek-ak "I am silent.” Obviously the 
infixing process has in this (and related) languages the 



76 


LANGUAGE 


same vitality that is possessed by the commoner prefixes 
and suffixes of other languages. The process is also 
found in a number of aboriginal American languages. 
The Yana plural is sometimes formed by an infixed ele- 
ment, e.g., k^uruwi ^'medicine-men,’’ k’uwi "medicine- 
man’’; in Chinook an infixed -I- is used in certain verbs 
to indicate repeated activity, e.g., ksik'ludelk "she keeps 
looking at him, ’ ’ iksik 'lutk ' ' she looked at him ’ ’ ( radical 
element 4k), A peculiarly interesting type of infixation 
is found in the Siouan languages, in which certain verbs 
insert the pronominal elements into the very body of the 
radical element, e.g., Sioux cheti "to build a fire,” 
chewati "I build a fire”; shuta "to miss,” sliuunta-pi 
"we miss.” 

A subsidiary but by no means unimportant grammati- 
cal process is that of internal vocalic or consonantal 
change. In some languages, as in English {sing^ sang, 
sung, song; goose, geese), the former of these has be- 
come one of the major methods of indicating fundamental 
changes of grammatical function. At any rate, the proc- 
ess is alive enough to lead our children into untrodden 
ways. We all know of the growing youngster who 
speaks of having hrung something, on the analogy of 
such forms as sung and flung. In Hebrew, as we have 
seen, vocalic change is of even greater significance 
than in English. What is true of Hebrew is of course 
true of all other Semitic languages. A few examples 
of so-called "broken” plurals from Arabic will sup- 
plement the Hebrew verb forms that I have given in 
another connection. The noun halad "place” has the 
plural form bilad; "hide” forms the plural gulud; 

12 Egyptian dialect. 

13 There are changes of accent and vocalic quantity in these 
forms as well, but the requirements of simplicity force us to 
neglect them. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 77 

ragil the plural rigol; shihbak ^‘window/’ the 

plural shahabik. Very similar phenomena are illus- 
trated by the Hamitic languages of Northern Africa, 
e.g., Shilh izbil ‘'hair,’’ plural izbel; a-slein “fish,” 
plural i-slim-en; sn “to know,” sen “to be knowing”; 
rmi “to become tired/’ rumni “to be tired”; itss^^ “to 
fall asleep,” ttoss “to sleep.” Strikingly similar to 
English and Greek alternations of the type sing — sang 
and leip-o “I leave,” leloip-a “I have left,” are such 
Somali^** cases as al “I am,” il “I was”; i-dah-a “I 
say, ’ ’ i-di ‘ ‘ I said, ’ ’ deJi ‘ ‘ say ! ’ ’ 

Vocalic change is of great significance also in a num- 
ber of American Indian languages. In the Athabaskan 
group many verbs change the quality or quantity of 
the vowel of the radical element as it changes its tense 
or mode. The Navaho verb for “I put (grain) into a 
receptacle” is bi-hi-sh-ju, in which -ja is the radical 
element; the past tense, bi-lii-ja\ has a long a-vowel, fol- 
lowed by the “glottal stop”; the future is bi-li-de-sli-ji 
with complete change of vowel. In other types of 
Navaho verbs the vocalic changes follow different lines, 
e.g., yaJi-a-7ii-ye “you carry (a pack) into (a stable)”; 
past, yaJi-i-ni-ym (with long i in -yin; -n is here used to 
indicate nasalization) ; future, yali-a-di-yelil (with long 
e). In another Indian language, Yokuts,^^ vocalic modi- 
fications affect both noun and verb forms. Thus, 
buchong “son” forms the plural bocliang-i (contrast the 
objective buchong-a) ; enasli “grandfather,” the plural 
inash-a; the verb engtyim “to sleep” forms the continu- 

14 A Berber language of Morocco. 

15 Some of the Berber languages allow consonantal combina* 
tions that seem unpronounceable to us. 

16 One of the Hamitic languages of eastern Africa. 

17 See page 49. 

18 Spoken in the south-central part of California. 



78 LANGUAGE 

ative ingetym-ad be sleeping’’ and the past ingetym- 
ash. 

Consonantal change as a functional process is prob- 
ably far less common than vocalic modifications, but 
it is not exactly rare. There is an interesting group 
of cases in English, certain nouns and corresponding 
verbs differing solely in that the final consonant is 
voiceless or voiced. Examples are wreath (with th as 
in think), but to wreathe (with th as in then); house, 
but to house (with s pronounced like z). That we have 
a distinct feeling for the interchange as a means of dis- 
tinguishing the noun from the verb is indicated by the 
extension of the principle by many Americans to such 
a noun as rise (e.g., the rise of democracy) — pronounced 
like rice — in contrast to the verb to rise (s like z). 

In the Celtic languages the initial consonants undergo 
several types of change according to the grammatical 
relation that subsists between the word itself and the 
preceding word. Thus, in modern Irish, a word like 
bo ‘"ox” may under the appropriate circumstances, take 
the forms bho (pronounce wo) or mo (e.g., cm bo ‘‘the 
ox,” as a subject, but tir na mo “land of the oxen,” 
as a possessive plural). In the verb the principle has as 
one of its most striking consequences the “aspiration” 
of initial consonants in the past tcmse. If a verb be- 
gins with t, say, it changes the t to th (now pronounced 
h) in forms of the past; if it begins with g, the conso- 
nant changes, in analogous forms, to gh (pronounced 
like a voiced spirant g or like y, according to the 
nature of the following vowel). In modern Irish 
the principle of consonantal change, which began in 
the oldest period of the language as a secondary conse- 
quence of certain phonetic conditions, has become one 

See pa^e 50. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


79 


of the primary grammatical processes of the language. 

Perhaps as remarkable as these Irish phenomena are 
the consonantal interchanges of Pul, an African lan- 
guage of the Soudan. Here we find that all nouns be- 
longing to the personal class form the plural by chang- 
ing their initial g, j, d, b, k, ch, and p io y {ov w), y, r, 
w, hy s and / respectively; e.g., jiyn-o ''companion,” 
yim-^he "companions”; pio-o "beater,” fio-'he "beat- 
ers.” Curiously enough, nouns that belong to the class 
of things form their singular and plural in exactly re- 
verse fashion, e.g., yola-re "grass-grown place,” jola-je 
‘^grass-grown places”; fitan-du "soul,” pital-i "souls.’’ 
In Nootka, to refer to but one other language in which 
the process is found, the t or tl of many verbal suf- 
fixes becomes Id in forms denoting repetition, e.g., 
"to fall out,” hita-^alil "to keep falling out”; 
mat-achisht-utl "to fly on to the water, ’ ’ mat-achisTit-ohl 
“to keep flying on to the water.” Further, the hi of 
certain elements changes to a peculiar 7i-sound in plural 
forms, e.g., yak-old “sore-faced,” yak-oli “sore-faced 
(people).” 

Nothing is more natural than the prevalence of re- 
duplication, in other words, the repetition of all or part 
of the radical element. The process is generally em- 
ployed, with self-evident symbolism, to indicate such 
concepts as distribution, plurality, repetition, customary 
activity, increase of size, added intensity, continuance. 
Even in English it is not unknown, though it is not gen- 
erally accounted one of the typical formative devices of 
our language. Such words as goody-goody and to pooh- 
pooh have become accepted as part of our normal vocabu- 
lary, but the method of duplication may on occasion be 
used more freely than is indicated by such stereotyped 

20 These orthographies are but makeshifts for simple sounds. 



80 


LANGUAGE 


examples. Such locutions as a hig big man or Let it 
cool till it's thick thick are far more common, especially 
in the speech of women and children, than our linguistic 
text-books would lead one to suppose. In a class by 
themselves are the really enormous number of words, 
many of them sound-imitative or contemptuous in psy- 
chological tone, that consist of duplications with either 
change of the vowel or change of the initial consonant — 
words of the type sing-song, riff-raff, wishy-washy, 
harum-skaf'um, roly-poly. Words of this type are all 
but universal. Such examples as the Kussian Chudo- 
Yudo (a dragon), the Chinese ping -pang ^‘rattling of 
rain on the roof,'’^^ the Tibetan kyang-kyong '‘lazy,’' 
and the Manchu porpon parpan “blear-eyed’^ are curi- 
ously reminiscent, both in form and in psychology, of 
words nearer home. But it can hardly be said that 
the duplicative process is of a distinctively grammatical 
significance in English. We must turn to other lan- 
guages for illustration. Such cases as Hottentot go-go 
“to look at carefully” (from go “to see”), Somali fen- 
fen “to gnaw at on all sides” (from fen “to gnaw at”), 
Chinook iwi iwi “to look about carefully, to examine” 
(from iwi “to appear”), or Tsimshian am' am “several 
(are) good” (from am “good”) do not depart from 
the natural and fundamental range of significance of 
the process. A more abstract function is illustrated in 
Ewe,^^ in which both infinitives and verbal adjectives are 
formed from verbs by duplication; e.g., yi “to go,” yiyi 
“to go, act of going”; ivo “to do,” wowo"^ “done”; 
mawomawo “not to do” (with both duplicated verb 
stem and duplicated negative particle). Causative du- 

21 Whence our ping-pong. 

22 An African language of the Guinea Coast. 

23 In the verbal adjective the tone of the second syllable differs 
from that of the first. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


81 


plications are characteristic of Hottentot, e.g., gartv- 
gam '-^ ''to cause to telE’ (from gmn “to telE'). Or the 
process may be used to derive verbs from nouns, as in 
Hottentot klioe-kJioe “to talk Hottentot (from khoe-h 
“man, Hottentot’’), or as in Kwakiutl metmat “to eat 
clams” (radical element met- “clam”). 

The most characteristic examples of reduplication are 
such as repeat only part of the radical element. It would 
be possible to demonstrate the existence of a vast num- 
ber of formal types of such partial duplication, accord- 
ing to whether the process makes use of one or more of 
the radical consonants, preserves or weakens or alters 
the radical vowel, or affects the beginning, the middle, 
or the end of the radical element. The functions are 
even more exuberantly developed than with simple du- 
plication, though the basic notion, at least in origin, 
is nearly always one of repetition or continuance. Ex- 
amples illustrating this fundamental function can be 
quoted from all parts of the globe. Initially redupli- 
cating are, for instance, Shilh ggen "to be sleeping” 
(from gen “to sleep”) ; Ful pepeu-^lo “liar” (i.e., “one 
who always lies”), plural fefeu-^be (from fewa “to 
lie”) ; Bontoc Igorot ayiak “child,” ananak “children”; 
kamu-ck "1 hasten,” kakamu-ek “I hasten more”; 
Tsimshian gyad “person,” gyigyad “people”; Nass 
gyihayuk “to fly,” gyigyihayuk “one who is flying.” 
Psychologically comparable, but with the reduplication 
at the end, are Somali ur “body,” plural urar; Hausa 
suna “name,” plural sunana-ki; Washo gusu “buf- 
falo,” gusnsu “buffaloes”; Takelma-® himi-d- “to talk 
to,” Jiimim-d- "to be accustomed to talk to.” Even 

24 Initial “click” (see page 55, note 15) omitted. 

25 An Indian language of Nevada. 

26 An Indian language of Oregon. 



82 


LANGUAGE 


more commonly than simple duplication, this partial 
duplication of the radical element has taken on in many 
languages functions that seem in no way related to 
the idea of increase. The best known examples are 
probably the initial reduplication of our older Indo- 
European languages, which helps to form the perfect 
tense of many verbs (e.g., Sanskrit dadarsJia have 
seen,’’ Greek leloipa ‘‘I have left,” Latin tetigi ''I have 
touched,” Gothic lelot ‘'I have let”). In Nootka re- 
duplication of the radical element is often employed in 
association with certain suffixes; e.g., Much- ‘‘woman” 
forms Muhluch-^ituhl “to dream of a woman,” hluhluch- 
k'ok “resembling a woman.” Psychologically similar 
to the Greek and Latin examples are many Takelma 
cases of verbs that exhibit two forms of the stem, one 
employed in the present or past, the other in the future 
and in certain modes and verbal derivatives. The for- 
mer has final reduplication, which is absent in the lat- 
ter; e.g., al-yeheh-i^n “I show (or showed) to him,” at- 
yeb-in “I shall show him.” 

We come now to the subtlest of all grammatical proc- 
esses, variations in accent, whether of stress or pitch. 
The chief difficulty in isolating accent as a functional 
process is that it is so often combined with alternations 
in vocalic quantity or quality or complicated by the 
presence of affixed elements that its grammatical value 
appears as a secondary rather than as a primary fea- 
ture. In Greek, for instance, it is characteristic of true 
verbal forms that they throw the accent back as far as 
the general accentual rules will permit, while nouns may 
be more freely accented. There is thus a striking ac- 
centual difference between a verbal form like elutJiemen 
^‘we were released,” accented on the second syllable of 
the word, and its participial derivative lutheis ‘‘re« 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


83 


leased, ’ ’ accented on the last. The presence of the char- 
acteristic verbal elements e- and -yyien in the first case 
and of the nominal -s in the second tends to obscure the 
inherent value of the accentual alternation. This value 
comes out very neatly in such English doublets as ta 
refund and a refund, to extract and an extract, to come 
down and a come down, to lack luster and lack-luster 
eyes, in which the difference between the verb and the 
noun is entirely a matter of changing stress. In the 
Athabaskan languages there are not infrequently sig- 
nificant alternations of accent, as in Navaho ta-di-gis 
‘^you wash yourself’^ (accented on the second syllable), 
ta-di-gis “he washes himself’^ (accented on the first 
Pitch accent may be as functional as stress and is 
perhaps more often so. The mere fact, however, that 
pitch variations are phonetically essential to the lan- 
guage, as in Chinese (e.g., feng “wind’^ with a level 
tone, feng “to serve with a falling tone) or as in classi- 
cal Greek (e.g., lab-on “having taken with a simple 
or high tone on the suffixed participial -on, gunaik-on “of 
women’’ with a compound or falling tone on the case 
suffix -on) does not necessarily constitute a functional, 
or perhaps we had better say grammatical, use of pitch. 
In such cases the pitch is merely inherent in the radi- 
cal element or affix, as any vowel or consonant might 
be. It is different with such Chinese alternations as 
chung (level) “middle” and cJiung (falling) “to hit 
the middle”; vmi (rising) “to buy” and mai (falling) 
“to sell”; pei (falling) “back” and pci (level) “to 
carry on the back.” Examples of this type are not 
exactly common in Chinese and the language cannot be 
said to possess at present a definite feeling for tonal dif- 

It is not unlikely, however, that these Athabaskan alterna- 
tions are primarily tonal in character. 



84 LANGUAGE 

ferences as symbolic of the distinction between noim 
and verb. 

There are languages, however, in which such differ- 
ences are of the most fundamental grammatical impor- 
tance. They are particularly common in the Soudan. 
In Ewe, for instance, there are formed from subo ‘‘to 
serve’’ two reduplicated forms, an infinitive suhosuba 
“to serve,” with a low tone on the first two syllables 
and a high one on the last two, and an abjectival subo- 
subo ''serving,” in which all the syllables have a high 
tone. Even more striking are cases furnished by Shil- 
luk, one of the languages of the headwaters of the Nile. 
The plural of the noun often differs in tone from the 
singular, e.g., yit (high) “ear” but yit (low) “ears.” 
In the pronoun three forms may be distinguished by tone 
alone; e “he” has a high tone and is subjective, -e “him” 
(e,g., a chwoUe “he called him”) has a low tone and is 
objective, -c “his” (e.g., wod-e “his house”) has a 
middle tone and is possessive. Prom the verbal ele- 
ment gwed- “to write” are formed gwed-o “(he) 
writes” with a low tone, the passive gwet “(it was) 
written” with a falling tone, the imperative gwet 
“write!” with a rising tone, and the verbal noun gwet 
“writing” with a middle tone. In aboriginal America 
also pitch accent is known to occur as a grammatical 
process. A good example of such a pitch language is 
Tlingit, spoken by the Indians of the southern coast 
of Alaska. In this language many verbs vary the tone 
of the radical element according to tense ; Jiun ' ‘ to sell, ’ ^ 
sin “to hide,” tin “to see,” and numerous other radi- 
cal elements, if low-toned, refer to past time, if high- 
toned, to the future. Another type of function is illus- 
trated by the Takelma forms hel “song,” with falling 
pitch, but hel “sing!” with a rising inflection; parallel 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL PROCESSES 


85 


to these forms are sel (falling) “black paint,” sel (ris- 
ing) “paint it!” All in all it is clear that pitch ac- 
cent, like stress and vocalic or consonantal modifications, 
is far less infrequently employed as a grammatical proc- 
ess than our own habits of speech would prepare us to 
believe probable. 



FORM IN LANGUAGE: GRAMMATICAL 

CONCEPTS 


We have seen that the single word expresses either 
a simple concept or a combination of concepts so inter- 
related as to form a psychological unity. We have, fur- 
thermore, briefly reviewed from a strictly formal stand- 
point the main processes that are used by all known 
languages to affect the fundamental concepts — those em- 
bodied in unanalyzable words or in the radical elements 
of words — by the modifying or formative influence of 
subsidiary concepts. In this chapter we shall look a 
little more closely into the nature of the world of con- 
cepts, in so far as that world is reflected and systematized 
in linguistic structure. 

Let us begin with a simple sentence that involves va- 
rious kinds of concepts — the farmer kills the duckling, 
A rough and ready analysis discloses here the presence 
of three distinct and fundamental concepts that are 
brought into connection with each other in a number of 
ways. These three concepts are farmer^’ (the subject 
yi discourse), ''kiir’ (defining the nature of the activity 
which the sentence informs us about), and ''duckling’^ 
(another subject ^ of discourse that takes an important 
though somewhat passive part in this activity). We can 
visualize the farmer and the duckling and we have also 
no difficulty in constructing an image of the killing. In 
iNot in its technical sense. 

86 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 87 

other words, the elements farmer, kill, and duckling de- 
fine concepts of a concrete order. 

But a more careful linguistic analysis soon brings us 
to see that the two subjects of discourse, however simply 
we may visualize them, are not expressed quite as di- 
rectly, as immediately, as we feel them. A ‘'farmer^’ 
is in one sense a perfectly unified concept, in another he 
is ‘'one who farms.'’ The concept conveyed by the radi- 
cal element (/ami-) is not one of personality at all but 
of an industrial activity {to farm), itself based on the 
concept of a particular type of object {a farm). Simi- 
larly, the concept of duckling is at one remove from that 
which is expressed by the radical element of the word, 
duck. This element, which may occur as an independ- 
ent word, refers to a whole class of animals, big and 
little, while duckling is limited in its application to the 
young of that class. The word farmer has an ‘ ‘ agenti ;e ’ ' 
suffix -er that performs the function of indicating the 
one that carries out a given activity, in this ease that 
of farming. It transforms the verb to farm into an 
agenti ve noun precisely as it transforms the verbs to 
sing, to pamt, to teach into the corresponding agentive 
nouns singer, painter, teacher. The element -ling is not 
so freely used, but its significance is obvious. It adds to 
the basic concept the notion of smallness (as also in 
gosling, fledgeling) or the somewhat related notion of 
“contemptible" (as in weakling, princeling, Inreling). 
The agentive -er and the diminutive -ling both convey 
fairly concrete ideas (roughly those of “doer" and “lit- 
tle"), but the concreteness is not stressed. They do 
not so much define distinct concepts as mediate between 
concepts. The -er of farmer does not quite say “one who 
(farms) " it merely indicates that the sort of person we 
call a farmer’’ is closely enough associated with ac- 



88 


LANGUAGE 


Uvity on a farm to be conventionally thought of as al- 
ways so occupied. He may, as a matter of fact, go to 
town and engage in any pursuit but farming, yet his 
linguistic label remains '‘farmer.’’ Language here be- 
trays a certain helplessness or, if one prefers, a stub- 
born tendency to look away from the immediately sug- 
gested function, trusting to the imagination and to usage 
to fill in the transitions of thought and the details of 
application that distinguish one concrete concept {to 
farm) from another "derived” one {farmer). It would 
be impossible for any language to express every con- 
crete idea by an independent word or radical element. 
The concreteness of experience is infinite, the resources 
of the richest language are strictly limited. It must per- 
force throw countless concepts under the rubric of cer- 
tain basic ones, using other concrete or semi-concrete 
ideas as functional mediators. The ideas expressed by 
these mediating elements — they may be independent 
words, affixes, or modifications of the radical element — 
may be called "derivational” or "qualifying.” Some 
concrete concepts, such as kill, are expressed radically; 
others, such as farmer and dxickling, are expressed 
derivatively. Corresponding to these two modes of ex- 
pression we have two types of concepts and of linguistic 
elements, radical {farm, kill, duck) and derivational 
{-er, ding). When a word (or unified group of words) 
contains a derivational element (or word) the concrete 
significance of the radical element {farm-, duck-) tends 
to fade from consciousness and to yield to a new concrete- 
ness {farmer, duckling) that is synthetic in expression 
rather than in thought. In our sentence the concepts 
of farm and dnick are not really involved at all ; they are 
merely latent, for formal reasons, in the linguistic ex- 
pression. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 89 

Returning to this sentence, we feel that the analysis 
of farmer and duckling are practically irrelevant to an 
understanding of its content and entirely irrelevant to 
a feeling for the structure of the sentence as a whole. 
From the standpoint of the sentence the derivational 
elements -er and -ling are merely details in the local 
economy of two of its terms {fanner, duckling) that it 
accepts as units of expression. This indifference of the 
sentence as such to some part of the analysis of its words 
is shown by the fact that if we substitute such radical 
words as man and chick for farmer and duckling, we 
obtain a new material content, it is true, but not in the 
least a new structuial mold. We can go further and 
substitute another activity for that of '‘killing/^ say 
^‘taking.’’ The new sentence, the man fakes the chick, 
is totally different from the first sentence in what it 
conveys, not in how it conveys it. We feel instinctively, 
without the slightest attempt at conscious analysis, that 
the two sentences fit precisely the same pattern, that they 
are really the same fundamental sentence, differing only 
in their material trappings. In other words, they express 
identical relational concepts in an identical manner. 
The manner is here threefold — the use of an inherently 
relational word {the) in analogous positions, the analo- 
gous sequence (subject; predicate, consisting of verb 
and object) of the concrete terms of the sentence, and 
the use of the suffixed element -s in the verb. 

Change any of these features of the sentence and it 
becomes modified, slightly or seriously, in some purely 
relational, non-material regard. If the is omitted 
{farmer kills duckling, man takes chick), the sentence 
becomes impossible ; it falls into no recognized formal 
pattern and the two subjects of discourse seem to hang 
incompletely in the void. We feel that there is no rela- 



90 


LANGUAGE 


tion established between either of them and what is 
already in the minds of the speaker and his auditor. 
As soon as a the is put before the two nouns, we feel 
relieved. We know that the farmer and duckling which 
the sentence tells us about are the same farmer and 
duckling that we had been talking about or hearing 
about or thinking about some time before. If I meet a 
man who is not looking at and knows nothing about the 
farmer in question, I am likely to be stared at for my 
pains if T announce to him that ^'the farmer [what 
farmer?] kills the duckling [didn^t know he had any, 
whoever he is].’’ If the fact nevertheless seems interest- 
ing enough to communicate, I should be compelled to 
speak of farmer up my way” and of duckling of 
his.” These little words, the and a, have the important 
function of establishing a definite or an indefinite 
reference. 

If I omit the first the and also leave out the suffixed 
-s, I obtain an entirely new set of relations. Farmer, 
kill the duckling implies that I am now speaking to the 
farmer, not merely about him; further, that he is not 
actually killing the bird, but is being ordered by me 
to do so. The subjective relation of the first sentence 
has become a vocative one, one of address, and the ac- 
tivity is conceived in terms of command, not of state- 
ment. We conclude, therefore, that if the farmer is to 
be merely talked about, the little the must go back into 
its place and the -s must not be removed. The latter 
element clearly defines, or rather helps to define, state- 
ment as contrasted with command. I find, moreover, 
that if I wish to speak of several farmers, I cannot say 
the farmers kills the duckling, but must say the farmers 
kill the duckling. Evidently involves the notion of 
singularity in the subject. If the noun is singular, the 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


91 


verb must have a form to correspond; if the noun is 
plural, the verb has another, corresponding form.^ Com- 
parison with such forms as 1 kill and you kill shows, 
moreover, that the -s has exclusive reference to a per- 
son other than the speaker or the one spoken to. We 
conclude, therefore, that it connotes a personal relation 
as well as the notion of singularity. And comparison 
with a sentence like the farmer killed the duckling indi- 
cates that there is implied in this overburdened -s a 
distinct reference to present time. Statement as such 
and personal reference may well be looked upon as in- 
herently relational concepts. Number is evidently felt 
by those who speak English as involving a necessary re- 
lation, otherwise there would be no reason to express 
the concept twice, in the noun and in the verb. Time 
also is clearly felt as a relational concept; if it were 
not, we should be allowed to say the farmer killed-s to 
correspond to the fanner kills. Of the four concepts 
inextricably interwoven in the s suffix, all are felt as 
relational, two necessarily so. The distinction between 
a truly relational concept and one that is so felt and 
treated, though it need not be in the nature of things, 
will receive further attention in a moment. 

Finally, I can radically disturb the relational cut of 
the sentence by changing the order of its elements. If 
the positions of farnner and kills are interchanged, 
the sentence reads kills the farmer the duckling, which 
is most naturally interpreted as an unusual but not un- 
intelligible mode of asking the question, does the farmer 
kill the duckling? In this new sentence the act is not 
conceived as necessarily taking place at all. It may 
or it may not be happening, the implication being that 

2 It is, of course, an “accident” that -s denotes plurality in the 
noun, singularity in the verb. 



92 


LANGUAGE 


the speaker wishes to know the truth of the matter and 
that the person spoken to is expected to give him the 
information. The interrogative sentence possesses an 
entirely different modality’’ from the declarative one 
and implies a markedly different attitude of the speaker 
towards his companion. An even more striking change 
in personal relations is effected if we interchange the 
farmer and the duckling. The ducklmg kills the farmer 
involves precisely the same subjects of discourse and 
the same type of activity as our first sentence, but the 
roles of these subjects of discourse are now reversed. 
The duckling has turned, like the proverbial worm, or, to 
put it in grammatical terminology, what was “subject” 
is now “object,” what was object is now subject. 

The following tabular statement analyzes the sentence 
from the point of view of the concepts expressed in it 
and of the grammatical processes employed for their 
expression. 

I. Concrete Concepts: 

1. First subject of discourse: farmer 

2. Second subject of discourse: duckling 

3. Activity : kill 

analyzable into: 

A. Radical Concepts: 

1. Verb: (to) farm 

2. Noun: duck 

3. Verb: kill 

B. Derivational Concepts: 

1. Agentive : expressed by suffix -er 

2. Diminutive : expressed by suffix -ling 
II. Relational Concepts : 

Reference : 

1. Definiteness of reference to first subject of dis- 
course : expressed by first the, which has pre- 
posed position 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 93 

2. Definiteness of reference to second subject of dis- 

course : expressed by second the, which has pre- 
posed position 
Modality : 

3. Declarative: expressed by sequence of “subjecP^ 

plus verb ; and implied by suffixed -s 
Personal relations: 

4. Subjectivity of farmer: expressed by position of 

farmer before kills; and by suffixed -s 

5. Objectivity of duckling: expressed by position of 

duckling after kills 
Number : 

6. Singularity of first subject of discourse : ex- 

pressed by lack of plural suffix in farmer; and 

by suffix -s in following verb 

7. Singularity of second subject of discourse: ex- 

pressed by lack of plural suffix in duckling 

Time: 

8. Present: expressed by lack of preterit suffix in 

verb; and by suffixed -s 

In this short sentence of five words there are expressed, 
therefore, thirteen distinct concepts, of which three are 
radical and concrete, two derivational, and eight rela- 
tional. Perhaps the most striking result of the analysis 
is a renewed realization of the curious lack of accord in 
our language between function and form. The method 
of suffixing is used both for derivational and for rela- 
tional elements ; independent wmrds or radical elements 
express both concrete ideas (objects, activities, qualities) 
and relational ideas (articles like the and a; words defin- 
ing case relations, like of, to, for, with, by; words defin- 
ing local relations, like in, 07i, at) ; the same relational 
concept may be expressed more than once (thus, the sin- 
gularity of farmer is both negatively expressed in the 
noun and positively in the verb) ; and one element may 



94 


LANGUAGE 


convey a group of interwoven concepts rather than one 
definite concept alone (thus the -s of kills embodies no 
less than four logically independent relations). 

Our analysis may seem a bit labored, but only be- 
cause we are so accustomed to our own well-worn grooves 
of expression that they have come to be felt as inevitable. 
Yet destructive analysis of the familiar is the only 
method of approach to an understanding of fundamen- 
tally different modes of expression. When one has 
learned to feel what is fortuitous or illogical or unbal- 
anced in the structure of his own language, he is already 
well on the way towards a sympathetic grasp of the 
expression of the various classes of concepts in alien 
types of speech. Not everything that is ^'outlandish’’ 
is intrinsically illogical or far-fetched. It is often pre- 
cisely the familiar that a wider perspective reveals as 
the curiously exceptional. From a purely logical stand- 
point it is obvious that there is no inherent reason why 
the concepts expressed in our sentence should have been 
singled out, treated, and grouped as they have been and 
not otherwise. The sentence is the outgrowth of his- 
torical and of unreasoning psychological forces rather 
than of a logical synthesis of elements that have been 
clearly grasped in their individuality. This is the case, 
to a greater or less degree, in all languages, though in 
the forms of many we find a more coherent, a more con- 
sistent, reflection than in our English forms of that un- 
conscious analysis into individual concepts which is 
never entirely absent from speech, however it may be 
complicated with or overlaid by the more irrational 
factors. 

A cursory examination of other languages, near and 
far, would soon show that some or all of the thirteen 
concepts that our sentence happens to embody may not 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 95 

only be expressed in different form bnt that they may 
be differently grouped among themselves; that some 
among them may be dispensed with; and that other 
concepts, not considered worth expressing in English 
idiom, may be treated as absolutely indispensable to the 
intelligible rendering of the proposition. First as to 
a different method of handling such concepts as we have 
found expressed in the English sentence. If we turn 
to German, we find that in the equivalent sentence {Der 
Bauer iotet das Entelein) the definiteness of reference 
expressed by the English the is unavoidably coupled with 
three other concepts — number (both der and das are ex- 
plicitly singular), case {der is subjective; das is sub- 
jective or objective, by elimination therefore objective), 
and gender, a new concept of the relational order that 
is not in this case explicitly involved in English {der is 
masculine, das is neuter). Indeed, the chief burden 
of the expression of case, gender, and number is in the 
German sentence borne by the particles of reference 
rather than by the words that express the concrete con- 
cepts {Bauer, Entelein) to which these relational concepts 
ought logically to attach themselves. In the sphere of 
concrete concepts too it is worth noting that the German 
splits up the idea of ‘'killing'' into the basic concept of 
‘"dead" {tot) and the derivational one of ''causing to 
do (or be) so and so" (by the method of vocalic change, 
tot-); the German tot-et (analytically ^<9^- + vowel 
change + -eO causes to be dead" is, approximately, 
the formal equivalent of our dead-en^s, though the idio- 
matic application of this latter word is different.^ 

Wandering still further afield, we may glance at the 

3 “To cause to be dead” or “to cause to die” in the sense of 
“to kill” is an exceedingly wide-spread usage. It is found, for 
instance, also in Nootka and Sioux. 



96 


LANGUAGE 


Yana method of expression. Literally translated, the 
equivalent Yana sentence would read something like 
‘ ‘ kill-s he farmer * he to duck-ling, ’ ’ in which ' ^ he ^ ’ and 
^^to’^ are rather awkward English renderings of a gen- 
eral third personal pronoun (he, she, it, or they) and an 
objective particle which indicates that the following 
noun is connected with the verb otherwise than as sub- 
ject. The suffixed element in kill-s^’ corresponds to 
the English suffix with the important exceptions that it 
makes no reference to the number of the subject and 
that the statement is known to be true, that it is vouched 
for by the speaker. Number is only indirectly expressed 
in the sentence in so far as there is no specific verb 
suffix indicating plurality of the subject nor specific 
plural elements in the two nouns. Had the statement 
been made on another's authority, a totally different 
^ ^ tense-modar ’ suffix would have had to be used. The 
pronouns of reference (‘‘he’^ imply nothing by them- 
selves as to number, gender, or case. Gender, indeed, 
is completely absent in Yana as a relational category. 

The Yana sentence has already illustrated the point 
that certain of our supposedly essential concepts may 
be ignored; both the Yana and the German sentence 
illustrate the further point that certain concepts may 
need expression for which an English-speaking person, 
or rather the English-speaking habit, finds no need what- 
ever. One could go on and give endless examples of 
such deviations from English form, but we shall have 
to content ourselves with a few more indications. In 
the Chinese sentence ‘‘Man kill duck,^^ which may be 
looked upon as the practical equivalent of “The man 

4 Agriculture was not practised by the Yana. The verbal idea 
of “to farm” would probably be expressed in some such synthetic 
manner as “to dig-earth” or “to grow-cause.” There are suf- 
fixed elements corresponding to -er and -ling. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 97 

kills the duck/^ there is by no means present for the 
Chinese consciousness that childish, halting, empty feel- 
ing which we experience in the literal English transla- 
tion. The three concrete concepts — two objects and an 
action — are each directly expressed by a monosyllabic 
word which is at the same time a radical element; the 
two relational concepts — ''subject” and "object” — are 
expressed solely by the position of the concrete words 
before and after the word of action. And that is all. 
Definiteness or indefiniteness of reference, number, per- 
sonality as an inherent aspect of the verb, tense, not 
to speak of gender — all these are given no expression in 
the Chinese scmteiice, which, for all that, is a perfectly 
adequate communication — provided, of course, there is 
that context, that background of mutual understanding 
that is essential to the complete intelligibility of all 
speech. Nor does this qualification impair our argu- 
ment, for in the English sentence too we leave unex- 
pressed a large number of ideas which are either taken 
for granted or which have been developed or are about 
to be developed in the course of the conversation. Noth- 
ing has been said, for example, in the English, German, 
Yana, or Chinese sentence as to the place relations of 
the farmer, the duck, the speaker, and the listener. Are 
the farmer and the duck both visible or is one or the 
other invisible from the point of view of the speaker, 
and are both placed within the horizon of the speaker, 
the listener, or of some indefinite point of reference '‘off 
yonder”? In other words, to paraphrase awkwardly 
certain latent "demonstrative” ideas, does this farmer 
(invisible to us but standing behind a door not far 
away from me, you being seated yonder well out of 
reach) kill that duckling (which belongs to you) ? or 
does that farmer (who lives in your neighborhood and 



LANGUAGE 


whom we see over there) kill that duckling (that be- 
longs to him) ? This type of demonstrative elaboration 
is foreign to our way of thinking, but it would seem very 
natural, indeed unavoidable, to a Kwakiutl Indian. 

What, then, are the absolutely essential concepts in 
speech, the concepts that must be expressed if language 
is to be a satisfactory means of communication ? 
Clearly we must have, first of all, a large stock of basic 
or radical concepts, the concrete wherewithal of speech. 
We must have objects, actions, qualities to talk about, 
and these must have their corresponding symbols in 
independent words or in radical elements. No proposi- 
tion, however abstract its intent, is humanly possible 
without a tying on at one or more points to the con- 
crete world of sense. In every intelligible proposition 
at least two of these radical ideas must be expressed, 
though in exceptional cases one or even both may be 
understood from the context. And, secondly, such re- 
lational concepts must be expressed as moor the concrete 
concepts to each other and construct a definite, funda- 
mental form of proposition. In this fundamental form 
there must be no doubt as to the nature of the rela- 
tions that obtain between the concrete concepts. We 
must know what concrete concept is directly or indi- 
rectly related to what other, and how. If we wish to 
talk of a thing and an action, we must know if they are 
coordinately related to each other (e.g., ''He is fond of 
wine and gamhling’^) ; or if the thing is conceived of as 
the starting point, the "doer’’ of the action, or, as it 
is customary to say, the "subject” of which the action 
is predicated ; or if, on the contrary, it is the end point, 
the "object” of the action. If I wish to communicate 
an intelligible idea about a farmer, a duckling, and 
the act of killing, it is not enough to state the linguistic 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL^ CONCEPTS 99 

symbols for these concrete ideas in any order, higgledy- 
piggledy, trusting that the hearer may construct some 
kind of a relational pattern out of the general probabili- 
ties of the case. The fundamental syntactic relations 
must be unambiguously expressed. I can afford to be 
silent on the subject of time and place and number and 
of a host of other possible types of concepts, but I can 
find no way of dodging the issue as to who is doing the 
killing. There is no known language that can or does 
dodge it, any more than it succeeds in saying something 
without the use of symbols for the concrete concepts. 

We are thus once more reminded of the distinction 
between essential or unavoidable relational concepts and 
the dispensable type. The former are universally ex- 
pressed, the latter are but sparsely developed in some 
languages, elaborated with a bewildering exuberance in 
others. But what prevents us from throwing in these 
dispensable^^ or ' ^ secondary ^ ^ relational concepts with 
the large, floating group of derivational, qualifying con- 
cepts that we have already discussed? Is there, after 
all is said and done, a fundamental difference between 
a qualifying concept like the negative in unhealthy and 
a relational one like the number concept in hooks? If 
unhealthy may be roughly paraphrased as not healthy, 
may not books be just as legitimately paraphrased, bar- 
ring the violence to English idiom, as several hook? 
There are, indeed, languages in which the plural, if ex- 
pressed at all, is conceived of in the same sober, re- 
stricted, one might almost say casual, spirit in which 
we feel the negative in unhealthy. For such languages 
the number concept has no syntactic significance what- 
ever, is not essentially conceived of as defining a rela- 
tion, but falls into the group of derivational or even 
of basic concepts. In English, however, as in French, 



100 


LANGUAGE 


German, Latin, Greek — indeed in all the languages that 
we have most familiarity with — the idea of number is 
not merely appended to a given concept of a thing. It 
may have something of this merely qualifying value, but 
its force extends far beyond. It infects much else in 
the sentence, molding other concepts, even such as have 
no intelligible relation to number, into forms that are 
said to correspond to or ''agree with'^ the basic concept 
to which it is attached in the first instance. If ' ‘ a man 
falls'’ but "men fall” in English, it is not because of 
any inherent change that has taken place in the nature 
of the action or because the idea of plurality inherent 
in ' ' men ’ ’ must, in the very nature of ideas, relate itself 
also to the action performed by these men. What we are 
doing in these sentences is what most languages, in 
greater or less degree and in a hundred varying ways, 
are in the habit of doing — throwing a bold bridge be- 
tween the two basically distinct types of concept, the 
concrete and the abstractly relational, infecting the lat- 
ter, as it were, with the color and grossness of the for- 
mer. By a certain violence of metaphor the material 
concept is forced to do duty for (or intertwine itself 
with) the strictly relational. 

The case is even more obvious if we take gender as our 
text. In the two English phrases, "The white woman 
that comes” and "The white men that come,” we are 
not reminded that gender, as well as number, may be 
elevated into a secondary relational concept. It would 
seem a little far-fetched to make of masculinity and 
femininity, crassly material, philosophically accidental 
concepts that they are, a means of relating quality and 
person, person and action, nor would it easily occur 
to us, if we had not studied the classics, that it was 
anything but absurd to inject into two such highly at« 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


101 


tenuated relational concepts as are expressed by ‘‘the” 
and “that” the combined notions of number and sex. 
Yet all this, and more, happens in Latin. Ilia alha 
femina quae venit and illi albi homines qui veniunt, 
conceptually translated, amount to this: that -one- femi- 
nine-doer ^ one-f eminine- 2 (;/iffe-doer feminine-doing-one* 
woman which - one - feminine - doer other one - now- 
come; and: tTiat- several -masculine -doer several -mascu- 
line-U’7nYe-doer maseuline-doing-several-man which-sev- 
eral-masculine-doer other-several-now-come. Each word 
involves no less than four concepts, a radical concept 
(either properly concrete — white, man, woman, come — 
or demonstrative — that, which) and three relational con- 
cepts, selected from the categories of case, number, gen- 
der, person, and tense. Logically, only case ^ (the rela- 
tion of woman or men to a following verb, of which to 
its antecedent, of that and white to woynan or men, and 
of which to come) imperatively demands expression, and 
that only in connection with the concepts directly af- 
fected (there is, for instance, no need to be informed 
that the whiteness is a doing or doer’s whiteness ®). The 


5 ‘‘Doer,” not “done to.” This is a necessarily clumsy tag to 
represent the “nominative” (subjective) in contrast to the “accu- 
sative” ( objective ) . 

6 I.e., not you or I. 

7 By “case” is here meant not only the subjective-objective rela- 
tion but also that of attribution. 

8 Except in so far as Latin uses this method as a rather awk- 
ward, roundabout method of establishing the attribution of the 
color to the particular object or person. In effect one cannot 
in Latin directly say that a person is white, merely that what is 
white is identical with the person who is, acts, or is acted upon 
in such and such a manner. In origin the feel of the Latin ilia 
alha femina is really “that-one, the-white-one, (namely) the- 
woman” — three substantive ideas that are related to each other 
by a juxtaposition intended to convey an identity. English 
and Chinese express the attribution directly by means of order. 
In Latin the ilia and alha may occupy almost any position in the 
sentence. It is important to observe that the subjective form 



102 


LANGUAGE 


other relational concepts are either merely parasitic 
(gender throughout; number in the demonstrative, the 
adjective, the relative, and the verb) or irrelevant to 
the essential syntactic form of the sentence (number 
in the noun; person; tense). An intelligent and sensi- 
tive Chinaman, accustomed as he is to cut to the very 
bone of linguistic form, might well say of the Latin sen- 
tence, ^'How pedantically imaginative!'’ It must be 
difficult for him, when first confronted by the illogical 
complexities of our European languages, to feel at home 
in an attitude that so largely confounds the subject- 
matter of speech with its formal pattern or, to be more 
accurate, that turns certain fundamentally concrete con- 
cepts to such attenuated relational uses. 

I have exaggerated somewhat the concreteness of our 
subsidiary or rather non-syntactical relational concepts 
in order that the essential facts might come out in bold 
relief. It goes without saying that a Frenchman has no 
clear sex notion in his mind when he speaks of un arhre 
(^'a-masculine tree") or of une pomme (‘^a-feminine 
apple"). Nor have we, despite the grammarians, a very 
vivid sense of the present as contrasted with all past 
and all future time when we say He comes? This is 
evident from our use of the present to indicate both 
future time (''He comes to-morrow") and general ac- 
tivity unspecified as to time ("Whenever he comes, I 
am glad to see him," where "comes" refers to past oc- 

of ilia and alha does not truly define a relation of these qualifying 
concepts to femina. Such a relation might be formally expressed 
via an attributive case, say the genitive {woman of whiteness). 
In Tibetan both the methods of order and of true case relation 
may be employed: woman white (i.e., "white woman”) or white~of 
woman (i.e., "woman of whiteness, woman who is white, white 
woman” ) . 

» Aside, naturally, from the life and imminence that may b« 
created for such a sentence by a particular context. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


103 


cnrrences and possible future ones rather than to pres- 
ent activity) . In both the French and English instances 
the primary ideas of sex and time have become diluted 
by form-analogy and by extensions into the relational 
sphere, the concepts ostensibly indicated being now so 
vaguely delimited that it is rather the tyranny of usage 
than the need of their concrete expression that sways us 
in the selection of this or that form. If the thinning- 
out process continues long enough, we may eventually 
be left with a system of forms on our hands from which 
all the color of life has vanished and which merely per- 
sist by inertia, duplicating each other ^s secondary, syn- 
tactic functions with endless prodigality. Hence, in 
part, the complex conjugational systems of so many 
languages, in which differences of form are attended by 
no assignable differences of function. There must have 
been a time, for instance, though it antedates our earliest 
documentary evidence, when the type of tense formation 
represented by drove or sank differed in meaning, in 
however slightly nuanced a degree, from the type 
{killedy worked) which has now become established in 
English as the prevailing preterit formation, very much 
as we recognize a valuable distinction at present between 
both these types and the ''perfect'' {has driven, has 
killed) but may have ceased to do so at some point in 
the future.^® Now form lives longer than its own con- 
ceptual content. Both are ceaselessly changing, but, on 
the whole, the form tends to linger on when the spirit 
has flown or changed its being. Irrational form, form 
for form's sake — however we term this tendency to hold 
on to formal distinctions once they have come to be — ^is 

10 This has largely happened in popular French and German, 
where the difference is stylistic rather than functional. The 
preterits are more literary or formal in tone than the perfects. 



104 


LANGUAGE 


as natural to the life of language as is the retention of 
modes of conduct that have long outlived the meaning 
they once had. 

There is another powerful tendency which makes for 
a formal elaboration that does not strictly correspond 
to clear-cut conceptual differences. This is the tend- 
ency to construct schemes of classification into which 
all the concepts of language must be fitted. Once we 
have made up our minds that all things are either 
definitely good or bad or definitely black or white, it 
is difficult to get into the frame of mind that recog- 
nizes that any particular thing may be both good and 
bad (in other words, indifferent) or both black and 
white (in other words, gray), still more difficult to 
realize that the good-bad or black-white categories may 
not apply at all. Language is in many respects as un- 
reasonable and stubborn about its classifications as is 
such a mind. It must have its perfectly exclusive 
pigeon-holes and will tolerate no flying vagrants. Any 
concept that asks for expression must submit to the 
classificatory rules of the game, just as there are statisti- 
cal surveys in which even the most convinced atheist 
must perforce be labeled Catholic, Protestant, or Jew 
or get no hearing. In English we have made up our 
minds that all action must be conceived of in reference 
to three standard times. If, therefore, we desire to state 
a proposition that is as true to-morrow as it was yes- 
terday, we have to pretend that the present moment may 
be elongated fore and aft so as to take in all eternity 
In French we know once for all that an object is mas- 
culine or feminine, whether it be living or not; just as 

11 Hence, “the square root of 4 is 2,” precisely as “my uncle is 
here now.” There are many “primitive” languages that are more 
philosophical and distinguish between a true “present” and a 
“customary” or “generaF' tense. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


105 


in many American and East Asiatic languages it must 
be understood to belong to a certain form-category (say, 
ring-round, ball-round, long and slender, cylindrical, 
sheet-like, in mass like sugar) before it can be enu- 
merated (e.g., '‘two ball-class potatoes,’’ "three sheet- 
class carpets”) or even said to "be” or "be handled in 
a definite way” (thus, in the Athabaskan languages and 
in Yana, "to carry” or "throw” a pebble is quite an- 
other thing than to carry or throw a log, linguistically 
no less than in terms of muscular experience)* Such 
instances might be multiplied at will. It is almost as 
though at some period in the past the unconscious mind 
of the race had made a hasty inventory of experience, 
committed itself to a premature classification that al- 
lowed of no revision, and saddled the inheritors of its 
language with a science that they no longer quite 
believed in nor had the strength to overthrow. Dogma, 
rigidly prescribed by tradition, stiffens into formalism. 
Linguistic categories make up a system of surviving 
dogma — dogma of the unconscious. They are often but 
half real as concepts; their life tends ever to languish 
away into form for form’s sake. 

There is still a third cause for the rise of this non- 
significant form, or rather of non-significant differences 
of form. This is the mechanical operation of phonetic 
processes, which may bring about formal distinctions 
that have not and never had a corresponding functional 
distinction. Much of the irregularity and general for- 
mal complexity of our declensional and conjugational 
systems is due to this process. The plural of luit is hats, 
the plural of self is selves. In the former case we have 
a true -s symbolizing plurality, in the latter a 2:-sound 
coupled with a change in the radical element of the word 
of f to V. Here we have not a falling together of forms 



106 


LANGUAGE 


that originally stood for fairly distinct concepts — as we 
saw was presumably the case with such parallel forms 
as drove and worked — but a merely mechanical mani- 
folding of the same formal element without a corre- 
sponding growth of a new concept. This type of form 
development, therefore, while of the greatest interest 
for the general history of language, does not directly 
concern us now in our effort to understand the nature 
of grammatical concepts and their tendency to degen- 
erate into purely formal counters. 

We may now conveniently revise our first classifica- 
tion of concepts as expressed in language and suggest 
the following scheme : 


1. Basic (Concrete) Concepts (such as objects, actions, 
qualities) : normally expressed by independent words 
or radical elements; involve no relation as such 
IL Derivational Concepts (less concrete, as a rule, than I, 
more so than III) : normally expressed by affixing 
non-radical elements to radical elements or by inner 
modification of these; differ from type I in defining 
ideas that are irrelevant to the proposition as a whole 
but that give a radical element a particular increment 
of significance and that are thus inherently related in 
a specific way to concepts of type I 


12 Except, of course, the fundamental selection and contrast nec- 
essarily implied in defining one concept as against another. 
“Man” and “white” possess an inherent relation to “woman” 
and “black,” but it is a relation of conceptual content only and 
is of no direct interest to grammar. 

13 Thus, the -er of farmer may be defined as indicating that 
particular substantive concept (object or thing) that serves as 
the habitual subject of the particular verb to which it is affixed. 
This relation of “subject” {a farmer farms) is inherent in and 
specific to the word; it does not exist for the sentence as a whole. 
In the same way the -ling of duckling defines a specific relation 
of attribution that concerns only the radical element, not the 
sentence. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


107 


III. Concrete Relational Concepts (still more abstract, yet 

not entirely devoid of a measure of concreteness) : 
normally expressed by affixing non-radical elements to 
radical elements, but generally at a greater remove 
from these than is the case with elements of type II, 
or by inner moditication of radical elements; differ 
fundamentally from type II in indicating or implying 
relations that transcend the particular word to which 
they are immediately attached, thus leading over to 

IV. Pure Relational Concepts (purely abstract) : normally 

expressed by affixing non-radical elements to radical 
elemenls (in which case these concepts are frequently 
intertwined with those of type III) or by their inner 
modification, by independent words, or by position; 
serve to relate the concrete elements of the proposition 
to each other, thus giving it definite syntactic form. 

The nature of these four classes of concepts as regards 
their concreteness or their power to express syntactic 
relations may be thus symbolized: 

Material i I. Basic Concepts 
Content j H* Derivational Concepts 

Relation i Relational Concepts 

[ IV. Pure Relational Concepts 

These schemes must not be worshipped as fetiches. 
In the actual work of analysis difficult problems fre- 
quently arise and we may well be in doubt as to how 
to group a given set of concepts. This is particularly apt 
to be the case in exotic languages, where we may be 
quite sure of the analysis of the words in a sentence 
and yet not succeed in acquiring that inner ‘^feel’’ of 
its structure that enables us to tell infallibly what is 
‘‘material content’^ and what is “ relation. Concepts 



108 


LANGUAGE 


of class I are essential to all speech, also concepts of 
class IV. Concepts II and III are both common, but not 
essential; particularly group III, which represents, in 
effect, a psychological and formal confusion of types II 
and IV or of types I and IV, is an avoidable class of 
concepts. Logically there is an impassable gulf between 
I and IV, but the illogical, metaphorical genius of 
speech has wilfully spanned the gulf and set up a con- 
tinuous gamut of concepts and forms that leads imper- 
ceptibly from the crudest of materialities (''house’' or 
‘‘John Smith to the most subtle of relations. It is 
particularly significant that the unanalyzable inde- 
pendent word belongs in most cases to either group I or 
group IV, rather less commonly to II or III. It is 
possible for a concrete concept, represented by a 
simple word, to lose its material significance entirely 
and pass over directly into the relational sphere 
without at the same time losing its independence as a 
word. This happens, for instance, in Chinese and Cam- 
bodgian when the verb “give^^ is used in an abstract 
sense as a mere symbol of the ‘'indirect objective” rela- 
tion (e.g., Cambodgian “We make story this give all 
that person who have child,” i.e., “We have made this 
story for all those that have children”). 

There are, of course, also not a few instances of transi- 
tions between groups I and II and I and III, as well 
as of the less radical one between II and III. To the 
first of these transitions belongs that whole class of ex- 
amples in which the independent word, after passing 
through the preliminary stage of functioning as the sec- 
ondary or qualifying element in a compound, ends up 
by being a derivational affix pure and simple, yet with- 
out losing the memory of its former independence. Such 
an element and concept is the full of teaspoonfull, which 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


109 


hovers psychologically between the status of an inde- 
pendent, radical concept (compare full) or of a sub- 
sidiary element in a compound (cf. brim-full) and that 
of a simple suffix (cf. dutiful) in which the primary con- 
creteness is no longer felt. In general, the more highly 
synthetic our linguistic type, the more difficult and even 
arbitrary it becomes to distinguish groups I and II. 

Not only is there a gradual loss of the concrete as we 
pass through from group I to group IV, there is also 
a constant fading away of the feeling of sensible re- 
ality within the main groups of linguistic concepts them- 
selves. In many languages it becomes almost imperative, 
therefore, to make various sub-classifications, to segre- 
gate, for instance, the more concrete from the more ab- 
stract concepts of group II. Yet we must always beware 
of reading into such abstracter groups that purely for- 
mal, relational feeling that we can hardly help associat- 
ing with certain of the abstracter concepts which, with 
us, fall in group III, unless, indeed, there is clear evi- 
dence to warrant such a reading in. An example or two 
should make clear these all-important distinctions.^* In 
Nootka we have an unusually large number of deriva- 
tional affixes (expressing concepts of group II). Some 
of these are quite material in content (e.g., ‘‘in the 
house,'' “to dream of"), others, like an element denot- 
ing plurality and a diminutive affix, are far more ab- 
stract in content. The former type are more closely 
welded with the radical element than the latter, which 
can only be suffixed to formations that have the value of 

14 It is precisely the failure to feel the “value’’ or “tone,” as 
distinct from the outer significance, of the concept expressed by 
a given grammatical element that has so often led students to 
misunderstand the nature of languages profoundly alien to their 
own. Not everything that calls itself “tense” or “mode” or 
“number” or “gender” or “person” is genuinely comparable to 
what we mean by these terms in Latin or French. 



no LANGUAGE 

complete words. If, therefore, I wish to say ‘Hhe small 
fires in the house’' — and I can do this in one word — I 
must form the word ‘‘fire-in-the-house,” to which ele- 
ments corresponding to '‘small,” our plural, and "the” 
are appended. The element indicating the definiteness 
of reference that is implied in our "the” comes at the 
very end of the word. So far, so good. " Fire-in-the- 
house-the” is an intelligible correlate of our "the house- 
fire.” But is the Nootka correlate of "the small fires 
in the house” the true equivalent of an English ''the 
Tiouse-firelets''? By no means. First of all, the plural 
element precedes the diminutive in Nootka: " fire-in-the- 
house-plural-small-the, ’ ’ in other words ' ‘ the house-fires- 
let,” which at once reveals the important fact that the 
plural concept is not as abstractly, as relationally, felt 
as in English. A more adequate rendering would be 
"the house-fire-several-let,” in which, however, "sev- 
eral” is too gross a word, "-let” too choice an element 
("small” again is too gross). In truth we cannot carry 
over into English the inherent feeling of the Nootka 
word, which seems to hover somewhere between "the 
house-firelets ” and "the house-fire-several-small.” But 
what more than anything else cuts off all possibility of 
comparison between the English -s of "house-firelets” 
and the "-several-small” of the Nootka word is this, 
that in Nootka neither the plural nor the diminutive 
affix corresponds or refers to anything else in the sen- 
tence. In English "the house-firelets burn” (not 
"burns”), in Nootka neither verb, nor adjective, nor 

15 Suffixed articles occur also in Danish and Swedish and in 
numerous other languages. The Nootka element for “in the 
house” differs from our “house-” in that it is suffixed and cannot 
occur as an independent word; nor is it related to the Nootka 
word for “house.” 

16 Assuming the existence of a word “firelet.” 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


111 


anything else in the proposition is in the least concerned 
with the plurality or the diminutiveness of the fire. 
Hence, while Nootka recognizes a cleavage between con- 
crete and less concrete concepts within group II, the less 
concrete do not transcend the group and lead us into 
that abstracter air into which our plural -s carries us. 
But at any rate, the reader may object, it is something 
that the Nootka plural affix is set apart from the con- 
creter group of affixes ; and may not the Nootka diminu- 
tive have a slenderer, a more elusive content than our 
-let or -ling or the German -chen or -leinf 

Can such a concept as that of plurality ever be clas- 
sified with the more material concepts of group II? 
Indeed it can be. In Yana the third person of the 
verb makes no formal distinction between singular and 
plural. Nevertheless the plural concept can be, and 
nearly always is, expressed by the suffixing of an ele- 
ment (-ha-) to the radical element of the verb. ‘‘It 
burns in the east’^ is rendered by the verb yorhau-si 
“burn-east-s.’^ “They burn in the east^^ is ya-ha- 
haii-si. Note that the plural affix immediately follows 
the radical element (ya-), disconnecting it from the local 
element (-liau-). It needs no labored argument to prove 
that the concept of plurality is here hardly less concrete 
than that of location “in the east,^^ and that the Yana 
form corresponds in feeling not so much to our “They 
burn in the east’’ (ardunt orientc) as to a “Burn-several- 
east-s, it plurally burns in the east, ’ ’ an expression which 

17 The Nootka diminutive is doubtless more of a feeling-element, 
an element of nuance, than our -ling. This is shown by the fact 
that it may be used with verbs as well as with nouns. In speak- 
ing to a child, one is likely to add the diminutive to any word in 
the sentence, regardless of whether there is an inherent diminutive 
meaning in the word or not. 

18 -si is the third person of the present tense, -iiatir "east” is 
an alQSx, not a compounded radical element. 



112 


LANGUAGE 


we cannot adequately assimilate for lack of the necessary 
form-grooves into which to run it. 

But can we go a step farther and dispose of the cate- 
gory of plurality as an utterly material idea, one that 
would make of '‘books’^ a ‘'plural book,^^ in which the 
‘^plural,’’ like the “white'' of “white book," falls con- 
tentedly into group I? Our “many books’' and “sev- 
eral books” are obviously not cases in point. Even if 
we could say “many book" and “several book" (as we 
can say “many a book” and “each book”), the plural 
concept would still not emerge as clearly as it should for 
our argument; “many" and “several" are contaminated 
by certain notions of quantity or scale that are not essen- 
tial to the idea of plurality itself. We must turn to 
central and eastern Asia for the tj^pe of expression we 
are seeking. In Tibetan, for instance, nga-s mi yntJwng 
“I-by man see, by me a man is seen, I see a man" may 
just as well be understood to mean “I see men," if there 
happens to be no reason to emphasize the fact of plu- 
rality.^° If the fact is worth expressing, however, I 
can say nga-s mi rnams mthong “ by me man plural see, ' ' 
where rnams is the perfect conceptual analogue of -s in 
hooks, divested of all relational strings. Rnams follows 
its noun as would any other attributive word — “man 
plural” (whether two or a million) like “man white.” 
No need to bother about his plurality any more than 
about his whiteness unless we insist on the point. 

What is true of the idea of plurality is naturally just 
as true of a great many other concepts. They do not 
necessarily belong where we who speak English are in 
the habit of putting them. They may be shifted to- 


19 These are classical, not modern colloquial, forms. 

20 Just as in English “He has written books” makes no com- 
mitment on the score of quantity (“a few, several, many”). 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 119 

wards I or towards IV, the two poles of linguistic ex- 
pression. Nor dare we look down on the Nootka In- 
dian and the Tibetan for their material attitude towards 
a concept which to us is abstract and relational, lest we 
invite the reproaches of the Frenchman who feels a 
subtlety of relation in femme blanche and liomme hlanc 
that he misses in the coarser-grained white ivoman and 
white man. But the Bantu Negro, were he a philoso- 
pher, might go further and find it strange that we put 
in group II a category, the diminutive, which he strongly 
feels to belong to group III and which he uses, along with 
a number of other classificatory concepts, to relate his 
subjects and objects, attributes and predicates, as a 
Russian or a German handles his genders and, if pos- 
sible, with an even greater finesse. 

It is because our conceptual scheme is a sliding scale 
rather than a philosophical analysis of experience 
that we cannot say in advance just where to 
put a given concept. We must dispense, in other 
words, with a well-ordered classification of categories. 
What boots it to put tense and mode here or number 
there when the next language one handles puts 
tense a peg ^ dower down^^ (tow^ards I), mode and 
number a peg higher up’^ (towards IV) ? Nor is there 
much to be gained in a summary work of this kind from 
a general inventory of the types of concepts generally 
found in groups II, III, and IV. There are too many 
possibilities. It would be interesting to show what are 
the most typical noun-forming and verb-forming ele- 
ments of group II ; how variously nouns may be classi- 
fied (by gender; personal and non-personal; animate and 
inanimate ; by form ; common and proper) ; how the con- 

21 Such as person class, animal class, instrument class, augmen- 
tative class. 



114 


LANGUAGE 


cept of number is elaborated (singular and plural; sin- 
gular, dual, and plural ; singular, dual, trial, and plural ; 
single, distributive, and collective) ; what tense distinc- 
tions may be made in verb or noun (the ^‘past,’' for in- 
stance, may be an indefinite past, immediate, remote, 
mythical, completed, prior) ; how delicately certain lan- 
guages have developed the idea of ‘^aspect” (momeu- 
taneous, durative, continuative, inceptive, cessative, 
durative-inceptive, iterative, momentaneous-iterative, du- 
rative-iterative, resultative, and still others) ; what mo- 
dalities may be recognized (indicative, imperative, po- 
tential, dubitative, optative, negative, and a host of 
others ^^) ; what distinctions of person are possible (is 
‘‘we,^’ for instance, conceived of as a plurality of ‘‘I’’ 
or is it as distinct from as either is from ‘‘you’^ 
or '^he''? — both attitudes are illustrated in language; 
moreover, does '^we^^ include you to whom I speak or 
not? — ^ ^ inclusive ^ ’ and ‘‘exclusive’’ forms) ; what may 
be the general scheme of orientation, the so-called demon- 
strative categories (“this’’ and “that” in an endless 
procession of nuances) ; how frequently the form ex- 

22 A term borrowed from Slavic grammar. It indicates the 
lapse of action, its nature from the standpoint of continuity. 
Our “cry” is indefinite as to aspect, “be crying” is durative, “cry 
out” is momentaneous, “burst into tears” is inceptive, “keep cry- 
ing” is continuative, “start in crying” is durative-inceptive, “cry 
now and again” is iterative, “cry out every now and then” or 
“cry in fits and starts” is momentaneous-iterative. “To put on a 
coat” is momentaneous, “to wear a coat” is resultative. As our 
examples show, aspect is expressed in English by all kinds of 
idiomatic turns rather than by a consistently worked out set of 
grammatical forms. In many languages aspect is of far greater 
formal significance than tense, with which the naive student is apt 
to confuse it. 

23 By “modalities” I do not mean the matter of fact statement, 
say, of negation or uncertainty as such, rather their implication 
in terms of form. There are languages, for instance, which have 
as elaborate an apparatus of negative forms for the verb as 
Greek has of the optative or wish-modality. 

24 Compare page 97. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


115 


presses the source or nature of the speaker's knowledge 
(known by actual experience, by hearsay,-^ by infer- 
ence) ; how the syntactic relations may be expressed in 
the noun (subjective and objective; agentive, instrumen- 
tal, and person affected;^® various types of ‘‘genitive’^ 
and indirect relations) and, correspondingly, in the verb 
(active and passive; active and static; transitive and in- 
transitive; impersonal, reflexive, reciprocal, indefinite as 
to object, and many other special limitations on the start- 
ing-point and end-point of the flow of activity). These 
details, important as many of them are to an under- 
standing of the ‘‘inner form” of language, yield in gen- 
eral significance to the more radical group-distinctions 
that we have set up. It is enough for the general reader 
to feel that language struggles towards two poles of lin- 
guistic expression — material content and relation — and 
that these poles tend to be connected by a long series 
of transitional concepts. 

In dealing with words and their varying forms we 
have had to anticipate much that concerns the sentence 


25 It is because of tliis classification of experience that in many 
languages the verb forms which are proper, say, to a mythical 
narration differ from those commonly used in daily inter- 
course. We leave these shades to the context or content ourselves 
with a more explicit and roundabout mode of expression, e.g., “He 
is dead, as I happen to know,’’ “They say he is dead,” “He must 
be dead by the looks of things.” 

26 We say “/ sleep” and “f go,” as well as “7 kill him,” but “he 
kills me.” Yet me of the last example is at least as close psycho- 
logically to I of “I sleep” as is the latter to I oi “I kill him.” It 
is only by form that we can classify the “I” notion of “I sleep” 
as that of an acting subject. Properly speaking, I am handled 
by forces beyond my control when T sleep just as truly as w^hen 
some one is killing me. Numerous languages differentiate clearly 
between active subject and static subject (/ go and I Jdll him as 
distinct from I sleep, T am good. I am killed) or between transi- 
tive subject and intransitive subject (7 kill him as distinct from 
7 sleep, I am, good, I am killed, 7 go). The intransitive or static 
subjects may or may not be identical with the object of the 
transitive verb. 



116 


LANGUAGE 


as a whole. Every language has its special method or 
methods of binding words into a larger unity. The im- 
portance of these methods is apt to vary with the com- 
plexity of the individual word. The more synthetic the 
language, in other words, the more clearly the status of 
each word in the sentence is indicated by its own re- 
sources, the less need is there for looking beyond the 
word to the sentence as a whole. The Latin agit (he) 
acts^’ needs no outside help to establish its place in a 
proposition. Whether I say agit dommus ^‘the master 
acts'' or sic femina agit ‘‘thus the woman acts,^' the net 
result as to the syntactic feel of the agit is practically the 
same. It can only be a verb, the predicate of a proposi- 
tion, and it can only be conceived as a statement of activ- 
ity carried out by a person (or thing) other than you 
or me. It is not so with such a word as the English act. 
Act is a syntactic waif until we have defined its status 
in a proposition — one thing in “they act abominably,’’ 
quite another in “that was a kindly act.” The Latin 
sentence speaks with the assurance of its individual mem- 
bers, the English word needs the prompting of its fel- 
lows. Roughly speaking, to be sure. And yet to say that 
a sufficiently elaborate word-structure compensates for 
external syntactic methods is perilously close to begging 
the question. The elements of the word are related to 
each other in a specific way and follow each other in a 
rigorously determined sequence. This is tantamount to 
saying that a word which consists of more than a radi- 
cal element is a crystallization of a sentence or of some 
portion of a sentence, that a form like agit is roughly 
the psychological equivalent of a form like age is ^ ^ act 
he.” Breaking down, then, the wall that separates word 
and sentence, we may ask: What, at last analysis, are 

27 Ultimately, also historical — say, age to “act that (one).” 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


117 


the fundamental methods of relating word to word and 
element to element, in short, of passing from the isolated 
notions symbolized by each word and by each element 
to the unified proposition that corresponds to a thought ? 

The answer is simple and is implied in the preceding 
remarks. The most fundamental and the most powerful 
of all relating methods is the method of order. Let us 
think of some more or less concrete idea, say a color, 
and set down its symbol — red; of another concrete idea, 
say a person or object, setting down its symbol — dog; 
finally, of a third concrete idea, say an action, setting 
down its symbol — run. It is hardly possible to set down 
these three symbols — red dog run — without relating them 
in some way, for example {the) red dog rnn{s). I 
am far from wishing to state that the proposition has 
always grown up in this analytic manner, merely that 
the very process of juxtaposing concept to concept, sym- 
bol to symbol, forces some kind of relational “feeling,’’ 
if nothing else, upon us. To certain syntactic adhesions 
we are very sensitive, for example, to the attributive rela- 
tion of quality {red dog) or the subjective relation {dog 
run) or the objective relation {kill dog), to others w^e 
are more indifferent, for example, to the attributive 
relation of circumstance {to-day red dog run or red dog 
to-day run or red dog run to-day, all of which are equiva- 
lent propositions or propositions in embryo). Words 
and elements, then, once they are listed in a certain or- 
der, tend not only to establish some kind of relation 
among themselves but are attracted to each other in 
greater or in less degree. It is presumably this very 
greater or less that ultimately leads to those firmly 
solidified groups of elements (radical element or ele- 
ments plus one or more grammatical elements) that we 
have studied as complex words. They are in all like- 



118 


LANGUAGE 


lihood nothing but sequences that have shrunk together 
and away from other sequences or isolated elements in 
the flow of speech. While they are fully alive, in other 
words, while they are functional at every point, they 
can keep themselves at a psychological distance from 
their neighbors. As they gradually lose much of their 
life, they fall back into the embrace of the sentence as a 
whole and the sequence of independent words regains 
the importance it had in part transferred to the crystal- 
lized groups of elements. Speech is thus constantly 
tightening and loosening its sequences. In its highly 
integrated forms (Latin, Eskimo) the energy^’ of 
sequence is largely locked up in complex word forma- 
tions, it becomes transformed into a kind of potential 
energy that may not be released for millennia. In its 
more analytic forms (Chinese, English) this energy is 
mobile, ready to hand for such service as we demand 
of it. 

There can be little doubt that stress has frequently 
played a controlling influence in the formation of ele- 
ment-groups or complex words out of certain sequences 
in the sentence. Such an English word as withstand 
is merely an old sequence with stands i.e., against^® 
stand, ’ ’ in which the unstressed adverb was permanently 
drawn to the following verb and lost its independence as 
a significant element. In the same way French futures 
of the type irai (I) shall go’’ are but the resultants of 
a coalescence of originally independent words: a!% 

‘‘to-go I-have,” under the influence of a unifying accent. 
But stress has done more than articulate or unify se- 
quences that in their own right imply a syntactic rela- 

28 For with in the sense of “against,” compare German widef 
“against.” 

29 Cf. Latin ire “to go”; also our English idiom “I have to go,** 
i.e., “must go.” 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 


119 


tion. Stress is the most natural means at our disposal 
to emphasize a linguistic contrast, to indicate the major 
element in a sequence. Hence we need not be sur- 
prised to find that accent too, no less than sequence, may 
serve as the unaided symbol of certain relations. Such 
a contrast as that of go' between (^^one who goes be- 
tween’') and to go between' may be of quite secondary 
origin in English, but there is every reason to believe 
that analogous distinctions have prevailed at all times 
in linguistic history. A sequence like see man might 
imply some type of relation in which see qualifies the 
following word, hence ‘^a seeing man” or ‘‘a seen (or 
visible) man,” or is its predication, hence ‘‘the man 
sees^^ or “the man is seen,” while a sequence like see 
man' might indicate that the accented word in some way 
limits the application of the first, say as direct object, 
hence “to see a man” or “(he) sees the man.” Such 
alternations of relation, as symbolized by varying 
stresses, are important and frequent in a number of 
languages.^^ 

It is a somewhat venturesome and yet not an altogether 
unreasonable speculation that sees in word order and 
stress the primary methods for the expression of all syn- 
tactic relations and looks upon the present relational 
value of specific words and elements as but a secondary 
condition due to a transfer of values. Thus, we may 
surmise that the Latin -m of words like fejyimam, 
dominum, and civem did not originally denote that 
“woman,” “master,” and “citizen” were objectively 
related to the verb of the proposition but indicated some- 


30 In Chinese no less than in English. 

31 By “originally” i mean, of course, some time antedating the 
earliest period of the Indo-European languages that we can get 
at by comparative evidence. 



120 


LANGUAGE 


thing far more concrete, that the objective relation was 
merely implied by the position or accent of the word 
(radical element) immediately preceding the -m, and 
that gradually, as its more concrete significance faded 
away, it took over a syntactic function that did not 
originally belong to it. This sort of evolution by trans- 
fer is traceable in many instances. Thus, the of in an 
English phrase like ^Hhe law of the land’’ is now as 
colorless in content, as purely a relational indicator as 
the ‘ ^ genitive ’ ’ suffix -is in the Latin lex urbis ‘ ‘ the law 
of the city.” We know, however, that it was originally 
an adverb of considerable concreteness of meaning, 
^‘away, moving from,” and that the syntactic relation 
was originally expressed by the case form of the sec- 
ond noun. As the ease form lost its vitality, the adverb 
took over its function. If we are actually justified in 
assuming that the expression of all syntactic relations 
is ultimately traceable to these two unavoidable, dynamic 
features of speech — sequence and stress — an interest- 
ing thesis results: — All of the actual content of speech, 
its clusters of vocalic and consonantal sounds, is in 
origin limited to the concrete; relations were originally 
not expressed in outward form but were merely implied 
and articulated with the help of order and rhythm. In 
other words, relations were intuitively felt and could 
only ^'leak out” with the help of dynamic factors that 
themselves move on an intuitional plane. 

There is a special method for the expression of rela- 
tions that has been so often evolved in the history of 
language that we must glance at it for a moment. This 
is the method of “concord” or of like signaling. It is 

*2 Perhaps it was a noun-classifying element of some sort. 

S3 Compare its close historical parallel off. 

34 “Ablative” at last analysis. 

35 Very likely pitch should be understood along with stress. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 121 

based on the same principle as the password or label. 
All persons or objects that answer to the same counter- 
sign or that bear the same imprint are thereby stamped 
as somehow related. It makes little difference, once they 
are so stamped, where they are to be found or how 
they behave themselves. They are known to belong to- 
gether. We are familiar with the principle of concord 
in Latin and Greek. Many of us have been struck by 
such relentless rhymes as vidi ilium honum. dominum 
saw that good master or quarum dearum saevarum 
^'of which stern goddesses.'’ Not that sound-echo, 
whether in the form of rhyme or of alliteration is nec- 
essary to concord, though in its most typical and orig- 
inal forms concord is nearly always accompanied by 
sound repetition. The essence of the principle is sim- 
ply this, that words (elements) that belong together, 
particularly if they are syntactic equivalents or are re- 
lated in like fashion to another word or element, are 
outwardly marked by the same or functionally equiva- 
lent affixes. The application of the principle varies 
considerably according to the genius of the particular 
language. In Latin and Greek, for instance, there is 
concord between noun and qualifying word (adjective 
or demonstrative) as regards gender, number, and case, 
between verb and subject only as regards number, and 
no concord between verb and object. 

In Chinook there is a more far-reaching concord be- 
tween noun, whether subject or object, and verb. Every 
noun is classified according to five categories — masculine, 
feminine, neuter/^ dual, and plural. ' Woman" is fem- 

36 As in Bantu or Chinook. 

37 Perhaps better “general.” The Chinook “neuter” may refer 
to persons as well as things and may also be used as a plural. 
‘‘Masculine” and “feminine,” as in German and French, include 
a great number of inanimate nouns. 



122 


LANGUAGE 


inine, ‘^sand” is neuter, ‘‘table’’ is masculine. If, 
therefore, I wish to say “The woman put the sand on 
the table, I must place in the verb certain class or 
gender prefixes that accord with corresponding noun pre- 
fixes. The sentence reads then, “The (fern.) -woman she 
(fern.) -it (neut.)-it (masc.) -on-put the (neut.)-sand the 
(masc.) -table. ” If “sand” is qualified as “much” and 
“table” as “large,” these new ideas are expressed as 
abstract nouns, each with its inherent class-prefix 
(“much” is neuter or feminine, “large” is masculine) 
and with a possessive prefix referring to the qualified 
noun. Adjective thus calls to noun, noun to verb. 
“The woman put much sand on the large table,” there- 
fore, takes the form: “The (fern.) -woman she (fern.) -it 
(neut.)-it (masc.) -on-put the (fern.) -thereof (neut.)- 
quantity the (neut.)-sand the (masc.) -thereof (masc.)- 
largeness the (masc.) -table.” The classification of “ta- 
ble” as masculine is thus three times insisted on — in the 
noun, in the adjective, and in the verb. In the Bantu 
languages,^® the principle of concord works very much 
as in Chinook. In them also nouns are classified into 
a number of categories and are brought into relation 
with adjectives, demonstratives, relative pronouns, and 
verbs by means of prefixed elements that call off the class 
and make up a complex system of concordances. In such 
a sentence as ‘ ‘ That fierce lion who came here is dead, ’ ^ 
the class of “lion,” which we may call the animal class, 
would be referred to by concording prefixes no less than 
six times, — with the demonstrative (“that”), the quali- 
fying adjective, the noun itself, the relative pronoun, 

38 Spoken in the greater part of the southern half of Africa. 
Chinook is spoken in a number of dialects in the lower Columbia 
River valley. It is impressive to observe how the human mind 
has arrived at the same form of expression in two such histori- 
cally unconnected regions. 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 123 

the subjective prefix to the verb of the relative clause, 
and the subjective prefix to the verb of the main clause 
(‘‘is dead^’). We recognize in this insistence on exter- 
nal clarity of reference the same spirit as moves in the 
more familiar ilium honum dominum. 

Psychologically the methods of sequence and accent 
lie at the opposite pole to that of concord. Where they 
are all for implication, for subtlety of feeling, concord 
is impatient of the least ambiguity but must have its 
well-certificated tags at every turn. Concord tends to 
dispense with order. In Latin and Chinook the inde- 
pendent words are free in position, less so in Bantu. 
In both Chinook and Bantu, however, the methods of 
concord and order are equally important for the differ- 
entiation of subject and object, as the classifying verb 
prefixes refer to subject, object, or indirect object ac- 
cording to the relative position they occupy. These ex- 
amples again bring home to us the significant fact that 
at some point or other order asserts itself in every lan- 
guage as the most fundamental of relating principles. 

The observant reader has probably been surprised that 
all this time we have had so little to say of the time- 
honored “parts of speech. The reason for this is not 
far to seek. Our conventional classification of words 
into parts of speech is only a vague, wavering approxi- 
mation to a consistently worked out inventory of experi- 
ence. We imagine, to begin with, that all “verbs” are 
inherently concerned with action as such, that a “noun” 
is the name of some definite object or personality that 
can be pictured by the mind, that all qualities are neces- 
sarily expressed by a definite group of words to which 
we may appropriately apply the term “adjective.” As 
soon as we test our vocabulary, we discover that the 
parts of speech are far from corresponding to so sim- 



124 


LANGUAGE 


pie an analysis of reality. We say ''it is red’^ and 
define "red^' as a quality-word or adjective. We should 
consider it strange to think of an equivalent of ‘^is red’’ 
in which the whole predication (adjective and verb of 
being) is conceived of as a verb in precisely the same 
way in which we think of extends” or "lies” or 
"sleeps” as a verb. Yet as soon as we give the "dura- 
tive” notion of being red an inceptive or transitional 
turn, we can avoid the parallel form "it becomes red, 
it turns red” and say "it reddens.” No one denies that 
"reddens” is as good a verb as '‘sleeps” or even 
"walks.” Yet "it is red” is related to "it reddens” 
very much as is " he stands ” to "he stands up ” or "he 
rises.” It is merely a matter of English or of general 
Indo-European idiom that we cannot say "it reds” in 
the sense of "it is red.” There are hundreds of lan- 
guages that can. Indeed there are many that can ex- 
press what we should call an adjective only by making 
a participle out of a verb. "Eed” in such languages is 
merely a derivative "being red,” as our "sleeping” or 
"walking” are derivatives of primary verbs. 

Just as we can verbify the idea of a quality in such 
cases as "reddens,” so we can represent a quality or an 
action to ourselves as a thing. We speak of "the height 
of a building” or "the fall of an apple” quite as though 
these ideas were parallel to "the roof of a building” or 
"the skin of an apple,” forgetting that the nouns 
{height, fall) have not ceased to indicate a quality and 
an act when we have made them speak with the accent 
of mere objects. And just as there are languages that 
make verbs of the great mass of adjectives, so there are 
others that make nouns of them. In Chinook, as we 
have seen, "the big table” is "the-table its-bigness ” ; in 
Tibetan the same idea may be expressed by "the table 



FORM: GRAMMATICAL CONCEPTS 125 

of bigness/' very much as we may say ‘‘a man of 
wealth" instead of '^a rich man." 

But are there not certain ideas that it is impossible 
to render except by way of such and such parts of 
speech ? What can be done with the ‘ ' to " of "he came 
to the house"? Well, we can say "he reached the 
house" and dodge the preposition altogether, giving 
the verb a nuance that absorbs the idea of local 
relation carried by the "to." But let us insist on 
giving independence to this idea of local relation. 
Must we not then hold to the preposition? No, we can 
make a noun of it. We can say something like "he 
reached the proximity of the house" or "he reached the 
house-locality." Instead of saying "he looked into the 
glass" we raay say "he scrutinized the glass-interior." 
Such expressions are stilted in English because they do 
not easily fit into our formal grooves, but in language 
after language we find that local relations are expressed 
in just this way. The local relation is nominalized. 
And so we might go on examining the various parts 
of speech and showing how they not merely grade into 
each other but are to an astonishing degree actually con- 
vertible into each other. The upshot of such an exami- 
nation would be to feel convinced that the "part of 
speech" refiects not so much our intuitive analysis of 
reality as our ability to compose that reality into a 
variety of formal patterns. A part of speech outside of 
the limitations of syntactic form is but a will o ’ the wisp. 
For this reason no logical scheme of the parts of speech 
— their number, nature, and necessary confines — is of the 
slightest interest to the linguist. Each language has its 
own scheme. Everything depends on the formal de- 
marcations which it recognizes. 

Yet we must not be too destructive. It is well to re- 



126 


LANGUAGE 


member that speech consists of a series of propositions. 
There must be something to talk about and something 
must be said about this subject of discourse once it is 
selected. This distinction is of such fundamental im- 
portance that the vast majority of languages have em- 
phasized it by creating some sort of formal barrier 
between the two terms of the proposition. The subject 
of discourse is a noun. As the most common subject of 
discourse is either a person or a thing, the noun clusters 
about concrete concepts of that order. As the thing 
predicated of a subject is generally an activity in the 
widest sense of the word, a passage from one moment of 
existence to another, the form which has been set aside 
for the business of predicating, in other words, the verb, 
clusters about concepts of activity. No language wholly 
fails to distinguish noun and verb, though in particular 
cases the nature of the distinction may be an elusive 
one. It is different with the other parts of speech. Not 
one of them is imperatively required for the life of 
language.^® 


39 In Yana the noun and the verb are well distinct, though there 
are certain features that they hold in common which tend to draw 
them nearer to each other than we feel to be possible. But there 
are, strictly speaking, no other parts of speech. The adjective 
is a verb. So are the numeral, the interrogative pronoun (e.g., 
“to be what?”), and certain “conjunctions” and adverbs (e.g., “to 
be and” and “to be not”; one says “and-past-I go,” i.e., “and I 
went” ) . Adverbs and prepositions are either nouns or merely 
derivative affixes in the verb. 



VI 


TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 

So far, in dealing with linguistic form, we have been 
concerned only with single words and with the relations 
of words in sentences. We have not envisaged whole 
languages as conforming to this or that general type. 
Incidentally we have observed that one language runs 
to tight-knit synthesis where another contents itself with 
a more analytic, piece-meal handling of its elements, or 
that in one language syntactic relations appear pure 
which in another are combined with certain other no- 
tions that have something concrete about them, however 
abstract they may be felt to be in practice. In this 
way we may have obtained some inkling of what is 
meant when we speak of the general form of a language. 
For it must be obvious to any one who has thought 
about the question at all or who has felt something of 
the spirit of a foreign language that there is such a 
thing as a basic plan, a certain cut, to each language. 
This type or plan or structural '' genius of the lan- 
guage is something much more fundamental, much more 
pervasive, than any single feature of it that we can 
mention, nor can we gain an adequate idea of its na- 
ture by a mere recital of the sundry facts that make up 
the grammar of the language. When we pass from 
Latin to Russian, we feel that it is approximately the 
same horizon that bounds our view, even though the near, 
familiar landmarks have changed. When we come to 
English, we seem to notice that the hills have dipped 

127 



128 


LANGUAGE 


down a little, yet we recognize the general lay of the 
land. And when we have arrived at Chinese, it is an 
utterly different sky that is looking down upon us. We 
can translate these metaphors and say that all languages 
differ from one another but that certain ones differ far 
more than others. This is tantamount to saying that 
it is possible to group them into morphological types. 

Strictly speaking, we know in advance that it is 
impossible to set up a limited number of types that 
would do full justice to the peculiarities of the thou- 
sands of languages and dialects spoken on the surface 
of the earth. Like all human institutions, speech 
is too variable and too elusive to be quite safely ticketed. 
Even if we operate with a minutely subdivided scale 
of types, we may be quite certain that many of our 
languages will need trimming before they fit. To get 
them into the scheme at all it will be necessary to over- 
estimate the significance of this or that feature or to 
ignore, for the time being, certain contradictions in their 
mechanism. Does the difficulty of classification prove 
the uselessness of the task? I do not think so. It 
would be too easy to relieve ourselves of the burden of 
constructive thinking and to take the standpoint that 
each language has its unique history, therefore its unique 
structure. Such a standpoint expresses only a half 
truth. Just as similar social, economic, and religious 
institutions have grown up in different parts of the 
world from distinct historical antecedents, so also lan- 
guages, traveling along different roads, have tended to 
converge toward similar forms. Moreover, the historical 
study of language has proven to us beyond all doubt 
that a language changes not only gradually but 
consistently, that it moves unconsciously from one type 
towards another, and that analogous trends are observ- 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


129 


able in remote quarters of the globe. From this it fol- 
lows that broadly similar morphologies must have been 
reached by unrelated languages, independently and fre- 
quently. In assuming the existence of comparable types, 
therefore, we are not gainsaying the individuality of all 
historical processes; we are merely affirming that back 
of the face of history are powerful drifts that move 
language, like other social products, to balanced pat- 
terns, in other words, to types. As linguists we shall 
be content to realize that there are these types and that 
certain processes in the life of language tend to modify 
them. Why similar types should be formed, just what 
is the nature of the forces that make them and dissolve 
them — these questions are more easily asked than an- 
swered. Perhaps the psychologists of the future will be 
able to give us the ultimate reasons for the formation of 
linguistic types. 

When it comes to the actual task of classification, we 
find that we have no easy road to travel. Various classi- 
fications have been suggested, and they all contain ele- 
ments of value. Yet none proves satisfactory. They 
do not so much enfold the known languages in their 
embrace as force them down into narrow, straight-backed 
seats. The difficulties have been of various kinds. First 
and foremost, it has been difficult to choose a point of 
view. On what basis shall Ave classify? A language 
shows us so many facets that we may well be puzzled. 
And is one point of view sufficient? Secondly, it is 
dangerous to generalize from a small number of se- 
lected languages. To take, as the sum total of our ma- 
terial, Latin, Arabic, Turkish, Chinese, and perhaps Es- 
kimo or Sioux as an afterthought, is to court disaster. 
We have no right to assume that a sprinkling of exotic 
types will do to supplement the few languages nearer 



130 


LANGUAGE 


home that we are more immediately interested in, 
Thirdly, the strong craving for a simple formula^ has 
been the undoing of linguists. There is something irre- 
sistible about a method of classification that starts with 
two poles, exemplified, say, by Chinese and Latin, clus- 
ters what it conveniently can about these poles, and 
throws everything else into a ^‘transitional type/’ 
Hence has arisen the still popular classification of lan- 
guages into an isolating” group, an ''agglutinative” 
group, and an “inflective” group. Sometimes the lan- 
guages of the American Indians are made to straggle 
along as an uncomfortable "polysynthetic” rear-guard 
to the agglutinative languages. There is justification 
for the use of all of these terms, though not perhaps 
in quite the spirit in which they are commonly employed. 
In any case it is very difficult to assign all known 
languages to one or other of these groups, the more so 
as they are not mutually exclusive. A language may be 
both agglutinative and inflective, or inflective and poly- 
synthetic, or even polysynthetic and isolating, as we 
shall see a little later on. 

There is a fourth reason why the classification of lan- 
guages has generally proved a fruitless undertaking. 
It is probably the most powerful deterrent of all 
to clear thinking. This is the evolutionary prejudice 
which instilled itself into the social sciences towards 
the middle of the last century and which is only now 
beginning to abate its tyrannical hold on our mind. In- 
termingled with this scientific prejudice and largely an- 
ticipating it was another, a more human one. The vast 
majority of linguistic theorists themselves spoke lan- 
guages of a certain type, of which the most fully de- 
veloped varieties were the Latin and Greek that they 

1 If possible, a triune formula. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


131 


had learned in their childhood. It was not difficult 
for them to be persuaded that these familiar languages 
represented the ‘^highest’’ development that speech 
had yet attained and that all other types were 
but steps on the way to this beloved ‘‘inflective’’ type. 
Whatever conformed to the pattern of Sanskrit and 
Greek and Latin and German was accepted as expressive 
of the “highest,” whatever departed from it was 
frowned upon as a shortcoming or was at best an inter- 
esting aberration.^ Now any classification that starts 
with preconceived values or that works up to senti- 
mental satisfactions is self-condemned as unscientific. 
A linguist that insists on talking about the Latin type 
of morphology as though it were necessarily the high- 
water mark -of linguistic development is like the zoolo- 
gist that sees in the organic world a hug© conspiracy to 
evolve the race-horse or the Jersey coav. Language in 
its fundamental forms is the symbolic expression of 
human intuitions. These may shape themselves in a 
hundred ways, regardless of the material advancement 
or backwardness of the people that handle the forms, of 
which, it need hardh" be said, they are in the main un- 
conscious. If, therefore, we wish to understand lan- 
guage in its true inwardness we must disabuse our 
minds of preferred “values”^ and accustom ourselves 


2 One celebrated American writer on cult lire and language de- 
livered himself of the dictum that, estimable as the speakers of 
agglutinative languages might be, it was nevertheless a crime for 
an inflecting woman to marry an agglutinating man. Tremendous 
spiritual values were evidently at stake. Champions of the “inflec- 
tive” languages are wont to glory in the very irrationalities of 
Latin and Greek, except when it suits them to emphasize their pro- 
foundly “logical” character. Yet the sober logic of Turkish or 
Chinese leaves them cold. The glorious irrationalities and formal 
complexities of many “savarre” languages they have no stomach 
for. Sentimentalists are difficult people. 

8 I have in mind valuations of form as such. Whether or not 



132 


LANGUAGE 


to look upon English and Hottentot with the same cool, 
yet interested, detachment. 

We come back to our first difficulty. What point of 
view shall we adopt for our classification? After all 
that we have said about grammatical form in the pre- 
ceding chapter, it is clear that we cannot now make 
the distinction between form languages and formless 
languages that used to appeal to some of the older 
writers. Every language can and must express the fun- 
damental syntactic relations even though there is not 
a single affix to be found in its vocabulary. We con- 
clude that every language is a form language. Aside 
from the expression of pure relation a language may, of 
course, be formless — formless, that is, in the mechani- 
cal and rather superficial sense that it is not encumbered 
by the use of non-radical elements. The attempt has 
sometimes been made to formulate a distinction on the 
basis of ^Mnner form.’’ Chinese, for instance, has no 
formal elements pure and simple, no outer form,” but 
it evidences a keen sense of relations, of the difference 
between subject and object, attribute and predicate, and 
so on. In other words, it has an inner form” in the 
same sense in which Latin possesses it, though it is out- 
wardly ^‘formless” where Latin is outwardly formal.” 
On the other hand, there are supposed to be languages ^ 
which have no true grasp of the fundamental relations 
but content themselves with the more or less minute 

a language has a large and useful vocabulary is another matter. 
The actual size of a vocabulary at a given time is not a thing 
of real interest to the linguist, as all languages have the resources 
at their disposal for the creation of new words, should need for 
them arise. Furthermore, we are not in the least concerned with 
whether or not a language is of great practical value or is the 
medium of a great culture. All these considerations, important 
from other standpoints, have nothing to do with form value. 

* E.g., Malay, Polynesian. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


133 


expression of material ideas, sometimes with an exu- 
berant display of ''outer form/’ leaving the pure rela- 
tions to be merely inferred from the context. I am 
strongly inclined to believe that this supposed "inner 
formlessness” of certain languages is an illusion. It 
may well be that in these languages the relations are 
not expressed in as immaterial a way as in Chinese or 
even as in Latin/"' or that the principle of order is sub- 
ject to greater fluctuations than in Chinese, or that a 
tendency to complex derivations relieves the language 
of the necessity of expressing certain relations as ex- 
plicitly as a more analytic language would have them 
expressed.*^ All this does not mean that the languages 
in question have not a true feeling for the fundamental 
relations. "We shall therefore not be able to use the no- 
tion of ' ' inner formlessness, ’ ’ except in the greatly modi- 
fied sense that syntactic relations may be fused with 
notions of another order. To this criterion of classi- 
fication w^e shall have to return a little later. 

More justifiable would be a classification according 
to the formal processes most typically developed in the 
language. Those languages that always identify the 
word with the radical element would be set off as an 
' ' isolating ’ ’ group against such as either affix modifying 
elements (affixing languages) or possess the power to 
change the significance of the radical element by in- 
ternal changes (reduplication; vocalic and consonantal 
change; changes in quantity, stress, and pitch). The 
latter type might be not inaptly termed "symbolic” 

5 Where, as we have seen, the syntactic relations are by no 
means free from an alloy of the concrete. 

6 Very much as an English cod-liver oil dodges to some extent 
the task of explicitly defining the relations of the three nouns. 
Contrast French huite do foie de morue “oil of liver of cod.” 

7 See Chapter IV. 



134 


LANGUAGE 


languages.® The affixing languages would naturally sub- 
divide themselves into such as are prevailingly prefix- 
ing, like Bantu or Tlingit, and such as are mainly or 
entirely suffixing, like Eskimo or Algonkin or Latin. 
There are two serious difficulties with this fourfold clas- 
sification (isolating, prefixing, suffixing, symbolic). In 
the first place, most languages fall into more than one 
of these groups. The Semitic languages, for instance, 
are prefixing, suffixing, and symbolic at one and the 
same time. In the second place, the classification in its 
bare form is superficial. It would throw together lan- 
guages that differ utterly in spirit merely because of 
a certain external formal resemblance. There is clearly 
a world of difference between a prefixing language like 
Cambodgian, which limits itself, so far as its prefixes 
(and infixes) are concerned, to the expression of deriva- 
tional concepts, and the Bantu languages, in which the 
prefixed elements have a far-reaching significance as 
symbols of syntactic relations. The classification has 
much greater value if it is taken to refer to the expres- 
sion of relational concepts ^ alone. In this modified form 
we shall return to it as a subsidiary criterion. We shall 
find that the terms ‘‘isolating,^’ ^‘affixing,” and ‘‘sym- 
bolic’’ have a real value. But instead of distinguishing 
between prefixing and suffixing languages, we shall find 
that it is of superior interest to make another distinc- 
tion, one that is based on the relative firmness with 

8 There is probably a real psychological connection between sym- 
bolism and such significant alternations as drink, drank, drunk 
or Chinese mai (with rising tone) “to buy’’ and mai (with fall- 
ing tone) “to sell.” The unconscious tendency toward symbolism 
is justly emphasized by recent psychological literature. Personally 
I feel that the passage from sing to sang has very much the same 
feeling as the alternation of symbolic colors — e.g., green for safe, 
red for danger. But we probably differ greatly as to the intensity 
with which we feel symbolism in linguistic changes of this tyne. 

©Pure or “concrete relational.” See Chapter V. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 135 

which the affixed elements are united with the core of 
the word.^® 

There is another very useful set of distinctions that 
can be made, but these too must not be applied exclu- 
sively, or our classification will again be superficial. I 
refer to the notions of analytic,^’ ^ ' synthetic, ’ ^ and 
''polysynthetic.’’ The terms explain themselves. An 
analytic language is one that either does not combine 
concepts into single words at all (Chinese) or does so 
economically (English, French). In an analytic lan- 
guage the sentence is always of prime importance, the 
word is of minor interest. In a synthetic language 
(Latin, Arabic, Finnish) the concepts cluster more 
thickly, the words aye more richly chambered, but there 
is a tendency, on the whole, to keep the range of con- 
crete significance in the single word down to a mod- 
erate compass. A polysynthetic language, as its name 
implies, is more than ordinarily synthetic. The elabora- 
tion of the word is extreme. Concepts which we should 
never dream of treating in a subordinate fashion are 

10 In spite of my reluctance to emphasize the difference between 
a prefixing and a suffixing language, I feel that there is more 
involved in this difference than linguists have generally recog- 
nized. It seems to me that there is a rather important psycho- 
logical distinction between a language that settles the formal 
status of a radical element before announcing it — and this, in 
effect, is what such languages as Tlingit and Chinook and Bantu 
are in the habit of doing— and one that begins with the concrete 
nucleus of a word and defines the status of this nucleus by suc- 
cessive limitations, each curtailing in some degree the generality 
of all that precedes. The spirit of the former method has some- 
thing diagrammatic or architectural about it, the latter is a 
metliod of pruning afterthoughts. In the more highly wrought 
prefixing languages the word is apt to affect us as a crystalliza- 
tion of floating elements, the words of the typical suffixing lan- 
guages (Turkish, Eskimo, Nootka) are “determinative” forma- 
tions, each added element determining the form of the whole anew. 
It is so difficult in practice to apply these elusive, yet impor- 
tant, distinctions that an elementary study has no recourse but to 
ignore them. 



136 


LANGUAGE 


symbolized by derivational affixes or ^ ^ symbolic ^ ’ changes 
in the radical element, while the more abstract notions, 
including the syntactic relations, may also be conveyed 
by the word. A polysynthetic language illustrates no 
principles that are not already exemplified in the more 
familiar synthetic languages. It is related to them 
very much as a synthetic language is related to our 
own analytic English.^^ The three terms are purely 
quantitative — and relative, that is, a language may be 
“analytic’^ from one s^tandpoint, ‘‘synthetic” from an- 
other. I believe the terms are more useful in defining 
certain drifts than as absolute counters. It is often 
illuminating to point out that a language has been 
becoming more and more analytic in the course of its 
history or that it shows signs of having crystallized 
from a simple analytic base into a highly synthetic 
form.^^ 

We now come to the difference between an “inflec- 
tive’’ and an “agglutinative” language. As I have al- 
ready remarked, the distinction is a useful, even a neces- 
sary, one, but it has been generally obscured by a 
number of irrelevancies and by the unavailing effort to 
make the terms cover all languages that are not, like 
Chinese, of a definitely isolating cast. The meaning that 
we had best assign to the term “inflective” can be gained 
by considering very briefly what are some of the basic 
features of Latin and Greek that have been looked upon 


English, however, is only analytic in tendency. Relatively 
to French, it is still fairly synthetic, at least in certain aspects. 

12 The former process is demonstrable for English, French, Dan- 
ish, Tibetan, Chinese, and a host of other languages. The latter 
tendency may be proven, I believe, for a number of American 
Indian languages, e.g., Chinook, Navaho. Underneath their pres- 
ent moderately polysynthetic form is discernible an analytic base 
that in the one case may be roughly described as English-like, 
in the other, Tibetan-like. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 137 

as peculiar to the inflective languages. First of all, 
they are synthetic rather than analytic. This does not 
help us much. Relatively to many another language 
that resembles them in broad structural respects, Latin 
and Greek are not notably synthetic ; on the other hand, 
their modern descendants, Italian and Modern Greek, 
while far more analytic than they, have not departed 
so widely in structural outlines as to warrant their being 
put in a distinct major group. An inflective language, 
we must insist, may be analytic, synthetic, or polysyn- 
thetic. 

Latin and Greek are mainly affixing in their method, 
with the emphasis heavily on suffixing. The agglutina- 
tive languages are just as typically affixing as they, some 
among them -favoring prefixes, others running to the use 
of suffixes. Affixing alone does not define inflection. 
Possibly everything depends on just what kind of affix- 
ing we have to deal with. If we compare our English 
words farmer and goodness with such words as height 
and depth, we cannot fail to be struck by a notable dif- 
ference in the affixing technique of the two sets. The 
-er and -ness are affixed quite mechanically to radical 
elements which are at the same time independent words 
(farm, good). They are in no sense independently sig- 
nificant elements, but they convey their meaning (agen- 
tive, abstract quality) with unfailing directness. Their 
use is simple and regular and we should have no diffi- 
eulty in appending them to any verb or to any adjec- 
tive, however recent in origin. From a verb to camou- 
flage we may form the noun camouflager ‘‘one who 
camouflages,^’ from an adjective jazzy proceeds with 

13 This applies more particularly to the Romance group: Italian, 
Spanish, Portuguese, French, Roumanian. Modern Greek is not 
so clearly analytic. 



138 


LANGUAGE 


perfect ease the noun jazziness. It is different with 
height and depth. Functionally they are related to 
high and deep precisely as is goodness to good, but the 
degree of coalescence between radical element and affix 
is greater. Radical element and affix, while measurably 
distinct, cannot be torn apart quite so readily as could 
the good and -ness of goodness. The -t of height is not 
the typical form of the affix (compare strength, length, 
filth, ireadth, youth), while dep- is not identical with 
deep. We may designate the two types of affixing as 
“fusing'' and “juxtaposing." The juxtaposing tech- 
nique we may call an ‘ ^ agglutinative ’ ' one, if we like. 

Is the fusing technique thereby set off as the essence 
of inflection? I am afraid that we have not yet 
reached our goal. If our language were crammed full 
of coalescences of the type of depth, but if, on the other 
hand, it used the plural independently of verb concord 
(e.g., the hooks falls like the book falls, or the hook fall 
like the hooks fall), the personal endings independently 
of tense (e.g., the hook fells like the hook falls, or the 
hook fall like the hook fell), and the pronouns inde- 
pendently of case (e.g., I see he like he sees me, or him 
see the man like the man sees him), we should hesitate 
to describe it as inflective. The mere fact of fusion 
does not seem to satisfy us as a clear indication of the 
inflective process. There are, indeed, a large number 
of languages that fuse radical element and affix in as 
complete and intricate a fashion as one could hope to 
find anywhere without thereby giving signs of that par- 
ticular kind of formalism that marks off such languages 
as Latin and Greek as inflective. 

What is true of fusion is equally true of the “sym- 
bolic" processes.^* There are linguists that speak of 

14 See pages 133, 134. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 139 

alternations like drink and drank as though they repre- 
sented the high-water mark of inflection, a kind of spir- 
itualized essence of pure inflective form. In such Greek 
forms, nevertheless, as pepom,ph-a ‘‘I have sent,’' as con- 
trasted with pemp-o ‘‘I send,” with its trebly symbolic 
change of the radical element (reduplicating pe-, change 
of e to 0, change of p to ph), it is rather the peculiar 
alternation of the first person singular -a of the perfect 
with the -0 of the present that gives them their inflective 
cast. Nothing could be more erroneous than to imagine 
that symbolic changes of the radical element, even for 
the expression of such abstract concepts as those of num- 
ber and tense, is always associated with the syntactic 
peculiarities of an inflective language. If by an ^‘ag- 
glutinative”, language we mean one that affixes accord- 
ing to the juxtaposing technique, then we can only say 
that there are hundreds of fusing and symbolic lan- 
guages — non-agglutinative by definition — that are, for 
all that, quite alien in spirit to the inflective type of 
Latin and Greek. We can call such languages inflective, 
if we like, but we must then be prepared to revise radi- 
cally our notion of inflective form. 

It is necessary to understand that fusion of the radi- 
cal element and the affix may be taken in a broader psy- 
chological sense than I have yet indicated. If every 
noun plural in English were of the type of hook: hooks, 
if there were not such conflicting patterns as deer: deer, 
ox: oxen, goose: geese to complicate the general form 
picture of plurality, there is little doubt that the fusion 
of the elements hook and -s into the unified word hooks 
would be felt as a little less complete than it actually is. 
One reasons, or feels, unconsciously about the matter 
somewhat as follows: — If the form pattern represented 
by the word hooks is identical, as far as use is concerned, 



140 


LANGUAGE 


with that of the word oxen, the pluralizing elements -5 
and -en cannot have quite so definite, quite so autono- 
mous, a value as we might at first be inclined to sup- 
pose. They are plural elements only in so far as plural- 
ity is predicated of certain selected concepts. The words 
ioohs and oxen are therefore a little other than mechani- 
cal combinations of the symbol of a thing {hook, ox) and 
a clear symbol of plurality. There is a slight psycho- 
logical uncertainty or haze about the juncture in books 
and ox-en. A little of the force of -s and -en is anticipated 
by, or appropriated by, the words hook and ox them- 
selves, just as the conceptual force of -tli in dep-tJi is 
appreciably weaker than that of -7iess in good-ness in 
spite of the functional parallelism between depth and 
goodness. Where there is uncertainty about the junc- 
ture, where the affixed element cannot rightly claim to 
possess its full share of significance, the unity of the 
complete word is more strongly emphasized. The mind 
must rest on something. If it cannot linger on the 
constituent elements, it hastens all the more eagerly 
to the acceptance of the word as a whole. A word like 
goodness illustrates ^^agglutination,’’ hooks “regular 
fusion,” depth “irregular fusion,” geese “symbolic fu- 
sion ” or “ symbolism. ’ ’ 

The psychological distinctness of the affixed elements 
in an agglutinative term may be even more marked than 
in the -ness of goodness. To be strictly accurate, the 
significance of the -ness is not quite as inherently deter- 

15 The following formuljB may prove useful to those that are 
mathematically inclined. Agglutination: c = a-|-l); regular fu- 
sion: crr::a-|-(b — x)-]-x; irregular fusion: c=;(a — x)4- 
(b — y ) (x -|- y ) ; symbolism: c=:=:(a — x)-|-x. I do not wish 
to imply that there is any mystic value in the process of fusion. 
It is quite likely to have developed as a purely mechanical prod- 
uct of phonetic forces that brought about irregularities of various 
sorts. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 141 

mined, as autonomous, as it might be. It is at the mercy 
of the preceding radical element to this extent, that it 
requires to be preceded by a particular type of such 
element, an adjective. Its own powe|j^is thus, in a man- 
ner, checked in advance. The fusion here, however, is 
so vague and elementary, so much a matter of course in 
the great majority of all cases of affixing, that it is 
natural to overlook its reality and to emphasize rather 
the juxtaposing or agglutinative nature of the affixing 
process. If the -ness could be affixed as an abstractive 
element to each and every type of radical element, if 
we could say figlitness (^^the act or quality of fighting ’0 
or waterness (^'the quality or state of water’’) or away- 
ness (‘‘the state of being away^O we can say goodness 
(^^the state of being good”), we should have moved ap- 
preciably nearer the agglutinative pole. A language 
that runs to synthesis of this loose- jointed sort may be 
looked upon as an example of the ideal agglutinative 
type, particularly if the concepts expressed by the agglu- 
tinated elements are relational or, at the least, belong to 
the abstracter class of derivational ideas. 

Instructive forms may be cited from Nootka. We 
shall return to our “fire in the house. The Nootka 
word inikw-M “fire in the house” is not as definitely 
formalized a word as its translation suggests. The 
radical element inikw- “fire” is really as much of a 
verbal as of a nominal term; it may be rendered now 
by “fire,” now by “burn,” according to the syntactic 
exigencies of the sentence. The derivational element -ihl 
“in the house” does not mitigate this vagueness or gen- 
erality; inikw-ihl is still “fire in the house’' or “burn 
in the house. ’ ’ It may be definitely nominalized or ver- 
balized by the affixing of elements that are exclusively 

16 See page 110. 



142 


LANGUAGE 


nominal or verbal in force. For example, inikw-ihl-Hf 
with its suffixed article, is a clear-cut nominal form: 
^‘the burning in the house, the fire in the house’ 
inikw-ilil-ma, with its indicative suffix, is just as clearly 
verbal : ‘ ' it burns in the house. ' ’ How weak must be the 
degree of fusion between ''fire in the house” and the 
nominalizing or verbalizing suffix is apparent from the 
fact that the formally indifferent mikwihl is not an ab- 
straction gained by analysis but a full-fledged word, 
ready for use in the sentence. The nominalizing -H and 
the indicative -ma are not fused form -affixes, they are 
simply additions of formal import. But we can con- 
tinue to hold the verbal or nominal nature of inikwiJil 
in abeyance long before we reach the -’i or We can 

pluralize it: inikw-M-’minili ; it is still either "fires in 
the house” or "burn plurally in the house.” We can 
diminutivize this plural : inikw4hl- ’mmiVi- ’is, ' ' little 
fires in the house” or "burn plurally and slightly in the 
house.” What if we add the preterit tense suffix 4tf 
Is not imkw41fil-’minili-4s4i necessarily a verb: "several 
small fires were burning in the house”? It is not. It 
may still be nominalized; inikwilil^minili4sit-4 means 
"the former small fires in the house, the little fires that 
were once burning in the house.” It is not an un- 
ambiguous verb until it is given a form that excludes 
every other possibility, as in the indicative inikwilil- 
minih4sit-a "several small fires were burning in the 
house.” We recognize at once that the elements 41x1^ 
-^minih, -4s, and 4t, quite aside from the relatively con- 
crete or abstract nature of their content and aside, fur- 
ther, from the degree of their outer (phonetic) cohe- 
sion with the elements that precede them, have a psycho- 
logical independence that our own affixes never have. 
They are typically agglutinated elements, though they 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 143 

have no greater external independence, are no more 
capable of living apart from the radical element to which 
they are suffixed, than the -ness and goodness or the -s 
of hooks. It does not follow that an agglutinative lan- 
guage may not make use of the principle of fusion, both 
external and psychological, or even of symbolism to a 
considerable extent. It is a question of tendency. Is 
the formative slant clearly towards the agglutinative 
method? Then the language is ^'agglutinative.’’ As 
such, it may be prefixing or suffixing, analytic, synthetic, 
or polysynthetic. 

To return to inflection. An inflective language like 
Latin or Greek uses the method of fusion, and this 
fusion has an inner psychological as well as an outer 
phonetic meaning. But it is not enough that the fusion 
operate merely in the sphere of derivational concepts 
(group II), it must involve the syntactic relations, 
which may either be expressed in unalloyed form (group 
IV) or, as in Latin and Greek, as "concrete relational 
concepts” (group III).^® As far as Latin and Greek 

17 See Chapter V. 

18 If we deny tlie application of the term “inflective” to fusing 
languages that express the syntactic relations in pure form, that 
is, without the admixture of such concepts as number, gender, and 
tense, merely because such admixture is familiar to us in Latin 
and Greek, we make of “inflection” an even more arbitrary con- 
cept tlian it need ])e. At the same time it is true that the method 
of fusion itself tends to break down the wall between our concep- 
tual groups IT and TV, to create group ITT. Yet the possibility 
of such “inflective” languages should not be denied. In modern 
Tibetan, for instance, in which concepts of group IT are but 
weakly expressed, if at all, and in which the relational concepts 
(e.g., the genitive, the agentive or instrumental) are expressed 
without alloy of the material, we get many interesting examples 
of fusion, even of symbolism. Mi di, e.g., “man this, the man” 
is an absolutive form which may be used as the subject of an 
intransitive verb. When the verb is transitive (really passive), 
the (logical) subject has to take the agentive form. Mi di then 
becomes mi di “by the man,” the vowel of the demonstrative pro- 
noun (or article) being merely lengthened. (There is probably 



144 


LANGUAGE 


are concerned, their inflection consists essentially of the 
fusing of elements that express logically impure rela- 
tional concepts with radical elements and with elements 
expressing derivational concepts. Both fusion as a gen- 
eral method and the expression of relational concepts 
in the word are necessary to the notion of ' ‘ inflection. ^ ^ 
But to have thus defined inflection is to doubt the 
value of the term as descriptive of a major class. Why 
emphasize both a technique and a particular content at 
one and the same time? Surely we should be clear 
in our minds as to whether we set more store by one 
or the otlier. ‘ ‘ Fusional ’ ’ and ^ ' symbol ic ’ ’ contrast with 
“agglutinative,” which is not on a par with “inflective” 
at all. What are we to do with the fusional and sym- 
bolic languages that do not express relational concepts 
in the word but leave them to the sentence? And are 
we not to distinguish between agglutinative languages 
that express these same concepts in the word — in so far 
inflective-like — and those that do not? We dismissed 
the scale : analytic, synthetic, polysynthetic, as too 
merely quantitative for our purpose. Isolating, affix- 
ing, symbolic — this also seemed insufficient for the reason 
that it laid too much stress on technical externals. Iso- 
lating, agglutinative, fusional, and symbolic is a pre- 
ferable scheme, but still skirts the external. We shall 
do best, it seems to me, to hold to ‘ ^ inflective ” as a val- 
uable suggestion for a broader and more consistently de- 
veloped scheme, as a hint for a classification based on 
the nature of the concepts expressed by the language. 

also a change in the tone of the syllable.) Tliis, of course, is of 
the very essence of inflection. It is an amusing commentary on 
the insufficiency of our current linguistic classification, which 
considers “inflective” and “isolating” as worlds asunder, that 
modern Tibetan may be not inaptly described as an isolating lan- 
guage, aside from such examples of fusion and symbolism as the 
foregoing. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 145 

The other two classifications, the first based on degree 
of synthesis, the second on degree of fusion, may be re- 
tained as intercrossing schemes that give us the oppor- 
tunity to subdivide our main conceptual types. 

It is well to recall that all languages must needs ex- 
press radical concepts (group 1) and relational ideas 
(group IV). Of the two other large groups of con- 
cepts — derivational (group II) and mixed relational 
(grouj) III) — both may be absent, both present, or only 
one present. This gives us at once a simple, incisive, 
and absolutely inclusive method of classifying all known 
languages. They are : 

A. Such as express only concepts of groups I and 
IV ; in other words, languages that keep the syntactic 
relations pure and that do not possess the power to 
modify the significance of tlieir radical elements by 
means of affixes or internal changes.^'^ We may call 
these Pure-relational non-deriving languages or, more 
tersely, Simple Pure-relaiional languages. These are 
the languages that cut most to the bone of linguistic 
expression. 

B. Such as express concepts of groups I, II, and IV ; 
in other words, languages that keep the syntactic rela- 
tions pure and that also possess the power to modify 
the significance of their radical elements by means of 
affixes or internal changes. These are the Pure-rela- 
tional deriving languages or Complex Pure-relational 
languages. 

I am eliminating entirely the possibility of compounding 
two or more radical elements into single words or word-like 
phrases (see pages 67-70). To expressly consider compounding in 
the present survey of types would be to complicate our problem 
unduly. Most languages that possess no derivational affixes of 
any sort may nevertheless freely compound radical elements (in- 
dependent words ) . Such compounds often have a fixity that sim- 
ulates the unity of single words. 



146 


LANGUAGE 


C. Srch as express concepts of groups I and III ; 
in other words, languages in which the syntactic rela- 
tions are expressed in necessary connection with con- 
cepts that are not utterly devoid of concrete significance 
but that do not, apart from such mixture, possess the 
power to modify the significance of their radical elements 
by means of affixes or internal changes.^^ These are the 
Mixed-relational non-deriving languages or Simple 
Mixed-relational languages. 

D. Such as express concepts of groups I, II, and III ; 
in other words, languages in which the syntactic rela- 
tions are expressed in mixed form, as in C, and that 
also possess the power to modify the significance of their 
radical elements by means of affixes or internal changes. 
These are the Mixed-relational deriving languages or 
Complex Mixed-relational languages. Here belong the 
‘‘infiective’’ languages that we are most familiar with 
as well as a great many ‘ ' agglutinative ’ ’ languages, some 
‘ ‘ polysynthetie, ’ ^ others merely synthetic. 

This conceptual classification of languages, I must re- 
peat, does not attempt to take account of the technical 
externals of language. It answers, in effect, two funda- 


20 We may assume that in these languages and in those of 
type D all or most of the relational concepts are expressed in 
“mixed” form, that such a concept as that of subjectivity, for 
instance, cannot be expressed without simultaneously involving 
number or gender or that an active verb form must be possessed 
of a definite tense. Hence group III will be understood to include, 
or rather absorb, group IV. Theoretically, of course, certain rela- 
tional concepts may be expressed pure, others mixed, but in prac- 
tice it will not be found easy to make the distinction. 

21 The line between types C and D cannot be very sharply 
drawn. It is a matter largely of degree. A language of mark- 
edly mixed-relational type, but of little power of derivation pure 
and simple, such as Bantu or French, may be conveniently put 
into type C, even though it is not devoid of a number of deriva- 
tional affixes. Koughly speaking, languages of type C may be 
considered as highly analytic (“purified”) forms of type D. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


147 


mental questions concerning the translation of concepts 
into linguistic symbols. Does the language, in the first 
place, keep its radical concepts pure or does it build up 
its concrete ideas by an aggregation of inseparable ele- 
ments (types A and C versus types B and D) ? And, 
in the second place, does it keep the basic relational con- 
cepts, such as are absolutely unavoidable in the ordering 
of a proposition, free of an admixture, of the concrete or 
not (types A and B versus types C and D) ? The sec- 
ond question, it seems to me, is the more fundamental of 
the two. We can therefore simplify our classification 
and present it in the following form: 

( A. Simple 

I. Pure-relational Languages ^ , 

( B. Complex 

i C. Simple 

II. Mixed-relational Languages • ^ , 

( D. Complex 

The classification is too sweeping and too broad for 
an easy, descriptive survey of the many varieties of 
human speech. It needs to be amplified. Each of the 
types A, B, C, D may be subdivided into an agglutina- 
tive, a fusional, and a symbolic sub-type, according to the 
prevailing method of modification of the radical 
element. In type A we distinguish in addition an 
isolating sub-type, characterized by the absence of 
all affixes and modifications of the radical element. In 
the isolating languages the vsyntactic relations are ex- 
pressed by the position of the words in the sentence. 
This is also true of many languages of type B, the terms 
‘‘agglutinative,’' “fusional,” and “symbolic” applying 
in their case merely to the treatment of the derivational, 
not the relational, concepts. Such languages could be 



148 


LANGUAGE 


termed ‘ ^ agglutinative-isolating, ’ ^ ‘ ^ f usional-isolating ^ ^ 
and '' symbolic-isolating. ’’ 

This brings up the important general consideration 
that the method of handling one group of concepts need 
not in the least be identical with that used for another. 
Compound terms could be used to indicate this differ- 
ence, if desired, the first element of the comj)ound re- 
ferring to the treatment of the concepts of group II, 
the second to that of the concepts of groups III and 
IV. An ‘'agglutinative’’ language would normally be 
taken to mean one that agglutinates all of its affixed ele- 
ments or that does so to a preponderating extent. In 
an “ agglutinative-f usional’ ’ language the derivational 
elements are agglutinated, perhaps in the form of pre- 
fixes, while the relational elements (pure or mixed) are 
fused with the radical element, possibly as another set 
of prefixes following the first set or in the form of suf- 
fixes or as part prefixes and part suffixes. By a “fu- 
sional-agglutinative ” language we would understand one 
that fuses its derivational elements but allows a greater 
independence to those that indicate relations. All these 
and similar distinctions are not merely theoretical pos- 
sibilities, they can be abundantly illustrated from the 
descriptive facts of linguistic mori)hology. Further, 
should it prove desirable to insist on the degree of elabo- 
ration of the word, the terms “analytic,” “synthetic,” 
and “ polysynthetic ” can be added as descriptive terms. 
It goes without saying that languages of type A are nec- 
essarily analytic and that languages of type C also are 
prevailingly analytic and are not likely to develop be- 
yond the synthetic stage. 

But we must not make too much of terminology. 
Much depends on the relative emphasis laid on this or 
that feature or point of view. The method of classifying 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


149 


languages here developed has this great advantage, that 
it can be refined or simplified according to the needs 
of a particular discussion. The degree of synthesis may 
be entirely ignored; ‘'fusion’^ and ^'symbolism’' may 
often be combined with advantage under the head of 
“fusion”; even the difference between agglutination 
and fusion may, if desired, be set aside as either too 
difficult to draw or as irrelevant to the issue. Languages, 
after all, are exceedingly complex historical structures. 
It is of less importance to put each language in a neat 
pigeon-hole than to have evolved a flexible method which 
enables us to place it, from two or three independent 
standpoints, relatively to another language. All this is 
not to deny that certain linguistic types are more stable 
and frequently represented than others that are just as 
possible from a theoretical standpoint. But we are too 
ill-informed as yet of the structural spirit of great num- 
bers of languages to have the right to frame a classifica- 
tion that is other than flexible and experimental. 

The reader will gain a somewhat livelier idea of the 
possibilities of linguistic morphology by glancing down 
the subjoined analytical table of selected types. The 
columns II, III, IV refer to the groups of concepts so 
numbered in the preceding chapter. The letters a, b, c, 
d refer respectively to the processes of isolation (posi- 
tion in the sentence), agglutination, fusion, and sym- 
bolism, Where more than one technique is employed, 
they are put in the order of their importance.^^ 

22 In defining the type to which a language belongs one must 
be careful not to be misled by structural features which are 
mere survivals of an older stage, which have no productive 
life and do not enter into the unconscious patterning of the 
language. All languages are littered with such petrified bodies. 
The English -ster of spinster and Weljster is an old agentive 
suffix, but, as far as the feeling of the present English-speaking 
generation is concerned, it cannot be said to really exist at 



Fundamental Type II III IV Technique Synthesis Examples 


.50 


LANGUAGE 



Note, — P arentheses indicate a weak development of the process in question. 


TYPES or LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


151 



Might nearly as well have come under D. 
Very nearly complex pure-relational. 


152 


LANGUAGE 


I need hardly point out that these examples are far 
from exhausting the possibilities of linguistic structure. 
Nor that the fact that two languages are similarly classi- 
fied does not necessarily mean that they present a great 
similarity on the surface. We are here concerned with 
the most fundamental and generalized features of the 
spirit, the technique, and the degree of elaboration of 
a given language. Nevertheless, in numerous instances 
we may observe this highly suggestive and remarkable 
fact, that languages that fall into the same class have 
a way of paralleling each other in many details or in 
structural features not envisaged by the scheme of clas- 
sification. Thus, a most interesting parallel could be 
drawn on structural lines between Takelma and Greek,^® 
languages that are as geographically remote from each 
other and as unconnected in a historical sense as two 
languages selected at random can well be. Their simi- 
larity goes beyond the generalized facts registered in 
the table. It would almost seem that linguistic features 
that are easily thinkable apart from each other, that 
seem to have no necessary connection in theory, have 
nevertheless a tendency to cluster or to follow together 
in the wake of some deep, controlling impulse to form 

all; spinster and Webster have been completely disconnected 
from the etymological group of spin and of weave ( web ) . Simi- 
larly, there are hosts of related words in Chinese whieh differ 
in the initial consonant, the vowel, the tone, or in the presence 
or absence of a final consonant. Even where the Chinaman feels 
the etymological relationship, as in certain cases he can hardly 
help doing, he can assign no particular function to the phonetic 
variation as such. Hence it forms no live feature of the language- 
mechanism and must be ignored in defining the general form of 
the language. The caution is all the more necessary, as it is 
precisely the foreigner, who approaches a new language with a 
certain prying inquisitiveness, that is most apt to see life in 
vestigial features which the native is either completely unaware of 
or feels merely as dead form. 

23 Not Greek specifically, of course, but as a typical representa- 
tive of Indo-European. 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


153 


that dominates their drift. If, therefore, we can only 
be sure of the intuitive similarity of two given lan- 
guages, of their possession of the same submerged form- 
feeling, we need not be too much surprised to find that 
they seek and avoid certain linguistic developments in 
common. We are at present very far from able to de- 
fine just what these fundamental form intuitions are. 
We can only feel them rather vaguely at best and must 
content ourselves for the most part with noting their 
symptoms. These symptoms are being garnered in our 
descriptive and historical grammars of diverse lan- 
guages. Some day, it may be, we shall be able to read 
from them the great underlying ground-plans. 

Such a purely technical classification of languages as 
the currents one into ‘ ^ isolating, ^ ’ '‘agglutinative,^^ and 
‘‘inflective'^ (read “fusional") cannot claim to have 
great value as an entering wedge into the discovery of 
the intuitional forms of language. I do not know 
whether the suggested classification into four conceptual 
groups is likely to drive deeper or not. My own feel- 
ing is that it does, but classifications, neat constructions 
of the speculative mind, are slippery things. They have 
to be tested at every possible opportunity before they 
have the right to cry for acceptance. Meanwhile we 
may take some encouragement from the application of 
a rather curious, yet simple, historical test. Languages 
are in constant process of change, but it is only reason- 
able to suppose that they tend to preserve longest what 
is most fundamental in their structure. Now if we take 
great groups of genetically related languages, we find 
that as we pass from one to another or trace the course 

24 Such, in other words, as can be shown by documentary or 
comparative evidence to have been derived from a common source. 
See Chapter VII. 



154 


LANGUAGE 


of their development we frequently encounter a gradual 
change of morphological type. This is not surprising, 
for there is no reason why a language should remain per- 
manently true to its original form. It is interesting, 
however, to note that of the three intercrossing classifi- 
cations represented in our table (conceptual type, tech- 
nique, and degree of synthesis), it is the degree of syn- 
thesis that seems to change most readily, that the tech- 
nique is modifiable but far less readily so, and that the 
conceptual type tends to persist the longest of all. 

The illustrative material gathered in the table is far 
too scanty to serve as a real basis of proof, but it is 
highly suggestive as far as it goes. The only changes 
of conceptual type within groups of related languages 
that are to be gleaned from the table are of B to A 
(Shilluk as contrasted with Ewe; Classical Tibetan as 
contrasted with Modern Tibetan and Chinese) and of 
D to C (French as contrasted with Latin ^^) . But types 
A : B and C : D are respectively related to each other as 
a simple and a complex form of a still more fundamental 
type (pure-relational, mixed-relational). Of a passage 
from a i)ure-relational to a mixed-relational type or vice 
versa I can give no convincing examples. 

The table shows clearly enough how little relative per- 
manence there is in the technical features of language. 
That highly synthetic languages (Latin; Sanskrit) have 
frequently broken down into analytic forms (French; 

25 These are far-eastern and far-western representatives of the 
“Soudan” group recently proposed by D, Westermann. The 
genetic relationship between Ewe and Shilluk is exceedingly re- 
mote at best. 

26 This case is doubtful at that. I have put French in C rather 
than in D with considerable misgivings. Evi,ry thing depends on 
how one evaluates elements like -al in national, -U in honU, or 
re- in retoumer. They are common enough, but are they as alive, 
as little petrified or bookish, as our English -ness and -ful and 
un-f 



TYPES OF LINGUISTIC STRUCTURE 


155 


Bengali) or that agglutinative languages (Finnish) have 
in many instances gradually taken on ‘ ' inflective ' ' fea- 
tures are well-known facts, but the natural inference does 
not seem to have been often drawn that possibly the 
contrast between synthetic and analytic or agglutinative 
and ‘^inflective’’ (fusional) is not so fundamental after 
all. Turning to the Indo-Chinese languages, we find that 
Chinese is as near to being a perfectly isolating language 
as any example we are likely to find, while Classical Ti- 
betan has not only fusional but strong symbolic features 
(e.g., g4ong-ha “to give,” past h-tang, future g-tang, 
imperative thong) ; but both are pure-relational lan- 
guages. Ewe is either isolating or only barely agglutina- 
tive, while Shilluk, though soberly analytic, is one of the 
most definitely symbolic languages I know ; both of these 
Soudanese languages are pure-relational. The relation- 
ship between Polynesian and Cambodgian is remote, 
though practically certain; while the latter has more 
markedly fusional features than the former,^^ both con- 
form to the complex pure-relational type. Yana and 
Salinan are superficially very dissimilar languages. 
Yana is highly polysynthetic and quite typically agglu- 
tinative, Salinan is no more synthetic than and as irreg- 
ularly and compactly fusional (“inflective”) as Latin; 
both are pure-relational. Chinook and Takelma, re- 
motely related languages of Oregon, have diverged very 
far from each other, not only as regards technique and 
synthesis in general but in almost all the details of 
their structure; both are complex mixed-relational lan- 
guages, though in very different ways. Facts such as 
these seem to lend color to the suspicion that in the 
contrast of pure-relational and mixed-relational (or con- 
crete-relational) we are confronted by something deeper, 

27 In spite of its more isolating cast. 



156 


LANGUAGE 


more far-reaching, than the contrast of isolating, agglu- 
tinative, and fusional.^® 


28 In a book of this sort it is naturally impossible to give an 
adequate idea of linguistic structure in ivs varying forms. Only 
a few schematic indications are possible. A separate volume 
would be needed to breathe life into tlie scheme. Such a volume 
would point out the salient structural characteristics of a num- 
ber of languages, so selected as to give the reader an insight into 
the formal economy of strikingly divergent types. 



VII 


LANGUAGE AS A HISTOEICAL PRODUCT: 
DRIFT 

Every one knows that language is variable. Two in- 
dividuals of the same generation and locality, speaking 
precisely the same dialect and moving in the same social 
circles, are never absolutely at one in their speech 
habits. A minute investigation of the speech of each 
individual would reveal countless differencas of detail — 
in choice of* words, in sentence structure, in the relative 
frequency with which particular forms or combinations 
of words are used, in the pronunciation of particular 
vowels and consonants and of combinations of vowels 
and consonants, in all those features, such as speed, 
stress, and tone, that give life to spoken language. In 
a sense they speak slightly divergent dialects of the 
same language rather than identically the same language. 

There is an important difference, however, between 
individual and dialectic variations. If we take two 
closely related dialects, say English as spoken by the 
‘^middle classes’’ of London and English as spoken by 
the average New Yorker, we observe that, however much 
the individual speakers in each city diifer from 
each other, the body of Londoners forms a compact, rela- 
tively unified group in contrast to the body of New 
Yorkers. The individual variations are swamped in or 
absorbed by certain major agreements — say of pronun- 
ciation and vocabulary — which stand out very strongly 

157 



158 


LANGUAGE 


when the language of the group as a whole is contrasted 
with that of the other group. This means that there is 
something like an ideal linguistic entity dominating the 
speech habits of the members of each group, that the 
sense of almost unlimited freedom which each individual 
feels in the use of his language is held in leash by a 
tacitly directing norm. One individual plays on the 
norm in a way peculiar to himself, the next individual 
is nearer the dead average in that particular respect in 
which the first speaker most characteristically departs 
from it but in turn diverges from the average in a way 
peculiar to himself, and so on. What keeps the indi- 
viduars variations from rising to dialectic importance 
is not merely the fact that they are in any event of 
small moment — there are well-marked dialectic variations 
that are of no greater magnitude than individual varia- 
tions within a dialect — it is chiefly that they are silently 
corrected’’ or canceled by the consensus of usage. If 
all the speakers of a given dialect were arranged in 
order in accordance with the degree of their conformity 
to average usage, there is little doubt that they would 
constitute a very finely intergrading series clustered 
about a well-defined center or norm. The differences 
between any two neighboring speakers of the series ^ 
would be negligible for any but the most microscopic 
linguistic research. The differences between the outer- 
most members of the series are sure to be considerable, 
in all likelihood considerable enough to measure up to 
a true dialectic variation. What prevents us from say- 
ing that these untypical individuals speak distinct dia- 
lects is that their peculiarities, as a unified whole, are 


1 In 80 far as they do not fall out of the normal speech group 
by reason of a marked speech defect or because they are isolated 
foreigners that have acguired the lansruage late in life. 



DRIFT 159 

not referable to another norm than the norm of their 
own series. 

If the speech of any member of the series could actu- 
ally be made to fit into another dialect series,^ we should 
have no true barriers between dialects (and languages) 
at all. We should merely have a continuous series of 
individual variations extending over the whole range 
of a historically unified linguistic area, and the cutting 
up of this large area (in some eases embracing parts of 
several continents) into distinct dialects and languages 
would be an essentially arbitrary proceeding with no 
warrant save that of practical convenience. But such a 
conception of the nature of dialectic variation does not 
correspond to the facts as we know them. Isolated in- 
dividuals rnay be found who speak a compromise be- 
tween two dialects of a language, and if their number 
and importance increases they may even end by creat- 
ing a new dialectic norm of their own, a dialect in which 
the extreme peculiarities of the parent dialects are ironed 
out. In course of time the compromise dialect may ab- 
sorb the parents, though more frequently these will tend 
to linger indefinitely as marginal forms of the enlarged 
dialect area. But such phenemena — and they are com- 
mon enough in the history of language — are evidently 
quite secondary. They are closely linked with such so- 
cial developments as the rise of nationality, the forma- 
tion of literatures that aim to have more than a local 
appeal, the movement of rural populations into the cities, 
and all those other tendencies that break up the intense 
localism that unsophisticated man has always found 
natural. 

2 Observe that we are speaking of an individual’s speech as a 
whole. It is not a question of isolating some particular pecu- 
liarity of pronunciation or usage and noting its resemblance to 
or identity with a feature in another dialect. 



160 


LANGUAGE 


The explanation of primary dialectic differences is 
still to seek. It is evidently not enough to say that if 
a dialect or language is spoken in two distinct localities 
or by two distinct social strata it naturally takes on 
distinctive forms, which in time come to be divergent 
enough to deserve the name of dialects. This is cer- 
tainly true as far as it goes. Dialects do belong, in the 
first instance, to very definitely circumscribed social 
groups, homogeneous enough to secure the common feel- 
ing and purpose needed to create a norm. But the em- 
barrassing question immediately arises, If all the indi- 
vidual variations within a dialect are being constantly 
leveled out to the dialectic norm, if there is no appre- 
ciable tendency for the individuars peculiarities to 
initiate a dialectic schism, why should we have dialectic 
variations at all? Ought not the norm, wherever and 
whenever threatened, automatically to reassert itself? 
Ought not the individual variations of each locality, even 
in the absence of intercourse between them, to cancel 
out to the same accepted speech average? 

If individual variations ^^on a flaU’ were the only 
kind of variability in language, I believe we should be 
at a loss to explain why and how dialects arise, why 
it is that a linguistic prototype gradually breaks up 
into a number of mutually unintelligible languages. But 
language is not merely something that is spread out 
in space, as it were — a series of reflections in indi- 
vidual minds of one and the same timeless picture. Lan- 
guage moves down time in a current of its own making. 
It has a drift. If there were no breaking up of a lan- 
guage into dialects, if each language continued as a firm, 
self-contained unity, it would still be constantly moving 
away from any assignable norm, developing new fea- 
tures unceasingly and gradually transforming itself into 



DRIFT 


161 


a language so different from its starting point as to be 
in effect a new language. Now dialects arise not be- 
cause of the mere fact of individual variation but be- 
cause two or more groups of individuals have become 
sufficiently disconnected to drift apart, or independently, 
instead of together. So long as they keep strictly to- 
gether, no amount of individual variation would lead 
to the formation of dialects. In practice, of course, no 
language can be spread over a vast territory or even 
over a considerable area without showing dialectic va- 
riations, for it is impossible to keep a large population 
from segregating itself into local groups, the language 
of each of which tends to drift independently. Under 
cultural conditions such as apparently prevail to-day, 
conditions that fight localism at every turn, the tend- 
ency to dialectic cleavage is being constantly counter- 
acted and in part corrected^’ by the uniformizing fac- 
tors already referred to. Yet even in so young a coun- 
try as America the dialectic differences are not incon- 
siderable. 

Under primitive conditions the political groups are 
small, the tendency to localism exceedingly strong. It 
is natural, therefore, that the languages of primitive 
folk or of non-urban populations in general are differ- 
entiated into a great number of dialects. There are 
parts of the globe where almost every village has its 
own dialect. The life of the geographically limited 
community is narrow and intense; its speech is corre- 
spondingly peculiar to itself. It is exceedingly doubtful 
if a language will ever be spoken over a wide area with- 
out multiplying itself dialectically. No sooner are the 
old dialects ironed out by compromises or ousted by the 
spread and infiuence of the one dialect which is cul- 
turally predominant when a new crop of dialects arises 



162 


LANGUAGE 


to undo the leveling work of the past. This is pre- 
cisely what happened in Greece, for instance. In 
classical antiquity there were spoken a large number 
of local dialects, several of which are represented in 
the literature. As the cultural supremacy of Athens 
grew, its dialect, the Attic, spread at the expense 
of the rest, until, in the so-called Hellenistic period 
following the Macedonian conquest, the Attic dia- 
lect, in the vulgarized form known as the ‘ ' Koine, ’ ^ be- 
came the standard speech of all Greece. But this lin- 
guistic uniformity ^ did not long continue. During the 
two millennia that separate the Greek of to-day from 
its classical prototype the Koine gradually split up into 
a number of dialects. Now Greece is as richly diversi- 
fied in speech as in the time of Homer, though the pres- 
ent local dialects, aside from those of Attica itself, are 
not the lineal descendants of the old dialects of pre- 
Alexandrian days.^ The experience of Greece is not 
exceptional. Old dialects are being continually wiped 
out only to make room for new ones. Languages can 
change at so many points of phonetics, morphology, and 
vocabulary that it is not surprising that once the lin- 
guistic community is broken it should slip off in differ- 
ent directions. It would be too much to expect a locally 
diversified language to develop along strictly parallel 
lines. If once the speech of a locality has begun to drift 
on its own account, it is practically certain to move fur- 
ther and further away from its linguistic fellows. Fail- 

3 It is doubtful if we have the right to speak of linguistic uni- 
formity even during the predominance of the Koine. It is hardly 
conceivable that when the various groups of non-Attic Greeks 
took on the Koine they did not at once tinge it with dialectic 
peculiarities induced by their previous speech habits. 

4 The Zaconic dialect of Lacedaemon is the sole exception. It 
is not derived from the Koine, but stems directly from the Doric 
dialect of Sparta. 



DRIFT 


163 


ing the retarding effect of dialectic interinfluences, 
which I have already touched upon, a group of dialects 
is bound to diverge on the whole, each from all of the 
others. 

In course of time each dialect itself splits up into sub- 
dialects, which gradually take on the dignity of dialects 
proper while the primary dialects develop into mutu- 
ally unintelligible languages. And so the budding proc- 
ess continues, until the divergences become so great that 
none but a linguistic student, armed with his docu- 
mentary evidence and with his comparative or recon- 
structive method, would infer that the languages in 
question were genealogically related, represented inde- 
pendent lines of development, in other words, from 
a remote and common starting point. Yet it is as 
certain as any historical fact can be that languages so 
little resembling each other as Modern Irish, English, 
Italian, Greek, Russian, Armenian, Persian, and Ben- 
gali are but end-points in the present of drifts that 
converge to a meeting-point in the dim past. There is 
naturally no reason to believe that this earliest Indo- 
European ’’ (or '‘Aryan’’) prototype which we can in 
part reconstruct, in part but dimly guess at, is itself 
other than a single "dialect” of a group that has either 
become largely extinct or is now further represented by 
languages too divergent for us, with our limited means, 
to recognize as clear kin.^ 

All languages that are known to be genetically re- 
lated, i.e., to be divergent forms of a single prototype, 
may be considered as constituting a "linguistic stock.” 
There is nothing final about a linguistic stock. When 

5 Though indications are not lacking of what these remoter kin 
of the Indo-European languages may be. This is disputed ground, 
however, and hardly fit subject for a purely general study of 
speech. 



164 


LANGUAGE 


we set it up, we merely say, in effect, that thus far we 
can go and no farther. At any point in the progress 
of our researches an unexpected ray of light may reveal 
the stock’’ as but a dialect” of a larger group. The 
terms dialect, language, branch, stock — it goes without 
saying — are purely relative terms. They are convertible 
as our perspective widens or contracts.® It would be 
vain to speculate as to whether or not we shall ever be 
able to demonstrate that all languages stem from a com- 
mon source. Of late years linguists have been able to 
make larger historical syntheses than were at one time 
deemed feasible, just as students of culture have been 
able to show historical connections between culture areas 
or institutions that were at one time believed to be totally 
isolated from each other. The human world is con- 
tracting not only prospectively but to the backward- 
probing eye of culture-history. Nevertheless we are as 
yet far from able to reduce the riot of spoken 
languages to a small number of stocks.” We must still 
operate with a quite considerable number of these stocks. 
Some of them, like Indo-European or Indo-Chinese, are 
spoken over tremendous reaches; others, like Basque,^ 
have a curiously restricted range and are in all likeli- 
hood but dwindling remnants of groups that were at 
one time more widely distributed. As for the single 
or multiple origin of speech, it is likely enough that lan- 
guage as a human institution (or, if one prefers, as a 
human ‘‘faculty’’) developed but once in the history 
of the race, that all the complex history of language is 
a unique cultural event. Such a theory constructed 
“on general principles” is of no real interest, however, 

6 “Dialect” in contrast to an accepted literary norm is a use of 
the term that we are not considering. 

7 Spoken in France and Spain in the region of the Pyrenees. 



DRIFT 165 

to linguistic science. What lies beyond the demonstrable 
must be left to the philosopher or the romancer. 

We must return to the conception of '' drift in lan- 
guage. If the historical changes that take place in a 
language, if the vast accumulation of minute modifica- 
tions which in time results in the complete remodeling of 
the language, are not in essence identical with the indi- 
vidual variations that we note on every hand about us, 
if these variations are born only to die without a trace, 
while the equally minute, or even minuter, changes that 
make up the drift are forever imprinted on the history 
of the language, are we not imputing to this history a 
certain mystical quality? Are we not giving language 
a power to change of its own accord over and above the 
involuntary tendency of individuals to vary the norm? 
And if this drift of language is not merely the familiar 
set of individual variations seen in vertical perspective, 
that is historically, instead of horizontally, that is in 
daily experience, what is it? Language exists only 
in so far as it is actually used — spoken and heard, writ- 
ten and read. What significant changes take place in it 
must exist, to begin with, as individual variations. This 
is perfectly true, and yet it by no means follows that 
the general drift of language can be understood ® from 
an exhaustive descriptive study of these variations alone. 
They themselves are random phenomena,^ like the waves 
of the sea, moving backward and forward in purposeless 
flux. The linguistic drift has direction. In other words, 
only those individual variations embody it or carry it 
which move in a certain direction, just as only certain 
wave movements in the bay outline the tide. The drift 

8 Or rather apprehended, for we do not, in sober fact, entirely 
understand it as yet. 

^ Not ultimately random, of course, only relatively so. 



166 


LANGUAGE 


of a language is constituted by the unconscious selection 
on the part of its speakers of those individual variations 
that are cumulative in some special direction. This di- 
rection may be inferred, in the main, from the past 
history of the language. In the long run any new fea- 
ture of the drift becomes part and parcel of the com- 
mon, accepted speech, but for a long time it may exist 
as a mere tendency in the speech of a few, perhaps of 
a despised few. As we look about us and observe cur- 
rent usage, it is not likely to occur to us that our lan- 
guage has a ‘'slope,'’ that the changes of the next few 
centuries are in a sense prefigured in certain obscure 
tendencies of the present and that these changes, when 
consummated, will be seen to be but continuations of 
changes that have been already effected. We feel 
rather that our language is practically a fixed system and 
that what slight changes are destined to take place in 
it are as likely to move in one direction as another. The 
feeling is fallacious. Our very uncertainty as to the 
impending details of change makes the eventual con- 
sistency of their direction all the more impressive. 

Sometimes we can feel where the drift is taking us 
even while we struggle against it. Probably the ma- 
jority of those who read these words feel that it is 
quite “incorrect" to say “Who did you see?" We 
readers of many books are still very careful to say 
“Whom did you see?" but we feel a little uncomfort- 
able (uncomfortably proud, it may be) in the process. 
We are likely to avoid the locution altogether and to 
say “Who was it you saw?" conserving literary tradi- 
tion (the “whom") with the dignity of silence.^® The 

10 In relative clauses too we tend to avoid the objective form of 
who.” Instead of “The man whom I saw” we are likely to say 
The man that I eaV’ or “The man I saw.” 



DRIFT 


167 


folk makes no apology. "‘Whom did yon see?’’ might 
do for an epitaph, but ^‘WJio did you see?” is the natu- 
ral form for an eager inquiry. It is of course the un- 
controlled speech of the folk to which we must look 
for advance information as to the general linguistic 
movement. It is safe to prophesy that within a couple 
of hundred years from to-day not even the most learned 
jurist will be saying ‘^Whom did you see?” By that 
time the ^^whom” will be as delightfully archaic as the 
Elizabethan ‘"his” for '4ts.”^^ No logical or histori- 
cal argument will avail to save this hapless ^^whom.” 
The demonstration ^ ^ I : me = he : him == who : whom ’ ’ 
will be convincing in theory and will go unheeded 
in practice. 

Even now we may go so far as to say that the 
majority of us are secretly wishing they could say ‘‘Who 
did you see?” It would be a weight off their uncon- 
scious minds if some divine authority, overruling the 
lifted finger of the pedagogue, gave them carte blanche. 
But we cannot too frankly anticipate the drift and 
maintain caste. We must affect ignorance of whither 
we are going and rest content with our mental 
conflict — uncomfortable conscious acceptance of the 
“whom,” unconscious desire for the “who.”^^ Mean- 

11 “Its” was at one time as impertinent a departure as the 
“who” of “Who did you see?” It forced itself into English be- 
cause the old cleavage between masculine, feminine, and neuter 
was being slowly and powerfully supplemented by a new one 
between thing-class and animate-class. The latter classification 
proved too vital to allow usage to couple males and things (“his”) 
as against females ("Tier”). The form “its” had to be created 
on the analogy of words like “man^s,” to satisfy the growing form 
feeling. The drift was strong enough to sanction a grammatical 
blunder. 

12 Psychoanalysts will recognize the mechanism. The mechan- 
isms of “repression of impulse” and of its symptomatic sym- 
bolization can be illustrated in the most unexpected corners of 
individual and group psychology. A more general psychology 



168 


LANGUAGE 


while we indulge our sneaking desire for the forbidden 
locution by the use of the ‘'who’’ in certain twilight 
cases in which we can cover up our fault by a bit of 
unconscious special pleading. Imagine that some one 
drops the remark when you are not listening attentively, 
“John Smith is coming to-night.” You have not caught 
the name and ask, not ''Wliom did you say?” but “Who 
did you say?” There is likely to be a little hesitation 
in the choice of the form, but the precedent of usages 
like ‘‘Whom did you see?” will probably not seem quite 
strong enough to induce a “Whom did you say?” Not 
quite relevant enough, the grammarian may remark, 
for a sentence like “Who did you say?” is not strictly 
analogous to “Whom did you see?” or “Whom did you 
mean?” It is rather an abbreviated form of some such 
sentence as “Who, did you say, is coming to-nighf?” 
This is the special pleading that I have referred to, and 
it has a certain logic on its side. Yet the case is more 
hollow than the grammarian thinks it to be, for in reply 
to such a query as “You’re a good hand at bridge, 
John, aren’t you?” John, a little taken aback, might 
mutter “Did you say me?” hardly “Did you say I?” 
Yet the logic for the latter (“Did you say I was a good 
hand at bridge?”) is evident. The real point is that 
there is not enough vitality in the “whom” to carry it 
over such little difficulties as a “me” can compass with- 
out a thought. The proportion “I : me = he : him 
who: whom” is logically and historically sound, but 
psychologically shaky. “Whom did you see?” is cor- 
rect, but there is something false about its correctness. 

It is worth looking into the reason for our curious 

than Freud’s will eventually prove them to be as applicable to 
the groping for abstract form, the logical or esthetic ordering 
of experience, aa to the life of the fundamental instincts. 



DRIFT 


169 


reluctance to use locutions involving the word ‘‘whom/’ 
particularly in its interrogative sense. The only distinc- 
tively objective forms which we still possess in English 
are me, Mm, her (a little blurred because of its identity 
with the possessive her), us, them, and whom. In all 
other cases the objective has come to be identical with 
the subjective — that is, in outer form, for we are not 
now taking account of position in the sentence. We ob- 
serve immediately in looking through the list of objec- 
tive forms that whom is psychologically isolated. Me, 
him, her, us, and them form a solid, well-integrated 
group of objective personal pronouns parallel to the 
subjective series I, he, she, we, they. The forms who 
and whom are technically “pronouns^’ but they are not 
felt to be in the same box as the personal pronouns. 
Whom has clearly a weak position, an exposed flank, 
for words of a feather tend to flock together, and if one 
strays behind, it is likely to incur danger of life. Now 
the other interrogative and relative pronouns {which, 
what, that), with which whom should properly flock, do 
not distinguish the subjective and objective forms. It 
is psychologically unsound to draw the line of form 
cleavage between whom and the personal pronouns on 
the one side, the remaining interrogative and relative 
pronouns on the other. The form groups should be sym- 
metrically related to, if not identical with, the function 
groups. Had which, what, and that objective forms 
parallel to whom, the position of this last would be more 
secure. As it is, there is something unesthetic about 
the word. It suggests a form pattern which is not filled 
out by its fellows. The only way to remedy the irregu- 
larity of form distribution is to abandon the whom alto- 
gether, for we have lost the power to create new objec- 
tive forms and cannot remodel our which-what-that group 



170 


LANGUAGE 


so as to make it parallel with the smaller group who- 
whom. Once this is done, who joins its flock and our 
unconscious desire for form symmetry is satisfied. We 
do not secretly chafe at "'Whom did you see?” without 
reason.^® 

But the drift away from whom has still other deter- 
minants. The words who and who^n in their interroga- 
tive sense are psychologically related not merely to the 
pronouns which and what, but to a group of interroga- 
tive adverbs — where, when, how — al\ of which are in- 
variable and generally emphatic. I believe it is safe 
to infer that there is a rather strong feeling in English 
that the interrogative pronoun or adverb, typically an 
emphatic element in the sentence, should be invariable. 
The inflective -m of whom is felt as a drag upon the 
rhetorical effectiveness of the word. It needs to be 
eliminated if the interrogative pronoun is to receive all 
its latent power. There is still a third, and a very 
powerful, reason for the avoidance of whom. The con- 
trast between the subjective and objective series of per- 
sonal pronouns {I, he, she, we, they: me, him, her, us, 
them) is in English associated with a difference of posi- 
tion. We say I see the man but the man sees me; he 
told him, never him he told or him told he. Such usages 
as the last two are distinctly poetic and archaic; they 
are opposed to the present drift of the language. Even 
in the interrogative one does not say Him did you see? 
It is only in sentences of the type Whom did you see? 
that an inflected objective before the verb is now used 

13 Note that it is different with whose. This has not the 
support of analogous possessive forms in its ov^n functional group, 
but the analogical power of the great body of possessives of 
nouns (man’s, hoy’s) as well as of certain personal pronouns {his, 
its; as predicated possessive also hers, yours, theirs) is sufficient 
to give it vitality. 



DRIFT 


171 


at all. On the other hand, the order in Whom did you 
see? is imperative because of its interrogative form; the 
interrogative pronoun or adverb normally comes first in 
the sentence {What are you doing? When did he go? 
Where are you from?). In the ''whom’' of Whom did 
you see? there is concealed, therefore, a conflict between 
the order proper to a sentence containing an inflected ob- 
jective and the order natural to a sentence with an inter- 
rogative pronoun or adverb. The solution Did you see 
whom? or You saw whom? is too contrary to the idio- 
matic drift of our language to receive acceptance. The 
more radical solution Who did you see? is the one the 
language is gradually making for. 

These three conflicts — on the score of form grouping, 
of rhetorical emphasis, and of order — are supplemented 
by a fourth difficulty. The emphatic ivliom, with its 
heavy build (half -long vowel followed by labial con- 
sonant), should contrast with a lightly tripping syllable 
immediately following. In whom did, however, we have 
an involuntary retardation that makes the locution sound 
"clumsy.” This clumsiness is a phonetic verdict, quite 
apart from the dissatisfaction due to the grammatical 
factors which we have analyzed. The same prosodic ob- 
jection does not apply to such parallel locutions as what 
did and when did. The vowels of what and ivhen are 
shorter and their final consonants melt easily into the 
following dy which is pronounced in the same tongue 
position as t and n. Our instinct for appropriate 
rhythms makes it as difficult for us to feel content with 
whom did as for a poet to use words like dreamed and 

14 Aside from certain idiomatic usages, as when You saw whom? 
is equivalent to You saw so and so and that so and so is who? 
In such sentences whom is pronounced high and lingeringly to 
emphasize the fact that the person just referred to by the listener 
is not known or recognized. 



172 


LANGUAGE 


hummtd in a rapid line. Neither common feeling nor 
the poet^s choice need be at all conscious. It may be 
that not all are equally sensitive to the rhythmic flow 
of speech, but it is probable that rhythm is an uncon- 
scious linguistic determinant even with those who set 
little store by its artistic use. In any event the poet’s 
rhythms can only be a more sensitive and stylicized ap- 
plication of rhythmic tendencies that are characteristic 
of the daily speech of his people. 

We have discovered no less than four factors which 
enter into our subtle disinclination to say '‘Whom did 
you see?” The uneducated folk that says "Who did 
you see?” with no twinge of conscience has a more acute 
flair for the genuine drift of the language than its 
students. Naturally the four restraining factors do 
not operate independently. Their separate energies, if 
we may make bold to use a mechanical concept, are 
"canalized” into a single force. This force or minute 
embodiment of the general drift of the language is psy- 
chologically registered as a slight hesitation in using 
the word whom. The hesitation is likely to be quite un- 
conscious, though it may be readily acknowledged when 
attention is called to it. The analysis is certain to be 
unconscious, or rather unknown, to the normal speaker. 
How, then, can we be certain in such an analysis as we 
have undertaken that all of the assigned determinants 
are really operative and not merely some one of them? 
Certainly they are not equally powerful in all cases. 
Their values are variable, rising and falling according 
to the individual and the locution.^® But that they really 

15 Students of language cannot be entirely normal in their atti- 
tude towards their own speech. Perhaps it would be better to 
say “naive” than “normal.” 

16 It is probably this variability of value in the significant 
compounds of a general linguistic drift tliat is responsible for 



DRIFT 


173 


exist, each in its own right, may sometimes be tested 
by the method of elimination. If one or other of the 
factors is missing and we observe a slight diminution in 
the corresponding psychological reaction (‘‘hesitation^’ 
in our case), we may conclude that the factor is in other 
uses genuinely positive. The second of our four factors 
applies only to the interrogative use of whom, the fourth 
factor applies with more force to the interrogative than 
to the relative. We can therefore understand why a sen- 
tence like Is he the man whom you referred to? though 
not as idiomatic as Is he the man (that) you referred to? 
(remember that it sins against counts one and three), 
is still not as difficult to reconcile with our innate feel- 
ing for English expression as Whom did you see? If 
we eliminate the fourth factor from the interrogative 
usage, say in Whom are you looking at? where the 
vowel following whom relieves this word of its phonetic 
weight, we can observe, if I am not mistaken, a lesser 
reluctance to use the whom. Who are you looking at? 
might even sound slightly offensive to ears that welcome 
Who did you see? 

We may set up a scale of “hesitation values” some- 
what after this fashion: 

Value 1 : factors 1, 3. “The man whom I referred to.” 

Value 2: factors 1, 3, 4. “The man whom they referred to.” 
Value 3: factors 1, 2, 3. “Whom are you looking at?” 
Value 4: factors 1, 2, 3, 4. “Whom did you see?” 

the rise of dialectic variations. Each dialect continues the gen- 
eral drift of the common parent, but has not been able to hold 
fast to constant values for each component of the drift. Devia- 
tions as to the drift itself, at first slight, later cumulative, are 
therefore unavoidable. 

17 Most sentences beginning with interrogative whom are likely 
to be followed by did or does, do. Yet not all. 



174 


LANGUAGE 


We may venture to surmise that while whom will ulti- 
mately disappear from English speech, locutions of the 
type Whom did you see? will be obsolete when phrases 
like The man whom I referred to are still in lingering 
use. It is impossible to be certain, however, for we can 
pever tell if we have isolated all the determinants of a 
drift. In our particular case we have ignored what may 
well prove to be a controlling factor in the history of 
who and whom in the relative sense. This is the uncon- 
scious desire to leave these words to their interrogative 
function and to concentrate on that or mere word order 
as expressions of the relative (e.g.. The man that I re- 
ferred to or The man I referred to). This drift, which 
does not directly concern the use of whom as such 
(merely of whom as a form of who)^ may have made 
the relative who obsolete before the other factors af- 
fecting relative whom have run their course. A consid- 
eration like this is instructive because it indicates that 
knowledge of the general drift of a language is insuffi- 
cient to enable us to see clearly what the drift is head- 
ing for. We need to know something of the relative 
potencies and speeds of the components of the drift. 

It is hardly necessary to say that the particular drifts 
involved in the use of whom are of interest to us not for 
their own sake but as symptoms of larger tendencies at 
work in the language. At least three drifts of major 
importance are discernible. Each of these has oper- 
ated for centuries, each is at work in other parts of our 
linguistic mechanism, each is almost certain to continue 
for centuries, possibly millennia. The first is the fa- 
miliar tendency to level the distinction between the sub- 
jective and the objective, itself but a late chapter in 
the steady reduction of the old Indo-European system 
of syntactic cases. This system, which is at present best 



DRIFT 


175 


preserved in Lithuanian,^® was already considerably re- 
duced in the old Germanic language of which English, 
Dutch, German, Danish, and Swedish are modern dia- 
lectic forms. The seven Indo-European cases (nomi- 
native, genitive, dative, accusative, ablative, locative, in- 
strumental) had been already reduced to four (nomi- 
native, genitive, dative, accusative). We know this from 
a careful comparison of and reconstruction based on 
the oldest Germanic dialects of which we still have rec- 
ords (Gothic, Old Icelandic, Old High German, Anglo- 
Saxon). In tlie group of West Germanic dialects, for 
the study of which Old High German, Anglo-Saxon, 
Old Frisian, and Old Saxon are our oldest and most 
valuable sources, we still have these four cases, but the 
phonetic form of the case syllables is already greatly 
reduced and in certain paradigms particular cases have 
coalesced. The case system is practically intact but it 
is evidently moving towards further disintegration. 
Within the Anglo-Saxon and early Middle English 
period there took place further changes in the same 
direction. The phonetic form of the case syllables be- 
came still further reduced and tlie distinction between 
the accusative and the dative finally disappeared. The 
ncAV objective’’ is really an amalgam of old accusative 
and dative forms; thus, him, the old dative (Ave still say 
I give him the hooh, not ‘^abbreviated” from 1 give 
to him: compare Gothic imma, modern German ihm), 
took over the functions of the old accusative (Anglo- 
Saxon hine; compare Gothic ina. Modern German ihn) 
and dative. The distinction betAveen the nominative and 
accusative was nibbled away by phonetic processes and 

Better, indeed , than in onr oldest Latin and Greek records. 
The old Indo-Iranian languages alone (Sanskrit, Avestan) show 
an equally or more arcliaie status of the Indo-European parent 
tongue as regards case forms. 



176 


LANGUAGE 


morphological levelings until only certain pronouns re- 
tained distinctive subjective and objective forms. 

In later medieval and in modern times there have been 
comparatively few apparent changes in our case system 
apart from the gradual replacement of thou — thee (sin- 
gular) and subjective ye — objective you (plural) by a 
single undifferentiated form you. All the while, how- 
ever, the case system, such as it is (subjective-objective, 
really absolutive, and possessive in nouns; subjective, 
objective, and possessive in certain pronouns) has been 
steadily weakening in psychological respects. At pres- 
ent it is more seriously undermined than most of us 
realize. The possessive has little vitality except in the 
pronoun and in animate nouns. Theoretically we can 
still say the moon^s phases or a newspaper's vogue; prac- 
tically we limit ourselves pretty much to analytic locu- 
tions like the phases of the moon and the vogue of a 
newspaper. The drift is clearl}" toward the limitation 
of possessive forms to animate nouns. All the possessive 
pronominal forms except its and, in part, their and 
theirs, are also animate. It is significant that theirs 
is hardly ever used in reference to inanimate nouns, that 
there is some reluctance to so use their, and that its also 
is beginning to give way to of it. The appearance 
of it or the looks of it is more in the current of the 
language than its appearance. It is curiously sig- 
nificant that its young (referring to an animaUs cubs) 
is idiomatically preferable to the young of it. The form 
is only ostensibly neuter, in feeling it is animate; psy- 
chologically it belongs with his children, not with the 
pieces of it. Can it be that so common a word as its is 
actually beginning to be difficult? Is it too doomed to 
disappear? It would be rash to say that it shows signs 
of approaching obsolescence, but that it is steadily weak- 



DRIFT 


177 


ening is fairly clear.^® In any event, it is not too much 
to say that there is a strong drift towards the restriction 
of the inflected possessive forms to animate nouns and 
pronouns. 

How is it with the alternation of subjective and ob- 
jective in the pronoun? Granted that whom is a weak 
sister, that the two cases have been leveled in you (in it, 
that, and what they were never distinct, so far as we can 
tell^®), and that her as an objective is a trifle weak be- 
cause of its formal identity with the possessive her, is 
there any reason to doubt the vitality of such alterna- 
tions as I see the man and the man sees me? Surely the 
distinction between subjective 1 and objective me, be- 
tween subjective he and objective him, and correspond- 
ingly for other personal pronouns, belongs to the very 
core of the language. We can throw whom to the dogs, 
somehow make shift to do without an its, but to level I 
and me to a single case — would that not be to un- 
English our language beyond recognition? There is no 
drift toward such horrors as Me see him or I see he. 
True, the phonetic disparity between I and me, he and 
him, we and us, has been too great for any serious pos- 
sibility of form leveling. It does not follow that the 
case distinction as such is still vital. One of the most 
insidious peculiarities of a linguistic drift is that where 
it cannot destroy what lies in its way it renders it innoc- 
uous by washing the old significance out of it. It turns 
its very enemies to its own uses. This brings us to the 
second of the major drifts, the tendency to fixed posi- 

19 Should its eventually drop out, it will have had a curious 
history. It will have played the rdle of a stop-gap between his 
in its non-personal use (see footnote 11, page 167) and the later 
analytic of it. 

20 Except in so far as that has absorbed other functions than 
such as originally belonged to it. It was only a nominative- 
accusative neuter to begin with. 



178 LANGUAGE 

tion in the sentence, determined by the syntactic relation 
of the word. 

We need not go into the history of this all-important 
drift. It is enough to know that as the inflected forms 
of English became scantier, as the syntactic relations 
were more and more inadequately expressed by the forms 
of the words themselves, position in the sentence gradu- 
ally took over functions originally foreign to it. The 
man in the man sees the dog is subjective; in the dog 
sees the man, objective. Strictly parallel to these sen- 
tences are he sees the dog and the dog sees him. Are 
the subjective value of he and the objective value of 
him entirely, or even mainly, dependent on the difference 
of form? I doubt it. We could hold to such a view 
if it were possible to say the dog sees he or hhn sees the 
dog. It was once possible to say such things, but we 
have lost the power. In other words, at least part of 
the ease feeling in he and him is to be credited to their 
position before or after the verb. May it not be, then, 
that he and him, we and ns, are not so much subjective 
and objective forms as pre-verbal and post-verbal 
forms, very much as my and mine are now pre-nominal 
and post-nominal forms of the possessive {jny father but 
father mine; it is my hook but the hook is mine) ? That 
this interpretation corresponds to the actual drift of 
the English language is again indicated by the language 
of the folk. The folk says it is me, not it is I, which is 
‘‘correct’’ but just as falsely so as the whom did yon 
see? that we have analyzed. I’m the one, iVs me; weWe 

21 Aside from the interrogative: am If is he? Emphasis counts 
for something. There is a strong tendency for the old “objec- 
tive’^ forms to bear a stronger stress than the “subjective” forms. 
This is why the stress in locutions like He didn't go, did he? and 
isn’t he? is thrown back on the verb; it is not a matter of logical 
emphasis. 



DRIFT 


179 


the ones, it^s us that will win out — such are the live 
paraUelisms in English to-day. There is little doubt 
that it is I will one day be as impossible in English as 
c^est je, for c'est moi, is now in French. 

How differently our 1: me feels than in Chaucer’s day 
is shown by the Chaucerian it am 7. Here the dis- 
tinctively subjective aspect of the I was enough to influ- 
ence the form of the preceding verb in spite of the intro- 
ductory it; Chaucer’s locution clearly felt more like a 
Latin sum ego than a modern it is I or colloquial it is me. 
We have a curious bit of further evidence to prove that 
the English personal pronouns have lost some share of 
their original syntactic force. Were he and she sub- 
jective forms pure and simple, were they not striving, 
so to speak, io become caseless absolutives, like man or 
any other noun, we should not have been able to coin 
such compounds as he-goat and she-goat, words that are 
psychologically analogous to hull-moose and mother-hear. 
Again, in inquiring about a new-born baby, we ask Is it 
a he or a she? quite as though he and she were the equiv- 
alents of male and feynale or hoy and girl. All in all, 
we may conclude that our English case system is weaker 
than it looks and that, in one way or another, it is des- 
tined to get itself reduced to an absolutive (caseless) 
form for all nouns and pronouns but those that are 
animate. Animate nouns and pronouns are sure to have 
distinctive possessive forms for an indefinitely long 
period. 

Meanwhile observe that the old alignment of case 
forms is being invaded by two new categories — a posi- 
tional category (pre-verbal, post-verbal) and a clas- 
sificatory category (animate, inanimate). The facts 
that in the possessive animate nouns and pronouns are 
destined to be more and more sharply distinguished 



180 


LANGUAGE 


from inanimate nouns and pronouns {the man^s, but 
of the house; his, but of it) and that, on the whole, it 
is only animate pronouns that distinguish pre-verbal 
and post-verbal forms are of the greatest theoretical 
interest. They show that, however the language strive 
for a more and more analytic form, it is by no means 
manifesting a drift toward the expression of ‘‘pure’’ 
relational concepts in the Indo-Chinese manner.^^ The 
insistence on the concreteness of the relational concepts 
is clearly stronger than the destructive power of the 
most sweeping and persistent drifts that we know of in 
the history and prehistory of our language. 

The drift toward the abolition of most case distinc- 
tions and the correlative drift toward position as an 
all-important grammatical method are accompanied, 
in a sense dominated, by the last of the three major 
drifts that I have referred to. This is the drift toward 
the invariable word. In analyzing the “whom” sen- 
tence I pointed out that the rhetorical emphasis natural 
to an interrogative pronoun lost something by its form 
variability {who, whose, whom). This striving for a 
simple, unnuanced correspondence between idea and 
word, as invariable as may be, is very strong in Eng- 
lish. It accounts for a number of tendencies which at 
first sight seem unconnected. Certain well-established 
forms, like the present third person singular -s of 
works or the plural -s of hooks, have resisted the 
drift to invariable words, possibly because they sym- 
bolize certain stronger form cravings that we do 
not yet fully understand. It is interesting to note 
that derivations that get away sufSciently from the 

22 They : them as an inanimate group may be looked upon as a 
kind of borrowing from the animate, to which, in feeling, it more 
properly belongs. 

23 See page 155. 



DRIFT 


181 


concrete notion of the radical word to exist as inde- 
pendent conceptual centers are not affected by this elu- 
sive drift. As soon as the derivation runs danger of 
being felt as a mere nuancing of, a finicky play on, the 
primary concept, it tends to be absorbed by the radical 
word, to disappear as such. English words crave spaces 
between them, they do not like to huddle in clusters 
of slightly divergent centers of meaning, each edging 
a little away from the rest. Goodness, a noun of qual- 
ity, almost a noun of relation, that takes its cue from 
the concrete idea of ‘'good’’ without necessarily predi- 
cating that quality (e.g., I do not think much of his 
goodness) is sufficiently spaced from good itself not to 
need fear absorption. Similarly, unable can hold its 
own against able because it destroys the latter's sphere 
of influence; unable is psychologically as distinct from 
able as is blundering or stupid. It is different with 
adverbs in 4y. These lean too heavily on their adjec- 
tives to have the kind of vitality that English demands 
of its words. Do it quickly! drags psychologically. 
The nuance expressed by quickly is too close to that of 
quicky their circles of concreteness are too nearly the 
same, for the two words to feel comfortable together. 
The adverbs in -ly are likely to go to the wall in the not 
too distant future for this very reason and in face of 
their obvious usefulness. Another instance of the sac- 
rifice of highly useful forms to this impatience of 
nuancing is the group whence, whither, hence, hither, 
thence, thither. They could not persist in live usage 
because they impinged too solidly upon the circles of 
meaning represented by the words where, here and there. 
In saying whither we feel too keenly that we repeat all 
of where. That we add to where an important nuance 
of direction irritates rather than satisfies. We prefer 



182 


LANGUAGE 


to merge the static and the directive {Where do you live? 
like Where are you going?) or, if need be, to overdo 
a little the concept of direction ( Where are you running 
M), 

Now it is highly symptomatic of the nature of the 
drift away from word clusters that we do not object to 
nuances as such, we object to having the nuances for^ 
mally earmarked for us. As a matter of fact our vo- 
cabulary is rich in near-synonyms and in groups of 
words that are psychologically near relatives, but these 
near-synonyms and these groups do not hang together 
by reason of etymology. We are satisfied with believe 
and credible just because they keep aloof from each 
other. Good and well go better together than quick and 
quickly. The English vocabulary is a rich medley be- 
cause each English word wants its own castle. Has 
English long been peculiarly receptive to foreign words 
because it craves the staking out of as many word areas 
as possible, or, conversely, has the mechanical imposi- 
tion of a flood of French and Latin loan-words, un- 
rooted in our earlier tradition, so dulled our feeling for 
the possibilities of our native resources that we are 
allowing these to shrink by default? I suspect that 
both propositions are true. Each feeds on the other. 
I do not think it likely, however, that the borrowings 
in English have been as mechanical and external a 
process as they are generally represented to have been. 
There was something about the English drift as early 
as the period following the Norman Conquest that wel- 
comed the new words. They were a compensation for 
something that was weakening within. 



VIII 


LANGUAGE AS A HISTORICAL PRODUCT: 

PHONETIC LAW 

I HAVE preferred to take up in some detail the analysis 
of our hesitation in using a locution like ‘"Whom did 
you see?’’ and to point to some of the English drifts, 
particular and general, that are implied by this hesi- 
tation than to discuss linguistic change in the abstract. 
What is true of the particular idiom that we started 
with is true of everything else in language. Nothing 
is perfectly static. Every word, every grammatical ele- 
ment, every locution, every sound and accent is a slowly 
changing configuration, molded by the invisible and im- 
personal drift that is the life of language. The evidence 
is overwhelming that this drift has a certain consistent 
direction. Its speed varies enormously according to cir- 
cumstances that it is not always easy to define. We have 
already seen that Lithuanian is to-day nearer its Indo- 
European prototype than was the hypothetical Germanic 
mother-tongue five hundred or a thousand years before 
Christ. German has moved more slowly than English; 
in some respects it stands roughly midway between Eng- 
lish and Anglo-Saxon, in others it has of course diverged 
from the Anglo-Saxon line. When I pointed out in the 
preceding chapter that dialects formed because a lan- 
guage broken up into local segments could not move 
along the same drift in all of these segments, I meant of 
course that it could not move along identically the same 
drift. The general drift of a language has its depths 

183 



184 


LANGUAGE 


At the surface the current is relatively fast. In certain 
features dialects drift apart rapidly. By that very fact 
these features betray themselves as less fundamental to 
the genius of the language than the more slowly modi- 
fiable features in which the dialects keep together long 
after they have grown to be mutually alien forms of 
speech. But this is not all. The momentum of the 
more fundamental, the pre-dialectic, drift is often such 
that languages long disconnected will pass through the 
same or strikingly similar phases. In many such cases 
it is perfectly clear that there could have been no dia- 
lectic interinfluencing. 

These parallelisms in drift may operate in the phonetic 
as well as in the morphological sphere, or they may 
affect both at the same time. Here is an interesting 
example. The English type of plural represented by 
foot: feet, mouse: mice is strictly parallel to the Ger- 
man Fuss: Fiisse, Maus: Mouse, One would be inclined 
to surmise that these dialectic forms go back to old 
Germanic or West-Germanic alternations of the same 
type. But the documentary evidence shows conclusively 
that there could have been no plurals of this type in 
primitive Germanic. There is no trace of such vocalic 
mutation (‘'umlaut’’) in Gothic, our most archaic Ger- 
manic language. More significant still is the fact that 
it does not appear in our oldest Old High German texts 
and begins to develop only at the very end of the Old 
High German period (circa 1000 a.d.). In the Middle 
High German period the mutation was carried through 
in all dialects. The typical Old High German forms 
are singular fuoss, plural fuossi; ^ singular mus, plural 

1 1 have changed the Old and Middle High German orthography 
slightly in order to bring it into accord with modern usage. These 
purely orthographical changes are immaterial. The u of mus is 
a long vowel, very nearly like the oo of English moose. 



185 


pAonetic law 

musL The corresponding Middle High German forms 
are fuoss, f Hesse; inus, miise. Modern German Fuss: 
Fusse, Mans: Manse are the regular developments of 
these medieval forms. Turning to Anglo-Saxon, we 
find that our modern English forms correspond to fot, 
fet; musy mysr These forms are already in use in the 
earliest English monuments that we possess, dating from 
the eighth century, and thus antedate the Middle High 
German forms by three hundred years or more. In 
other words, on this particular point it took German 
at least three hundred years to catch up with a phonetic- 
morphological drift ^ that had long been under way in 
English. The mere fact that the affected vowels of 
related words (Old High German uo, Anglo-Saxon o) 
are not alwqys the same shows that the affection took 
place at different periods in German and English.^ 
There was evidently some general tendency or group 
of tendencies at work in early Germanic, long before 
English and German had developed as such, that eventu- 
ally drove both of these dialects along closely parallel 
paths. 

How did such strikingly individual alternations as 
fot: fety fuoss: f Hesse develop? We have now reached 


2 The vowels of these four words are long; o as in rode, e like 
a of fade, ii like oo of brood, y like German ii. 

3 Or ratlier stage in a drift. 

4 Anglo-Saxon fet is “unrounded” from an older fot, which is 
phonetically related to fot precisely as is mys (i.e., miis) to mus. 
Middle High German tie (Modern German ii) did not develop from 
an “umlauted” prototype of Old High German uo and Anglo- 
iSaxon o, but was based directly on the dialectic uo. The unaf- 
fected prototype was long o. Had this been affected in the 
earliest Germanic or West-Germanic period, we should have had 
a pre-German alternation fot: fbti; this older 6 could not well 
have resulted in iie. Fortunately we do not need inferential evi- 
dence in this case, yet inferential comparative methods, if handled 
with care, may be exceedingly useful. They are indeed indis- 
pensable to the historian of language. 



186 


LANGUAGE 


what is probably the most central problem in linguistic 
history, gradual phonetic change. ‘"Phonetic laws^’ 
make up a large and fundamental share of the subject- 
matter of linguistics. Their influence reaches far be- 
yond the proper sphere of phonetics and invades that 
of morphology, as we shall see. A drift that begins as 
a slight phonetic readjustment or unsettlement may in 
the course of millennia bring about the most profound 
structural changes. The mere fact, for instance, that 
there is a growing tendency to throw the stress auto- 
matically on the first syllable of a word may eventually 
change the fundamental type of the language, reducing 
its final syllables to zero and driving it to the use of 
more and more analytical or symbolic ® methods. The 
English phonetic laws involved in the rise of the words 
foot, feet, mouse and mice from their early West-Ger- 
manic prototypes fot, foti, miis, musi^ may be briefly 
summarized as follows: 

1. In foti “feet^’ the long o was colored by the fol- 
lowing i to long 0, that is, o kept its lip-rounded quality 
and its middle height of tongue position but anticipated 
the front tongue position of the i; d is the resulting com- 
promise. This assimilatory change was regular, i.e., 
every accented long o followed by an i in the following 
syllable automatically developed to long d; hence totlii 
‘ ‘ teeth became tothi, fodian “to feed'’ became fodlian. 
At first there is no doubt the alternation between o and 
0 was not felt as intrinsically significant. It could only 
have been an unconscious mechanical adjustment such as 
may be observed in the speech of many to-day who mod- 
ify the “oo’’ sound of words like you and few in the 

5 Seo page 133. 

6 Primitive Germanic fot{s)yfotis!y mus,musiz; Indo-European 
pods,podes, mus, muses. The vowels of the first syllables are all 
long. 



PHONETIC LAW 


187 


direction of German ii without, however, actually de- 
parting far enough from the ‘"oo"’ vowel to prevent their 
acceptance of who and you as satisfactory rhyming 
words. Later on the quality of the o vowel must have 
departed widely enough from that of o to enable d to 
rise in consciousness ^ as a neatly distinct vowel. As 
soon as this happened, the expression of plurality in 
foti, tothi, and analogous words became symbolic and 
fusional, not merely fusional. 

2. In musi ‘^mice’^ the long u was colored by the 
following i to long iL This change also was regular; 
lusi ‘4ice” became liisi, kui ^^cows’^ became kui (later 
simplified to kii; still preserved as ki- in kine), fulian 
‘‘to make fouL^ became fiilian (still preserved as -file in 
defile). The psychology of this phonetic law is entirely 
analogous to that of 1. 

3. The old drift toward reducing final syllables, a 
rhythmic consequence of the strong Germanic stress on 
the first syllable, now manifested itself. The final 4, 
originally an important functional element, had long 
lost a great share of its value, transferred as that was 
to the symbolic vowel change {o: o ) . It had little power 
of resistance, therefore, to the drift. It became dulled 
to a colorless -e; foti became foie, 

4. The weak -e finally disappeared. Probably the 
forms fate and fot long coexisted as prosodic variants 
according to the rhythmic requirements of the sentence, 
very much as Filsse and Fiiss^ now coexist in German. 

5. The 0 of fot became “unrounded"’ to long e (our 
present a of fade). The alternation of fot: foti, transi- 
tionally fot: foti, fote, fot, now appears as fot: fet. 
Analogously, toth appears as teth, fodian as fedian, later 

7 Or in that unconscious sound patterning which is ever on the 
point of becoming conscious. See page 57. 



188 


LANGUAGE 


fedan. The new long e-vowel ‘‘fell together” with the 
older 6- vowel already existent (e.g., her “here,” he 
“he’^). Henceforward the two are merged and their 
later history is in common. Thus our present he has 
the same vowel as feet, teeth, and feed. In other words, 
the old sound pattern o, e, after an interim of o, b, e, 
reappeared as o, e, except that now the e had greater 
“weight” than before. 

6. Fot: fet, mus: mils (written mys) are the typical 
forms of Anglo-Saxon literature. At the very end of 
the Anglo-Saxon period, say about 1050 to 1100 a.d., 
the ii, whether long or short, became unrounded to i. 
Mys was then pronounced mis with long i (rhyming with 
present niece). The change is analogous to 5, but takes 
place several centuries later. 

7. In Chaucer’s day (circa 1350-1400 a.d.) the forms 
were still fot: fet (written foot, feet) and mvs: mis 
(written very variably, but moiis, rnyse are typical). 
About 1500 all the long i-vowels, whether original (as 
in write, ride, wine) or unrounded from Anglo-Saxon 
il (as in hide, bride, mice, defile), became diphthongized 
to ei (i.e., e of 7nct -|- short i). Shakespeare pronounced 
mice as meis (almost the same as the present Cockney 
pronunciation of mace). 

8. About the same time the long ii- vowels were diph- 
thongized to ou (i.e., 0 of present Scotch not -(- n of full). 
The Chaucerian mus: 7nis now appears as the Shake- 
spearean mous: meis. This change may have mani- 
fested itself somewhat later than 7 ; all English dialects 
have diphthongized old Germanic long but the long 
undiphthongized u is still preserved in Lowland Scotch, 
in which house and mouse rhyme with our loose. 7 
and 8 are analogous developments, as were 5 and 6; 8 

8 As have most Dutch and German dialects. 



PHONETIC LAW 189 

apparently lags behind 7 as 6, centuries earlier, lagged 
behind 7. 

9. Some time before 1550 the long e of fet (written 
feet) took the position that had been vacated by the old 
long i, now diphthongized (see 7), i.e., c took the higher 
tongue position of i. Our (and Shakespeare’s) ‘Hong 
e'^ is, then, phonetically the same as the old long i. Feet 
now rhymed with the old write and the present heat. 

10. About the same time the long o of fot (written 

foot) took the position tliat had been vacated by the old 
long n, now diphthongized (see 8), i.e., o took the higher 
tongue position of a. Our (and Shakespeare’s) “long 
00 ” is phonetically the same as the old long a. Foot now 
rhymed Avith the old out and the present hoot. To sum- 
marize 7 to 10, Shakespeare pronounced moiis, fit, 

fut, of which mcis and mous would affect our ears as a 
rather “mincing” rendering of our present mice and 
mouse y fit would sound practically identical with (but 
probably a bit more “drawled” than) our present feet, 
while foot, rhyming with hoot, would now be set down 
as “broad Scotch.” 

11. Gradually the first vowel of the diphthong in 
mice (see 7) was retracted and loAvered in position. The 
resulting diphthong now varies in different English dia- 
lects, but ai (i.e., a of father, but shorter, + short i) 
may be taken as a fairly accurate rendering of its aver- 
age quality/’ 'What we now call the “long (of words 
like ride, hite, ynice) is, of course, an Gi-diphthong. 
Mice is now pronounced mais. 

12. Analogously to 11, the first vowel of the diph- 
thong in mouse (see 8) was unrounded and lowered in 
position. The resulting diphthong may be phonetically 
rendered an, though it too varies considerably accord- 


oAt least in America. 



190 


LANGUAGE 


ing to dialect. Mouse, then, is now pronounced mans. 

13. The vowel of foot (see 10) became ‘‘open’’ in 
quality and shorter in quantity, i.e., it fell together with 
the old short w-vowel of words like full, wolf, wool. 
This change has taken place in a number of words with 
an originally long u (Chaucerian long close o), such 
as forsook, hook, hook, look, rook, shook, all of which 
formerly had the vowel of hoot. The older vowel, how- 
ever, is still preserved in most words of this class, such 
as fool, moon, spool, stoop. It is highly significant of 
the nature of the slow spread of a ''phonetic law’’ that 
there is local vacillation at present in several words. 
One hears roof, soot, and hoop, for instance, both with 
the "long” vowel of hoot and the "short” of foot. It 
is impossible now, in other words, to state in a definitive 
manner what is the "phonetic law” that regulated the 
change of the older foot (rhyming with hoot) to the 
present foot. We know that there is a strong drift 
towards the short, open vowel of foot, but whether or 
not all the old "long oo” words will eventually be af- 
fected we cannot presume to say. If they all, or prac- 
tically all, are taken by the drift, phonetic law 13 will 
be as " regular, ’ ’ as sweeping, as most of the twelve that 
have preceded it. If not, it may eventually be possible, 
if past experience is a safe guide, to show that the modi- 
fied words form a natural phonetic group, that is, that 
the "law” will have operated under certain definable 
limiting conditions, e.g., that all words ending in a voice- 
less consonant (such as p, t, k, f) were affected (e.g., 
hoof, foot, look, roof), but that all words ending in the 
oo-vowel or in a voiced consonant remained unaffected 
(e.g., do, food, move, fool). Whatever the upshot, we 
may be reasonably certain that when the "phonetic 
law” has run its course, the distribution of "long” and 



PHONETIC LAW 


191 


‘‘short’’ vowels in the old oo-words will not seem quite 
as erratic as at the present transitional moment.®®' We 
learn, incidentally, the fundamental fact that phonetic 
laws do not work with spontaneous automatism, that 
they are simply a formula for a consummated drift that 
sets in at a psychologically exposed point and gradually 
worms its way through a gamut of phonetically 
analogous forms. 

It will be instructive to set down a table of form 
sequences, a kind of gross history of the words foot, feet, 
mouse, mice for the last 1500 years : 

I. fot: foil; mus: musi (West Germanic) 

II. fot: foti; mus: rniisi 

III. fot: fote; mus: milse 

IV. fot: fot; mus: mils 

V. fot: fet; mus: mils (Anglo-Saxon) 

VI. fot: fet; mus: mis (Chaucer) 

VII. fot: fet; mous: meis 

VIII. fut (rhymes with hoot) : fit; mous: meis (Shakespeare) 

IX. fut: fit; maus: mais 

X. fut (rhymes with put) : fit; maus: mais (English of 
1900) 

It will not be necessary to list the phonetic laws that 
gradually differentiated the modern German equiva- 
lents of the original West Germanic forms from their 
English cognates. The following table gives a rough 
idea of the form sequences in German : 

oa It is possible that other than purely phonetic factors are also 
at work in the history of these vowels. 

10 The orthography is roughly phonetic. Pronounce all ac- 
cented vowels long except where otherwise indicated, unaccented 
vowels short; give continental values to vowels, not present Eng- 
lish ones. 

11 After I. the numbers are not meant to correspond chronologi- 
cally to those of the English table. The orthography is again 
roughly phonetic. 



192 


LANGUAGE 


L fot: foti; mus: musi (West Germanic) 

IL foss:'^^ fossi; mus: musi 

III. fuoss: fuossi; mus: musi (Old High German) 

IV. fuoss: fiiessi; mus: musi 

V. fuoss: fiiesse; mus: muse (Middle High German) 

VI. fuoss: fiiesse; mus: miize'^^ 

VII. fuos: fiiese; mus: milze 

VIII. fuos: fiiese; mous: moiize 
IX. fus: fiise; mous: moiize (Luther) 

X. fus: fuse; mans: moizc (German of 1900) 

We cannot even begin to ferret out and discuss all 
the psychological problems that are concealed behind 
these bland tables. Their general parallelism is obvious. 
Indeed we might say that to-day the English and Ger- 
man forms resemble each other more than docs either 
set the West Germanic prototypes from which each is 
independently derived. Each table illustrates the tend- 
ency to reduction of unaccented syllables, the vocalic 
modification of the radical element under the influence 
of the following vowel, the rise in tongue position of the 
long middle vowels (English o to Uy e to i; German o to 
uo to Uy He to il), the diphthongizing of the old high 
vowels (English i to ei to ai; English and German n to 

12 I use ss to indicate a peculiar long, voiceless s-sound that 
was etymologically and phonetically distinct from tiie old Ger- 
manic s. It always goes back to an old t. In the old sources it 
is generally written as a variant of z, though it is not to be con- 
fused with the modern German z (=ts). It was probably a 
dental ( lisped ) s. 

13 Z is to be understood as French or English z, not in its 
German use. Strictly speaking, this “z” (intervocalic -s-) was 
not voiced but was a soft voiceless sound, a sibilant intermediate 
between our s and In modern North German it has become 
voiced to z. It is important not to confouna this s — z with the 
voiceless intervocalic s that soon arose from the older lisped ss. 
In Modern German (aside from certain dialects), old s and ss are 
not now differentiated when final (^faus and Fuss have identical 
sibilants), but can still be distinguished as voiced and voice- 
less s between vowels (Mduse and Fusse). 



PHONETIC LAW 


193 


OIL to an; German il to dii to oi) . These dialectic par- 
allels cannot be accidental. They are rooted in a com- 
mon, pre-dialectic drift. 

V'Phonetic changes are ''regular.” All but one (Eng- 
lish table, X.), and that as yet uncompleted, of the 
particular phonetic laws represented in our tables affect 
all example's of the sound in question or, if the phonetic 
change is conditional, all examples of the same sound 
that are analogously circumstanced.^^ An example of 
the first type of change is the passage in English of all 
old long i-vovrels to diphthongal ai via ei. The passage 
could hardly have been sudden or automatic, but it was 
rapid enough to prevent an irregularity of development 
due to cross drifts. The second type of change is illus- 
trated in the development of Anglo-Saxon long o to long 
e, via Of under the influence of a following i. In the 
first case we may say that an mechanically replaced long 
My in the second that the old long o “split” into two 
sounds — long o, eventually u, and long e, eventually i. 
The former type of change did no violence to the old 
phonetic pattern, the formal distribution of sounds into 
groups ; the latter type rearranged the pattern some- 
what. If neither of the two sounds into which an old 
one “splits” is a new sound, it means that there has 
been a phonetic leveling, that two groups of words, each 
with a distinct sound or sound combination, have fallen 
together into one group. This kind of leveling is quite 
frequent in the history of language. In English, for 

14 In practice phonetic laws have their exceptions, but more 
intensive study almost invariably shows that these exceptions 
are more apparent than real. They are generally due to the dis- 
turbing influence of morpliological groupings or to special psycho- 
logical reasons which inhibit the normal progress of the phonetic 
drift. It is remarkable with how few exceptions one need operate 
in linguistic history, aside from “analogical leveling^’ (morpho- 
logical replacement ) . 



194 


LANGUAGE 


instance, we have seen that all the old long -w-vowels, 
after they had become unrounded, were indistinguishable 
from the ma^s of long i-vowels. This meant that the 
long ^-vowel became a more heavily weighted point of 
the phonetic pattern than before. It is curious to ob- 
serve how often languages have striven to drive orig- 
inally distinct sounds into certain favorite positions, 
regardless of resulting confusions.^® In Modern Greek, 
for instance, the vowel i is the historical resultant of no 
less than ten etymologically distinct vowels (long and 
short) and diphthongs of the classical speech of Athens. 
There is, then, good evidence to show that there are 
general phonetic drifts toward particular sounds. 

More often the phonetic drift is of a more general 
character. It is not so much a movement toward a par- 
ticular set of sounds as toward particular types of articu- 
lation. The vowels tend to become higher or lower, the 
diphthongs tend to coalesce into monophthongs, the voice- 
less consonants tend to become voiced, stops tend to 
become spirants. As a matter of fact, practically all 
the phonetic laws enumerated in the two tables are but 
specific instances of such far-reaching phonetic drifts. 
The raising of English long o to u and of long e to iy 
for instance, was part of a general tendency to raise the 
position of the long vowels, just as the change of t to ss 
in Old High German was part of a general tendency to 
make voiceless spirants of the old voiceless stopped con- 
sonants. A single sound change, even if there is no 
phonetic leveling, generally threatens to upset the old 
phonetic pattern because it brings about a disharmony 
in the grouping of sounds. To reestablish the old pattern 


15 These confusions are more theoretical than real, however. 
A language has countless methods of avoiding practical ambigui- 
ties. 



PHONETIC LAW 


195 


without going back on the drift the only possible method 
is to have the other sounds of the series shift in analogous 
fashion. If, for some reason or other, p becomes shifted 
to its voiced correspondent h, the old series p, t, k ap- 
pears in the unsymmetrical form t, k. Such a series 
is, in phonetic effect, not the equivalent of the bid series, 
however it may answer to it in etymology. The gen- 
eral phonetic pattern is impaired to that extent. But 
if t and k are also shifted to their voiced correspondents 
d and y, the old series is reestablished in a new form: 

d, g. The pattern as such is preserved, or restored. 
Provided that the new series h, d, g does not become con- 
fused with an old series h, d, g of distinct historical 
antecedents. If there is no such older series, the crea- 
tion of a b, dy g series causes no difficulties. If there is, 
the old patterning of sounds can be kept intact only by 
shifting the old b, dy g .sounds in some way. They may 
become aspirated to b/i, d/i, gh or spirantized or nasalized 
or they may develop any other peculiarity that keeps 
them intact as a series and serves to differentiate them 
from other series. And this sort of shifting about with- 
out loss of pattern, or with a minimum loss of it, is 
probably the most important tendency in the history of 
speech sounds. Phonetic leveling and ^'splitting’’ coun- 
teract it to some extent but, on the whole, it remains the 
central unconscious regulator of the course and speed 
of sound changes. 

The desire to hold on to a pattern, the tendency to 
‘‘correct’' a disturbance by an elaborate chain of sup- 
plementary changes, often spread over centuries or even 
millennia— these psychic undercurrents of language are 
exceedingly difficult to understand in terms of individual 
psychology, though there can be no denial of their his- 
torical reality. What is the primary cause of the un- 



196 


LANGUAGE 


settling of a phonetic pattern and what is the cumulative 
force that selects these or those particular variations of 
the individual on which to float the pattern readjust- 
ments we hardly know. Many linguistic students have 
made the fatal error of thinking of sound change as a 
quasi-physiological instead of as a strictly psychological 
phenomenon, or they have tried to dispose of the problem 
by bandying such catchwords as “the tendency to in- 
creased ease of articulation’^ or “the cumulative result 
of faulty perception” (on the part of children, say, in 
learning to speak). These easy explanations will not 
do. “Ease of articulation” may enter in as a factor, 
but it is a rather subjective concept at best. Indians 
find hopelessly difficult sounds and sound combinations 
that are simple to us ; one language encourages a phonetic 
drift that another does everything to fight. “Faulty 
perception” does not explain that impressive drift in 
speech sounds which I have insisted u])on. It is much 
better to admit that we do not yet understand the pri- 
mary cause or causes of the slow drift in phonetics, 
though we can frequently point to contributing factors. 
It is likely tliat we shall not advance seriously until we 
study the intuitional bases of speech. How can we un- 
derstand the nature of the drift that frays and reforms 
phonetic patterns when we have never thought of study- 
ing sound patterning as such and the “weights” and 
psychic relations of the single elements (the individual 
sounds) in these patterns? 

Every linguist knows that phonetic change is fre- 
quently followed by morphological rearrangements, but 
he is apt to assume that morphology exercises little or 
no influence on the course of phonetic history. I am 
inclined to believe that our present tendency to 
isolate phonetics and grammar as mutually irrelevant 



PHONETIC LAW 


197 


linguistic provinces is unfortunate. There are likely to 
be fundamental relations between them and their re- 
spective histories that we do not yet fully grasp. After 
all, if speech sounds exist merely because they are the 
symbolic carriers of significant concepts and groupings 
of concepts, why may not a strong drift or a permanent 
feature in the conceptual sphere exercise a furthering 
or retarding influence on the phonetic drift? I believe 
that such influences may be demonstrated and that they 
deserve far more careful study than they have received. 

This brings us back to our unanswered question; How 
is it that both English and German developed the curi- 
ous alternation of unmodified vowel in the singular 
{foot, Fuss) and modified vowel in the plural {feet, 
Fiissc) ? Was the pre-Anglo-Saxon alternation of fot 
and foti an absolutely mechanical matter, without other 
than incidental morphological interest? It is always 
so represented, and, indeed, all the external facts sup- 
port such a view. The change from o to d, later e, is by 
no means peculiar to the plural. It is found also in the 
dative singular {fet), for it too goes back to an older 
foti. Moreover, fet of the plural applies only to the 
nominative and accusative; the genitive has fota, the 
dative fotum. Only centuries later was the alternation 
of 0 and e reinterpreted as a means of distinguishing 
number; o was generalized for the singular, e for the 
plural. Only when this reassortment of forms took 
place was the modern symbolic value of the foot: feet 
alternation clearly established. Again, we must not for- 
get that 0 was modified to d (c) in all manner of other 
grammatical and derivative formations. Thus, a pre- 
Anglo-Saxon hohan (later ho 7 i) ''to hang’’ corresponded 

10 A type of adjustment generally referred to as “analogical 
leveling/’ 



198 


LANGUAGE 


to a lidhith, heliith (later JiehtJi) ^Giangs’^; to dom 
^'dooin/' hlod ‘'blood/’ and fod "food’’ corresponded 
the verbal derivatives dumian (later deman) "to deem,” 
bloduni (later hJedan) "to bleed,” and fddiaii (later 
fedan) "to feed.” All this seems to point to the purely 
mechanical nature of the modification of o to d to e. So 
many unrelated functions were ultimately served by the 
vocalic change that we cannot beli(‘ve that it was mo- 
tivated by any one of them. 

The German facts are entirely analogous. Only later 
in the history of the language was the vocalic alterna- 
tion made significant for number. And yet consider 
the following facts. The change of foti to fbti ante- 
dated that of foil to fotCy fdt. This may be looked upon 
as a "lucky accident,” for if foti had become fotCy fot 
before the 4 had had the chance to (avert a relroactive 
influence on tlie o, there would have horn no difference 
between the singular and the plural. This would have 
been anomalous in Anglo-Saxon for a masculine noun. 
But was the sequence of phonetic changes an "acci- 
dent”? Consider two further facts. All the Germanic 
languages were familiar with vocalics change as pos- 
sessed of functional significance. Alternations like sing, 
sangy sung (Anglo-Saxon slngaiiy soug, sungen) were 
ingrained in the linguistic consciousness. Further, the 
tendency toward the weakening of final syllables was 
very strong even then and had been manifesting itself 
in one way and another for centuries. I believe that 
these further facts help us to understand the actual se- 
quence of phonetic changes. We may go so far as to 
say that the o (and n) could afford to stay the change 
to b (and I/) until the destructive drift had advaneed 
to the point where failure to modify the vowel would 
soon result in morphological embarrassment. At a cer- 



PHONETIC LAW 


199> 


tain moment the 4 ending of the plural (and analogous 
endings with i in other formations) was felt to be too 
weak to quite bear its functional burden. The uncon- 
scious Anglo-Saxon mind, if I may be allowed a some- 
what summary way of putting the complex facts, was 
glad of the opportunity afforded by certain individual 
variations, until then automatically canceled out, to 
have some share of the burden thrown on them. These 
particular variations won through because they so beau- 
tifully allowed the general phonetic drift to take its 
course without unsettling the morphological contours of 
the language. And the presence of symbolic variation 
{sing, sang, sung) acted as an attracting force on the 
rise of a new variation of similar character. All these 
factors wene equally true of the German vocalic shift. 
Owing to the fact that the destructive phonetic drift was 
proceeding at a slower rate in German than in English, 
the preservative change of no to iic {u to il) did not need 
to set in until 300 years or more after the analogous Eng- 
lish change. Nor did it. And this is to my mind a 
highly significant fact. Phonetic changes may some- 
times be unconsciously encouraged in order to keep in- 
tact the psychological spaces between words and vmrd 
forms. The general drift seizes upon those individual 
sound variations that help to preserve the morphological 
balance or to lead to the new balance that the language 
is giving for. 

V/1 would suggest, then, that phonetic change is com- 
pacted of at least three basic strands: (1) A general 
drift in one direction, concerning the nature of which 
we know almost nothing but which may be suspected to 
be of prevailingly dynamic character (tendencies, e.g., 
to greater or less stress, greater or less voicing of ele- 
ments) ; (2) A readjusting tendency which aims to pre- 



200 


LANGUAGE 


serve or restore the fundamental phonetic pattern of the 
language; (3) A preservative tendency which sets in 
when a too serious morphological unsettlement is threat- 
ened by the main drift. I do not imagine for a moment 
that it is always possible to separate these strands or 
that this purely schematic statement does justice to the 
complex forces that guide the phonetic drift. The 
phonetic pattern of a language is not invariable, but 
it changes far less readily than the sounds that compose 
it. Every phonetic element that it possesses may change 
radically and yet the pattern remain unaffected. It 
would be absurd to claim that our present English pat- 
tern is identical with the old Indo-European one, yet it 
is impressive to note that even at this late day the Eng- 
lish series of initial consonants: 

p t k 
h d g 
f th h 

corresponds point for point to the Sanskrit series : 

b d g 
hh dh gh 
p t k 

The relation between phonetic pattern and individual 
sound is roughly parallel to that which obtains between 
the morphologic type of a language and one of its spe- 
cific morphological features. Both phonetic pattern and 
fundamental type are exceedingly conservative, all su- 
perficial appearances to the contrary notwithstanding. 
Which is more so we cannot say. I suspect that they 
hang together in a way that we cannot at present quite 
understand. 

If all the phonetic changes brought about by the 
phonetic drift were allowed to stand, it is probable that 



PHONETIC LAW 


201 


most languages would present such irregularities of mor- 
phological contour as to lose touch with their formal 
ground-plan. Sound changes work mechanically. Hence 
they are likely to affect a whole morphological group 
here — this does not matter — , only part of a morphologi- 
cal group there — and this may be disturbing. Thus, 
the old Anglo-Saxon paradigm : 


Sing. 

N. Ac. fot 

G. fotes 

D. fet (older foti) 


Plur. 

fet (older foti) 

fota 

fotum 


could not long stand unmodified. The o — e alternation 
was welcome in so far as it roughly distinguished the 
singular from the plural. The dative singular fet, how- 
ever, though justified historically, was soon felt to be 
an intrusive feature. The analogy of simpler and more 
numerously represented paradigms created the form fote 
(compare, e.g., fisc ‘'fish,’’ dative singular fisce). Fet 
as a dative becomes obsolete. The singular now had o 
throughout. But this very fact made the genitive and 
dative o-forms of the plural seem out of place. The 
nominative and accusative fet was naturally far more 
frequently in use than were the corresponding forms of 
the genitive and dative. These, in the end, could not 
but follow the analogy of fet. At the very beginning 
of the Middle English period, therefore, we find that the 
old paradigm has yielded to a more regular one : 



Sing. 

Plur. 

N. Ac. 

*fot 

*fet 

G. 

* fotes 

fete 

D. 

fote 

feten 


The starred forms are the old nucleus around which the 
new paradigm is built. The unstarred forms are not 



202 


LANGUAGE 


genealogical kin of their formal prototypes. They are 
analogical replacements. 

The history of the English language teems with such 
levelings or extensions. Elder and eldest were at one 
time the only possible comparative and superlative forms 
of old (compare German alt, alter, der dlteste; the vowel 
following the old-, alt- was originally an i, which modified 
the quality of the stem vowel). The general analogy of 
the vast majority of English adjectives, however, has 
caused the replacement of the forms elder and eldest by 
the forms with unmodified vowel, older and oldest. Elder 
and eldest survive only as somewhat archaic terms for 
the older and oldest brother or sister. This illustrates 
the tendency for words that are psychologically discon- 
nected from their etymological or formal group to pre- 
serve traces of phonetic laws that have otherwise left no 
recognizable trace or to preserve a vestige of a morpho- 
logical process that has long lost its vitality. A careful 
study of these survivals or atrophied forms is not without 
value for the reconstruction of the earlier history of a 
language or for suggestive hints as to its remoter affilia- 
tions. 

Analogy may not only refashion forms within the con- 
fines of a related cluster of forms (a ‘‘paradigm’^) but 
may extend its influence far beyond. Of a number of 
functionally equivalent elements, for instance, only one 
may survive, the rest yielding to its constantly widening 
influence. This is what happened with the English -s 
plural. Originally confined to a particular class of mas- 
culines, though an important class, the -s plural was 
gradually generalized for all nouns but a mere handful 
that still illustrate plural types now all but extinct 
{foot: feet, goose: geese, iootli: teeth, mouse: mice, louse: 
lice; ox: oxen; child: children ; slicfi): sheep, deer: deer). 



PHONETIC LAW 


203 


Thus analogy not only regularizes irregularities that 
have come in the wake of phonetic processes but intro- 
duces disturbances, generally in favor of greater sim- 
plicity or regularity, in a long established system of 
forms. These analogical adjustments are practically al- 
ways symptoms of the general morphological drift of 
the language. 

A morphological feature that appears as the incidental 
consequence of a phonetic process, like the English plural 
with modified vowel, may spread by analogy no less read- 
ily than old features that owe their origin to other than 
phonetic causes. Once the 6-vowel of Middle English 
fet had become confined to the plural, there was no the- 
oretical reason why alternations of the type fot: fet and 
mats: mis might not have become established as a pro- 
ductive type of number distinction in the noun. As a 
matter of fact, it did not so become established. The 
fot: fet type of plural secured but a momentary foothold. 
It was swept into being by one of the surface drifts of 
the language, to be swept aside in the Middle English 
period by the more powerful drift toward the use of 
simple distinctive forms. It was too late in the day for 
our language to be seriously interested in such pretty 
symbolisms as foot: feet. What examples of the type 
arose legitimately, in other words via purely phonetic 
processes, were tolerated for a time, but the type as such 
never had a serious future. 

It was different in German. The whole series of 
phonetic changes comprised under the term “ umlaut, 
of which w: il and oai: oi (widtten du) are but specific 
examples, struck the German language at a time when 
the general drift to morphological simplification was not 
so strong but that the resulting formal types (e.g.. Fuss: 
Filsse; fallen ‘ ' to fall ' ' : fallen ^ ' to fell ^ ' ; Horn ^ ^ horn ’ * : 



204 


LANGUAGE 


Gehorne ‘‘group of horns^’; Hems “house’’: Hduslein 
“little house”) could keep themselves intact and even 
extend to forms that did not legitimately come within 
their sphere of influence. “Umlaut” is still a very live 
symbolic process in German, possibly more alive to-day 
than in medieval times. Such analogical plurals as Baum 
“tree”: B'dume (contrast Middle High German houm: 
ioume) and derivatives as lachen “to laugh”: Geldcliter 
“laughter” (contrast Middle High German gelacli) show 
that vocalic mutation has won through to the status of 
a productive morphologic process. Some of the dialects 
have even gone further than standard German, at least 
in certain respects. In Yiddish, for instance, “um- 
laut” plurals have been formed where there are no 
Middle High German prototypes or modern literary par- 
allels, e.g., tog “day”: teg “days” (but German Tag: 
Tage) on the analogy of gast “guest”: gest “guests” 
(German Gast: Gdste), sliucJi^^ “shoe”: shicli “shoes” 
(but German Schuli: Schulte) on the analogy of fits 
“foot”: fis “feet.” It is possible that “umlaut” will 
run its course and cease to operate as a live functional 
process in German, but that time is still distant. Mean- 
while all consciousness of the merely phonetic nature of 
“umlaut” vanished centuries ago. It is now a strictly 
morphological process, not in the least a mechanical 
phonetic adjustment. We have in it a splendid example 
of how a simple phonetic law, meaningless in itself, may 
eventually color or transform large reaches of the mor- 
phology of a language. 

17 Isolated from other German dialects in the late fifteenth 
and early sixteenth centuries. It is therefore a good test for 
gauging the strength of the tendency to “umlaut,” particularly as 
it has developed a strong drift towards analytic methods, 

18 Ch as in German Buck, 



IX 


HOW LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 

Languages, like cultures, are rarely sufficient unto 
themselves. The necessities of intercourse bring the 
speakers of one language into direct or indirect contact 
with those of neighboring or culturally dominant lan- 
guages. The intercourse may be friendly or hostile. It 
may move on the humdrum plane of business and trade 
relations or it may consist of a borrowing or interchange 
of spiritual goods — art, science, religion. It would be 
difficult to point to a completely isolated language or 
dialect, least of all among the primitive peoples. The 
tribe is often so small that intermarriages with alien 
tribes that speak other dialects or even totally unrelated 
languages are not uncommon. It may even be doubted 
whether intermarriage, intertribal trade, and general 
cultural interchanges are not of greater relative sig- 
nificance on primitive levels than on our own. What- 
ever the degree or nature of contact between neighboring 
peoples, it is generally sufficient to lead to some kind of 
linguistic interinfiuencing. Frequently the influence 
runs heavily in one direction. The language of a people 
that is looked upon as a center of culture is naturally 
far more likely to exert an appreciable influence on other 
languages spoken in its vicinity than to be influenced by 
them. Chinese has flooded the vocabularies of Corean, 
Japanese, and Annamite for centuries, but has received 
nothing in return. In the western Europe of medieval 
and modern times French has exercised a similar, though 

205 



206 


LANGUAGE 


probably a less overwhelming, influence. English bor- 
rowed an immense number of words from the French of 
the Norman invaders, later also from the court French 
of Isle de France, appropriated a certain number of 
aflSxed elements of derivational value (e.g., -ess of prin- 
cess, -ard of drunkard, -ty of royalty), may have been 
somewhat stimulated in its general analytic drift by 
contact with French,^ and even allowed French to modify 
its phonetic pattern slightly (e.g., initial v and j in words 
like veal and judge; in words of Anglo-Saxon origin v 
and j can only occur after vowels, e.g., over, hedge) . But 
English has exerted practically no influence on French. 

The simplest kind of influence that one language may 
exert on another is the ^‘borrowing’’ of words. When 
there is cultural borrowing there is always the likelihood 
that the associated words may be borrowed too. When 
the early Germanic peoples of northern Europe first 
learned of wine-culture and of paved streets from their 
commercial or warlike contact with the Komans, it was 
only natural that they should adopt the Latin words 
for the strange beverage {vinum, English wine, German 
Wein) and the unfamiliar type of road {strata [via], 
English street, German Strasse), Later, when Chris- 
tianity was introduced into England, a number of asso- 
ciated words, such as bishop and angel, found their 
way into English. And so the process has continued un- 
interruptedly down to the present day, each cultural 
wave bringing to the language a new deposit of loan- 
words. The careful study of such loan-words consti- 
tutes an interesting commentary on the history of cul- 
ture. One can almost estimate the role which various 

1 The earlier students of English, however, grossly exaggerated 
the general “disintegrating” effect of French on middle English. 
English was moving fast toward a more analytic structure long 
before the French influence set in. 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 207 

peoples have played in the development and spread of 
cultural ideas by taking note of the extent to which 
their vocabularies have filtered into those of other peo- 
ples. When we realize that an educated Japanese can 
hardly frame a single literary sentence without the use 
of Chinese resources, that to this day Siamese and Bur- 
mese and Cambodgian bear the unmistakable imprint of 
the Sanskrit and Pali that came in with Hindu Bud- 
dhism centuries ago, or that whether we argue for or 
against the teaching of Latin and Greek our argument 
is sure to be studded with words that have come to us 
from Rome and Athens, we get some inkling of what 
early Chinese culture and Buddhism and classical Medi- 
terranean civilization have meant in the world’s history. 
There are just five languages that have had an over- 
whelming significance as carriers of culture. They are 
classical Chinese, Sanskrit, Arabic, Greek, and Latin. 
In comparison with these even such culturally important 
languages as Hebrew and French sink into a secondary 
position. It is a little disappointing to learn that the 
general cultural influence of English has so far been all 
but negligible. The English language itself is spread- 
ing because the English have colonized immense terri- 
tories. But there is nothing to show that it is any- 
where entering into the lexical heart of other languages 
as French has colored the English complexion or as 
Arabic has permeated Persian and Turkish. This fact 
alone is significant of the power of nationalism, cultural 
as well as political, during the last century. There are 
now psychological resistances to borrowing, or rather 
to new sources of borrowing,^ that were not greatly alive 
in the Middle Ages or during the Renaissance. 

2 For we still name onr new scientific instruments and patent 
medicines from Greek and Latin. 



208 


LANGUAGE 


Are there resistances of a more intimate nature to the 
borrowing of words? It is generally assumed that the 
nature and extent of borrowing depend entirely on the 
historical facts of culture relation; that if German, for 
instance, has borrowed less copiously than English from 
Latin and French it is only because Germany has had 
less intimate relations than England with the culture 
spheres of classical Kome and France. This is true to 
a considerable extent, but it is not the whole truth. We 
must not exaggerate the physical importance of the Nor- 
man invasion nor underrate the significance of the fact 
that Germany’s central geographical position made it 
peculiarly sensitive to French influences all through the 
Middle Ages, to humanistic influences in the latter fif- 
teenth and early sixteenth centuries, and again to the 
powerful French influences of the seventeenth and eight- 
eenth centuries. It seems very probable that the psycho- 
logical attitude of the borrowing language itself towards 
linguistic material has much to do with its receptivity 
to foreign words. English has long been striving for 
the completely unified, unanalyzed word, regardless of 
whether it is monosyllabic or polysyllabic. Such words 
as credible, certitude, intangible are entirely welcome in 
English because each represents a unitary, well-nuanced 
idea and because their formal analysis {cred-ible, cert- 
itude, in-tang-ible) is not a necessary act of the uncon- 
scious mind {cred-, cert-, and tang- have no real exist- 
ence in English comparable to that of good- in goodness). 
A word like intangible, once it is acclimated, is nearly 
as simple a psychological entity as any radical mono- 
syllable (say vague, thin, grasp). In German, however, 
polysyllabic words strive to analyze themselves into 
significant elements. Hence vast numbers of French 
and Latin words, borrowed at the height of certain cul- 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 209 


tural influences, could not maintain themselves in the 
language. Latin-German words like kredibel ''credi- 
ble’^ and French-German words like reussieren **to suc- 
ceed” offered nothing that the unconscious mind could 
assimilate to its customary method of feeling and han- 
dling words. It is as though this unconscious mind said : 
"I am perfectly willing to accept kredibel if you will 
just tell me what you mean by kred-/^ Hence German 
has generally found it easier to create new words out of 
its own resources, as the necessity for them arose. 

The psychological contrast between English and Ger- 
man as regards the treatment of foreign material is a 
contrast that may be studied in all parts of the world. 
The Athabaskan languages of America are spoken by 
peoples that 'have had astonishingly varied cultural con- 
tacts, yet nowhere do we find that an Athabaskan dia- 
lect has borrowed at all freely ^ from a neighboring lan- 
guage. These languages have always found it easier 
to create new words by compounding afresh elements 
ready to hand. They have for this reason been highly 
resistant to receiving the linguistic impress of the ex- 
ternal cultural experiences of their speakers. Cam- 
bodgian and Tibetan offer a highly instructive contrast 
in their reaction to Sanskrit influence. Both are ana- 
lytic languages, each totally different from the highly- 
wrought, inflective language of India. Cambodgian is 
isolating, but, unlike Chinese, it contains many poly- 
syllabic words whose etymological analysis does not mat- 
ter. Like English, therefore, in its relation to French 
and Latin, it welcomed immense numbers of Sanskrit 
loan-words, many of which are in common use to-day. 
There was no psychological resistance to them. Classi- 
cal Tibetan literature was a slavish adaptation of Hindi? 

8 One might all but say, “has borrowed at all.” 



210 


LANGUAGE 


Buddhist literature and nowhere has Buddhism im- 
planted itself more firmly than in Tibet, yet it is strange 
how few Sanskrit words have found their way into the 
language. Tibetan was highly resistant to the poly- 
syllabic words of Sanskrit because they could not auto- 
matically fall into significant syllables, as they should 
have in order to satisfy the Tibetan feeling for form. 
Tibetan was therefore driven to translating the great 
majority of these Sanskrit words into native equivalents. 
The Tibetan craving for form was satisfied, though the 
literally translated foreign terms must often have done 
violence to genuine Tibetan idiom. Even the proper 
names of the Sanskrit originals were carefully trans- 
lated, element for element, into Tibetan; e.g., Surya- 
garhka ‘‘Sun-bosomed’^ was carefully Tibetanized into 
Nyi-mai snying-po “Sun-of heart-the, the heart (or es- 
sence) of the sun.” The study of how a language reacts 
to the presence of foreign words — rejecting them, trans- 
lating them, or freely accepting them — may throw much 
valuable light on its innate formal tendencies. 

The borrowing of foreign words always entails their 
phonetic modification. There are sure to be foreign 
sounds or accentual peculiarities that do not fit the native 
phonetic habits. They are then so changed as to do as 
little violence as possible to these habits. Frequently 
we have phonetic compromises. Such an English word 
as the recently introduced camouflage, as now ordi- 
narily pronounced, corresponds to the typical phonetic 
usage of neither English nor French. The aspirated h, 
the obscure vowel of the second syllable, the precise 
quality of the I and of the last a, and, above all, the 
strong accent on the first syllable, are all the results 
of unconscious assimilation to our English habits of pro- 
nunciation. They differentiate our camouflage clearly 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 211 

from the same word as pronounced by the French. On 
the other hand, the long, heavy vowel in the third sylla- 
ble and the final position of the “zh’’ sound (like z in 
azure) are distinctly un-English, just as, in Middle Eng- 
lish, the initial j and v ^ must have been felt at first as 
not strictly in accord with English usage, though the 
strangeness has worn off by now. In all four of these 
cases — initial j, initial v, final ''zh,^’ and unaccented a 
of father — English has not taken on a new sound but has 
merely extended the use of an old one. 

Occasionally a new sound is introduced, but it is 
likely to melt away before long. In Chaucer’s day the 
old Anglo-Saxon il (written y) had long become un- 
rounded to i, but a new set of it-vowels had come in from 
the French (in such words as due, value, nature). The 
new il did not long hold its own ; it became diphthongized 
to iu and was amalgamated with the native iw of words 
like new and slew. Eventually this diphthong appears 
as yu, with change of stress — dew (from Anglo-Saxon 
deaw) like due (Chaucerian dil). Facts like these show 
how stubbornly a language resists radical tampering with 
its phonetic pattern. 

Nevertheless, we know that languages do influence 
each other in phonetic respects, and that quite aside 
from the taking over of foreign sounds with borrowed 
words. One of the most curious facts that linguistics 
has to note is the occurrence of striking phonetic par- 
allels in totally unrelated or very remotely related lan- 
guages of a restricted geographical area. These par- 
allels become especially impressive when they are seen 
contrastively from a wide phonetic perspective. Here 
are a few examples. The Germanic languages as a whole 
have not developed nasalized vowels. Certain Upper 

^ See page 206. 



212 


LANGUAGE 


German (Suabian) dialects, however, have now nasalized 
vowels in lieu of the older vowel + nasal consonant (ti). 
Is it only accidental that these dialects are spoken in 
proximity to French, which makes abundant use of nasal- 
ized vowels? Again, there are certain general phonetic 
features that mark off Dutch and Flemish in contrast, 
say, to North German and Scandinavian dialects. One 
of these is the presence of unaspirated voiceless stops 
(p, t, k)y which have a precise, metallic quality remi- 
niscent of the corresponding French sounds, but which 
contrast with the stronger, aspirated stops of English, 
North German, and Danish. Even if we assume that 
the unaspirated stops are more archaic, that they are 
the unmodified descendants of the old Germanic con- 
sonants, is it not perhaps a significant historical fact 
that the Dutch dialects, neighbors of French, were in- 
hibited from modifying these consonants in accordance 
with what seems to have been a general Germanic 
phonetic drift ? Even more striking than these instances 
is the peculiar resemblance, in certain special phonetic 
respects, of Kussian and other Slavic languages to the 
unrelated Ural-Altaic languages^ of the Volga region. 
The peculiar, dull vowel, for instance, known in Eussian 
as ^'yeri'^® has Ural-Altaic analogues, but is entirely 
wanting in Germanic, Greek, Armenian, and Indo- 
Iranian, the nearest Indo-European congeners of Slavic. 
We may at least suspect that the Slavic vowel is not 
historically unconnected with its Ural-Altaic parallels. 
One of the most puzzling cases of phonetic parallelism 
is afforded by a large number of American Indian lan- 
guages spoken west of the Rockies. Even at the most 

5 Ugro-Finnic and Turkish (Tartar). 

6 Probably, in Sweet’s terminology, high-back ( or, better, be- 
tween back and “mixed” positions ) -narrow- unrounded. It gen- 
erally corresponds to an Indo-European long u. 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 213 


radical estimate there are at least four totally unrelated 
linguistic stocks represented in the region from southern 
Alaska to central California. Nevertheless all, or prac- 
tically all, the languages of this immense area have 
some important phonetic features in common. Chief of 
these is the presence of a ^ ^ glottalized ^ ’ series of stopped 
consonants of very distinctive formation and of quite un- 
usual acoustic effect.'^ In the northern part of the area 
all the languages, whether related or not, also possess 
various voiceless Z-soiiiuls and a series of ‘‘velar” (back- 
guttural) stopped consonants which are etymologically 
distinct from the ordinary Zr-series. It is difficult to 
believe that three such peculiar phonetic features as I 
have mentioned could have evolved independently in 
neighboring groups of languages. 

How are we to explain these and hundreds of similar 
phonetic convergences? In particular cases we may 
really be dealing with archaic similarities due to a 
genetic relationship that it is beyond our present power 
to demonstrate. But this interpretation will not get 
us far. It must be ruled entirely out of court, for in- 
stance, in two of the three European examples I have 
instanced; both nasalized vowels and the Slavic “yeri” 
are demonstrably of secondary origin in Indo-European. 
However we envisage the process in detail, we cannot 
avoid the inference that there is a tendency for speech 
sounds or certain distinctive manners of articulation to 
spread over a continuous area in somewhat the same 
way that elements of culture ray out from a geographi- 
cal center. We may suppose that individual variations 
arising at linguistic borderlands — whether by the un- 
conscious suggestive influence of foreign speech habits 

7 There seem to be analogous or partly analogous sounds in cer- 
tain languages of the Caucasus. 



214 


LANGUAGE 


or by the actual transfer of foreign sounds into the 
speech of bilingual individuals — have gradually been in- 
corporated into the phonetic drift of a language. So 
long as its main phonetic concern is the preservation of 
its sound patterning, not of its sounds as such, there 
is really no reason why a language may not uncon- 
sciously assimilate foreign sounds that have succeeded 
in worming their way into its gamut of individual va- 
riations, provided always that these new variations (or 
reinforced old variations) are in the direction of the 
native drift. 

A simple illustration will throw light on this con- 
ception. Let us suppose that two neighboring and un- 
related languages, A and B, each possess voiceless J- 
sounds (compare Welsh ll). We surmise that this is 
not an accident. Perhaps comparative study reveals 
the fact that in language A the voiceless Z-sounds cor- 
respond to a sibilant series in other related languages, 
that an old alternation s: sJi has been shifted to the new 
alternation Z (voiceless) : s.^ Does it follow that the 
voiceless Z of language B has had the same history ? Not 
in the least. Perhaps B has a strong tendency toward 
audible breath release at the end of a word, so that the 
final Z, like a final vowel, was originally followed by a 
marked aspiration. Individuals perhaps tended to an- 
ticipate a little the voiceless release and to ‘‘unvoice’’ 
the latter part of the final Z-sound (very much as the I 
of English words like felt tends to be partly voiceless 
in anticipation of the voicelessness of the t). Yet this 
final Z with its latent tendency to unvoicing might never 
have actually developed into a fully voiceless Z had not 
the presence of voiceless Z-sounds in A acted as an un- 

8 This can actually be demonstrated for one of the Athabaskan 
dialects of the Yukon. 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 215 

conscious stimulus or suggestive push toward a more 
radical change in the line of B's own drift. Once the 
final voiceless I emerged, its alternation in related words 
with medial voiced I is very likely to have led to its 
analogical spread. The result would be that both A and B 
have an important phonetic trait in common. Even- 
tually their phonetic systems, judged as mere assem- 
blages of sounds, might even become completely assimi- 
lated to each other, though this is an extreme case hardly 
ever realized in practice. The highly significant thing 
about such phonetic interinfluencings is the strong tend- 
ency of each language to keep its phonetic pattern in- 
tact. So long as the respective alignments of the similar 
sounds is different, so long as they have differing ‘^val- 
ues’’ and ‘Sveights^’ in the unrelated languages, these 
languages cannot be said to have diverged materially 
from the line of their inherent drift. In phonetics, as 
in vocabulary, we must be careful not to exaggerate the 
importance of interlinguistic influences. 

I have already pointed out in passing that English 
has taken over a certain number of morphological ele- 
ments from French. English also uses a number of 
affixes that are derived from Latin and Greek. Some 
of these foreign elements, like the -ize of materialize or 
the -able of breakable, are even productive to-day. Such 
examples as these are hardly true evidences of a mor- 
phological influence exerted by one language on an- 
other. Setting aside the fact that they belong to the 
sphere of derivational concepts and do not touch the cen- 
tral morphological problem of the expression of relational 
ideas, they have added nothing to the structural pecu- 
liarities of our language. English was already prepared 
for the relation of pity to piteous by such a native pair 
as luck and lucky; material and materialize merely 



216 


LANGUAGE 


swelled the ranks of a form pattern familiar from such 
instances as wide and widen. In other words, the mor- 
phological influence exerted by foreign languages on Eng- 
lish, if it is to be gauged by such examples as I have 
cited, is hardly different in kind from the mere borrow- 
ing of words. The introduction of the suffix -ize made 
hardly more difference to the essential build of the lan- 
guage than did the mere fact that it incorporated a 
given number of words. Had English evolved a new 
future on the model of the synthetic future in French 
or had it borrowed from Latin and Greek their employ- 
ment of reduplication as a functional device (Latin 
tango: tetigi; Greek leipo: leloipa)^ we should have the 
right to speak of true morphological influence. But such 
far-reaching influences are not demonstrable. Within 
the whole course of the history of the English language 
we can hardly point to one important morphological 
change that was not determined by the native drift, 
though here and there we may surmise that this drift 
was hastened a little by the suggestive influence of 
French forms.® 

It is important to realize the continuous, self-contained 
morphological development of English and the very 
modest extent to which its fundamental build has been 
affected by influences from without. The history of the 
English language has sometimes been represented as 
though it relapsed into a kind of chaos on the arrival 
of the Normans, who proceeded to play nine-pins with 
the Anglo-Saxon tradition. Students are more con- 
servative today. That a far-reaching analytic develop- 
ment may take place without such external foreign 

0 In the sphere of syntax one may point to certain French and 
Latin influences, but it is doubtful if they ever reached deeper 
than the written language. Much of this type of influence be- 
longs rather to literary style than to morphology proper 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 217 


influence as English was subjected to is clear from 
the history of Danish, which has gone even further than 
English in certain leveling tendencies. English may 
be conveniently used as an a fortiori test. It was flooded 
with French loan-words during the later Middle Ages, 
at a time when its drift toward the analytic type was 
especially strong. It was therefore changing rapidly 
both within and on the surface. The wonder, then, is 
not that it took on a number of external morphological 
features, mere accretions on its concrete inventory, but 
that, exposed as it was to remolding influences, it re- 
mained so true to its own type and historic drift. The 
experience gained from the study of the English lan- 
guage is strengthened by all that we know of documented 
linguistic history. Nowhere do we find any but super- 
ficial morphological interinfluencings. We may infer 
one of several things from this: — That a really serious 
morphological influence is not, perhaps, impossible, but 
that its operation is so slow that it has hardly ever had 
the chance to incorporate itself in the relatively small 
portion of linguistic history that lies open to inspec- 
tion ; or that there are certain favorable conditions that 
make for profound morphological disturbances from 
without, say a peculiar instability of linguistic type 
or an unusual degree of cultural contact, conditions that 
do not happen to be realized in our documentary ma- 
terial ; or, finally, that we have not the right to assume 
that a language may easily exert a remolding morphologi- 
cal influence on another. 

Meanwhile we are confronted by the baffling fact that 
important traits of morphology are frequently found dis- 
tributed among widely differing languages within a 
large area, so widely differing, indeed, that it is cus«. 
tomary to consider them genetically unrelated. Some- 



218 


LANGUAGE 


times we may suspect that the resemblance is due to a 
mere convergence, that a similar morphological feature 
has grown up independently in unrelated languages. 
Yet certain morphological distributions are too specific 
in character to be so lightly dismissed. There must be 
some historical factor to account for them. Now it 
should be remembered that the concept of a ‘linguistic 
stock is never definitive^® in an exclusive sense. We 
can only say, with reasonable certainty, that such 
and such languages are descended from a common 
source, but we cannot say that such and such 
other languages are not genetically related. All we 
can do is to say that the evidence for relationship 
is not cumulative enough to make the inference of 
common origin absolutely necessary. May it not be, 
then, that many instances of morphological similarity 
between divergent languages of a restricted area are 
merely the last vestiges of a community of type and 
phonetic substance that the destructive work of diverg- 
ing drifts has now made unrecognizable ? There is 
probably still enough lexical and morphological resem- 
blance between modern English and Irish to enable us 
to make out a fairly conclusive case for their genetic 
relationship on the basis of the present-day descriptive 
evidence alone. It is true that the case would seem 
weak in comparison to the case that we can actually 
make with the help of the historical and the compara- 
tive data that we possess. It would not be a bad case 
nevertheless. In another two or three millennia, how- 
ever, the points of resemblance are likely to have be- 
come so obliterated that English and Irish, in the ab- 
sence of all but their own descriptive evidence, will 
have to be set down as “unrelated’’ languages. They 

10 See page 163. 



LANGUAGES INFLUENCE EACH OTHER 219 


will still have in common certain fundamental morpho- 
logical features, but it will be difficult to know how to 
evaluate them. Only in the light of the contractive 
perspective afforded by still more divergent languages, 
such as Basque and Finnish, will these vestigial resem- 
blances receive their true historic value. 

I cannot but suspect that many of the more signifi- 
cant distributions of morphological similarities are to 
be explained as just such vestiges. The theory of ‘^bor- 
rowing’’ seems totally inadequate to explain those fun- 
damental features of structui‘e, hidden away in the very 
core of the linguistic complex, that have been pointed 
out as common, say, to Semitic and Hamitic, to the 
various Soudanese languages, to Malayo-Polynesian and 
Mon-Khmer-^^ and Munda,^^ to Athabaskan and Tlingit 
and Haida, We must not allow ourselves to be fright- 
ened away by the timidity of the specialists, who are 
often notably lacking in the sense of what I have called 
^‘contrastive perspective.” 

Attempts have sometimes been made to explain the 
distribution of these fundamental structural features by 
the theory of diffusion. We know that myths, religious 
ideas, types of social organization, industrial devices, 
and other features of culture may spread from point 
to point, gradually making themselves at home in cul- 
tures to which they were at one time alien. We also 
know that words may be diffused no less freely than 
cultural elements, that sounds also may be ‘‘borrowed,” 
and that even morphological elements may be taken over. 
We may go further and recognize that certain lan- 
guages have, in all probability, taken on structural fea- 

11 A group of languages spoken in southeastern Asia, of which 
Khmer ( Cambodgian ) is the best known representative. 

12 A group of languages spoken in northeastern India. 



220 


LANGUAGE 


tures owing to the suggestive influence of neighboring 
languages. An examination of such cases, however, 
almost invariably reveals the significant fact that they 
are but superficial additions on the morphological kernel 
of the language. So long as such direct historical testi- 
mony as we have gives us no really convincing examples 
of profound morphological influence by diffusion, we 
shall do well not to put too much reliance in diffusion 
theories. On the whole, therefore, we shall ascribe the 
major concordances and divergences in linguistic form — 
phonetic pattern and morphology — to the autonomous 
drift of language, not to the complicating effect of single, 
diffused features that cluster now this way, now that. 
Language is probably the most self-contained, the most 
massively resistant of all social phenomena. It is easier 
to kill it off than to disintegrate its individual form. 

13 1 have in mind, e.g,, the presence of postpositions in Upper 
Chinook, a feature that is clearly due to the influence of neigh- 
boring Sahaptin languages; or the use by Takelma of instrumen- 
tal prefixes, which are likely to have been suggested by neigh- 
boring “Hokan’' languages (Shasta, Karok). 



X 


LANGUAGE, EACE AND CULTUEE 

Language has a setting. The people that speak it 
belong to a race (or a number of races), that is, to a 
group which is set off by physical characteristics from 
other groups. Again, language does not exist apart from 
culture, that is, from the socially inherited assemblage 
of practices and beliefs that determines the texture of 
our lives. Anthropologists have been in the habit of 
studying man under the three rubrics of race, language, 
and culture. One of the first things they do with a 
natural area like Africa or the South Seas is to map 
it out from this threefold point of view. These maps 
answer the questions iWhat and where are the major 
divisions of the human animal, biologically considered 
(e.g., Congo Negro, Egyptian White; Australian Black, 
Polynesian) ? What are the most inclusive linguistic 
groupings, the 'linguistic stocks,^' and what is the dis- 
tribution of each (e.g., the Hamitic languages of north- 
ern Africa, the Bantu languages of the south ; the 
Malayo-Polynesian languages of Indonesia, Melanesia, 
Micronesia, and Polynesia) ? How do the peoples of 
the given area divide themselves as cultural beings? 
what are the outstanding "cultural areas'’ and what 
are the dominant ideas in each (e.g., the Mohammedan 
north of Africa ; the primitive hunting, non-agricultural 
culture of the Bushmen in the south ; the culture of the 
Australian natives, poor in physical respects but richly 

221 



222 


LANGUAGE 


developed in ceremonialism; the more advanced and 
highly specialized culture of Polynesia) ? 

The man in the street does not stop to analyze his 
position in the general scheme of humanity. He feels 
that he is the representative of some strongly integrated 
portion of humanity — now thought of as a ‘‘nation- 
ality/’ now as a ‘"race” — and that everything that per- 
tains to him as a typical representative of this large 
group somehow belongs together. If he is an Eng- 
lishman, he feels himself to be a member of the “Anglo- 
Saxon” race, the “genius” of which race has fashioned 
the English language and the “Anglo-Saxon” culture 
of which the language is the expression. Science is 
colder. It inquires if these three types of classification 
— racial, linguistic, and cultural — are congruent, if their 
association is an inherently necessary one or is merely 
a matter of external history. The answer to the inquiry 
is not encouraging to “race” sentimentalists. Histori- 
ans and anthropologists find that races, languages, and 
cultures are not distributed in parallel fashion, that their 
areas of distribution intercross in the most bewildering 
fashion, and that the history of each is apt to follow 
a distinctive course. Races intermingle in a way that 
languages do not. On the other hand, languages may 
spread far beyond their original home, invading the 
territory of new races and of new culture spheres. A 
language may even die out in its primary area and 
live on among peoples violently hostile to the persons 
of its original speakers. Further, the accidents of his- 
tory are constantly rearranging the borders of culture 
areas without necessarily effacing the existing linguistic 
cleavages. If we can once thoroughly convince our- 
selves that race, in its only intelligible, that is biological, 



LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 223 

sense, is supremely indifferent to the history of lan- 
guages and cultures, that these are no more directly ex- 
plainable on the score of race than on that of the laws 
of physics and chemistry, we shall have gained a view- 
point that allows a certain interest to such mystic slogans 
as Slavophilism, Anglo-Saxondom, Teutonism, and the 
Latin genius but that quite refuses to be taken in by any 
of them. A careful study of linguistic distributions and 
of the history of such distributions is one of the driest 
of commentaries on these sentimental creeds. 

That a group of languages need not in the least cor- 
respond to a racial group or a culture area is easily dem- 
onstrated. We may even show how a single language in- 
tercrosses with race and culture lines. The English 
language is -not spoken by a unified race. In the United 
States there are several millions of negroes who know 
no other language. It is their mother-tongue, the formal 
vesture of their inmost thoughts and sentiments. It is 
as much their property, as inalienably theirs, as the 
King of England's. Nor do the English-speaking whites 
of America constitute a definite race except by way of 
contrast to the negroes. Of the three fundamental white 
races in Europe generally recognized by physical an- 
thropologists — the Baltic or North European, the Alpine, 
and the Mediterranean — each has numerous English- 
speaking representatives in America. But does not the 
historical core of English-speaking peoples, those rela- 
tively unmixed’’ populations that still reside in Eng- 
land and its colonies, represent a race, pure and single ? 
I cannot see that the evidence points that way. The 
English people are an amalgam of many distinct strains. 
Besides the old Anglo-Saxon, in other words North 
German, element which is conventionally represented 



224 


LANGUAGE 


as the basic strain, the English blood comprises Norman 
French,^ Scandinavian, '‘Celtic,’’^ and pre-Celtic ele- 
ments. If by ‘ ' English ^ ^ we mean also Scotch and Irish, ^ 
then the term ^‘Celtic’’ is loosely used for at least two 
quite distinct racial elements — ^the short, dark-complex- 
ioned type of Wales and the taller, lighter, often ruddy- 
haired type of the Highlands and parts of Ireland. Even 
if we confine ourselves to the Saxon element, which, 
needless to say, nowhere appears ‘‘pure,’’ we are 
not at the end of our troubles. We may roughly iden- 
tify this strain with the racial type now predominant 
in southern Denmark and adjoining parts of northern 
Germany. If so, we must content ourselves with the 
reflection that while the English language is historically 
most closely affiliated with Frisian, in second degree with 
the other West Germanic dialects (Low Saxon or “Platt- 
deutsch,” Dutch, High German), only in third degree 
with Scandinavian, the specific “Saxon” racial type that 
overran England in the fifth and sixth centuries was 
largely the same as that now represented by the Danes, 
who speak a Scandinavian language, while the High Ger- 

1 Itself an amalgam of North ‘Trench” and Scandinavian ele- 
ments. 

2 The “Celtic” blood of what is now England and Wales is by 
no means confined to the Celtic-speaking regions — Wales and, 
until recently, Cornwall. There is every reason to believe that 
the invading Germanic tribes (Angles, Saxons, Jutes) did not 
exterminate the Brythonic Celts of England nor yet drive them 
altogether into Wales and Cornwall (there has been far too much 
“driving” of conquered peoples into mountain fastnesses and 
land^s ends in our histories), but simply intermingled with them 
and imposed their rule and language upon them. 

3 In practice these three peoples can hardly be kept altogether 
distinct. The terms have rather a local-sentimental than a 
clearly racial value. Intermarriage has gone on steadily for 
centuries and it is only in certain outlying regions that we get 
relatively pure types, e.g., the Highland Scotch of the Hebrides. 
In America, English, Scotch, and Irish strands have become 
inextricably interwoven. 



LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 225 

man-speaking population of central and southern Ger- 
many ^ is markedly distinct. 

But what if we ignore these finer distinctions and 
simply assume that the ‘‘Teutonic'’ or Baltic or North 
European racial type coincided in its distribution with 
that of the Germanic languages? Are we not on safe 
ground then? No, we are now in hotter water than 
ever. First of all, the mass of the German-speaking 
population (central and southern Germany, German 
Switzerland, German Austria) do not belong to the tall, 
blond-haired, long-headed “Teutonic’’ race at all, but 
to the shorter, darker-complexioned, short-headed ® Al- 
pine race, of which the central population of France, 
the French Swiss, and many of the western and north- 
ern Slavs (e-.g., Bohemians and Poles) are equally good 
representatives. The distribution of these “Alpine” 
populations corresponds in part to that of the old con- 
tinental “Celts,” whose language has everywhere given 
way to Italic, Germanic, and Slavic pressure. We shall 
do well to avoid speaking of a “Celtic race,” but if we 
were driven to give the term a content, it would prob- 
ably be more appropriate to apply it to, roughly, the 
western portion of the Alpine peoples than to the two 
island types that I referred to before. These latter were 
certainly “ Celticized, ” in speech and, partly, in blood, 
precisely as, centuries later, most of England and part 
of Scotland was “Teutonized” by the Angles and Sax- 
ons. Linguistically speaking, the “Celts” of to-day 
(Irish Gaelic, Manx, Scotch Gaelic, Welsh, Breton) are 

4 The High German now spoken in northern Germany is not of 
great age, but is due to the spread of standardized German, uased 
on Upper Saxon, a High German dialect, at the expense of 
“Plattdeutsch.” 

5 “Dolichocephalic.” 

« “Brachycephalic.” 



226 


LANGUAGE 


Celtic and most of the Germans of to-day are Germanic 
precisely as the American Negro, Americanized Jew, 
Minnesota Swede, and German- American are ^'English/’ 
But, secondly, the Baltic race was, and is, by no means 
an exclusively Germanic-speaking people. The north- 
ernmost '‘Celts,’’ such as the Highland Scotch, are in 
all probability a specialized offshoot of this race. What 
these people spoke before they were Celticized nobody 
knows, but there is nothing whatever to indicate that 
they spoke a Germanic language. Their language may 
quite well have been as remote from any known Indo- 
European idiom as are Basque and Turkish to-day. 
Again, to the east of the Scandinavians are non-Germanic 
members of the race — the Finns and related peoples, 
speaking languages that are not definitely known to be 
related to Indo-European at all. 

We cannot stop here. The geographical position of 
the Germanic languages is such as to make it highly 
probable that they represent but an outlying transfer of 
an Indo-European dialect (possibly a Celto-Italic pro- 
totype) to a Baltic people speaking a language or a 
group of languages that was alien to Indo-European.® 
Not only, then, is English not spoken by a unified race 
at present but its prototype, more likely than not, was 
originally a foreign language to the race with which 

7 By working back from such data as we possess we can make 
it probable that these languages were o’*iginally confined to a 
comparatively small area in northern Germany and Scandinavia. 
This area is clearly marginal to the total area of distribution of 
the Indo-European-speaking peoples. Their center of gravity, 
say 1000 b.c., seems to have lain in southern Russia. 

8 While this is only a theory, the technical evidence for it is 
stronger than one might suppose. There are a surprising 
number of common and characteristic Germanic words which can- 
not be connected with known Indo-European radical elements 
and which may well be survivals of the hypothetical pre-Ger- 
manic language; such are house, stone, sea, wife (German Haus, 
Stein, See. Weib). 



LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 227 

English is more particularly associated. We need not 
seriously entertain the idea that English or the group 
of languages to which it belongs is in any intelligible 
sense the expression of race, that there are embedded 
in it qualities that reflect the temperament or ^'genius'' 
of a particular breed of human beings. 

Many other, and more striking, examples of the lack 
of correspondence between race and language could be 
given if space permitted. One instance will do for many. 
The Malayo-Polynesian languages form a well-defined 
group that takes in the southern end of the Malay Penin- 
sula and the tremendous island world to the south and 
east (except Australia and the greater part of New 
Guinea). In this vast region we find represented no 
less than three distinct races — the Negro-like Papuans of 
New Guinea and Melanesia, the Malay race of Indonesia, 
and the Polynesians of the outer islands. The Polyne- 
sians and Malays all speak languages of the Malayo- 
Polynesian group, while the languages of the Papuans 
belong partly to this group (Melanesian), partly to the 
unrelated languages (‘'Papuan’’) of New Guinea.® In 
spite of the fact that the greatest race cleavage in this 
region lies between the Papuans and the Polynesians, the 
major linguistic division is of Malayan on the one side, 
Melanesian and Polynesian on the other. 

As with race, so with culture. Particularly in more 
primitive levels, where the secondarily unifying power 
of the “national”^® ideal does not arise to disturb the 

9 Only the easternmost part of this island is occupied by 
Melanesian-speaking Papuans. 

10 A “nationality” is a major, sentimentally unified, group. 
The historical factors that lead to the feeling of national unity 
are various — political, cultural, linguistic, geographic, sometimes 
specifically religious. True racial factors also may enter in, 
though the accent on “race” has generally a psychological rather 
than a strictly biological value. In an area dominated by the 



228 


LANGUAGE 


flow of what we might call natural distributions, is it 
easy to show that language and culture are not intrinsi- 
cally associated. Totally unrelated languages share in 
one culture, closely related languages — even a single lan- 
guage — belong to 'distinct culture spheres. There are 
many excellent examples in aboriginal America. The 
Athabaskan languages form as clearly unified, as struc- 
turally specialized, a group as any that I know of.^^ 
The speakers of these languages belong to four distinct 
culture areas — the simple hunting culture of western 
Canada and the interior of Alaska (Loucheux, Chipe- 
wyan), the buffalo culture of the Plains (Sarcee), the 
highly ritualized culture of the southwest (Navaho), and 
the peculiarly specialized culture of northwestern Cali- 
fornia (Hupa). The cultural adaptability of the Atha- 
baskan-speaking peoples is in the strangest contrast to 
the inaccessibility to foreign influences of the languages 
themselves.^2 Hupa Indians are very typical of the 

culture area to which they belong. Culturally identical 
with them are the neighboring Yurok and Karok. There 
is the liveliest intertribal intercourse between the Hupa, 
Yurok, and Karok, so much so that all three generally 
attend an important religious ceremony given by any 
one of them. It is difficult to say what elements in their 
combined culture belong in origin to this tribe or that, 
so much at one are they in communal action, feeling, and 

national sentiment there is a tendency for language and culture 
to become uniform and specific, so that linguistic and cultural 
boundaries at least tend to coincide. Even at best, however, 
the linguistic unification is never absolute, while the cultural 
unity is apt to be superficial, of a quasi-political nature, rather 
than deep and far-reaching. 

11 The Semitic languages, idiosyncratic as they are, are no 
more definitely ear-mark^. 

12 See page 209. 



LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 229 

thought. But their languages are not merely alien to 
each other ; they belong to three of the major American 
linguistic groups, each with an immense distribution on 
the northern continent. Hupa, as we have seen, is Atha- 
baskan and, as such, is also distantly related to Haida 
(Queen Charlotte Islands) and Tlingit (southern 
Alaska) ; Yurok is one of the two isolated Californian 
languages of the Algonkin stock, the center of gravity 
of which lies in the region of the Great Lakes; Karok 
is the northernmost member of the Hokan group, which 
stretches far to the south beyond the confines of Cali- 
fornia and has remoter relatives along the Gulf of 
Mexico. 

Returning to English, most of us would readily admit, 
I believe, thi£t the community of language between Great 
Britain and the United States is far from arguing a like 
community of culture. It is customary to say that they 
possess a common '‘Anglo-Saxon^^ cultural heritage, but 
are not many significant differences in life and feeling 
obscured by the tendency of the "cultured^’ to take this 
common heritage too much for granted? In so far as 
America is still specifically "English,’’ it is only coloni- 
ally or vestigially so; its prevailing cultural drift is 
partly towards autonomous and distinctive developments, 
partly towards immersion in the larger European cul- 
ture of which that of England is only a particular facet. 
We cannot deny that the possession of a common lan- 
guage is still and will long continue to be a smoother 
of the way to a mutual cultural understanding between 
England and America, but it is very clear that other 
factors, some of them rapidly cumulative, are working 
powerfully to counteract this leveling influence. A com- 
mon language cannot indefinitely set the seal on a com- 



230 


LANGUAGE 


mon culture when the geographical, political, and eco- 
nomic determinants of the culture are no longer the 
same throughout its area. 

Language, race, and culture are not necessarily cor- 
related. This does not mean that they never are. There 
is some tendency, as a matter of fact, for racial and 
cultural lines of cleavage to correspond to linguistic ones, 
though in any given case the latter may not be of the 
same degree of importance as the others. Thus, there 
is a fairly definite line of cleavage between the Poly- 
nesian languages, race, and culture on the one hand and 
those of the Melanesians on the other, in spite of a con- 
siderable amount of overlapping.^^ The racial and cul- 
tural division, however, particularly the former, are of 
major importance, while the linguistic division is of quite 
minor significance, the Polynesian languages constituting 
hardly more than a special dialectic subdivision of the 
combined Melanesian-Polynesian group. Still clearer- 
cut coincidences of cleavage may be found. The lan- 
guage, race, and culture of the Eskimo are markedly 
distinct from those of their neighbors ; in southern 
Africa the language, race, and culture of the Bushmen 
offer an even stronger contrast to those of their Bantu 
neighbors. Coincidences of this sort are of the greatest 
significance, of course, but this significance is not one 
of inherent psychological relation between the three fac- 
tors of race, language, and culture. The coincidences of 
cleavage point merely to a readily intelligible historical 
association. If the Bantu and Bushmen are so sharply 

13 The Fijians, for instance, while of Papuan (negroid) race, 
are Polynesian rather than Melanesian in their cultural and lin- 
guistic affinities. 

14 Though even here there is some significant overlapping. The 
southernmost Eskimo of Alaska were assimilated in culture to 
their Tlingit neighbors. In northeastern Siberia, too, there is 
no sharp cultural line between the Eskimo and the Chukchi. 



LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 231 

differentiated in all respects, the reason is simply that 
the former are relatively recent arrivals in southern Af- 
rica. The two peoples developed in complete isolation 
from each other ; their present propinquity is too recent 
for the slow process of cultural and racial assimilation 
to have set in very powerfully. As we go back in time, 
we shall have to assume that relatively scanty popula- 
tions occupied large territories for untold generations 
and that contact with other masses of population was 
not as insistent and prolonged as it later became. The 
geographical and historical isolation that brought about 
race differentiations was naturally favorable also to far- 
reaching variations in language and culture. The very 
fact that races and cultures which are brought into his- 
torical contact tend to assimilate in the long run, while 
neighboring languages assimilate each other only casually 
and in superficial respects, indicates that there is no 
profound causal relation between the development of 
language and the specific development of race and of 
culture. 

But surely, the wary reader will object, there must 
be some relation between language and culture, and be- 
tween language and at least that intangible aspect of race 
that we call ‘'temperament.'' Is it not inconceivable 
that the particular collective qualities of mind that have 
fashioned a culture are not precisely the same as were 
responsible for the growth of a particular linguistic 
morphology f This question takes us into the heart of 
the most difficult problems of social psychology. It is 
doubtful if any one has yet attained to sufficient clarity 
on the nature of the historical process and on the ulti- 
mate psychological factors involved in linguistic and cul- 

15 The supersession of one lanpiaj3re by another is of course not 
truly a matter of linguistic assimilation. 



232 


LANGUAGE 


tural drifts to answer it intelligently. I can only very 
briefly set forth my own views, or rather my general 
attitude. It would be very difficult to prove that ‘tem- 
perament/’ the general emotional disposition of a peo- 
ple/® is basically responsible for the slant and drift of 
a culture, however much it may manifest itself in an 
individual’s handling of the elements of that culture. 
But granted that temperament has a certain value for 
the shaping of culture, difficult though it be to say just 
how, it does not follow that it has the same value for 
the shaping of language. It is impossible to show that 
the form of a language has the slightest connection with 
national temperament. Its line of variation, its drift, 
runs inexorably in the channel ordained for it by its his- 
toric antecedents ; it is as regardless of the feelings and 
sentiments of its speakers as is the course of a river of the 
atmospheric humors of the landscape. I am convinced 
that it is futile to look in linguistic structure for dif- 
ferences corresponding to the temperamental variation's 
which are supposed to be correlated with race. In this 
connection it is well to remember that the emotional 
aspect of our psychic life is but meagerly expressed in 
the build of language.^^ 

Language and our thought-grooves are inextricably In- 
terwoven, are, in a sense, one and the same. As there is 
nothing to show that there are significant racial differ- 

16 “Temperament” is a difficult term to work with. A great 
deal of what is loosely charged to national “temperament” is 
really nothing but customary behavior, the effect of traditional 
ideals of conduct. In a culture, for instance, that does not look 
kindly upon demonstrativeness, the natural tendency to the dis- 
play of emotion becomes more than normally inhibited. It would 
be quite misleading to argue from the customary inhibition, a 
cultural fact, to the native temperament. But ordinarily we can 
get at human conduct only as it is culturally modifle'. Tem- 
perament in the raw is a highly elusive thing. 

i"? See pages 39, 40. 



LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 233 

ences in the fundamental conformation of thought, it 
follows that the infinite variability of linguistic form, 
another name for the infinite variability of the actual 
process of thought, cannot be an index of such significant 
racial differences. This is only apparently a paradox. 
The latent content of all languages is the same — the in- 
tuitive science of experience. It is the manifest form 
that is never twice the same, for this form, which we call 
linguistic morphology, is nothing more nor less than a 
collective art of thought, an art denuded of the irrele- 
vancies of individual sentiment. At last analysis, then, 
language can no more flow from race as such than can 
the sonnet form. 

Nor can I believe that culture and language are in 
any true sense causally related. Culture may be defined 
as what a society does and thinks. Language is a par- 
ticular how of thought. It is difficult to see what par- 
ticular causal relations may be expected to subsist be- 
tween a selected inventory of experience (culture, a 
significant selection made by society) and the particular 
manner in which the society expresses all experience. 
The drift of culture, another w^ay of saying history, is a 
complex series of changes in society’s selected inventory 
■ — additions, losses, changes of emphasis and relation. 
The drift of language is not properly concerned with 
changes of content at all, merely with changes in formal 
expression. It is possible, in thought, to change every 
sound, word, and concrete concept of a language with- 
out changing its inner actuality in the least, just as one 
can pour into a fixed mold vrater or plaster or molten 
gold. If it can be shown that culture has an innate form, 
a series of contours, quite apart from subject-matter of 
any description whatsoever, we have a something in 
culture that may serve as a term of comparison with 



234 


LANGUAGE 


and possibly a means of relating it to language. But 
until such purely formal patterns of culture are dis- 
covered and laid bare, we shall do well to hold the drifts 
of language and of culture to be non-comparable and 
unrelated processes. From this it follows that all at- 
tempts to connect particular types of linguistic mor- 
phology with certain correlated stages of cultural devel- 
opment are vain. Rightly understood, such correla- 
tions are rubbish. The merest coup d’ocil verifies our 
theoretical argument on this point. Both simple and 
complex types of language of an indefinite number of 
varieties may be found spoken at any desired level of 
cultural advance. When it comes to linguistic form, 
Plato walks with the Macedonian swineherd, Confucius 
with the head-hunting savage of Assam. 

It goes without saying that the mere content of lan- 
guage is intimately related to culture. A society that 
has no knowledge of theosophy need have no name for it ; 
aborigines that had never seen or heard of a horse were 
compelled to invent or borrow a word for the animal 
when they made his acquaintance. In the sense that the 
vocabulary of a language more or less faithfully reflects 
the culture whose purposes it serves it is perfectly true 
that the history of language and the history of culture 
move along parallel lines. But this superficial and ex- 
traneous kind of parallelism is of no real interest to the 
linguist except in so far as the growth or borrowing of 
new words incidentally throws light on the formal trends 
of the language. The linguistic student should never 
make the mistake of identifying a language with its dic- 
tionary. 

If both this and the preceding chapter have been 
largely negative in their contentions, I believe that they 
have been healthily so. There is perhaps no better way 



235 


LANGUAGE, RACE AND CULTURE 

to learn the essential nature of speeeh than to realize 
what it is not and what it does not do. Its superficial 
connections with other historic processes are so close 
that it needs to be shaken free of them if we are to see 
it in its own right. Everything that we have so far 
seen to be true of language points to the fact that it is 
the most significant and colossal work that the human 
spirit has evolved — nothing short of a finished form of 
expression for all communicable experience. This form 
may be endlessly varied by the individual without 
thereby losing its distinctive contours; and it is con- 
stantly reshaping itself as is all art. Language is the 
mo.st massive and inclusive art we know, a mountainous 
and anonymous work of unconscious generations. 



XI 


LANGUAGE AND LITEEATURE 

Languages are more to us than systems of thought- 
transference. They are invisible garments that drape 
themselves about our spirit and give a predetermined 
form to all its symbolic expression. When the expres- 
sion is of unusual significance, we call it literature.^ Art 
is so personal an expression that we do not like to feel 
that it is bound to predetermined form of any sort. The 
possibilities of individual expression are infinite, lan- 
guage in particular is the most fluid of mediums. Yet 
some limitation there must be to this freedom, some re- 
sistance of the medium. In great art there is the illu- 
sion of absolute freedom. The formal restraints imposed 
by the material — paint, black and white, marble, piano 
tones, or whatever it may be — are not perceived ; it is as 
though there were a limitless margin of elbow-room be- 
tween the artistes fullest utilization of form and the 
most that the material is innately capable of. The artist 
has intuitively surrendered to the inescapable tyranny 
of the material, made its brute nature fuse easily with 
his conception.^ The material “ disappears ’ ' precisely 

1 1 can hardly stop to define just what kind of expression is 
“significant’’ enough to be called art or literature. Besides, I do 
not exactly know. We shall have to take literature for granted. 

2 This “intuitive surrender” has nothing to do with subservience 
to artistic convention. More than one revolt in modern art has 
been dominated by the desire to get out of the material just 
what it is really capable of. The impressionist wants light and 
color because paint can give him just these; “literature” in paint- 
ing, the sentimental suggestion of a *‘story,” is offensive to him 

236 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 237 

because there is nothing in the artist’s conception to in- 
dicate that any other material exists. For the time be- 
ing, he, and we with him, move in the artistic medium 
as a fish moves in the water, oblivious of the existence 
of an alien atmosphere. No sooner, however, does the 
artist transgress the law of his medium than we realize 
with a start that there is a medium to obey. 

Language is the medium of literature as marble or 
bronze or clay are the materials of the sculptor. Since 
every language has its distinctive peculiarities, the in- 
nate formal limitations — and possibilities — of one liter- 
ature are never quite the same as those of another. The 
literature fashioned out of the form and substance of a 
language has the color and the texture of its matrix. 
The literary artist may never be conscious of just how 
he is hindered or helped or otherwise guided by the 
matrix, but when it is a question of translating his work 
into another language, the nature of the original matrix 
manifests itself at once. All his effects have been cal- 
culated, or intuitively felt, with reference to the formal 
‘^genius” of his own language; they cannot be carried 
over without loss or modification. Croce ^ is therefore 
perfectly right in saying that a work of literary art 
can never be translated. Nevertheless literature does get 
itself translated, sometimes with astonishing adequacy. 
This brings up the question whether in the arr of lit- 
erature there are not intertwined two distinct kinds or 
levels of art — a generalized, non-linguistic art, which 
can be transferred without loss into an alien linguistic 
medium, and a specifically linguistic art that is not trans- 

because he does not want the virtue of his particular form to be 
dimmed by shadows from another medium. Similarly, the poet, 
as never before, insists that words mean just what they really 
mean. 

3 See Benedetto Croce, “.^Esthetic.” 



238 


LANGUAGE 


ferable.^ I believe the distinction is entirely valid, 
though we never get the two levels pure in practice. 
Literature moves in language as a medium, but that 
medium comprises two layers, the latent content of lan- 
guage — our intuitive record of experience — and the par- 
ticular conformation of a given language — the specific 
how of our record of experience. I/iterature that draws 
its sustenance mainly — never entirely — from the lower 
level, say a play of Shakespeare’s, is translatable with- 
out too great a loss of character. If it moves in the 
upper rather than in the lower level — a fair example is 
a lyric of Swinburne’s — it is as good as untranslatable. 
Both types of literary expression may be great or 
mediocre. 

There is really no mystery in the distinction. It can 
be clarified a little by comparing literature with science. 
A scientific truth is impersonal, in its essence it is un- 
tinetured by the particular linguistic medium in which 
it finds expression. It can as readily deliver its mes- 
sage in Chinese ® as in English. Nevertheless it must 
have some expression, and that expression must needs 
be a linguistic one. Indeed the apprehension of the sci- 
entific truth is itself a linguistic process, for thought is 


4 The question of the transferability of art productions seems 
to me to be of genuine theoretic interest. For all that we speak 
of the sacrosanct uniqueness of a given art work, we know very 
well, though we do not always admit it, that not all productions 
are equally intractable to transference. A Chopin ^tude is in- 
violate; it moves altogether in the world of piano tone. A Bach 
fugue is transferable into another set of musical timbres with- 
out serious loss of esthetic significance. Chopin plays with the 
language or the piano as though no other language existed (the 
medium “disappears”) : Bach speaks the language of the piano 
as a handy means of giving outward expression to a conception 
wrought in the generalized language of tone. 

5 i^rovided, of course, Chinese is careful to provide itself with 
the necessary scientific vocabulary. Like any other language, 
it can do so without serious difficulty if the need arises. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 239 

nothing but language denuded of its outward garb. The 
proper medium of scientific expression is therefore a gen- 
eralized language that may be defined as a symbolic 
algebra of which all known languages are translations. 
One can adequately translate scientific literature because 
the original scientific expression is itself a translation. 
Literary expression is personal and concrete, but this 
does not mean that its significance is altogether bound up 
with the accidental qualities of the medium. A truly 
deep symbolism, for instance, does not depend on the 
verbal associations of a particular language but rests 
securely on an intuitive basis that underlies all lin- 
guistic expression. The artist’s ‘‘intuition,” to use 
Croce’s term, is immediately fashioned out of a gener- 
alized human experience — thought and feeling — of 
which his own individual experience is a highly per- 
sonalized selection. The thought relations in this deeper 
level have no specific linguistic vesture ; the rhythms are 
free, not bound, in the first instance, to the traditional 
rhythms of the artist’s language. Certain artists whose 
spirit moves largely in the non-linguistic (better, in the 
generalized linguistic) layer even find a certain diffi- 
culty in getting themselves expressed in the rigidly set 
terms of their accepted idiom. One feels that they are 
unconsciously striving for a generalized art language, a 
literary algebra, that is related to the sum of all known 
languages as a perfect mathematical symbolism is re- 
lated to all the roundabout reports of mathematical rela- 
tions that normal speech is capable of conveying. Their 
art expression is frequently strained, it sounds at times 
like a translation from an unknown original which, in- 
deed, is precisely what it is. These artists — ^Whitmans 
and Brownings— impress us rather by the greatness of 
their spirit than the felicity of their art. Their relative 



240 


LANGUAGE 


failure is of the greatest diagnostic value as an index of 
the pervasive presence in literature of a larger, more in- 
tuitive linguistic medium than any particular language. 

Nevertheless, human expression being what it is, the 
greatest — or shall we say the most satisfying — literary 
artists, the Shakespeares and Heine§, are those who have 
known subconsciously to fit or trim the deeper intuition 
to the provincial accents of their daily speech. In them 
there is no effect of strain. Their personal ^ ^ intuition ’ ’ 
appears as a completed synthesis of the absolute art of 
intuition and the innate, specialized art of the lin- 
guistic medium. With Heine, for instance, one is under 
the illusion that the universe speaks German. The ma- 
terial ‘‘disappears.” 

Every language is itself a collective art of expression. 
There is concealed in it a particular set of esthetic fac- 
tors — phonetic, rhythmic, symbolic, morphological — 
which it does not completely share with any other lan- 
guage. These factors may either merge their potencies 
with those of that unknown, absolute language to which 
I have referred — this is the m_ethod of Shakespeare and 
Heine — or they may weave a private, technical art fabric 
of their own, the innate art of the language intensified 
or sublimated. The latter type, the more technically 
“literary” art of Swinburne and of hosts of delicate 
“minor” poets, is too fragile for endurance. It is built 
out of spiritualized material, not out of spirit. The 
successes of the Swinburnes are as valuable for diagnostic 
purposes as the semi-failures of the Brownings. They 
show to what extent literary art may lean on the col- 
lective art of the language itself. The more extreme 
technical practitioners may so over-individualize this col- 
lective art as to make it almost unendurable. One is 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 241 

not always thankful to have one's flesh and blood frozen 
to ivory. 

An artist must utilize the native esthetic resources of 
his speech. He may be thankful if the given palette of 
colors is rich, if the springboard is light. But he de- 
serves no special credit for felicities that are the lan- 
guage's own. We itiust take for granted this language 
with all its qualities of flexibility or rigidity and see 
the artist's work in relation to it. A cathedral on the 
lowlands is higher than a stick on Mont Blanc. In other 
words, we must not commit the folly of admiring a 
French sonnet because the vowels are more sonorous 
than our own or of condemning Nietzsche's prose be- 
cause it harbors in its texture combinations of consonants 
that would- affright on English soil. To so judge litera- 
ture would be tantamount to loving '' Tristan und Isolde'' 
because one is fond of the timbre of horns. There are 
certain things that one language can do supremely well 
w^hich it would be almost vain for another to attempt. 
Generally there are compensations. The vocalism of 
English is an inherently drabber thing than the vowel 
scale of French, yet English compensates for this draw- 
back by its greater rhythmical alertness. It is even 
doubtful if the innate sonority of a phonetic system 
counts for as much, as esthetic determinant, as the rela- 
tions between the sounds, the total gamut of their simi- 
larities and contrasts. As long as the artist has the 
wherewithal to lay out his sequences and rhythms, it 
matters little what are the sensuous qualities of the ele- 
ments of his material. 

The phonetic groundwork of a language, however, is 
only one of the features that give its literature a cer- 
tain direction. Far more important are its morphologi- 



242 


LANGUAGE 


cal peculiarities. (^It makes a great deal of difference 
for the development of style if the language can or can- 
not create compound words, if its structure is synthetic 
or analytic, if the words of its sentences have considera- 
ble freedom of position or are compelled to fall into a 
rigidly determined sequence/. The major characteristics 
of style, in so far as stjde is a technical matter of the 
building and placing of words, are given by the language 
itself, quite as inescapably, indeed, as the general acoustic 
effect of verse is given by the sounds and natural ac- 
cents of the language. These necessary fundamentals 
of style are hardly felt by the artist to constrain his 
individuality of expression. They rather point the way 
to those stylistic developments that most suit the natural 
bent of the language. It is not in the least likely that a 
truly great style can seriously oppose itself to the basic 
form patterns of the language. It not only incorporates 
them, it builds on them. . The merit of such a style as 
W. H. Hudson’s or George Moore’s ^ is that it does with 
ease and economy what the language is always trying to 
do. Carlylese, though individual and vigorous, is yet ’ 
not style ; it is a Teutonic mannerism. Nor is the prose 
of Milton and his contemporaries strictly English ; it is ; 
semi-Latin done into magnificent English words. 

It is strange how long it has taken the European lit- 
eratures to learn that style is not an absolute, a some- 
thing that is to be imposed on the language from Greek 
or Latin models, but merely the language itself, run- 
ning in its natural grooves, and with enough of an indi- 
vidual accent to allow the artist’s personality to be felt 
as a presence, not as an acrobat. We understand more 
clearly now that what is effective and beautiful in one 

6 Aside from individual peculiarities of diction, the selection 
and evaluation of particular words as such. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 243 

language is a vice in another. Latin and Eskimo, with 
their highly inflected forms, lend themselves to an elabo- 
rately periodic structure that would be boring in Eng- 
lish. English allows, even demands, a looseness that 
would be insipid in Chinese. And Chinese, with its un- 
modified words and^ rigid sequences, has a compactness 
of phrase, a terse parallelism, and a silent suggestiveness 
that would be too tart, too mathematical, for the English 
genius. While we cannot assimilate the luxurious periods 
of Latin nor the pointilliste style of the Chinese classics, 
we can enter sympathetically into the spirit of these 
alien techniques. 

I believe that any English poet of to-day would be 
thankful for the concision that a Chinese poetaster at- 
tains without effort. Here is an example : 

Wu-river ® stream mouth evening sun sink, 

North look Liao-Tung,® not see home. 

Steam whistle several noise, sky-earth boundless, 

Float float one reed out Middle-Kingdom. 

These twenty-eight syllables may be clumsily interpreted : 
“At the mouth of the Yangtsze River, as the sun is 
about to sink, I look north toward Liao-Tung but do not 
see my home. The steam-whistle shrills several times on 
the boundless expanse where meet sky and earth. The 
steamer, floating gently like a hollow reed, sails out of 
the Middle Kingdom. ^ ’ "" But we must not envy Chinese 
its terseness unduly. Our more sprawling mode of ex- 
pression is capable of its own beauties, and the more 

TNot by any means a great poem, merely a bit of occasional 
verse written by a young Chinese friend of mine when he left 
Shanghai for Canada. » . 

8 The old name of the country about the mouth of the Yangtsze 

^ A province of Manchuria. 

10 I.e., China. 



244 


LANGUAGE 


compact luxuriance of Latin style has its loveliness too. 
There are almost as many natural ideals of literary style 
as there are languages. Most of these are merely po- 
tential, awaiting the hand of artists who will never come. 
And yet in the recorded texts of primitive tradition 
and song there are many passages of unique vigor and 
beauty. The structure of the language often forces an 
assemblage of concepts that impresses us as a stylistic 
discovery. Single Algonkin words are like tiny imagist 
poems. We must be careful not to exaggerate a fresh- 
ness of content that is at least half due to our fresh- 
ness of approach, but the possibility is indicated none 
the less of utterly alien literary styles, each distinctive 
with its disclosure of the search of the human spirit for 
beautiful form. 

Probably nothing better illustrates the formal depend- 
ence of literature on language than the prosodic aspect ; 
of poetry. Quantitative verse was entirely natural to 
the Greeks, not merely because poetry grew up in con- 
nection with the chant and the dance, but because alter- 
nations of long and short syllables were keenly live facts 
in the daily economy of the language. The tonal ac- 
cents, which were only secondarily stress phenomena, 
helped to give the syllable its quantitative individuality. 
When the Greek meters were carried over into Latin 
verse, there was comparativly little strain, for Latin 
too was characterized by an acute awareness of quan- 
titative distinctions. However, the Latin accent was 
more markedly stressed than that of Greek. Probably, 
therefore, the purely quantitative meters modeled after 

11 Poetry everywhere is inseparable in its* origins from the 
singing voice and the measure of the dance. Yet accentual and 
syllabic types of verse, rather than quantitative verse, seem to be 
the prevailing norms. 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 245 

the Greek were felt as a shade more artificial than in 
the language of their origin. The attempt to cast Eng- 
lish verse into Latin and Greek molds has never been 
successful. The dynamic basis of English is not quan- 
tity/^ but stress, the alternation of accented and un- 
accented syllables. This fact gives English verse an 
entirely different slsftit and has determined the develop- 
ment of its poetic forms, is still responsible for the 
evolution of new forms. Neither stress nor syllabic 
weight is a very keen psychologic factor in the dynamics 
of French. The syllable has great inherent sonority and 
does not fluctuate significantly as to quantity and stress. 
Quantitative or accentual metrics would be as artificial 
in French as stress metrics in classical Greek or quan- 
titative or purely syllabic metrics in English. French 
prosody was compelled to develop on the basis of unit 
syllable-groups. Assonance, later rhyme, could not but 
prove a welcome, an all but necessary, means of articu- 
lating or sectioning the somewhat spineless flow of son- 
orous syllables. English was hospitable to the French 
suggestion of rhyme, but did not seriously need it in 
its rhythmic economy. Hence rhyme has always been 
strictly subordinated to stress as a somewhat decorative 
feature and has been frequently dispensed with. It isj 
no psychologic accident that rhyme came later into 
English than in French and is leaving it sooner.^^ * 
Chinese verse has developed along very much the same 
lines as French verse. The syllable is an even more 

have not the same inner, psychological value that they had inf 
Greek. * 

13 Verhaeren was no slave to the Alexandrine, yet he remarked 
to Symons, d propos of the translation of Les Aubes, that while 
he approved of the use of rhymeless verse in the English version, 
he found it “meaningless” in French. 



246 


LANGUAGE 


integral and sonorous unit than in French, while quan- 
tity and stress are too uncertain to form the basis of a 
metric system. Syllable-groups — so and so many syl- 
lables per rhythmic unit — and rhyme are therefore two 
of the controlling factors in Chinese prosody. The third 
factor, the alternation of syllables with level tone and 
syllables with inflected (rising or fgflling) tone, is pecu- 
liar to Chinese.*" 

To summarize, Latin and Greek verse depends on the 
principle of contrasting weights; English verse, on the 
principle of contrasting stresses; French verse, on the 
principles of number and echo; Chinese verse, on the 
principles of number, echo, and contrasting pitches. 
Each of these rhythmic systems proceeds from the un- 
conscious dynamic habit of the language, falling from 
the lips of the folk. Study carefully the phonetic sys- 
tem of a language, above all its dynamic features, and 
you can tell what kind of a verse it has developed — or, if 
history has played pranks with its phychology, what 
kind of verse it should have developed and some day 
will. 

Whatever be the sounds, accents, and forms of a lan- 
guage, however these lay hands on the shape of its lit- 
erature, there is a subtle law of compensations that gives 
the artist space. If he is squeezed a bit here, he can 
swing a free arm there. And generally he has rope 
enough to hang himself with, if he must. It is not 
strange that this should be so. Language is itself the 
collective art of expression, a summary of thousands 
upon thousands of individual intuitions. The individual 
goes lost in the collective creation, but his personal ex- 
pression has left some trace in a certain give and flexi- 
bility that are inherent in all collective works of the 
human spirit. The language is ready, or can be quickly 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 247 

aiade rsady, to define the artist’s individuality. If no 
literary artist appears, it is not essentially because the 
language is too weak an instrument, it is because the cul- 
ture of the people is not favorable to the growth of such 
personality as seeks a truly individual verbal expression. 




INDEX 


Note. Italicized entrifs are names 

A 

Abbreviation of stem, 26 
Accent, stress, 26, 36, 48, 55, 
61, 64; as grammatical 

process, 82, 83 ; importance 
of, 118, 119, 120; metrical 
value of, 244, 245, 246 
“Accent,” 44 
“Adam’s apple,” 48 
Adjective, 123, 124, 125 
Affixation, 26, 04, 70-6 
Affixing languages, 133, 134, 
137 

African languages, pitch in, 55 
Agglutination, 140-3 
Agglutinative languages, 130, 
136-8, 139, 146, 147, 148, 
150, 151, 155 

Agglutinative-fusional, 148, 150 
Agglutinative-isolating, 148, 150 
AJgonkin languages (1^. Amer. ), 
70, 74, 134, 151, 220, 244 
Alpine race, 223, 225 
Analogical leveling, 103, 107, 
200-3 

Analytic tendency, 135, 136, 

148, 150, 151, 154, 216, 217 
Angles, 224, 225 
Anglo-Saxon, 28, 175, 183, 185, 
186-8, 101, 107, 108, 201 
Anglo-Saxon culture, 220; race, 
222, 223, 224 

Annamite (S. E. Asia), 66, 
150, 205 

Apache (N. Amer. ), 71 
Arabic, 76, 77, 135, 151, 207 
Armenian, 163, 212 
Art, 236-40; language as, 233, 
235, 240, 241, 246, 247; 

transferability of, 237, 238 


languages or groups of languages. 

Articulation, ease of, 106; 

types of, drift toward, 104 
Articulations, laryngeal, 40, 
50; manner of consonantal, 

52, 53; nasal, 50, 51; oral, 
51, 52; place of consonantal, 

53, 54; vocalic, 52 
Aryan. See Indo-European. 
Aspect, 114 

Association of concepts and 
speech elements, 38, 30 
Associations fundamental to 
speech, 10, 11 

Athabaskan languages (N. 
Amer.), 6, 71, 77, 83, 105, 
200, 214, 210, 228, 220 
Athabaskans, cultures of, 228 
Attic dialect, 162 
Attribution, 101 
Auditory cycle in language, 17 
Australian culture, 221, 222 
Avestan, 175 

B 

Bach, 238 

Baltic race, 223, 225, 226 
Banin languages (Africa), 71, 
113, 122, 123, 134, 135, 151, 
221, 230 

Bantus, 230, 231 
Basque (Pyrenees), 164, 210 
Bengali (India), 155, 163 
Berber. See Bamitic. 
Bohemians, 225 

Bontoc Igorot (Philippines), 
75, 81 

Borrowing, morphological, 215- 
17, 210, 220 

Borrowing, word: 205-7; pho- 
netic adaptation in. 210, 211 
resistances to, 207-10 


249 



250 


INDEX 


Breton^ 225 
Broncliial tubes, 48 
Browning, 2o0, 240 
Buddhism, influence of, 207, 
209 

Burmese, 207 

Bushman (S. Africa), 55, 230 
Bushmen, 221, 230, 231 

C 

Gamhodgian (S. E. Asia), 71, 

75, 108, 134, 150, 155, 207, 
200, 219 

Carlyle, 242 

Carrier (British Columbia), 71 
Case, 115. See Attrihution ; 
Object; Personal relations; 
Subject. 

Case-system, history of, 174-7 
Caucasus, languages of, 213 
Celtic. See Celts. 

Celtic languages, 7vS, 79 
Celts, 224, 225, 220; Brvthonic, 
224 

'^Cerebral’' articulations, 54 
Chaucer, English of, 179, 188, 
191, 211 

Chimariko (N. California), 73 
Chinese: absence of affixes, 70; 
analytic character, 135, 136; 
attribution, 101; compounds, 
67; grammatical concepts 
illustrated, 96, 97; influ- 

ence, 205, 207; “inner form,^’ 
132; pitch accent, 55, 83, 84; 
radical words, 29; relational 
use of material words, 108; 
sounds, 49; stress, 119; 
structure, 150, 151, 155; 

style, 243; survivals, mor- 
phological, 152; symbolism, 
134; verse, 243, 244, 245; 

word duplication, 80; word 
order, 66, 97, 118 
Chinook (17. Amer.), 66, 73, 

76, 80, 121, 122, 123, 124, 
135, 136, 151, 155, 220 

Chipewyan (N. Amer.), 71; C. 

Indians, 228 
Chopin, 238 


Christianity, influence of, 206 
Chukchi, 230 

Classification; of concepts, 
rigid, 104, 105; of linguistic 
types, 129-56. See Structure^ 
linguistic. 

“Clicks,” 55, 81 
Composition, 20, 30, 64, 145; 
absenq^ of, in certain lan- 
guages, 68; types of, 60, 70; 
word order as related to, 
67, 68 

Concepts, 12, 25-30, 31 
Concepts, grammatical: analy- 
sis of, in sentence, 86-94 ; 
classification of, 104, 105, 

100-13; concrete, 86, 87, 92, 
106; concrete relational, 98- 
102, 107 ; concreteness in, 

varying degree of, 108, 109; 
derivational, 87, 88, 02, 106; 
derivational, abstract, 109-11 ; 
essential, 98, 99, 107, 108; 
grouping of, non-logical, 94; 
lack of expression of certain, 
97, 98; pure relational, 99, 

107, 179; radical, 88, 92, 

98; redistribution of, 94-8; 
relational, 89-93, 98, 99; 

tbinning-oiit of significance 
of, 102-4; types of, 106, 107, 

108, 109; typical categories 
of, 113-15. See Structure, 
linguistic. 

Concord, 100, 120-23 
Concrete concepts. See Con^ 
cepts. 

Conflict, 167, 168, 171, 172 
Consonantal change, 26, 61, 

64, 78, 79 

Consonants, 52-4; combinations 
of, 56 

Coordinate sentences, 37 
Corean, 205 

Croce, Benedetto, 237, 239 
Culture, 221 • language and, 
227-30, 231, 232, 233-5; lan- 
guage as aspect of, 2, 10; 
language, race and, 222, 223, 
230, 231 ; reflection of his- 
tory of; in language, 206, 207 



INDEX 


251 


Culture areas, 221, 222, 228 
D 

Vanish, 49, 110, 136, 175, 217 
Pemonstrative ideas, 97, 98, 114 
Dental articulations, 54, 192 
Derivational concepts. See 
Concepts. j 

Determinative structure, 135 
Dialects, causes of, 160-3; com- 
promise between, 159; dis- 
tinctness of, 159; drifts in, 
diverging, 183, 184; drifts 
in, parallel, 184-93; splitting 
up of, 163, 164; unity of, 
157-9. 

DilTiision, morphological, 217- 
20 

Diphthongs, 56 

Drift, linguistic: 160-3, 183, 
184; components of, 172-4; 
determinants of, in English, 
168-82; direction of, 165, 
166, 183; direction of, illus- 
trated in English, ^ 166-8; 
examples of general, in Eng- 
lish, 174-82; parallelisms in, 
181*9.3; sp'^ed of, 183, 184. 
See Phonetic Laiv ; Phonetic 
processes. 

Duplication of words, 79-81 
Butch, 175, 188, 212, 224 

E 

Elements of speech, 24-42 
Emotion, expression of invol- 
untary, 3; linguistic, 39- 
41 

English: agentive suffix, 87; 
analogical leveling, 202, 203; 
analytic tendency, 135, 136, 
216, 217; animate and in- 
animate, 176, 177, 179, 180; 
aspect, 114; attribution, 101; 
case, history of, 3 69, 170, 
175-7, 179;" compounds, 67, 
68, 60, 70; concepts, gram- 
matical, in sentence, 86-94; 
concepts, passage of concrete 


into derivational, 108, 109; 
consonantal change, 64, 78; 
culture of speakers of, 229, 
230; desire, expression of, 
39; diminutive suffix, 87; 
drift, 166-82; duplication, 
word, 79, 80; esthetic quali- 
ties, 241, 243; feeling-tone, 
41, 42; form, word, 59, 60, 
61 ; French influence on, 206, 
207, 208, 210, 211, 215. 216; 
function and form, 93, 94; 
fusing and juxtaposing, 137, 
138, 139-41; gender, 100; 

Greek influence on. 215, 216; 
influence of, 207 ; influence 
on, morpliological, lack of 
deep, 215-17; interrogative 
words, 170; invariable words, 
tendency to, 180-2, 208; in- 
fixing, 75 ; Latin influence 
on, 206, 207, 208, 215, 216; 
loan-words, 182; modality, 
90, 91, 92, 93; number, 90, 
91; order, word, 65, 66. 170, 
171, 177-9, 191, 192; parts of 
speech, 123-5; patterning, 
formal, 62, 63; personal re- 
lations, 91, 92, 93; phonetic 
drifts, history of, 184-93, 
194, 197-9; phonetic drifts, 
history of, 184-93, 194, 197-9; 
phonetic leveling, 193, 194; 
phonetic pattern, 200, 206; 
plurality, 38, 99, 100, 105, 
106, 202; race of speakers 
of, 223-7 ; reference, definite- 
ness of, 89, 90, 92, 93; re- 
lational words, 32; relations, 
genetic, 163, 175, 183, 218; 
rhythm, 171, 172; sentence, 
analysis of, 37 ; sentence, de- 
pendence of word on, 116; 
sound-imitative words, 6, 80; 
sounds, 44, 45, 49, 51, 53, 54, 
56, 57; stress and pitch, 36, 
65, 83; structure, 151, 180; 
survivals, morphological, 149, 
152; symbolism, 134; syn- 
tactic adhesions, 117, 118; 
syntactic values, transfer of, 



252 


INDEX 


120; tense, 91, 93, 102, 103, 
104; verb, syntactic rela- 
tions of, 115; verse, 245, 246; 
vocalic change, 76; word and 
element, analysis of, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 29, 30, 35 
English, Middle, 175, 176, 188, 
191, 201, 202, 203 
English people, 223, 224 
Eskimo, 60, 68, 70, 74, 118, 
134, 135, 230, 243 
Eskimos, 230 

Ewe (Guinea coast, Africa), 
80, 84, 150, 154, 155 
Expiratory sounds, 65 
“^Explosives,” 52 

F 

Eaucal position, 53 

Feeling-tones of words, 41, 42 

Fijians, 230 

Finnish, 135, 155, 219 

Finns, 226 

Flemish, 212 

“Foot, feet” (English!, history 
of, 184-03, 197-0, 201, 

202 

Form, cultural, 233, 234; feel- 
ing of language for, 58, 62, 
63, 152, 153, 210, 220; “in- 
ner,” 132, 133 

Form, linguistic: conservatism 
of, 102-4; differences of, me- 
chanical origin of, 105, 106; 
elaboration of, reasons for, 
102-6; function and, inde- 
pendence of, 50-63, 93, 94; 
grammatical concepts em- 
bodied in, 86-126; gram- 
matical processes embodying, 
59-85; permanence of differ- 
ent aspects of, relative, 153- 
6; twofold consideration of, 
59-61. See Structure, lin~ 
guistic. 

Form-classes, 105, 113. See 
Gender. 

Formal units of speech, 33 
“Formlessness, inner,” 132, 133 
Fox (N. Amer.), 74 


French : analytical tendency, 
135, 136, 137; esthetic quali- 
ties, 241; gender, 102, 104, 
113; influence, 205, 206, 207, 
208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 215, 
216; order, word, 67; plu- 
rality, 99; sounds, 61, 212; 
sounds as words, single, 24; 
stress, 55, 118; structure, 

151, lo4; tense forms, 103; 
verse, 245, 246 
French, Norman, 224 
French people, 224, 225 
Freud, 168 
Fricatives, 52 
Frisian, 175, 224 
Ful (Soudan), 79, 81 
Function, independence of form 
and, 59-63, 93, 94 
Functional units of speech, 33 
Fusion, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 
149 

Fusional languages, 147, 150, 
151. See Fusion. 
Fusional-agglutinative, 148, 
150, 151 

Fiisional-isolating, 148, 150 
“Fuss, Fiisse” (German), his- 
tory of, 184, 185, 191-3, 197- 
99 ‘ 


G 

Gaelic, 225 
Gender, 100-2, 113 
German: French influence on, 
208, 209, 212; grammatical 
concepts in sentence, 95 ; 
Latin influence on, 206, 208; 
phonetic drifts, liistory of, 
184, 185, 188, 191-3, 197-9; 
plurality, 100; relations, 175, 
183; sound-imitative words, 
6; sounds, 56, 212; tense 
forms, 103; “umlaut,” 202, 
203, 204; unanalyzable words, 
resistance to, 208, 209 
German, High, 224 
German, Middle High, 184, 185, 
192, 204 



INDEX 


253 


Germany Old High, 175, 184, 

185, 192, 194 

Germanic languages, 175, 183, 
184, 185, 186, 206, 212, 226 
Germanic y West, 175, 184, 185, 

186, 187, 191, 192, 224 
Germans, 224, 225, 226 
Gesture languages, 20, 21 
Ginneken, Jae van, 40 ^ 

Glottal cords, 48 ; action of, 

48-50 

Glottal stop, 49 
Gothic, 82, 176, 184 
Grammar, 39 

Grammatical element, 26-32 
Grammatical concepts. See Con- 
cepts, grammatical. 
Grammatical processes, classi- 
fied by, languages, 133-5; 
particular, development by 
each language of, 62, 63 ; 
types of, 63, 64; variety of, 
use in one language of, 61, 62 
Greek, dialectic history of, 162 
Greek, classical: affixing, 137; 
compounds, 67, 68; concord, 
321; infixing, 75; influence, 
207, 215, 216; pitch accent, 
83; plurality, 100; redupli- 
cated perfects, 82, 216; 

stress, 82, 83 ; structure, 

139, 151, 152; synthetic char- 
acter, 137 ; verse, 244, 246 
Greek, modern, 137, 163, 194, 
212 

H 

Baida (British Columbia), 56, 
57, 150, 219, 229 
Bamitic languages (N. Africa), 
77, 219, 221 
Bausa (Soudan), 81 
Behrew, 61, 62, 73, 76, 151, 
207 

Heine, 240 

Hesitation, 172, 173, 183 
History, linguistic, 153-6, 7- 
204 

Bokan languages (N. Amer.), 
220, 229 


Bottentot (S. Africa), 55, 81, 
70, 80, 81 
Hudson, W. H., 242 
Humming, 50 

Bupa (N. California), 71, 72 
Hupa Indians, 228 


I 

Icelandic, Old, 175 
India, languages of, 54 
Indians, American, languages 
of, 34, 35, 49, 51, 66, 67, 58, 
84, 85, 105, 130, 212, 213. 
See also Algonkin; Athor 
haskan; Chimariko ; Chinook* 
Eskimo; Fox ; Baida; Bokan; 
Bupa ; Iro quois ; Karo k ; 
Kwakiutl; Nahuatl; Nass; 
Navaho; Nootka; Ojihwa; 
Paiute; Sahaptin ; Balinan; 
Shasta; Siouan; Sioux; Tak- 
elma; Tlingit ; Tsimshian; 
Washo; Yana; Yakuts; 
Yurok. 

Indo-Chinese languages, 165, 
164 

Indo-European, 24, 75, 82, 163, 
164, 174, 175, 186, 200, 226 
Indo-Iranian languages, 175, 
212 

Infixes, 26, 64, 75, 76 
Inflection. See Inflective lan- 
guages. 

Inflective languages, 130, 136- 
41, 143, 144, 146, 155 
Influence, cultural, reflected in 
language, 205-10; morpho- 
logical, of alien language, 
215-17, 220; phonetic, of 

alien language, 210-15 
Inspiratory sounds, 55 
Interjections, 4, 5 
Irish, 224 

Irish, 78, 79, 163, 218 
Iroquois (N. Amer.), 69, 70 
Isolating languages, 130, 133, 
147, 150 

Italian, 54, 55, 137, 163 
^Hts,” history of, 167, 176, 177 



254 


INDEX 


J 

Japanese^ 205, 207 

Jutes, 224 

Juxtaposing. See Agglutina^ 
Hon. 

K 

Karok (N. California), 220, 
229; K. Indiana, 227 

Khmer. See Camhodgian. 

Knowledge, source of : as gram- 
matical category, 115 

Koine, 102 

KwaJcivtl (British. Columbia), 
81, 97, 98 

L 

Labial trills, ^ 

Language: associations in, 38, 
30 ; associations underlying 
elements of, 10, 11; auditory 
cycle in, 17; concepts ex- 
pressed in, 12; a cultural 
function, 2, 10; definition of, 
7; diversity of, 21-3; ele- 
ments of, 24-38 ; emotion ex- 
pressed in, 39-41 ; feeling- 
tones in, 41, 42; grammatical 
concepts of, 86-12(); gram- 
matical processes of, 59-85; 
historical aspects of, 157- 
204; imitations of sounds, 
not evolved from, 5, 6; influ- 
ences on, exotic, 205-20; in- 
terjections, not evolved from, 
5; literature and, 236-47; 
modifications and transfers of 
typical form of, 17-21 ; an 
“overlaid” function, 8; psy- 
cho-physical basis of, 8, 9; 
race, culture a_nd, 221-35; 
simplification of experience 
in, 11, 12; sounds of, 43-58; 
structure of, 127-56; thought 
and, 12-17, 232, 233; uni- 
versality of, 21-3; variability 
of, 157-65; volition expressed 
in, 39-41 
Larynx, 48-50 


Lateral sounds, 62, 53 
Latin: attribution, 101 ; con- 
cord, 121 ; infixing, 26, 75 ; 
influence of, 206, 207, 215, 
216; objective -m, 119, 120; 
order of words, 65, 66, 123; 
plurality, 100; prefixes and 
suffixes, 71 ; reduplicated per- 
fects, ^2, 216; relational con- 
cepts expressed, 101, 102; 

sentence-word, 33, 36; sound 
as word in, single, 24 ; struc- 
ture, 151, 151; style, 243, 
244; suffixing character, 134, 
137 ; syntactic nature of 
sentence, 116, 118; synthetic 
character, 135, 137; verse, 
244, 245, 246; word and ele- 
ment in, analysis of, 27, 29, 
30 

Lettish, 49 

Leveling, phonetic, 193, 194, 
195. See Analogical leveling. 
Lips, 48; action of, 52, 53 
Literature, compensations in, 
formal, 246, 2!7; language 
and, 42, 236-47; levels in, 
linguistic, 237-41 ; medium 
of, language as, 236, 237 ; 
science and, 238-40 
Literature, determinants of: 
linguistic, 240, 241 ; metrical, 
244-6; morphological, 241-4; 
phonetic, 241 
Lithuanian, 55, 175, 183 
Localism, 161 

Localization of speech, 8, 0 
Loncheua: (N. Amer.), 71; L. 

Indians, 228 
Lungs, 48 

Luther, German of, 102 


M 

Malay, 132; M. race, 227 
Malayan, 227 

Malayo-Polynesian languages, 
219, 221, 227 
Manchii, 80 
Manic, 225 



INDEX 


255 


“Maus, Miluse” (German), his- 
tory of, 184, 185, 101-3 
Mediterranean race, 223 
Melanesian languages, 227, 230 
Meter. See Verse. 

Milton, 242 

Mixed-relational languages, 146, 
147, 154; complex, 146, 147, 
151, 155; simple, 146, 147, 
151 * 

Modality, 90, 91, 92, 93, 114 
Mon-Khmer (S. E. Asia), 219 
Moore, George, 242 
Morphological features, diffu- 
sion of, 217-20 

Morphology. See Structure, 
lingvistic. 

^^Mouse, mice” (English), his- 
tory of, 184-93 

Munda languages (E. India), 
219 

Murmuring, 50 

Mutation, vocalic, 184, 185, 

197-9, 203, 204 

N 

Nahuatl (Mexico), 69, 70 
Nasal sounds, 51 
“Nasal twang,” 51 
Nasalized stops, 52 
Nass (British Columbia), 62, 
81 

Nationality, 222, 227, 228 
Navaho (Arizona, New Mex- 
ico), 71, 77, S.3, 136; N. In- 
dians, 228 
Nietzsche, 211 

NootJea (Vancouver Id.), 29, 
33, 35, 68, 70, 74, 79, 82, 
95, 109-11, 135, 141-3, 151 
Nose, 48; action of, 50, 51 
Noun, 123, 124, 126 
Nouns, classification of, 113 
Number, 90, 91, 93, 114. See 
Plurality. 

O 

Object, 92, 98. See Personal 
relations. 


Ojihwa (N. Amer.), 55 
Onomatopoetic theory of origin 
of speech, 5, 6 
Oral sounds, 51-4 
Order, word: 64-6, 91, 92; com- 
position as related to, 67, 
?)8; fixed, English tendency 
to, 177-9; sentence molded 
by, 117, 118; signifieance of, 
fundamental, 119, 120, 123 
Organs of speech, 7, 8, 47, 48; 
action of, 48-54 

P 

Paiute (N. Amer.), 31, 32, 36, 
52, 53, GO, 70 

Palate, 48 ; action of soft, 51 ; 

articulations of, 53 
Pali (India), 207 
Papuan languages, 227 
Papuans, 227, 230 
Parts of speech, 123-5, 126 
Pattern, formal, 61, 63, 234, 
242; phonetic, 57, 58, 187, 
93-6, 99, 200, 206, 211, 214, 
215, 220 

Persian, 163, 207 
Person, 114 

Personal relations, 91, 92, 93, 
115 

Phonetic adaptation, 210, 211 
Phonetic diffusion, 211-15 
Ph^etic law, basis of, 195, 
^ 196, 199, 200; direction of; 
194, 195, 199; examples of, 
186-93; influence of, on mor- 
phology, 203, 204; influence of 
morphology on, 196-9; regu- 
larity of, 193, 194; signifi- 
cance of, 186; spread of, 
slow, 190, 191. See Leveling, 
phonetic; Pattern, phonetic. 
Phonetic processes, form caused 
by, differences of, 105, 106; 
parallel drifts in, 184-93, 
197-9 

Pitch, grammatical use of, 83- 
5; metrical use of, 246; pro- 
duction of, 49 ; significant 
differences in, 55, 64 



256 


INDEX 


Plains Indians, gesture lan- 
guage of, 20 
‘Tlattdeutsch,” 224, 225 
Plurality: classification of con- 
cept of, variable, 110, 111, 
112; a concrete relational 
category, 00, 100; a deriva- 
tional or radical concept, 99 ; 
expression of, multiple, 38, 
62. See Numher. 

Poles, 225 

Polynesian, 132, 150, 155, 227, 
230 

Polynesians, 221, 222, 227, 230 
Polysyntlietic languages, 130, 
135, 146, 148, 150, 151 
Portuguese, 137 
Predicate, 37, 126 
Prefixes, 26, 64, 70, 71-5 
Prefixing languages, 134, 135 
Preposition, 125 
Psycho - pliysical, aspect of 
speech, 8, 9 

Pure-relational languages, 145, 
147, 154, 155; complex, 145, 
147, 150, 155; simple, 145, 
147, 150 

Q 

Qualifying concepts. See Con- 
cepts, derivational. 

Quality of speech sounds, 48; 

of individual’s voice, 48 
Quantity of speech sounds, 65, 
64 

R 

Race, 221, 222; language and, 
lack of correspondence be- 
tween, 227 ; language and, 
theoretical relation between, 
231-3; language as correlated 
with, English, 223-7; lan- 
guage, culture and, corre- 
spondence between, 230, 231; 
language, culture and, inde- 
pendence of, 222, 223 
Radical concepts. See Concepts. 
Radical element, 26-32 
Radical word, 28, 29 


"Reading from the lips,” 19 
Reduplication, 64, 79-82 
Reference, definite and indefi- 
nite, 89, 90 

Repetition of stem, 26. See Re- 
duplication. 

Repression of impulse, 167, 168 
Rhyme, 245, 246 
Rolled consonants, 63 
Romani languages, 137 
Root, 25 
Roumanian, 137 
Rounded vowels, 52 
Russian, 44, 45, 64, 71, 80, 
163, 212 


S 

Rahaptin languages (N. Amer. ) , 
220 

Salinan (S. W. California), 

150, 155 

Sanskrit (India), 54, 75, 82, 

151, 154, 175, 200, 207, 209, 

210 

Sarcee Indians, 228 

Saxon, Low, 224; Old, 175; 

Upper, 225 
Saxons, 224, 225 
Scandinavian, 224. Danish ; 

Icelandic ; S wed ish. 
Scandinavians, 224 
Scotch, 224, 226 
Scotch, Lowland, 188 
Semitic languages, 61, 68, 76, 
134, 151, 219, 228 
Sentence, 33, 36-8; binding 

wwds into, methods of, 115- 
17; stress in, influence of, 
118, 119; word-order in, 

117, 118 

Sequence. See Order of words. 
Shakespeare, art of, 238, 240; 

English of, 188, 189, 191 
Shasta (N. California), 220 
ShiJh (Morocco), 77, 81 
Shifluk (Nile headwaters), 84, 
150, 154, 155 
Siamese, 55, 66, 70, 207 
Singing, 60 



INDEX 


257 


Siouan languages (N. Amer.), 
76 

Sioux (Dakota), 29, 76, 95, 
150 

Slavic languages, 212 
Slavs, 225 

Somali (E. Africa), 77, 80, 81 
Soudanese languages, 84, 154, 
155, 163 • 

Sound-imitative words, 4, 5, 6, 
80 

Sounds of speech, 24; adjust- 
ments involved in, muscular, 
46; adjustments involved in 
certain, inhibition of, 46, 47; 
basic importance of, 43; clas- 
sification of, 54, 55; combi- 
nations of, 56; conditioned 
appearance of, 56, 57 ; dy- 
namics of, 55, 56; illusory 
feelings in regard to, 43-5; 
“inner'’ or, “ideal” system 
of, 57, 58; place in phonetic 
pattern of, 194-6; produc- 
tion of, 47-54; values of, psy- 
chological, 56-8; variability 
of, 45, 46 
Spanish, 137 
Speech. See Language. 
Spirants, 52 

Splitting of sounds, 103, 195 
Stem, 26 

Stock, linguistic, 163-5, 218, 
221 

Stopped consonants (or stops), 
52 

Stress. See Accent. 

Structure, linguistic, 127-56; 
conservatism of, 200; differ- 
ences of, 127, 128; intui- 

tional forms of, 153, 154 
Structure, linguistic, types of: 
classification of, by char- 
acter of concepts, 143-7, by 
degree of fusion, 136-43, by 
degree of synthesis, 135, 136, 
by formal processes, 133-5, 
from threefold standpoint, 
147-9, 154, into “formal” and 
“formless,” 132, 133; classi- 
fying, difficulties in, 129-32, 


149; examples of, 149-51; 
mixed, 148; reality of, 123, 
129, 149, 152, 153; validity 
of coneeptual, historical test 
of, 152-6 

Style, 38, 216, 242-4 
Subject, 92, 98. See Personal 
relations. 

Subject of discourse, 37, 126 
Suflixes, 26, 64 
Suffixing, 61, 70, 71-5 
Suffixing languages, 134, 135 
Survivals, morphological, 149, 
152, 202, 218, 210 
Swedish, 55, 110, 175 
Swinburne, 238, 240 
Swiss, French, 225 
Syllabifying, 56 
Symbolic languages, 133, 134, 
147, 150, 151 

Symbolic processes, 134, 138, 
*130, 140 

Symbol ic-fusional, 151 
Symbolic- isolating, 148 
Symons, 245 

Syntactic adhesions, 117, 118 
Syntactic relations, primary 
methods of expressing, 119, 
120; transfer of values in, 
120. See Concepts, rela- 
tional ; Concord; Order, 
word; Personal relations; 
Sentence. 

Synthetic tendency, 60, 135, 

136, 137, 148, 1*50, 151, 154 



T 


TaJcelma (S. 

W. Oregon ) , 

, 81, 

82, 84, 

220 

85, 151, 

152, 

Teeth, 48 ; 

articulations 

of, 


53, 54 

Telegraph code, 20 
Temperament, 231, 232 
Tense, 01, 93, 114 
Teutonic race. See Baltic race. 
Thinking, types of, 17, 18 
Thought, relation of language 
to, 12-17, 232, 233 



258 


INDEX 


Throat, 48; articulations of, 
49 50 53 

Tibetan Jm, 102, 112, 124, 125, 
136, 143, 144, 150, 154, 155, 
200 , 210 

Time. See Tense. 

Tlingit (S. Alaska), 84, 134, 
135, 210, 229; T. Indians, 
230 

Tongue, 48; action of, 52, 53, 
54 

Transfer, types of linguistic, 
18-21 

Trills, 53 

Tsimshian (British Columbia), 
70, 80, 81. See Nass. 

Turkish, 70, 135, 150, 207, 212 

Types, linguistic, change of, 
153-6. See Structure, lin- 
guistic. 

U 

Ugro-Finnic, 212 
^ “Umlaut.” See Mutation, vo- 
calic. 

United States, culture in, 209; 
race in, 223 

Ural-Altaic languages, 212 

Uvula, 48, 53 

V 

Values, “hesitation,” 173; mor- 
phologic, 131, 132; phonetic, 
56-8; variability in, of com- 
ponents of drift, 172, 173 

Variations, linguistic: dialec- 
tic, 157-65; historical, 160- 
204; individual, 157-9, 165, 
199 

Verb, 123, 124, 126; syntactic 
relations expressed in, 115 

Verhaeren, 24.5 

Verse, accentual, 244, 245; lin- 
guistic determinants of, 242- 
6; quantitative, 244, 245; 
syllabic, 244, 245 


Vocalic change, 26, 61, 64, 76-8. 

See Mutation, vocalic. 

Voice, production of, 50 
Voiced sounds, 50 
Voiceless: laterals, 53; nasals, 
51; sounds, 49, 50; trills, 53; 
vowels, 52 

“Voicelessness,” production of, 
49 • 

Volition expressed in speech, 
38, 39 
Vowels, 52 


W 

Walking, a biological function, 

1 , 2 

Washo (Nevada), 81 

Welsh, 51, 53, 225 

Westermann, D., 154 

Whisper, 50 

Whitman, 239 

“Whom,” use and drift of, 
166-74 

Word, 25-8; definition of, 32-6; 
syntactic origin of complex, 
117, 118; “twilight” type of, 
28, 299 ; types of, formal, 
29-32 

Written language, 19, 20 


Y 

Yana (N. California), 60, 70, 
74, 76, 96, 105, 111, 112, 126, 
150, 155 
Yiddish, 204 

Yakuts (S. California), 77, 78 
Ynrok (N. W. California), 
229; Y. Indians, 228 

i, 

z 

Zaconic dialect of Greek, 162 






