The Proof Palpable of Immortality (Epes Sargent, 1875)
======================================================
Epes Sargent — Sargent's materialization-phenomena survey — the key record of 1870s physical mediumship. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (propalpableimmo00sarggoog) — 1876 edition.

Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 

Id b, Google 

Id b, Google 

OP 

IMMOETALITT. 

SARGENT. 

Ho,t,db, Google 

II assuredly comB, 11i»t day of i 

Theadrentof Spiritualism 19 throueh tacts and not theories, llapur- 
rOBB Is positive knuwIadge.—HKifson TtUlle. 

jertliaii»man"5iiaud;itlsMoilemSpUltuallBlli.— ionJBroueftani. 
>rils«ir. To eiplain tUe causBOf all, tlicre^ore, we miist ailmlta 

Hosled by Google 

Id b, Google 

POHTHAIT OF THE SPiBST "KATIE KING.' 

Hosled by Google 

PROOF PALPABLE 

IMMOETALITY; 

AN ACCOUNT OP THE MATEEIAIIZATION PHENOMENA 
OF MODEM SPIEITD.UISM. 

REMARKS ON THE EELATIONS OF THE FACTS 
TO THEOLOGY, MORALS, AND RELIGION. 

EPES SARGENT, 

BOSTON : 
COLBY AND RICH, 

9 MoNTGOJiERr Place. 

Ho,t,db, Google 

Id b, Google 

PREFACE TO THE SECOSD EDITION. 

TO the uninformed many tlie narrative portiona of this volume 
will seem like the fantasies of a medifBTaJ superstition. But the faith- 
ful obserrer of what Is going on In the world must be well aware that 
the accumulation of facts corresponding with those here presented 
is getting to De irresbtible. For their refutation something move 
Uian a word or gesture of contempt la now required. Those critics 
wtio hope to dispose of them thus easily will soon he counled in tlie 
long procession of infatuated opponents ol dawning truths. The 
phenomena are fast spreading and becoralnf- better known ; they 
attract new converts dally, and are hcginnlng to be admitted by rc- 
BpectaWe scienllflo auHiorities, such as Waiiaee and Crooltes In Eng- 
land, Perty in Berne, and Wagner and Butlerof In Russia. All the 
frauds of real or pretended mediums are powerless to oeutralize the 
eKect of what has been proved, and has now taken Its place among 
the certainties of Bcienee. Moreover, the question Is beginnii^ to be 
t^sed whetbor mucLthatwe have set down as the conscious impos- 
ture of cextainltnown mediums may not he the woilt ol foreign forces, 
the eccentric operation of which we do not yet understand. 

But in the reyision of tliis work I have heen careful to note all those 
instances in which testimony has been wealiened or witlidrawn since 
the llrst edition was printed. Thus I have stricken out the accounts 
which Mr. R. D. Owen gave of phenomena through Mr. aud Mrs. 
Hohnes, thougli he has since admitted that in this case genuine mani- 
testations were piobably mixed up with those he suspected as ques- 
tionable. I liave also made such quallflcationa as seemed pertinent 
in other cases. Spiritualism needs no invaUdated supports. 

The fact that the present volume grew oat ol a series of familiar 
communications respecting tho materlaUzatlon phenomena, will ex- 
plain, If It will not encuso, the somewhat Ireo and desultory manner 

^d by Google 

Iv PREFACE. 

in which the many-sided subject has been treated. I( my transitions 
from fact to theory sliould seem iriegular, the (ault hes in the oiiglna! 
unamliitlons form of the pnhUcation. 

I liave brought down the record of phenomena to the ijeglnning of 
tlie year ISTG ; and It will bo interesting to the student of them to re- 
mark how wlmt seemed incredible at one time, even to advanced Spir- 
itnallsta, has been eonflrmed as the manifestations have gone on ami 
multiplied ( and how every new "exposure " has resulted in a reaction 
favorable 1« the confirmation of the fact involved. The course o( 
truth, Goethe fella us, is spiral, and progress camiot be bad without 
occasional retrogression. 

That Spiritualism now offers Ibe grounda for a science founded on 
observed facts is the belief of all persistent investigators. It has made 
its way In spllfl of the most vehement opposition that over a great 
truth encountered. The hirge majority of the cultivated classes, the 
reUglous and the scientific, have all combined to hoot it down, ahnost 
blind to the consideration whether It is a thing of facts or chimeras i 
lor there is much in it that to a superficial observer is repulsive. But 
It still lives and grows. It true, It Is God's truUi, and we must not 
lear it, however portentous to our short-sightedness it may appear. 
It is time for people of common sense to accommodate their opinions 
to the facts, since it Is evident that the facts will not accommodate 
themselves k> the preconceptions and dislikes of any majority, how- 
ever wise and worthy. E. S. 

Ifo. M SoTtland gtreat, Battan, Bsd, Ut, ISTfl. 

^d by Google 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CHAPTER I. 
Materializations ok the Past & Bl 

Tbo recent dEVPlopnifntB-SensltlYCBor Mecllums-Mr. TCBllBee on 
n)— Tiingibleopporlllons— The II jacsrti lo phenumena-Tlie Da- 
more MaDltestmlons-siio mnrrios Mr, Jenclien-TUtir Infant 

CHAPTER II. 
Phenomenal Pkoofb op Immortalitt 21-32 

Natnra ot spirit malerlaUaatlons-C haves' a three Questions— 

ganlsm—C Prist's raaorrection notatypeot ours-Clalrroyance 
prores (he splilt lioclr— Kant on tbo Moral DIemeni— Mr. Emer- 
son anawered—Oeneslaof tlielielief in Immonality-Phenoioe- 
nal rroots— StcpIlclBm in high auaileia-^octates a meilium— 

CHAPTER III. 
Mateeializatiokb at Moravia, N. Y., and Else- 

WHBRB 82-41 

Ur. Haiara'sEteTenDayilnMaravla—MaterlalliatlongfarelDld— 
EffortBtomanl rest— Mrs, Haiiirdoppoars— Mr. L. A. Blgelows 
tcstlmoDy— Mr. iKtac Keleo's— A Epirit speech -Susplclona of 
fraud dissipated— Mra. Faekardis tBEtlmony-Dr. A. S. Ha;- 
ward's— Kedlnmshlp of Dr. Blade- Testimony or Mrs. A. A. 
Andrews-Or Mr. Clarke Irrlno-Mrs. Hollla-s Medlumshlp- 
Dr. K, B. Wolfe's testimony-Mr. D. H. Hale'a-Mr. F. B, 
Plimpton 's-Kalle King In Phil»ilelphla-Dr. II. T. Child and 
Ur. Unen- QuestloB ot Identity-John King— SeOecticns. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Materializations in England 41-C7 

Eiperlmeiita In London-Mrs. Gupry-Massrs. Heme ondWll- 
Uaias-Tha phenomena ihrough Miss Cout-The spirits Johu 

^d by Google 

TABLE OF CONTESTS. 

the spirit m M Dui pby a atateineiil 
CHAPTER V. 

SCIBSTIFIC iKVESTiaATIONS . . . 

okeslDvestlgBKs tbe m 

[er— Ulaappunktus— TbeDlslectlcMSoelely— 
— TheCSctB Bcl«nt]flcallT tesced— Theory ot P: 

CHAPTER VI. 
Spirit akd Matter T2-85 

Are there tno Enbslances— Immateriality— Soul and Spirit— Im- 
mortalLiyIn theBlWe— AuelenihellefliiSpirlts-TheClirlatJan 
rstliBra— Frlmtiry concaiiiloii ot eplrll— Augoetina— DeseartcB- 
Bpliioiaaaantl-Eplrltuallsl-His cim-roTBrsywllli aS]ilrUual- 
)Bt_HlB system— Ills notiouof ImmortalltT-lileallemaDd Itesl' 

Spirit wrlliDg- Levllation— MuaLc— PhotogrBphy-Letler car- 
ried by Spli Its— S. C, Hall's testimony— Mr. W. 11. Harrleon's 
-Space to Spirlls-Sireaenbotg's leacbings-HBrberl Spencer— 
Uau'B llmitaUoiis. 

CHAPTER VII. 
Pkiobitt of Spirtt 85-94 

by spirlD— First Causes-The Delflc Nature. 

cnAPTEE Tin. 
MiB OP THE Phenomena throcgh Miss Cook . 04-110 

Mr. W. H, BarrisoD on Miss Cook's meaiamshlp-Her own ac- 
count—An uiisplritOBl spirit— Anecdotss liy Mr. Dunpby— Miss 
KlsllngburyslBstlmonj-SlttlngafuraphotoBrapbortbOBpirlt 

Mr. Ci-ookes'a tesllmony-Kalle's spirit draperj-— Cut places 
m.ide whole-Farewell s6ance-Mr3. Rnss-Cliurch's sceountot 
it-plK*ograpli8by Mr. Croofces-Ilis ooucIubIto eiperlmeots. 

^d by Google 

TABLE OF CONTENTS. Til 

CHAPTEK IX. 
Americas Phenombma 110-123 

What l3 cieaDt by ImmorlalJly-rhcnomenon and Canse-TliB 
Pbllade:pbia Kalio Klne-SUo diBappcara and reappcars-Mr. 
A. D, Crosby's Mslimony-Dr. C. liane'a-K. D, Oweii'a— 

chaptek x. 

Matcrializatiosb thbotjoh the Eddy Family . 123-130 

Fads lor InductLun— Tjndall and the CombrldKe proteasors on 
Davis gn mo plieuumena— Un Spirit and Matter. 
CHAPTER XI. 

THB SPIItlT-BODT 135-164 

RBilaWlliy of seers-Swedcnliorg-.lames E. Bmilh on IndiTiduai 

teacMnga-Tlia Bpirii.i«)dT-Ui:iver5iil tcfitimony-Chaaeray- 
Cabanla— Coiaridga— Dt. Georgat— Scriptural piieumalology— 
Eesnrrectlon of Iba body— Tlia trie body— Tna lower anfmais— 
Sir J. E. Snutn— Cliarles Bonnel— A tuiuretorall— W. M. Wll- 
iinaon— Me^Bncllinii— Luiner— CalTln-PiiHifs of direct action 
ot Spirlfs-A nervous ttlier— A wonderful world of spli-lt-Kar- 
decand Bacon on Ibo splrlHiody— flutarch on mediumshlp— 
The creation out of nolhlng-fllateililizalLons of ilotUlni!, oina- 
meniB, eta.— The splrlt-body not a meie liypoUiesla. 

CHAPTER XII. 

POWEK OF SPIBIT OVEB MATTEB 154-160 

Origin of force- Vera on toroo— The Darwinian tbeorj— Molewhott 
on thouglit— TyndalLa apecumtlons— ColerJdgo and Scliellliig— 
PrlesMey-raul Janet— Can matter erolte mltid— Atbelsm con- 
trary to Bcience-TyudiiJl'i alur at SplrltuBllam, 

CHAPTER XIII. 

kUD Phehouera 160-167 

-Aryan nionolbelam-Cbenilstry tends lo 

ot dead mecbanlsms— Identily of life and 
ad Cacbollc cODcuitence— Double eoDscious- 

Id b, Google 

Vlii TABLE OF CONTENTS, 

CHAPTEE Xiy. 
Eblationb of Spibitcalism to Belief ih God . 167-187 

Alhelstic spirits anil Beers— The finllo and luflnite— Descartes— 
Emlle Salsset-Min, Spencer and Leires on thelsm-The Eipe- 
rtenee PIi i:osophy-Pere«nal Inciden t- E uchner den leg clai 1 yoy- 

quesllon-MatetUHismeiplilnsnoLhlng-Splritualisinnotnthe- 
hauer—Picton— Bacon. 

CHAPTEE SV. 

The DrviNE Natobb tbiunb 187-108 

rantHelsm-Splrllualism enlarges oar ylews of G od-U nlon of Pan- 

Eey. John Hunt— Goa peraonal-Huiley admits douhie con- 
BClDusneBS-Mozarfs ease— Inffrenc?s-T!irea In One— Man haa 
A dtvkne protolypo — Naturalism and Theism— Swedenborg— 

-Thodlvlne and haman trinity- Hooter-HamllKm-Cousln, 

cuaptee xti. 
Eelationb oe Spikitualism to Morality . . 198-209 

Wallace's teslimony-SplriHiBl mm ecIecttc-Bellglon and ethics 
-ConveutiODOlDioiBlIty-Socrates on Evil— Nature of the moral 
tow— Baiter— Personal espertencfl In mesmerism— Townshend 
— Orlgen- Bt. Tbomai— Bplnoia— Sin punishes Itself— Malerlall- 
latlon— The trinne principle— Alhelstic begging of the duesllon 
—A moral creed— Teachings o( Spiritualism. 

CHAPTER XVII. 
OS SprElTTTALtsst 209-220 

Personal E p ce The M merists-Kemer-Ob]ectlonB to 
Spiritualism Th B h ry-Locko s adYlce-Oul.lpn- 

Voysey'so ns-3 n m n must yield to laots. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

FcBTHEB Pkoops Palpable 220-234 

Spirit pbotograplia and materialization s-M. A. (Oion. )— Marnier 
—Mrs. A. A. AndtewB— The IBelsand the Inferences— Conclml- 

Id b, Google 

PROOF PALPABLE OF IMMORTALITY. 

CHAPTER r. 

The surprising character o£ the developments which the 
phenomena of Modern Spiritualism have recently attained to 
eeems to call for a clear, succinct review of tlie whole subject 
of similar contemporary manifestations. The concurrent 
testimony ot well-known scientists and of unprofessional in- 
vestlgators, so numerous tliat to attempt to set aside their at- 
testations as inadmissible is simply Irrational, is now in the 
keeping of science. It is of a nature so astonishing, so truly 
wonderful, that I can hardly blame the incredulity that still 
assails the reported facts with rldieule and denial in the face 
even of al! the confirmations by which they are established. 

As introductory to an account of the extraordinary manl' 
Testations through Miss Florence Eliia Cook, now Mrs. Cor- 
ner, of London, in which manifestations, as proved by Pro- 
fessor Crookes, Dr. J. M. Gully, Mr. C. F. Tarley, Mr. Benja- 
min Coleman, and many others, a spirit form, temporarily 
materialized, and undlstinguisbable from a human being in 
the flesh, has come forth in the light, conversed, and submitted 
to the mostconvincing tests, and then disappeared, leaving no 
visible trace, I will give a brief account of the manifestations 
that have preceded or accompanied tills crowning wonder. 

In all ages of the world and among all nations, it bas been 
claimed that thpre have been men and women with certain 

^d by Google 

10 SENSITIVES OR MEDIUMS. 

Buperaensi al f It f u ties exceptionally or abnormally 
developed, nd 1 y th se of which they have become 

clairvoyant la dl nt and able to receive impressions not 
bnowntotlegn al ty of n anklnd. All tiraesandalKribes 
have had tl 1 p ph rs, sensitives, psychics, or medi- 

ums. The nf n that these same powers are possessed 
in different degrees by ail human tteings, but that it Is only 
under certain conditions of organisation, temperament, or in- 
fluence, that they are developed as we find them to be In par- 
ticular Instances. 

The ready objection of skeptlcismis : " I will not believe that 
another man possesses such extraordinary powers while I can 
discover no sign of them in myself. I am the measure of all 
other liuman beings ; and when you tell me that such persona 
as Abraham, Balaam, Hagar, Paul, Peter, Swedenborg, Ilome, 
Foster, Mrs. Fox-Jencltcu, Mrs. Andrews, Miss Cook, Miss 
Showers and others, can see spirits, manifest clairvoyance, 
and fall Into trances, I will not believe it." 

But consider to what Inconsistencies assumptions like this 
would lead us I One man is utterly destitute of the musical 
faculty i he cannot tell one tune from another ; and yet here 
Is a little child, Wolfgang Mozart, who at five years of age 
shows a musical genius, power of execution, originality and 
taste, which can bp characterized only as inexplicable and 
amazing. And again: Hereisa manof average intelligence 
who is slow at figures, and finds it hard to perform an ordi- 
nary sum in addition or multipticotion ; and here is a boy or 
an idiot, who will In a few seconds, by a menial compulation, 
solve a sum in arithmetic which a skillful accountant, with 
the aid of liis slate, could hardly verify in half an hour. The 
cases of Zerah Colburn, Professor Safford, and others, prov- 
ing this statement, are known to all inquirers Into the abpor- 
malpowersof the human mind. These instances would seem 
to show by nnalogy that there may be also a faculty of spirit- 
ual vision and clairvoyance, which may be undeveloped in ona 
person and manifested is another. 

Mr. Alfred R. Wallace, in Ills recent "Defence of Spiritual. 

^d by Google 

SENSATIONS OP A MEDIUM. iX 

ism," has accurately stated the tact, of which ample profifs 
nay be given, that different individuals possess the power of 
seeing sphrit forms and figures in very variable degrees. 

"ThQS it often happens at a seance," he says, " that some 
will see distinct lights of which they will describe the form, 
appearance and position, while others see nothing at all. IC 
only one or two persons see the lights, the rest will naturally 
impute it to their imagination ; but there are cases in which 
only one or two of those present are nnable to see them. 
There are also eases in which all see them, but in very differ- 
ent degrets of di tmctness yet that thej sec the same ob- 
jects IS proved by their all agreeing as to the pobition and 
movement of the ligl ts Again wh'it some see as merely 
luminous clouds others wiU see as distinct human forms, 
either partial or entire In other cases all i resent see the 
form— whether hand face or entire figure— with eqi al dis- 
tinctness. Again, the objective reality of these appearances 
Is sometimes proved by their being touched, or by their being 
seen to move objects— In some cases heard to speak, in others 
seen to write, by several persons at one and the same time ; 
the figure seen or the writing produced being sometimes un- 
mistakably recognizable as that of some deceased friend." 

The question Is often asked, " What are the sensations ot 
the medium himself when under spiritual impression?" As, 
where the impression is very strong, the medium is generally 
thrown int« a state of unconsciousness, or trance, this in- 
quiry Is not often satisfactorily answered. As a contribu- 
tion to the philosophy of the subject, the following remarks, 
read by Mr. T. Herbert Noyes, B. A., (himself a partially- 
developed medium) at a meeting of the London Dialectical 
Society, are of interest ; 

"I have learnt by practical experience the difficulty of in- 
ducing prejudiced men to listen even to one's premises— let 
alone one's conclusions. The extent of that difficulty may 
be estimated from the consideration of the absolute impossi- 
bility of conveying to the apprehension ot a man, bom with- 
out any <'ne of our Ave senses, the exact sensation experi- 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT FORMa 

vplopment of a latent sixth sense ; indeed, I am Inclined to 
think that they, may, perhaps, Involve the development of 

only, but destined to be developed ii. _ ^ „. 

from the prlsou-house of the body, just as are the wings of 
the butterfly or the limbe of the frog, which are latent in 
the caterpllliir and the tadpole. 

" I know that 1 should excite the derision of tlie skeptics 
If I were to say that I liave conversed with spirits alter a 
lashion wiiicli was asserted to he that in which spirits com- 
niunioate with each other— by an ' Inner voice,' vthich I could 
only compare to the. sensation wblch would be caused bya 
teieuraphlc apparatus being booked on to one of tlie n 

bleof thecL , 

but of which one was made conscious bya_._ . _ 

which was clearly distinguiahable from thoughts originatisl 
in one's own mind; but it is nevertheless a fact, whicli Iknow 
to be as true as that I am now in full possession of my five 
normal senaes, and in no way qualified for Ilanwell. 

"This enabled me, for the first time in my life, to under- 
stand the rational inapiralional speaking, as writing medl- 
umsliip, which lias also been given to me, enables me to 
understand inspirational writing. Bnt this latter gift in- 
ToJves an expenditure of vitality and nervous force which 
is excessively debilitating if too long continued; and lam 
now iiaying tho penalty of excess by enforced abstinence 
from tlia eserolse of the new faculty. 

"If It be only the unconscious action of one's own mind, 
how will our acientilic infaliibles account for this anomalous 
result of automatic writing? But I have already trespassed 
too long on your patience ; snfBce it to say, that I can nfQrm, 
with the ciTtainty of absolute knowledge, that Modern 
Spiritualism is true ; that it affords the most satisfactory evi- 
dence that the soul of man survives the death of the body, 
retains its individuality and Its personal identity and its falli- 
Dillty and the power of communicating, under certain deli- 
cate conditions, with those with whoa* it is stiU hi sympathy 
iu earth-life." 

The fact of palpable and tangible apparitions from tho 
spiril^world Is asserted in all the records of psychological 
phenonieua that have come down to us from remotest antiqui- 
ty. The angel who met Jacob at Peniel, and wrestled with 
him, must have been a materialized spirit, if a legitimate in- 
ference may be made from parallel phenomena, repeatedly 
certified to as occurring within the last year. The hand that 
appeared on Belshazzar's palace-wall was a materialized 
hand, such as I myself liave felt and seen, while in companj 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT FORMS. 13 

with other witnesses who confirmed my experience bj' their 

With the first irruption of the modem spirituai phenomena 
at nydesville, B". Y., on which occasion little Kate Fox, then 
nine years old, may be said to liave initiated tlie modem 
spiritual movement by interrogating the raps, and finding an 
intelligence in them, there were instances of the appearance 
Otpliantom forms and partial materializations. At the rooms 
of J. Koons, in Athena County, Ohio, In 1854, spirit-bands 
and voices were among the common manifestations. Before 
this, in ISfiO, the Davenport Brothers began to be developed 
as mediums ; and among the phenomena at their seances waa 
that oC the appearance of entire spirit-forms, so far material- 
ized as to be visible not only to sensitives, but to ail the par- 
ties present. 

Mr. Home, the well-known loedium, has, on several occa- 
sions, had spirit-forma appear to parties in his presence. One 
in particular is mentioned, in which a slater of Mr. S. C. Hall 
was recognized by her brother and seen clearly by Lord Lind- 
say and the entire party. 

The first oarefulIy-prepar(~d account that we have, in mod- 
ern times, of the repeated appearanceof a materialized spirit- 
form, ia that furnished by my friend, Mr. C. F. Llvermore, of 
New TorJc, formerly of the well-known firm of Llvermore & 
Clewes, bankers. Another friend, one I have known and 
honored for thirty years. Dr. John F. Gray, of New York, 
writes (Jan., 1869) ; " Mr, Livermore's recitals of the seances 
in which I participated are faithfully and most accurately 
stated, leaving not a shade of doubt in ray mind as to the 
truth and accuracy of his accounts of those at which I waa 
nota witness. I saw with him the philosopher Franklin, in 
a living, tangible, physical form, several times ; and, on as 
many different occasions, I also witnessed the production of 
lights, odors, and sounds ; and also the formation of flowers. 
Cloth-textures, &c., and their disintegration and dispersion. 
. . . Mr. Llvermore is a good observer of spirit-phenomena ; 
brave, clear, and quick-sighted. I have known him from 

^d by Google 

H MISS KATE FOX 

very early manhood, and am his medical adviser." He was 
an entire skeptic before lie witnessed these phenomena. 

Of Miss Kat« Fox, Dr. Gray writes ; "She lias been inti- 
mately known to my wife and me from the time she was a 
very young girl ; that is to aay, from 1H50 to tliis data (1867). 
At that early day in the history of the manifestations she 
was frequently a visitor in my family ; and then, through that 
child alone, without the possibility of trick from collusion 
with others, or, I may add, of imposture of any kind, all the 
various phenomena recorded by Mr. LiTermore, except the 
reproduction of visible, human forms, were witnessed by Mrs. 
Gray and myself, and many other relatives and friends of our 
family," 

That Modern Spiritualism waa initiated by the action of 
the child, Kate Fox, seems t* admit of no doubt. The family 
of David Fox, at Hydesville, N. Y., were disturbed by cer- 
tain inexplicfible knockings. nis little girl, Kate, aroused 
from her evening slumber by the noise and the alarm of the 
family, asked the unknown cause of the sounds to give a cer- 
tain number of raps. It did so; and "Oh, mother," tlie little 
girl exclaimed, " it hears what I say I it knows what I tell it, 
for it has rapped the number of times I asked it !" 

Here was a discovery : the phenomena had an Intelligent 
cause I A similar Intelligence had been manifested by the 
phenomena investigated by the Eev. Joseph Glanvil, at Ted- 
worth, EuKland, in IGGI, and by those which attracted the 
attention of the Wesley Family, in Lincolnsliire, in 1716 ; but 
the hint was not acted on, and the manifestations ended in 
the families where they originated. Tlie discovery, when 
made by Kate Fox, liowever, was productive of consequences 
that can be only estimated by the growth and future influ- 
eaee of Modern Spiritnallsm. 

There is an interesting prediction connected with the sub- 
sequent career of Kate Fox. It was communicated to Mr. R. 
D. Owen by Mr. and Mrs. n. P. Towusend, living on Madison 
Avenue, New York City. In the winter of 1869 Miss Fox 
was the guest of Mrs. Townaend, who slept with her one 

^d by Google 

AN INFANT MEDIUil. IB 

night in tho hope of getting some manifestations of spirit 
power. Waiting bclore day the two enteretl into conversa- 
tion. Mrs. Townsend said, "Kate, you are a strange crea- 
ture. Tou win never get married. Tou will be sure f« die 
an old maid." There came a loud rap on tho head- board, and 
tlicre was spelled out through the raps : "Kate will be mar- 
ried, and will bear a cliild who will be tho wonder of the 
world. Kate herself will be a cypher in comparison. Shu 
will only be remembered as his mother." "HU motherl" 
said Mrs. Townsend; "it is to be a boy I" 

Tills was related to several of Mrs. Townsend's friends long 
before Kate went to Eai'ope. In December, 1872, Kate waa 
married in England to Mr. II. D. Jencken, barrister-at-iaw, 
London, wliose acquaintance I liad the pleasure of makiug in 
Paris in 1S09. He is tiie son of a well-known man of science, 
and liiraself an earnest and intelligent investigator of psyelio- 
loglcal phenomena, and one well able to give reasons for iiU 
belief in Spiritualism, as his paper read before tlie London 
Bialectical Society (April, 1869) abundantly shows. 

In September, 1873, there was born to these parents an in- 
fant son who, before he was three montiis old, began to de- 
velop powers as a medium. On one occasion Ills nurse, Mrs. 
MeCartiiy, saw four spirit hands making passes over his little 
form. Eappings on liis pillow and on the iron rail of the bed- 
stead would occur almost every day. A few weeks later a 
still more marked evidence of tho wonderful power of spirits 
to use this infant's organization was given, A legible coni- 
munieation was written tJirough his hand, of a part of which 
the following words, a fair specimen of the ehirography of 
the whole, are a/ac simile ; 

The entire communication was as follows : 
" I toi>o this Uitie chM God bless him advice his father toga 
liqe/c to {.ondvn Monday/ by aU meam Saaun.''^ 

^d by Google 

16 MR. LIVEBMORE'S EXPERIENCES. 

The following teatimonlal is appended to fhofac stmite, fta 
published in tUe London Medium and Daybreak o( May 
8t1i, 1874 : 

Mrs. ana Mr. Jencken. aged Ave montbe and flf teen days, on Iho Gtb day 
or March, Wi, at Limsdowne Tarrace Esat, Western Kuad, BrlgliKin, by 

The communication was supposed to come from the depart- 
ed wife of Mr. Wason, a respectable solicitor of Liverpool, 
and one of the witnesses. The advice given was iCcted upon 
and found to be good. 

In a letter, published June, 1874, Mr. Jencken writes of 
this little infant : "Some few days ago, late ia the evening, 
his eyes sparkled, and the restlessness of his hands warned 
Mrs. Jencken that he wanted to write. A large sheet o( pa- 
per, t!ie only one at hand, was then placed before him. He 
wrote a long sentence, covering the sheet." That he does not 
get his power from the presence of his mother is proved by 
the fact that, on a recent occasion, when she was absent from 
liome, on Mr. Jencken's taking him np to play with him, 
while the Infant was trying to catch his gold chain, soft raps 
came by which intelligible messages were spelt out. 

Mr. Livermore's sittings for manifestations tiirougb Miss 
Kate Fox commenced in February, 1881, extended over a pe- 
riod of ttve years, and were more than three hundred In num- 
oer. The chief phenomenon was the appearance of a tangi- 
ble, visible female figure, which was sometimes accompanied 
by a male figure purporting to he Dr. Franklin, and strongly 
resemWing the portraits of that well-known philosopher. 

In the female figure Mr. Livermoro recognized unmistak- 
ably the face, form and voice of Estelle, his wife. " The re- 
cognition," he says, "was complete, derived alike from the 
features and her natural expression. The figure displayed 
long flowing hair, which, even in its shade of color, appeared 
like the natural tresses of ray wife, and, like hers, was unusu- 

^d by Google 

MR. LIVEKMORE'S EXPERIENCES. IT 

«lly luxuriant. . . . I asked her to kiss me if she could; 
and, tomygreat astonishment and delight, an arm was placed 
wound my neck, and a real palpable kiss was implanted on 
my lips, through something like fine mualin. A head was 
laid upon mine, the hair falling luxuriantly down niy face. 
The kiss was frequently repeated, and was audible in every 
part of the room." 

The tresses that dropped over hia face Mr. L. describes as 
" having the scent of delicate, freshly-gathered violets." lie 
says; "Ilaidholdof the hair, which seemed to the touch, at 
first, identical with human hair ; but, after a brief space, it 
melted away, leaving nothing in my grasp. 

During the manifestations, cards, provided by Mr. Liver- 
more, were placed on the floor with a pencil ; and long mes- 
sages in his wife's chirography were found written on them. 
"These manifestations," says Dr. Gray, "could not have 
been produced by human means ; and if you admit the com- 
petency of the witness, of which, from my knowledge of him, 
1 liave no doubt, they are, in my opinion, conclusive evidenc* 
of spirit identity." 

The following passages I quote, somewhat at random, from 
Mr. Livermore's diary : 

" The spirits of my wife and Dr. Franklin came to me in 
form at the same time— he slapping me heavily upon the 
back, while she gently patted me upon tho head and shoul- 

"The spirit-robe was shown in a variety of ways, and the 
testure was exquisitely beautiful. Whenever it approached 
closely, wo discovered a peculiar scent of purity, like a very 
delicious perfume of newly-gathered grass or violets." 

" I asked to be touched ; when she advanced, laid her arm 
across ray forehead, and permitted me to kiss it. I found It 
as largo and as real in weight as a living arm. At first It felt 
cold, then grew gradually warm." 

"My wife came in full form, placing lier arms completely 
around my nock. Sometliing resembling a veil in Its contact, 
was thrown over my head; and while it was resting there, 

^d by Google 

18 A SPIRIT-HAN0 EXAMINED. 

epirit-flowers were placed at my nose, exlialing the most ex- 
quisite perfume I have eyei smelt. I asked wliat tliis was, 
and was told, 'My wreatliof spirit-flowers.'" 

"Dr. Franklin was apparently dressed in a wliite cravat 
and a brown coat ot the olden style; liis head was very large, 
with gray Lair behind his ears ; his face was radiant with 
benignity, intelligence, and spirituality. . . . The light be- 
coming very vivid discovered to us Dr. Franklin seated, his 
whole fig'ire and dress complete." 

"Something like a handkerchief of transparent gossamer 
was brought; and we were told to look at the hand which 
now appeared under the gossamer, as perfect a female hand 
as was ever created. 1 advanced my own liand, when the 
splrit-Uand was placed in it, grasping mine ; and we again 
grasped bands witi all the fervor of long-parted friends, my 
wife in the spirit- land and myself bcre." 

" It was a reality which lasted through nearly halt an honr. 
I examined carefully tliat spirit-hand, squeezed it, felt the 
knuckles, joints, and nails, and kissed it, while it was con- 
stantly vUible to my sight. I took each finger separately In 
my hand, and could discern no difference between it and a 
human hand, except in temperature , the spint-liand being 
cold at first, and (jrowlng warm." 

"Thettoweri in her hair and on her person were real in 
appearance. Over her forehead was a crown of flowers. The 
light shone vividly upon her face ami figure ; and while we 
stood looking Intently, she instantly, as quick as thought, 
disappeared, with a rushing sound. Then, by raps was com- 
municatfld, 'The electricity is very strong; and we did this 
to show you how quickly we can disappear.' Very soon she 
returned, as real as before." 

" The figure of Dr. Franklin appeared perfectly delineated, 
seated in the window, and permitted mo to examine bis hair 
with my hand. The hair was to sight and touch as real as 
human bnir." 

"Estelle and Dr. Franklin appeared alternately. Dr. 
Franklin's shirt-bosom and collar were as real to appearance 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT FU)WBE3. 19 

as tliough made of linen. Wo handled them, and examined 
in the same manner his tunic, which was black, and felt Ilka 
cloth." 

"Mywifo appeared leaning upon the bureau, with white 
lace hanging in front of and around lier head. This lace or 
open work (I'^e embroidery) was so real, that the figures 
were plainly discernible and could liave been sketched. The 
body of her dress or robe was of spotted white gossamer, 
while the lace- work was in diamonds and flowers." 

" Flowers aj;ain appeared. A bright light rose to the surface 
of the table, of the usual cylindrical form, covered with gos- 
samer. Held directly over this was a sprig of roses, al>out 
six inches in length, containing two liaif-blown white roses 
and a bud with leaves. The flowers, leaves, and stem were 
perfect, and smeiied as thougli freslily gathered. We took 
them in our Angers, and I carefully examined the stem and 
flowers." 

" By taps we were told to ' Notice, and see them dissolve.' 
The sprig was placed over the light, the flowers drooped, 
and, in less than one minute, melted as though made of wax, 
their substance seeming to spread as they disappeared. By 
raps : 'See them come again.' A faint line immediately shot 
across the cylinder, grew into a stem, and, in about the same 
time required for their d issoiution, the stem, bud and roses had 
grown into created perfection. This was several times re- 
peated, and was truly wonderful." 

" The flowers were reproduced in the same manner as last 
evening. I felt them carefully, and a rose was placed in my 
mouth, so that I took its leaves between my lips. They were 
delicate as natural rose-leaves, and cold ; and there was a pe- 
culiar freshness about them, but very little fragrance." 

On one occasion a biincli of flowers, consisting of a red 
rose, with green leaves and forget- me-no's, was siiown. "I 
inspected them," says Mr. L., "for several minutes, at inter- 
vals ; turning off the gasandrellgiiting five or six times. The 
flowers still remained. Above them was written ; ' I/^owen 
from our home in Seaoen.' Finally the flowers began to fad«i 

^d by Google 

20 OBJECTIVE PKOOFS. 

and we were requested to extlnguisli the gas. Wlien we did 
so, it was replaced by a spirit-light, under which the fiowers 
were again distinctly visible. Then, by the raps: 'Do not 
take your eyes off the flowers ; watehthera closely.' Wodid 
so. Tbeygraduallydiminisliedinsize, as we gazed, till they be- 
came mere specks ; and then they disappeared before our eyes. 
When I lighted the gas I found no trace cf them on the card. 
Then I carefully examined the seals on the doors and win- 
dows, anil found tbem intact." 

These phenomena t«ok place itt tour different houses (Mr. 
Livermore'a and the medium's being both changed during 
the period over which the stances extended), and were ac- 
companied with the most rigid tests. Tho figure of Estelle 
not only moved freely about the room, but it displaced ob- 
jects and wrote messages. It allowed a portion of its dress to 
be cut off, which, though at first of strong and apparently ma- 
terial, gauzy texture, in a short time melted away and be- 
came Inviaible. 

At ten of these remarkable seanees Dr. Gray was present 
with Mr. Livermore, and at eight of them tho iarter's brother- 
in-law, Mr. Groute. On one occasion Dr. Gray and Mr. Liv- 
ermore were allowed to cut off with scissors a piece of the 
garment of the spirit, coming under the appearance of Frank- 
lin. The cloth seemed of so firm a testure that for a time it 
could be pulled without coming apart. It was examined 
doselyuntil It melted away. During one sitting (No. 355, of 
May 1st, 1863) both Dr. Gray and Mr. Groute were present 
with Mr. Livermore, when the form of Dr. Franklin appear- 
ed ; it was perfect, and fully recognized by all the parties. 
The last time the figure of Estelle appeared was the 2d of 
April, 18C6. Th^ number of seances liad been three hundred 
and eighty-eight. 

Uaving had the opportunity of questioning Mr. Livermore 
closely in regard to these occurrences, and of comparing them 
with the equally remarkable experlencesof other friends, well 
known to me, both in England and in tiie United States, 1 am 
Batisfied that he has used the most scrupulous care in describ- 

ed by GoOgIc 

AN INFERENCE. 21 

Ing the phenomena and recording his Investigations. Every 
conceivable precaution was taken to guard against imposture. 
The medium's hands were held during tlie most important 
manifestations. Doors and windows were carefully secured ; 
and the phenomena took plane often in Mr. Liyermore's own 
house, under circumstances which render the theories of fraud 
or illusion wholly Inadmissible. And to eroitn the testimony 
we have the corroborative experience of Dr. Gray and Mr. 
Groute, These gentlemen are all still (1874) fully convinced 
of the objective reality of the phenomena and of the absence 
of any attempt at exaggeration or imposition on the part of 
any human being. 

Of the mediumship of Miss Kate Fox (now Mrs. Jencken) 
through whom these remarkal)le phenomena occurred, Mr. 
Wallace justly remarks ; " We have here a career of twenty- 
six years of mediumship of the most varied and remarkable 
Character; mediumship which has been scrutinized and test- 
ed from the first hour of Its manifestation down to this day, 
and with one invariable result— that no imposture or attempt 
at imposture has ever been discovered, and no cause ever been 
suggested that will account for the phenomena except that 
advanced by Spiritualists." 

CHAPTER II. 

The inference from the phenomena oC spirit-forms is not 
that these forms represent the spirit as it appears in its own 
world. By an efiort of the will, or by some ethereal chem- 
istry hardly conceivable to man in his present state, the re- 
tnrning spirit is supposed to reproduce certain faB-eimilei of 
't pp n e while in the earth life ; doing this mainlj for 
tl p p of Identifying itself to surviving relatives and 
fid A feminine spirit, who manifested herself at Uo- 
w n one occasion known to produce. In rapid sue- 
I u fan- imiles of lier personal appearance at six differ- 

^d by Google 

22 A TANGIBLE APPARITION. 

ent pericMjs of lier eartli-life, ranging from childhood to old 
■ge. 

According to Prof. Daumer, author of "DasGeisterreicli," 
(Dresden, 1867), these apparitiona ore neither hodies nor 
eoula, but a third entity, which lie calls eidclon (a shape), by 
which he uuderstan^^ the ditect self-manifestation of the 
pfyche (soul). The soul, accordinj; to his theory, is restrict- 
ed to the corporeal exhibition only so lonj; as it anima,tes the 
body. Once released by the death of the latter, it can mani- 
fest its immanent reality in any way it pleases ; it can even 
reproduce whole episodes from its former life, including any 
number of figures of itself or of other persons ; it can also 
produce sounds and other material acts. 

That spirits have tiiese powers is proved by the recent phe- 
nomena i but if the theory would imply that the soul mani- 
fests itself without an organism In tlie spirit-world, this is 
contrary to nearly all the teachings we have from spirits and 
seecs. How can it be said that the apparition Is not a body, 
when the body in which it appears Is tangible and undistin- 
gulshable from the human form 7 Mrs. Florence Marryatt 
Boss-Church (1ST4) was allowed to put her hand on the nude 
person of the spirit Hatle, and felt her heart beat. A spirit 
has been known to cut its finger with a knife, then to borrow 
a handkerchief to wind around the wound, and, at the end of 
the sitting, to return the handkerchief marlied with blood. 

Ina lecture delivered May 12th, ISflS, Chavue, an eminent 
French chemist and scientist, put the following ciuestions ; 

Ist. Is it possible for an individual being to exist without 
an organism 7 

2d. Ought the admission of the existence in man of an 
ethereal, invisible organism, of which the component ele- 
ments are not patent to the senses, to be considered as con- 
trary to the ordinary laws of chemistry, physics, or science 
In general ? 

Sd. Are there cases in this life in positive pathology which 
teach us that the organism wliich succeeds the one we are 
using now, occasionally acts by itself, or nearly so, in such a 

^d by Google 

TESTIMONY OF SCIENCE. 23 

manlier as to pivo lis glimpses, as it were, of an orKauism su- 
I>eriortoour present one? 

To the first question CliavCe replies in tlie negative; inhia 
opinion lliere is no individual being without an organism, for 
1)0 thinks the soul never exists alone as simple spirit, entire- 
ly separated from all organism ; In tiis present state man has 
two organisms : the terrestrial, which falls under tlio cogni- 
zance of the senses, and the ethereal, whicli Is Invisible at 
the dis'^olution of the first tlie soul continues to retain the 
second 

Tlie celebrated lecturer replies to the second question by 
affirming that we amtraeeae no kasiett lais cf aaenee, eliemia- 
try, phync% mecftamis, etc , m admitUng (fte extnUnee of an 
ethereal or electro-luminow organism 

The third question Le answers in the affirmative Yes, 
there are eases o( positive pathology nhere ne cm grtsp the 
superior organism, and ohserve its action, while the inferior 
one— tliat wliich Is perceptible to tlie senses— is no longer in 
exercise. These oases are natura! and magnetic somnambu- 
lism and the trance. Thus observation leads us to conclude 
that there is a future life. 

And thus neither reason, observation nor sclenco ia op- 
posed to the belief that man survives the death of the body,, 
and that, provided witli organs analogous to our present 
ones, he may be able ia manifest himself to ua hy means ap. 
propriato to liis new sphere, and anhjeet to the laws which 
regulate tho intercommunication. 

My attention was first called to Chav^o's lecture by M. 
Leon Favre, a name honored by Spiritualists. Since Chavee 
delivered it, tlie progress of the spiritual phenomena has sup- 
plied wonderful confirmation of the truth of his opinions. 
Spirits have manifested their power, not only ot rc-mateiializ- 
ing, for tho purpose of temporary use or exbibitioii, p^rts 
and members not diitingulshabio from those of tlie human 
body, bat (hey have presented entire human Dgnrea, appro- 
priately clad, conversing and moving about in the light in 
the midst of a circle of inquin-ri, wallting arm-in-arm with 

^d by Google 

24 THE SUPEIilOR OEGANISM. 

mortals, writing lettera, performing, with liigli powers of 
execution, on the piano, and giving other proofs ol faculties 
not dillcrlng from those of oidinary mortals. 

The unceasing atomic changes of the material body, and 
tho preservation of tho human identity tlirough tliem all, 
present tlie sufQeient and logical reason why thcto should bo 
ft superior and permanent organism ; in short, asptritual body. 
Tbo wings of the butterfly lio folded in the worm. If man la 
destined to a future state, all tlie analogies of Nature conspire 
to suggest Uiat the future body ought to exist wrapt In tho 
present. 

Tho resurrection of the natural body of Jesus Is neither a 
pledge nor a type of our own. There is much in tlic Ciblo 
narrative ol tliis event. that is incongruous and inconsistent 
I cannot deny tho power of spirits to work a seeming miracle. 
But what we want tor tlie proof of out own immortality is a 
fact tliat shall show us that, after Ihc destruction and disap- 
pearance of the natural body, (lie spirit can still manifest it- 
self to tlie human senses. Immortality must bo inferred from 
a rosurreotion of life quite independent of the corruptible 
body that is laid in tiio tomb to mingle, like other corporeal 
psuvitB which we arc all tho timo casting off, witli the ele- 

If, as clairvoyance proves, tho mind can see without the aid 
of light or of the optic nerve, and hear without the agency of 
the apparatus of tho tar, there must be spiritual organs of 
sight and heating distinct from the physical , and If tlieio are 
spiritual organs of sight and hearing, it is legitimate to 
coneinde that there is a complete spiritual organization or 
body 

The phenomenal fact'? of Spiritualism all concur in estab- 
lishing tliii hj pothesis All apparitions of depai ted men and 
women are In the imman form. 

"In apparitions," saysIiOclte, "there is something that ap- 
pears; that liliich a^eara 13 not immatarial." 

With more force than lie was aware of (for he wrote in igno- 
rance of tlie reeiint phenomeiiit), C'aro, an eliSiiUBnt French 

^d by Google 

THE MORAL ELEMENT. as 

writer, wliom I Iierfi translate, denifinds: "Does the wliole 
(iuestiOQ of out future liCoiedHco itself for us to tliG inquiry 
wither the soul's mslaphysical principle ehall sa/isistl AV 
BUrcdlynotl What Splrifualism, in accordance with llio in- 
stinctive faith of the human race, oiILh iramcrtality, H tlic im- 
mortality o( a\o psraon; of that particniar soul wliieh lias 
tLought, loved, acted, stmggled, suffered during a life oE uioro 
orlossosleut. It ia the persistence of tiiisindiviiiual existence, 
l^xepins, if I may so say. after death, ihs physiojnims aJiieh it 
ereatedforiUclfhera, Uiosign of Itg distinct and separate re- 
ality. This Immortality alone interests ns [ every otiicr Kind 
of immortality leaves us absolutely unaffected and insonslhle. 
It is only by an effort of abstraction that I can seraraty my 
substance from ray person." 

Tliero are those who, in order to magnify the moral element 
in our nature, would have us rest apathetic in regard to all 
physical evidences of a future life. According to these writ- 
ers it Is only a coarso realism that seeks for palpable proofs, 
Kant tells us that the disinterested nature of our morality is 
Impaired if we give to our actions for end tlie perspective of 
Immortality. 

Mr. Emerson adopts this idea; he objects tj our severing 
doration from tho moral elements,- to our teaching the im. 
mortality of tho soul as a doetHjie, and maintaining it by evi- 
dences. " No inspired mind," lie tells us, " wr asks this ju£j. 
Hon, or condcseands to these cnidencis." 

This is I1I3I1 tall:, but is It true talk ? These echoes of Eant 
(who, in his turn, gets his scntiiaent from the ancient Stoics 
and Sadducees), were finely satirized by Schiller who, I tliint, 
will pass for an "inspired mind." Ho says: "I find plests- 
nro In my friends ; it Is agroeablo to mo to do my duty; all 
this diairassca me, for thus I am not virtuous." 

Was Paul, then, not "inspired" wlien lie said to his disci- 
ples, "If Christ bo not raised, your faith is vain?" Didho 
not here " condescend " to phenomena] evidences as the basis 
of faitli ? Docs our Concord aago claim an inspiration supe. 
riorto that of Paul? 

^d by Google 

26 ME. EMEKSON ANSWERED. 

Was Socrates not inspired" when he drew his confident 
belief In immortality Iiom the fact that he was in communi- 
catioDnith 1 <:pLrit? 

Noinspiied mau condescends to these evidences," says 
Mr Lmcrson winch I would supplement with tho romarfc, 
No inspired man CDiidcsiends to any thing or to any person. 
Condiscension is for tlie vulgar and self-seeking. If Mr. 
Emerson moans tliat the inspired man overlooks or disdains 
any (acts of Nature however lowly, then I say. Nay ; on the 
contrary his inspiration will be Just in proportion to Lis 
recognition of what is true and Le will see in the physical 
eTtdcneca of a Iicrenfter none other tlian the Divine imprint. 

Tho Eev Josepli Mav reptits a common but fallacious re- 
mark when he says The doctrine of immortality cannot be 
demonstrated scient flcally and to the intellect. It rests alto- 
gether on faith 

Nij itmayrtst on knowledge. Why is it tliat the belief 
fn immortality is stionger among savages, Ilindoos, and Chi- 
nese tlian amonjj cult vitcd Christians ? It is because the for- 
mer Iiave encountered hard, objective factswhicli liave forced 
on them the belief. They Iiavo seen, have felt, have heard 
tho spirits. 

It is related of a Ilindoo woman that she allowed her son to 
cut oft !ier head, so that she might, as a ghost, pursue and pun- 
isli an enemy who had wronged tlio family. Parallel cases 
are numerous. They do not spring from faith j they aro not 
the chimeras of mere superstition ; theyrestoutiie conviction 
inspired by familiar objective facts. 

Arguments for tJic imraorlality of the sou! have been drawn 
from tho universality of tlic belief among all tribes and at ail 
periods of lime. I have licard of ft pious Frencliman who 
used to peruse every new book of travels witli fear lest he 
should learn of some tribe who did not have this belief. lie 
dreaded the loss of a staple argument for a future state. 

But an argument that is lims contingent is of little vatne. 
Stil! the fact remains; but Spiritualism traces it to its true 
soiTce, and puts on it the only construction that makes it o( 
Bny importance. 

^d by Google 

GENESIS OF TUE BELIEF. 27 

If any one doubts that the belief in a future state is eoni- 
mon to all races of meu, let liini read Mr. E. B. Tvlor'3 
"PnmltlvQCLilture,"in whicli work tlio fact of this Lei icf 
beins llms universal is mado to take its place aiiong the ad- 
missions of .1 careful ahd comprehensivo critical science. 

Tlio researches of geologists sliow that oven tlie men of 
tbo pro-historic period believed fully in a hereafter for man. 
In tlic tenth chapter of Lyell's "Antiquity of Man," there is 
an account of the discoveries In the cave ot Auvignac, In 
France, from which it appears that men even in the far-off 
times, that only geology can reckon, had their funeral feasts 
and preparations, showing that, like the North American 
Indians, they fitted out tho departing spirit witli food and 
Implements for liis journey. They believed in immortality. 

Cutwiiatis tho genesis of tho belief? "It comes," says 
one, "from tho poetical fancy." "Nay, it is born of Iho 
moral element in man," says another. " My affections de- 
mand it," say Buckle, Hortenso Bonaparte, and every loving 
soul. " It is the mere eraviug of egoism and morbid desire," 
says Biiehner. "It exists only in tho subjective imagina- 
tion," says Pcnerbaeh. "It originates," says Strauss, "in 
tlie survivor's retention of tho conception of the deceased, 
which meets him with delusive reality in dreams." " It is a 
sentiment, a daydream, a morbid and presumptuous conceit, 
tlioolfspringof a diseased state of tlie pulmonary organs," 
say Messrs. Togt, Moleschott, Taine, and otiiers. 

All these theories are scattered like mist, by Spiritualism, 
which declares to us that the proofs which have made tho be- 
lief ia immortality so universal and effective do not eome in 
tlie largo sense from anything so capricious as human fancj 
and desire, so questionable and evanescent as iiuman tradi- 
tion, or so transient and fickle as human sentiment and opin- 
ion. They do not spring from any arbitrary systems, rituals, 
theologies, philosophies, religions, wliatsoever. Oa tlie con- 
trary, the abldiug proofs spring from certain constantly re- 
eurriug facts of liuman nature, such as Modern Spiritualism 
adduces, and which, though they may liave their limitations, 

^d by Google 

28 PHENOMENiL PROOFS. 

and may not bo open to tiie Immediate experience andcom- 
maudof all persons at will, are yet so general, sosurprislngin 
their cliaiacter, and so widely credited by those wlio have ex- 
perienced them, that they have kept alive through the agea, 
among the eoltivated as well as the uncivilized races, that he- 
lief in a tutui'o state for whicli merely speculative reasonera 
assign so many false origins. 

The author of "Oriental r^eligiona," Mr. SamuelJohnaon, 
does not dissent from Kant and Emerson. lie tliinks that 
the evidences of immortality whicli do not mcft certain con- 
ditions of assoraucoare "crude and imperfect " These con- 
ditions, as far as I can glean thtm from his text, ore ; " To 
live in the whole ; to know God by discernment of the soul 
as real being ; to know ono a self as ono with necessary be- 
ing. For," asks Mr. Johnson, "how can we possibly know 
ourselves immortal otherwise than by eipenence of what Is 
Imperishable, and by knowing that we are in and of and in- 
separable from it ? " 

Among the evidences to which Mr Johnson objects, as 
locfciDg " spiritual vitality and relation," are those which rest 
" on testimonies to Ihe rcappearajiceof many peracm after their 
bodilj/ death, <m thnmrjh tome natural lam; and those which 
proceed on the ground that we can be spiritually ted by the 
reflection of our curiosity or desire, or erten by the echoes of 
tnir gomp, from behind the veiV A blow would seem to be 
here aimed at Modern Spiritualism. 

When the question ia, What is the destiny of mon 1 to reply 
by telling the interrogator to " live in the whole," to "discern 
the soul as real being," may be, for all that I know to the 
contrary, to address a certain class of minds profitably and 
Intelligibly ; but surely there must be a large class of 
thoughtful persons whose wants are not at all met by " condi- 
tions o£ assurance " like these. As well might you point 
them to a fog-bank, and say, " See there a proof of the eternal 

To assume that these unsatisfied persons are an Inferior or- 
fer of minds will hardly answer. Alexander Humboldt was 

^d by Google 

ALL DARE. 29 

a stubborn realist and disbeliever, but a great man nevertbe- 
ie»3. Tlie notion tbab Uie belief in Immortality, nbicb one 
gets from the piienomenai proofs of it, is "crudo and imper- 
fect" as compared with tha.tw]iloli another gets from discern- 
ing "the Boul as real being," 13 certainly not established by 
any evidences of superior insight, faith, or refinement on the 
part of those who would undervalue the process by which the 
Spiritualist arrives at bis convictions. 

Nothing can be trivial which impresses me with a belief in 
my immortality. Whether It bo a " testimony to the reap- 
jwaranceof a person after bis bodily death," or an "echo of 
gossip from behind the veil"— whether it be the waving of a 
long- vanished )iand or tho simple movement of a table inde- 
pendent of human touch— it it serve the purpose of convinc- 
ing me that I shall survive the dissolution of the mortal body, 
then is the evidence to me good and suEBcient, and I will 
" condescend to It " with a grateful heart. 

Is the proof palpable nut wanted? Consider the deadness 
of all belief in a future for man among some of the foremost 
minds of the age. Listen to the almost contemptuous denials 
that come (from such men as Haeekel, Vogt, Feuerbach, 
ISuehner, Moleschott, and many of the leading scientists of 
Germany. See tlie indisposition of their brother scientists tn 
England and America to gainsay what they so persistently 
and boldly assert, near the shouts of approval from a crowd- 
ed scientific assemblage in Germany when Togt proclaimid 
atheism and annihilation as the creed ot science. 

If facts like these will not satisfy yoii that the " condescen- 
sion" which stoops to palpable evidences of immortality ia 
not superfluous or untimely, listen to the words that come 
from the lips of so devout a Christian as tho late Albert 
Barnes, of Piiiladelphia, well known to the religious public 
at homo and abroad. Hear bis cry of doubt nnd despair : 
" It is all dark, dark, dark to my soul, and I cannot disguise 
it. In (bo distress and anguish of my own spirit I confess 
that 1 see no light whatever." 

Hardly less desponding than this in tone was tlie ri cent 

^d by Google 

30 INTO THE LIGHT. 

ntteranoe of President MeCosh, ol Princeton College, whilo 
oiliciating at a funeral. 

Turn from wailinga of anguish like tUcso to the last words, 
almost playful in their serenity, of t!ie Spiritualist, Socrates. 
Crito asks liini, " How and wliero shall wo bury you ?" Soc- 
rates rebukes the phrase. "Bury me," ho replies, "in any 
way you please, »/'jou can catch me, and I do not cscapo from 
yeu.'" And, at the same time smiling and looking around on 
his hearers, he said, "I cannot persuade Crito. my frltnils, 
that I am this Socrates who is now conversing with you and 
arranging each part of this discourse; but ho obstinately 
thinkslam that which he shall shortly bthoia'dead, andlie 
wants to know how he shall bury me. But that which I have 
been arguing with you bo Ions, ""^* when I have ilrunk this 
poison I shall bo with you no longer, but shall depart straight- 
way to some happy stale o( the blessed, I seem to have ar- 
gued JD vain, and I cannot convince hira. . . . Say uot, at 
the interment, that Socrates is laiil out, or is carried out, or is 
buried. Say that you bury my body. Bury it, llien, in such 
a manner as is pleasing to you, and as you thick is most 
agreeable to our laws." 

The sequel of tho familiar narrative, tho introduction ol 
the hemlock, the drinking of it amid tho tears and lamenta- 
tions of friends, llic solemn silence enjoined by himself, the 
pacing to and fro, the perfect equanimity and the unquench- 
able faitii manifested in alihis last words and acts, show that 
Socrates fulfilled In his deaUi all the professions of his life. 

As no unworthy pendant to this picture of thedeath of Soc- 
rates, learn how another Spiritualist, Mrs. liosanna C. Ward, 
of Cincinnati, met her end. For several years she had said 
to hcrJiusband that she should pass away in the autumn ot 
1873, in tho twilight Of a beautiful day. The fact virified 
her prediction. She, too, like Socrates, was ft sensitive or me- 
dium, in her relations to spiritual influences. 

A few days before her departure she sent for a Unitarian 
elurgyman, tho liev. STr. Tickers, and requested him to con- 
duct the services at her funeral, and to say, ■' This woman did 

^d by Google 

A FEMALE SOCIiATES. 31 

notdleintlie/ai(Aof Spiritualism, tut inan. abaoluU ktiawl- 
edge of tlie reality Of the after-life and the fact of spirit-inter- 

Shc arranged all lier aEfairs, and gave minute directions. 
" After the spirit leaves tlie body," she said, "lay the !)ody 
out for cooling in thia room ; lower the windows about sii 
inches, and allow nobody to come in," &c. . . . "Theremust 
be no sitting up. (io, ail, and take your needed rest, as / 
ajiatt hedoing." 

The day preceding her death she lapsed into a deep trance, 
and was absent three hours. Daring this time her arm was 
pulseless and her breathing was imperceptible. When slie 
re-took possession of hex body, she said, "There is so much 
life in the back brain that I could not pasaaway. The hack 
brain must die a little more before I can leave." She then 
said to Mr. Ward, who liad just handed her a flower, "Tho 
flowers are a thousand times more beautiful in the spirit- 
world than these I But all God's works arc beautiful, if we 
are only in sympathy with them. My dear, it is all right." 

She then spoke of the interviews she had been having wltii 
departed relatives and friends, and said, " I will go to mor- 
row." On the morrow, a few moments before she passed 
away, she gave some instructions for her husband's comfort, 
and then, with a smile, looliinj! him in tlie face, said, "My 
work Is now done ; tho curtain falls." And so tho welipro- 
pared spirit passed on to the better clime, "tlie purer ether, 
tte diviner air." 

What truly " Inspired " mind can depreciate evidences that 
could lend such a lustre to death as they did in these eases of 
Socrates and Mrs. Ward? Who shall disparage the proof 
palpable of immortality when it can thus give us joy for 
mourning, beauty for ashes, and make the dissolution of tho 
mortal body the opened pathway to a nobler and more beau- 
tiful life ? 

It is by no means contended tliat tlje mere knowledge of 
immortality, any more than of anatomy, inspires all tlie vir- 
tues. We have seen that it may be accompanied with ex- 

^d by Google 

32 MR. HAZARD'S EXPERIENCES. 

treme vlndictivcness aiiiil malifinlty. Belief in an ytliinR must 
1)0 vitaiized by rlglit tliinlcing before it can be prodnctive o( 

But to aay tbat tiic reflective mind is not lifted to a higher 
plane of tliouglit and aspiration by an assured sense of con- 
tiguous life, is an at>surdlty. As welt mi^ht it ha said that 
the man wlio expected to live only a week would make tho 
same provisions for Ills life that he would if he expected to 
live a century. As well might it bo said tliat the Ptolemaic 
view ot tbo universe Is as frnitful in sublime conceptions as 
tlie Copemican. 

Spiritualism regards man, not only from the side of his lim- 
itations, but ot his possibilities. "Wliydost thou wonder, 
oil, man," says Isidore, " at the height of the stars or the 
depth of tlie sea? Enter into thine own soul, and wonder 
there I" 

CHAPTER III. 

In the year 1871 tlie materializations of splrit-forraa at the 
house of Mr. Keeler, in Jloravia, N. Y., began to attract pub- 
lic attention. The medium, Mrs. Mary Andrews, was o( 
Irish parentage, and lived for some time as a domestic in Mr, 
Heeler's family. She was described (Dec., 187I)as"n well- 
formed, comely married woman between twenty-live and 
thirty years old, and tho mother of three little girls." 

Mr. Thomas E. Hazard, of Bhode Island, has given. In 
his "Eleven Days in Moravia," a clear account of tliochar- 
acter of tlio phenomena. Mr. Hazard— who must now liavo 
numbered liis three-score and ten years— Is well known to me 
personally as one of tho most diligent and careful investiga- 
tors ot the facts of Spiritualism. A man of culture and ot 
leisure, a wholly independent witness, his testimony is enti- 
tled to tliu greatest respect lie is a brother of Gowland G. 
Hazard, distinguished among metaphysical writers f.jr his 
volume entitled "Freedom of Mind in Willing." 

^d by Google 

MR. HAZARD'S EXPERIENCES. 33 

The manifestations at Moravia used to eommmce with a 
"dark circle," at whkli questions would be answered by 
spirit 11 gilts, llireo appearing as an affirmative. Then tlio 
keys of the piano would, be struck, water would bo sprinkled 
in tbe faces of the sitters, and stars, or lights, would appear 
ia various parts of the room, and sometimes engage in play- 
ful exhibitions, as if mingling in a dance. Spirlt^voices 
would ]oiii in the singing. The heads and persons of sitters 
would be patted by spirit-hands, and often spirits would man- 
ifest themselves to the sitters by speaking audibly, or in dis- 
tinct whispers, and sometimes at considerable length. A 
spirit- voice would at last call for a light, and tlie dar'- "^"nce 
would close. 

The mrdium would Uien take her seat in a cabinet some 
ten feet by four or five in size, and liaTing an aperture of 
about twelve by thirteen inches, screened by a piece of black 
broadcloth some fourteen inches square. Tlie clotli was fas- 
tened at the top only, ou the inside of tlie apprture, so as to 
admit or csclude the llgltt, and the spirits in attendance 
would raise or drop it at their pleasure. The room where 
the spectators sat would be partially lighted by a kerosene 
lamp, so adjusted as to reflect on the aperture. 

After singing. In which spirit-voices would sometimes Join, 
faces, busts, arras and hands would appear, the faces being 
visible, and even the motion of the lips in speaking being 
plainly discernible. Frequently fliese faces would be readily 
recognized by some one or more of the spectators as repre- 
sentations of departed friends ; and the voices would be some- 
times so characteristic as to affordasufflcient test of Identity. 

Mr. Hazard describes tbe apparent efforts made by his de- 
ceased wife to manifest her presence at Moravia. For sever- 
al years previous he had been promised, through various me- 
diums, that, before lie joined her tn spirit-life, she wouid be 
able not only to show herself, but to converse with him as 
plainly as she ever did whilst on earth. Through two medi- 
ums she had expressed her intention of manifestiug herself at 
Moravia. 

^d by Google 

M MR. HAZARD'S EXPERIENCES. 

Ou the I4th and 21st of December, 1B71, a message, pur- 
porting to be from Theodore Parker, in rijgard to tiiese manl- 
Jestations, camo through Mrs. Staats, of Xew York, in which 
the following extraordinary passage occurii : "As these mani- 
festations increase, they will spread everywhere, and the re- 
snlt will be mH(» talking face to faee with man. I see great 
advancement and earnest investigation everywhere. One 
thing is ucctain ; nothing else can make man a law to himself 
and a light to others, and there is but one thing to look for 
progress in, namely, individual reform — learning to think and 
actfor one's self." 

The prediction, italicized above, was soon singularty veti' 
fied, in the case of the spirit "Katie King" in London. 

On one occasion an accompanyingsplrit described Mr. Haz- 
ard's wife as "standing back, partly because she could not 
attain the proper conditions and partly to give place to other 
spirits who were anxious to manifest themselves to tlieir 
friends." Several times she would tlirow her arms at full 
length, with hands clasped, out of the aperture. The eichibi- 
tion was perfectly life-like and natural. 

Another day, when Mr. Hazard asked if she still meant to 
mate another effort to show her face, in reply an arm was 
thrown upward some twelve or fifteen inches above the top of 
the aperture, in the full light, while she made lively raps on 
the partition with her fingers. 

At length, on one of the last days of his stay at Moravia, 
he saw a face gradually developing, or approaching the aper- 
ture, that he soon recognized "unmistakably" as that of his 
wife. She seemed highly gratified, and so expressed horself. 
At first she wore spectacles. Then the face disappeared, 
but quickly returned without the spectacles, and " looking as 
natural as in earth-life." 

Upon this Mr. Hazard said : " It is enough, Fanny. I want 
no more ; I am now fully satisfied ;" at which she thrust her 
face partly out of the aperture, and said, in a clear, loud 
whisper, "Wo have tried hard, Thomas, to make myself plain 
to you, and I thank God that we have succeeded." 

^d by Google 

MK. HAZARDS EXPERIENCES. 33 

Tlie figure was witiiln s]\ feet of where Mr. Ilazard sat, 
and Le saw her lips move as distinctly and naturally wliilst 
slie waa spealiinR as lio ever saw tliem in cartli-life. Over- 
come witli Joyful emotion lie said, "Kiss me, darling!" 
wliereupon lier hand was twice raised to her llpa as she threw 

"It may be imagined," says Mr. Hazard, " what my emo- 
tions were, just as the last moment of my last seance was 
about to expire, to see my wife's face suddenly presented be- 
fore me, as plain and distinct as I ever saw it in our own 
house— not as it looked in the last weary hours of life, nor 
even yet as it was in leas mature years, when the color had 
partially faded from her cheel;s, but in the full bloom of 
health, and all the gloiious beauty that so pre-eminently dis- 
tinguished her early womanhood. Before this crowning 
proof, my experiences had baniihed all doubts from my mind 
as regards a future state of existence ; but now, even Iwlief 
tliat had passed into knowledge, was donbly confirmed. I liad 
at last obtained all I sought for. I had looked upon the re-incar- 
nated spirit- face of a loved one, the identity of whose features 
I am not only willing to afBrm to, under the paina and penal- 
ties of perjury, before any assemblage of mortals or tribunal 
on earth, but, iE need be, swear to it, on peril of my salva- 
tion, before the assembled hosts of heaven and the judgnient 
Beat of God." 

In a letter, dated 1873, Mr. Hazard writes : 

" For the last seventeen years 1 have been an Investlgalor 
of the alleged spirit phenomena ; during wIjIcIi time my 
leisure, as well as my inclination, has prompted me to hold 
converse, tlirough the agency of many scores of those sensi- 
tive and peculiarly organized persons called ' spirit mediums," 
withwhat Ideein tobesplritsot the so-called dead; and of 
the many Im'ndreds or thousands with wliom I have in this 
way communicated, all that have referred to the subject allhe 
testify that there la a spiritual form involved in every human 
body, and that this forni not only retains ItsnaturaUifeand 
Identity on passing to the hishet life, but is clothed in vesture 
more or leas resplendent and beautiful, or otherwise, in ac- 
cordance with ita moral attainments or degrees of Innocence 
or guilt, thatattached toitat theperlod it passed from earth, 
or which it has since acquired in spirit-life. 

"With like unanimity returning splrila allege that under 

^d by Google 

86 OTHEK WITNESSES. 

medloniistlc conditions they have, with the aid o( aomeoccnlt 
ftlchemy unexplalnable to mat^^rial senses, tlic power to ix- 
tract elements from their surruundiiigs, whcro with tbeyare 
cnaMed to present themselves in an exact resemblance to 'their 
earth hody, together with Its clothlnj; and peculiaritieii, and 
thus enable their eartli friends -to identify them, and, In uinny 
instances, respond to their loving advances more readily tliaa 
they otherwise would. Absurd as this seems to some, and 
once seemed to me,ofthefa«tl have now no doubt ; nor.wilh 
the many and varied experiences 1 liave had, can I believe 
that anytliin^ will ever shake my belief and acceptance 
of it." 

Mr. L. A. Blgelow, of Boston, an investigator who shrinks 
from no trouble in verif jinR a fact, and whose candor is be- 
yond a iiuestion, was at Sloravia, October 20th, 1871; and ho 
relates the following as a part Of his experiences there : 

"As the circle was small, we were within eight feet of the 
opening, so that everything was visible. Very soon two deli- 
cate female hands, closed and then opened, as i( in benedic- 
tion, appeared at the window before us ; a face was next seen, 
but indistinctly. When asked whose frientl it was, a finger 
seemed to point to a lady at my left, and then move toward 
me. I inquired it I were the one indicated, whereupon the 
whole hand was shown and shaken, as it for Joy. I then 
requested tlie face to come more into the light. U did so, but 
not far enough to enable me to distinguish It clearly. I then 
said, ' Please present yourself fully in the aperture,' when! 
most plainly saw a man's face, with gray wlilskers, gold spec- 
tacles and AafiJAaid Ireci^'iized it beyond question as that 
of my father-in-law, the late Otis Tufta, of this city, and so 
remarked aloud. It bowed as If tx> give assent, and disap- 
peared. I endi avored to recall it, tliatit might speak to mo, 
s,... _.;.i,„..i — ;i _ jj^ jjjjj^ present knew my name or 

ise of the stance." 

Mr. Isaac Kelso, of Alton, Dl., writes to the St. Louis Dem- 
ocrat, (January, 1873.) as follows : 

" I sawmany strange faces nt the aperture— some days from 
ten to fifteen or twenty— tho most of whom were reeognizi'd 
by some one or more present in tiie circle. At length two of 
my sisters succeeded in materializing tliemseives, and appear- 
ed side by side at the aperture. The recognition was un- 
doubted, my sister at my side recognizing them at the same 
moment I did; and strangers present remarking upon the 
family lesemblance. But the certainty was made doubly 
certain when the apparitions mentioned incidents in their 
earth-life and ours wlilcli we readily and vividly remem- 

" A few days subsequent, our mother appeared, threw open 
tho door of the cabinet, and showed herself to us from head to 
foot. 

"Six times during tho three weeks an old acquaintance 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT SPEECH. 8J 

who died a mateclalist, appeared to me, looked and talked 
naturally; referred repeatedly to his materialistic notions, 
and Low unhappy they made liim ; said mucli about his pres- 
ent condition, and its advantages over tlie former ; tried to 
give mo an ideit of spirit-lifo, the pnrsuits, pleasures and 
amusements o( spirits, as well as their institutiona for doing 
pood, educating tlie ignorant, and lifting higher tlio low and 

a gentleman came there, 

in^r l[onie my wife observed, "I would go too if I thought 
mother would show herself ttiere ; but as she was always op- 
posed to Spiritualism, I 'm sure she 'II have no desire to make 
any manifestation!" But lot after the light stance began, 
who should appear first at the aperture but this same old 
grandmother! She bent her eyes affectionately upon the 
citlldren. The little );lrls gazed a moment in mute astonish- 
ment, then both at once, clapping their hands in eestaoy, ex- 
claimed; 'Grandmal Granduial' 

"'Keep still," said the father, in a low tone of yoieo, and 
evidently much moved ; then to the apparition he said, ' You 
did n't believe in this a tew weeks ago?' 

"'No,'replied the spirit; 'but, thank God, Itls true I' These 
words were uttered very distinctly and with a peculiar stress 
of voice, indicating earnestness and deep feeling. The old 
lady had been dead but three weeks." 

Messrs. Daniel D. Bennett and John Hayward, under date 
of New York, Sept. 25th, 1872, testify that in the light circle 
they saw several faces, arms and hands, and that tlie faces so 
closely resembled those whom they represented, that in near- 
ly all cases they were readily recognized ; that the late Kev. 
John Pierpont came and was simultaneously recognised by 
many, and that lie made a short address, concluding with the 
words, "Thank God, we live after death." 

Tlie following I^ a specimen of the addresses made by the 
spirits at JUoravia ; 

" Friends, it is much better to say nothing, unless yon can 
say something goixi. You will all be sorry it you have In- 
jured any one, but never for the gooil you have (lone. Be not 
ashamed, friends, to proclaim the trutli of Spiritualism to the 
world. The time Is approaching when you will bo proud of 
it. Oh, how I long to speak to the hearts that are crushed 
when their loved ones are takeiv from them, and they think 
they liave laid them in thegroundt Ilongtosay, 'Rejoicol 
they are all free. Be glad ! they are all happy in the Hpirit^ 
land.' And, friends, it is but a snort time before you will meet 
them. God bless you all !" 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT SPEECH. 

All very simple this— very common place, you will say— 
language which n child might have uttered t And yet may it 
not bo tliat the highest trutha are ever the commonest, lilco 
Hie common sunshine and the common air? Wliat more, af- 
ter all, than this substantially, could the highest seiapli have 
said in tlie way of saving truth ? 

Occasionally, In tlio darli circles at Moravia tho spirits 
would speak through ram nd nee, .1 skep- 

tic having blackened h ra ud w h printers' ink, 

the ink was found, uck, on tlie 

moutii of tlie medium p d w re raised, as 

usual, but there was n d h ca T act lias been 

repeatedly proved tha wli n li ng matter is 

taken on the hand or lips of the spirit, it may reappear on tho 
corresponding part of the medium's person. Tho "nerve 
aura," " Psychic or electric force," or what over it may be that 
is abstracted from the medium to form tho materialization, 
carries back with it the foreign substance it has contracted. 
Innocent mediums iiave sometimes been unjustly condemned 
by persons Ignorant of this curious fact. 

Atasitting described by Mrs. Chester Packard, No. 83 Lan- 
caster street, Albany, N. T., as occurring Nov. 2l3t, 1S71, at 
Moravia, a spirit with a wlilte beard and long white hair came 
to the aperture, and said, "Friends, I am glad to see you here. 
Youhave come to Moravia to see si range things, hut they will 
he seen in other places within a few years at furthest ; you will 
meet your spirit- friends on the highway, and tiiey will,eomo 
into your houses, and you will recognize them without fear or 
doubt." 

The first part of the prediction has been verified in a strik- 
ing manner as we have alreadyseen. This spirit, when about 
to leave, having hcen asked for his Jiamo, laughed and said : 
"Tou liave been singing ' John Brown's body lies mouldering 
in the grave," and you did not know John Brown when ho 
was talking to you." 

Mrs. Packard gives the following account of her recogni- 
tion of tho presence of three of her departed relatives ; 

^d by Google 

MRS. PACKAED'S TESTIMONT. 39 

" AmoDK the floating lights was one, star-like in appear- 
ance, that SHemecl to work bv itself, or for a purpose of its 
own. Finally it became dotaclied from the rest of the lights, 
and floated away to the extreme corner of the room, when it 
began to cross and recross the room, coming a little nearer to 
roe each time it crossed. It was nearly as liigh np as theceil- 
ing. Sly wliolo attention was attracted to it. Soon it gained 
a position immediately over my head, and, while I was strain- 
ing my eyes to look upward, I wasnwareof a presence around 
me, and in ft moment the sweet voice of my spirit- son said, 
'Mother! motherl' 

"Hetooklioldof ray left hand and patted it so lovingly: 
he seemed to have my hand bttwei'n both of lila, as I could 
feel a hand on each side of mine. lie then raised his hand to 
my head, and smoothed my forehead. He drunimnl on tlio 
([lasses of my spectacles, and then seemed to take liold with 
both hands and remove the spectacles entirely from my head, 
and then placethem back again— this operation being repeat- 
ed three times. Just then the spirits called for a Itglit, my 
son's manifestations at once ceased, and the star became in- 
visible. The spectacles my son removed from my head were 
ft pair that lie placed there himself for the first time, some 
seven or eight years ago." 

After the lamp was lighted, the spirits began to sliow them- 
selves at the aperture. Soon, in a full glare of light, she saw 
her deceased husband. She writes : 

". Ho stood before me fimlhng ; his lips were moving, as if 
holding an earnest couversatioii, altliongh I heard no sound. 
As he seemed about to move away I called him hack, saying, 
'Do nit leave; I want to see you a^^ain.' In a moment he 
was back again, and my mother stood beside him, looliInRSO 
happy and smiling at me I Bhe stood Ions enough for all in 
tite room to observe that she wore a cap with a full border on 
each side, and plain across the top, with loops of narrow 
white satin ribbon in the border on each, and tied under tlie 
chin witli white satin ribbon. She wore (as in life) a band 
of brown hair acrosa the forehead. The liand seemed pushed 
backallttle too high, and showed some of her gray hair be- 
low the band— which was very natural. She looked precise- 
ly as Hho did when in the form. 

" Assho was moving away, I as 
...ut I might see her more. Slio n(mu> u, ou-uc'i, uni, r-u^f;uuv, 
but did not return. My husband went out of sight, and re- 
tnmeil five or six times at my request. Each time ho came I 
looked at himclosi'ly; 1 saw ft dimple on his cheek and a pe- 
culiar wrinkle in tho ont-comer'Ot his eye— the same he used 
tohave In cartli-IIfo when much pleased. All was solite-likcl 
My husband looked as hensi'd to In health, and very much 
better tlian ho did for months before ho passed away ; his lips 
moved as if talking, but I did notsee my mother's lips move 
at alt. I looked after them until they were gone ; 1 f<'lt the 
great question answered — that the soul liveoon, and. under 

E roper eonditioii, could r' j.- ... _.. --.,..-.-.._ j 
y,ithosoleft behind!" 

^d by Google 

40 DK. SLADE'S MBDIUMSHIP. 

Dr. A. S. Hayward, writing from Moravia, underrate of 
AuR. 31st, 1872, after describing tlie phenomena, remarks : 
" In conclusion, I would say, tliat what occurs in the pres- 
ence of Mrs. Audiews I helleve to he done by disembodied 
spirits that have once lived on this earth. I could find hardly 
a person who has attended the acances who did not hold to 
the same opinion." 

Testimonials similar to these could be multiplied to fill 
large volumes i but the time has gone by when they were 
needed. They are now corroborated by the larger and more 
conclusive plienomena to which I liave yet to call attention. 

The phenomena of materialization have attended the me- 
diumship of so many in the United States that I can only 
attempt to narrate a few well-attested cases. 

In the presence of Dr. Henry Slade, of New York, remark- 
able physical proofs of spirit power liave been repeatedly 
Witnessed. Mrs. A. A. Andrews, of SprluBfield, Mass., (1873) 
testifies in regard to some ol these as follows : — 

■' I have had a spirit-hand write a letter on paper placed 
upon my lap, when the room was sufSciently lighted tyRas 
for me t6 seS distinctly the long lead pencil held in the white 
flncm. and remaining In sight, directly under ray eyes, until 
thewriuSgwas finished. When both hand and pencil disap. 
peared ; in a. moment afterwards the latter was tlirown upon 
the table, close to our hands, from a point opposite to where 
the medium sat. , .. ... , ,. , . „o_,„ 

" I have seen the faces of spirits within three feet of me, 
about whose Identity I could no more imstako than I coad 
fail to recoonlze members of my own family who are stiu in 
thematerial body. 1 have watched these ff .^ co"^^^^.,"'"* 
form from what seemed a luminous mist. I have seen tliem 
smile brightly and naturally upon me. 

" I liave had one among them, in compliance with a sug- 
gestion made from the rmpniseof the moment, turn away, 
Bhowing me the back of the'^head, that I might recogui/e the 
naturally curling hair, falling upon the neck, aj. worn in lite. 
Ihavcwatcliedthe movinnlips, and heard whispered mes- 
sages of love and warning sent to absent friends. 

Communications purporting to come from Mrs. Andrews's 
spirit-son were written upon a slate which was laid in full 
View, with a fragment of pencil beneatli it ; and sometimes 
this took place while the slate was held by herself. The men- 
tal proofs of Identity were so strong, that alter many repetitions 

^d by Google 

MKS. HOLLIS-S MEDITJMSniP. 41 

and eTer-recurrinff tests, doubt became more difficult to licr 
tlian belief. A hand, in sliope and size Jilic lier soil's, canio 
forth in bvood daylight. Shceawand felt it; it patted and 
caressed her, aad played with licr dicss ; it toot out Iior 
watcli by a guard which used to belong to liim, and then the 
following words were written ;— " Dear mother, always wear 
my guard ; I lovo to sec you have it." 

The piienomenon of slate-writing In tho light, independent 
of human touch, has been witnessed by hundreds at Dr. 
Slade's stances. Mr. Clarke Irvine, of Oregon, Ilolt County, 
testitteU that he received a message which was written on a 
slate, placed on Lis own head, while Dr. Slado sat some yards 
from him, and llio message was correctly signed, "Thomas 
Irvine, your grandfather;" Jlr. Irvino never having seen 
the medium before, or communicated with liim in any way. 

Mr. n. Darnard, of Minneapolis, Minn., a stranger to Dr. 
Slade, brought a folding slate ot his own ; a grain of pencil 
was put inside of it, and wliile no one touched tho slate, and 
It lay before him in plain sight on tho table, a message, pur- 
jwrting to bo from Jlr, Barnard's mother, was written, 
which was so characteristic and apt, that ho says of it ; "I 
now have as good evidence of my mother's existence as I 
have of that of my brothers and sisters whoso letters I re- 
ceive by mail." 

Many of the manifestations known to Modern Spiritualism 
have occurred in tho presence of Mrs. E. J. Ilollis, of Louis- 
ville, Kentncky. These include levitations of tlio medium, 
slate- writing independent of the human touch, the exhibitioa 
of spirit hands, transmission ot messages through a common 
telegraph by spirit power, singing and talking by spirit voices, 
and, finally, tho materialization of spirit forms. 

For a period ot thirty weeks. Dr. N. C. Wolfe, of Cincin- 
nati, investigated the phenomena through Mrs. Ilollis, spar- 
ing no expenditure of time, money or personal case, in order 
to satisfy himself ot their character, and engaging other 
persons of well-known liitelUgence to cooperate with him. 
He gives the result in a volume of 543 pages (1S74). Ou tiis 

^d by Google 

42 MRS. HOLLIS'S MEDIUMSHIP. 

ETtli of May, 1872, lie received a test which could not fail to 
mate a deep impression ; lie saw and heard his deceased mother 
under circumstances which he describes as follows : 

"Thotable on which the music-box was placed, stood not 
more tlinn two feet from tho cabinet. I proceeded to wind it 
up, and was just turning to resume myeeat in thecircU', iu 
duln^ wliich I liad to faco tlio aperture. A» I did (hit, ibs- 
ttelifay molher'afaaaintAecpefiinffoftAeeabinetdooT. ' tVhy, 
mcithfi',' losclaimed, 'IsltpossibloV I riveted my gaztr upon 
hiT for twPiity sgcodcIh, durluK'whlcli tlnioebo sniili'd, bowed, 
and pronounced myuame. Tliecurtain tlieu Bwung between 
her (lice nod nie. All in tho room saw and lieatd as .1 did. 1 
was not more than two feet f roni thH-cabiuct and aperture, 

" I am not given to illusions, and rarely dream when aslnep, 
much lesH when awake. I nm avery cool, quiet man inemer- 
fceucles, and was never more so than upo-i this occasion. 
Every person In the circle saw this face,l)utonly I recognizrtl 
it Jl woi tap -mother' » face. She recognized me, and called 
mobymyciveu name. To make assurance doubly sure, I 
said, ' Mother, please materialize your l^t hand, and pnsient 
it at tho aperture.' 

"In a very brief space of time a left baud anpearedat the 
openiu}:, v>%th the foripMer »hvt at the mtddlejau t My 
motlitrr liad Just such a Anger on her left liana When a 
child Hherecelved a burn wliich contracted the tendon, and 
fixed the forefinger of her left Itand permanently in that 
position." 

:s innumerable could l>c named where peculiarities 
similar to that liero described liavo been reproduced, in these 
extemporized representations of tho mundane body. Quick 
as thought tho communicating spirit seem.s to be able to show 
the bodily scars or malformations which are needed for iden- 
tlGcatiou. 

On another oecaslonthe spirit- representation of Dr. Wolfe's 
mother remained at tho aperture two minutes, and was recog- 
nized not only by himself but by his nephew, a lad fifteen 
years old, who had never been at a seance before. 

It is unnecessary to record the many explicit testimonials 
to the recognition of departed friends in tho materiallzationi 
through Mrs. Hollis, Mr. D, U. Halo and his son, Clinton 
D. Hale, from Indiana, being present, both recognized simul- 
taneously, tho one a daughter, tho other a sister. A young 
lady appeared and wrote ; " Dear Mr, Hale, how kind you 
were to me ! " Mr. Hale wept as lie recognized the features of 
one whom he had assisted In her destitution. 

^d by Google 

KATIE IN PniLADELPHIA. 43 

Mr. F. B. FlimptOD, associate editor of the Cincinnati Com- 
mercial, gives, underdateof May 8th, 1873, an account of his 
invest igat ions. In tlio autumn of 1872 lio liaU studied the 
plicnomcna that take placo in llie presence of Mrs. Ilollls, 
and, though tliorouglily aatisGed ol their genuineness, was 
not quite sure that they could not bo explained upon somo 
Other than the spiritual solution. But to this he was driven 
after prosecuting his inquiries lurtlier; and such has been 
the fate of nearly all ttio peraevering investigators with whom 
I am acquainted. Ho concludes his Report as follows : 

"Begirning these Investigations as a skeptic, with a feeling 
aimostot contempt for believers in Spiritualism, but at the 
samotimo determined to testifyto the truth, regardlesa of 
the consequences to myself, to what other conclusion can i 
come, as one after another of my doubts Imve been vanquish- 
ed, ond my unbelief overcome, tiian tliat (heso manifestations 
UToprecUniyviMtfhevprofeutoba/ The conviction is forced 
npnn me, iliat intelllKences, invisllilo to us, savo as tliey 
manifest tiiemselves through the medium of i)erson8 jwculiar- 
iy endowed, can and do communicate with llie living, and 
that they bavo as absolutely a personal exiat«nce and identi- 
ty ns ourselves. 

"They not only assert this, but assure us that they 11 va m 
a world (13 rationally constructed forlhodeveloitment of their 
finite capacities audfortlielr iiroeressiou tostillbigliercon- 
ditiona of being. In manifesting theirpresencotoourgrosser 
sense, tbey assure ustliey employ natural agencies i and as 
thoworldbecomes mora receptlvcof the tnitli, theyonticl- 
patestlll greater power lo reveal ttiemselves, andcouvince 
lis that w«ftre indeed compassed about by an innumerable 
Cloud of witnesses, testifying to the immortality of num." 

The 12th of May, 1874, aapirit calling herself " Katie King " 
appeared in a materialized form at a sdanco in Philadelpliia, 
Mr. and Mrs, Holmes being the mediums. Dr. Henry T, 
Cliild, himself a " sensitive," and at the same time an expe- 
rienced and studious investigator, was present. He writes 
tliat on the 0th of June, while he and Robert Dale Owen were 
among tlio witnesses, Katie King appeared in " a very beauti- 
ful sliape, clotlied in wiiite robes." June 7tli, lliey iiad a long 
conversation with Katie at the cabinet window. She allowed 
Dr. Child to count her pulse ; it was about seventy-two per 
minute, and perfectly natural. She also permitted him 
to see her tongue, and asked if he tiiought she was "right 
well." 

^d by Google 

a THE nOLMES AFFAIR. 

Mr. Owen was of the opinion tliat the "Katio King." or 
"Annie Morgan," who thus appeared, was identical with the 
Spirit wlio for three years communicated tliroiifiii Miss Coofe 
in London. Tliero were many circumstances, however, lliat 
threw doubt on tlie identity. The featnres were unlilic those 
of tlic London Katie. In London the Ilolmcaes, one or both, 
had heen proved to possess remarliablo media! powers ; hut it 
was also ciiarged that they would sometimes eke out their 
manifestations with Imposture. It will be seen further on 
lnmynarrativG(pagelli)thathothMr OwenandDr Child, 
having enco te d wl t se m d t 11 1 btf 1 f tures 
in the phen m w tl d w Ih f d 1 p bl cly 

expressed th i d t f t[ Wl w d tl t they 

had been f w I by E 11 1 i t k t tl t fra ds 
might bo a tl Ip t d Ih w d is th t tl y 1 Id h ve 
been so over ea g i th i p ess f co fid der 

the circumstances. That genuine phenomena were given, 
however, there is now every reason to believe. The whole 
subject of spirit materialization was thrown under a cloud 
for a time by the confllctins statements growing out of the 
Holmes affair. Cut as the phenomena through other mediums 
were multiplied, and test conditions were adopted, and the 
number of wilnesses greatly increased, the affair gradually 
dwindled into insignificance. 

In weiRhing charges of imposture, it should bo borne in 
mind by investigators, that however the ignorant may scout 
and ridicule the idea, it Is nevertheless probable that under 
certain inharmonious conditions such mischievous spirits may 
be attracted as will force an unconscious medium to do things 
automatically which, to the inexperienced, look like deliber- 
ftto frauds on his part. The more we study the phenomena 
the larger becomes our charity for the sensitives through 
whoso peculiar recepliveness to inlluences good or bad the 
wonders are wrought. 

The power of spirits to reproduce timvlaera of persons who 
have passed from the earth-lifo suggests the question. How 
far tau we be assured of tho identity of any spirit, let the 

^d by Google 

QUESTION OF IDENTITY. 48 

testsbe whatthey may? Wo liave not yet aiTived at that 
stage of cnUKlitenmetit tliat would enable us to reply coaCi- 
dently to II1I3 Inquiry. The John Kings and the Katiu Klngj 
who have come in tlie full form, and converaed with mortals, 
have not yet given proofs of their identity, that can bo sub- 
stantiated by documentary evidence. In claiming to have 
been Sir Ilenry Morgan and a contemporary of llaleieli, Jolm 
King does not give ua sucli minute corroborative proofs as 
must be bad before bis declaration can be accepted. 

There is much that is yet a puzzle In the language and ac- 
tion of this class of materialized spirits. How far they are 
limited in theit mental operations and in their recollections 
b)' the act of materialization, or how far by the Intellectual 
horizon of the medium, is still a question. In otiier cases, 
proofs of identity, both mental and physical, satisfactory to 
the recipients, have been given, as Mr. Ilazard, Mrs. A. A. 
Andrews, and others from whom I have quoted, testify. 

It is satisfactory to discover that the further we proceed in 
inyesligition the more apparent does it become, that if there 
arodoeeptlvc fiivolous immatuie spirits there aro also those 
who arc sincere intelhgent affectionate and earnest in their 
efforts to do good The great majorltj as in this world, are 
of the unintelltctual soit Pciliapa tho development of a 
spiritual sense In ourselves is needed before we can have a 
conDrmat on that can bo conclusive of identity. Perhaps, 
under mortal ind splr tual Im itation* as they now are, we 
can have only an approximate assi ranee The science of 
Spiritualism bi.ing still in its Infancy we may hope for more 
iigtit on this quL'ition 

As for the Orthodox notion tl at tlio devil is the only 
spirit a ulliori zed to communicite withlho laity," and that all 
spiritual communications that do not come through certain 
prescribed channels are Satanie this will hardly weigh with 
people of common smso engaged In a stricth' scientific iu- 
veatigati m 

"Nothing 13 »ai brutally conclusive asa/i«(," saysBrous- 
sals i and therefore facts must w 11 in the long run. Tho 

^d by Google 

10 TET THE SPIRITS. 

tnitli itself, and not our mere conceptions of what ought ta 
bo true, must ultimntcly prevail. 

Meanwhile ffc see Iho signiflcancc of the caution to us to 
"trytho Bpirlts;" totrythem not by conjuration through 
tlii3 or that name, however sacrod, but by our reason, the pu- 
rification of our motives, and the singleness of ouraspitationa 
for the truth. 

Plainly it is not tho proved lawof ourljeing, that we should 
sarrender to any one, mortal or immorlal, the custody of our 
individuality, our reason, and our seK respect. Every earnest 
and rational spirit, whether in the flesh or out of it, at tlie 
sarao time that he has relations to tlio universe, and tliu uni- 
verse to Iiiin, would seem to be Impelled by the onvironmcnta, 
tlio restrictions, and the varied experiences to which he is 
Buhjectcil, and by tlie fallacies with whlcli ho soon finds that 
all human teachings and interpretations are mixed, to exer- 
cise his own reason, to discipline iiis own powers, and to dc- 
velopc bis own individuality ; ond, wliile courting ail good 
influences, to resist the dictation of tlioso who would con- 
strain him, by aught ciso than appeals to his sense of riglit, 
to adopt their opinions or walk In their ways. 

"Think as Ido, ordrint the homloclt," embodies in words 
the monster sin that is not conHned to mortals or to ancient 
Atliens. As there were spirits of old who would try to force 
a way for their authority by a " Thus saith tlio Lord," so there 
are spirits now who claim adivinc infallibility when tliey can 
find dupes to heed them. 

Spiritualism enforces upon us the fact that In being loosen- 
ed by death from this exterior husk wo call a body, the veri- 
table man is not greatly changed. Witbaeorresponding organ- 
ism of subtler elcmenta, ho starts on his new career from the 
vantage-ground, low or high, which he has attained to iiere. 
Condition follows character i and the spiritual environments 
which our prevailing thoughts and affections, our noblenesses 
or our meannesses, have creoted for us in this life, will impart 
their beauty or their deformity to cur objective surroundings 
on our entrance into what is now to us the unseen world. 

^d by Google 

ADDRESS BY JOHN KING. 

CHAPTER IV". 

The news of the manifestations through Mrs. Andrews, at 
Moravia, N. T., was reoeived by Spiritualists in England 
with some incredulity, accompanied by a wish to ascertain if 
similar phenomena could be had through their own mediums. 
Accordingly, several of these began to sit for spirit forms. 
The faces appeared at the stances of Mrs. Guppy, and subse- 
quently Messrs. Heme and Williams succeeded in obtaining 
these manifestations at dark circles, the spirits manufacturing 
a light of their own, which they held in their hands to show 
themselves by. 

Certain phenomena in the presence of Miss Florence Eliza 
Coofe, a young lady of fifteen, daughter of a member of the 
Dalston Association of Inquirers Into Spiritualism, began to 
attract attention in England the latter part of the year 1871. 
The spirits producing these manifestations claimed to be 
John and Eatle £lng, and their daughter Katie ; \nit Morgan, 
they said, was their true earth-name ; and li^atie, on several 
occasions, would sign herself, Katie King, property Annie 
Morgan. 

At numerous seances in America, and at those of Ilcrne 
and Williams, in England, spirits calling themselves John 
and Katie King have frequently manifested themselves. The 
name King would seem, for some reason, to be a favorite one 
among the class of spirits giving physical manifestations. 

"John King" used to make himself audible, at an early 
period, at the sittings of the Davenport Brothers ; and, subse- 
quently, at those of Jonathan Koons, in Dover, Athens Co,, 
Ohio, where he once made a long address, written by a spirit 
hand supposed to be his own, in which he calls himself, a 
"servant and scholar of God," and says; " We know that our 
work will be rejected by many, and condemned as the pro- 
duction of their King Devil, whom they profess to repudiate, 

^d by Google 

48 ME. WILLIAMS'S MEDIUMSHIP. 

but do so constantly serve by crueif ylng truth and rejecting 
all that is eonttary to their own narrow iiride and vain imag- 

In manifesting himself through the Enfillsh medium!), Jolin 
Elng claimed to be identleal with this spirit, and ib eaiinot be 
denied that a certain unity of speech and character Las dia- 
tlnguislicd 1dm on these oceasious. lie asserted that his name 
ou cartii was Sir Henry Morgan, and that he was a contcmxK)- 
rary of Sir Walter Raleigh. 

The 20th of March, 1ST3, at a sitting in London, of which 
full particulars are given by the weli-tnown publisher, Mr. 
James Burns, In "Human Nature," for April, 1873, tlie spirit 
claiming to he John King manifested himself in a, material- 
ized form 30 successfully that a sketch was made of him by a 
sliilllul artist. Tiie seance took place in thedajliglit, Charles 
E. Williams being the medium. This sitting was followed 
by another tlie next week (March 27th), when John King ap- 
peared visibly, as before, as solid and material as an ordinary 
human being, while the medium's hands were held by Mrs. 
Bums, and he sat entranced in ills seat. 

On this last occasion the spirit spohe aloud, saying : " Ton 
won't doubt any more, will you ? It Is God's truth, is it not? 
It is a glorious truth. Uodblessyou! Itls. Godbiessyout" 
Having more tlian satisfled the sitters, he withdrew inside the 
cabinet, but retumetl to the aperture to renew the colloquy. 
While Mrs. Bums dragged the medium's hands through the 
door of the cabinet into full view, Jolin King also showed his 
at the window : the test was complete. 

Of the sincerity and intelligenco of Mrs. Burns, no one who 
has made iier acquaintance, as I have, can doubt. 

The genuineness of the mediumship of Mr. Williams baa 
been tested by Princn Wittgenstein and others, who have sat- 
isQed tliomselves of the objective appearance of "John King" 
and his wonderful lamp. Even Serjeant Cox admits that he 
hasfound Mr. Williams "most trustworthy." On the Htli 
of May, 1874, at a seance held at the licuse of Mr. Chlnnery, 
ill Paris, 03 Hue do Rome, wlicn John King witli his lamp 

^d by Google 

STRANGE PROCEEDINGS. 49 

was seen, a young man rushed forward to seize the spirit. 
Tlie latter eluded his gra'ip, leaving beliind only a small por- 
tion of the drapery which coverud tlie form. A light was 
Btruck, and the medium was found entranced In his chair. 
He wag searched, but Kothlng In the sliylitest degree suspi- 
cious was discovered. What had become of the (irajMry? Thu 
integrity of Jlr. Williams was fully vindicated. 

At some experiments at Mr. Cook's house, April 2Ist, 1872, 
of which Mr. W. II. narrison, editor of Uie Londou Spiritu- 
alist, has given an account, a dark seance for the voices was 
held. Miss Cook and Mr. Ileruo being the mediums. The fol- 
lowing I'emarkablo Incident occurred: A tapping was heard 
upon one of the window panes ; tho bar of the shutter was 
unlocked and taken down, and the shutter opened, and John 
King's voice said : "Cook, you must take that plug out o( 
the gutter, if you do n't want the foundations of your house 
sapped. Tlio gutter is stopped up." On examination this 
proved to be true. It had been raining, and the area was full 
of water. Nobody inside the house knew of this until told ia 
this remarkable way. 

"Strangely human all this I" you will say; "so strangely 
human, that we think there must have been a human person- 
ator of the spirit I " But, as I shall have stranger things 
than this to relate by and by, I will only pa uao to remark 
that the incident is in full harmony witli occurrences the eon- 
flrmatlon of which, under test conditions. Is ample. 

We now approach the early manifestations tiirough Hiss 
Cook, ju whose presence the phenomena eventually became 
so marked. On tho 22d of April, 1872, a seance was held at 
which Mrs. Cook, the children, and the servant were wit- 
nesses. In the endeavor to abolish dark seanees, Mr. narri- 
son had made experiments with different kinds of liglit. 
He had tried, at Mr. Cook's house, a phosphorescent light, 
made by coating tho inside of a warm bottle with phosphorus 
dissolved In oil of cloves, and then letting in the air. 

The oil was left at Mr. Cook's, as will be learnt by the fol- 
lowhig passage from a letter from Miss Cook herself to Sir. 

^d by Google 

BO LETTER FROM MISS COOK. 

Harriaon, nnder date of April 23d, 1872. I quote the passaga 
because it is interesting as giving us some notion of the intel- 
lectual calibre of tlie writer, Miss Cook, who was soon to be- 
come so i'amous as a medium : 

" Yesterday afternoon KaEin told lis that if we liked to put 
up a cabinet of curtuins for her, slie would try to show i\s 
somethtns, but as I was not developed enough for lier to take 
enough phosphorus from me to show lier face by, we were to 
give her some of your phosphoric oil, I was delightPd, and 
at half-past elglit yesterday evening ail was ready. Mamma, 
anutie. ihechildren, and the servant stcwd on tbestairs. £ 
was left alone (not In my rIofv, for I was very frightened) 
inside the breakfast-room. Katie began by giving mamiua 
some fresh Ivy leaves; none were in our house or garden of 
the size she brought. A hand and arm with a white sleeve 
came to the opening holding tlie bottle of oil; then, at the 
lower opening in the curtain, came a face, unveiled, the head 
covered witli a quantity of pure white drapery. Katie held 
the bottle to her face so that all outslda could see her plainly. 
She remained for quit* two minutes. It was an oval face, 
straiglit nose, bright eyps, and a very pretty mouth. She 
again came to the opening, her lips moved, and at last she 
spoke. All outside conld see her lips moving; she talked 
with mamma some few minutes. 1 could not see her face 
plainly, so asked her to turn and show me. She said, ' Of 
course I will,' came to my chatr and bent over me. She was 
materialized only to the bust. From there she went into a 
cloud, stigiitlv luminous. Slie told mamma to look at her 
CEirefuIly, and made the observation that ' she knew she 
looked most unearthly. ' It was indeed very startling. I was 
too frightened to move or call out when she came near me. 
She used no tabes for speaking. The last time she appeared 
she stayed qnlte five minutes, and directed mamma to send to 

you, asking you if you could come here one day this week 

Katie King finished her seance with ' Uod bless you alL I am 
so pleased to show myself.' " 

On the occasion here referred to by Miss Cook, the face of 
Katie King was described by Mrs. Cook, as "looking white 
and deathlike, while her eyes were fixed and staring, as if 
made of glass," 

At a siiaiice at Mr. Cook's, April 25th, 1872, Katie made 
several eflorts to materialize a form. Mr. W. II. Uarrison 
was present. lie has given a curions description of some of 
the performances. Tlie medium, Miss Cook, sat in a darfc 
room. A seraping noise was heard ; Katie had some spirit 
drapery in her hand, which she rubbed down over the medium 
to collect some of the " iiifluence " used by spirits in raaterl- 

^d by Google 

KATIE AMD HER MEDIUM. 51 

alization. A conversation, in low tones, varied witli an occa- 
sLonal scraping uoise, llieu took place between Florence Cook 
and tbe spirit : 

Jfisg Cool-Go amiy, Kati?; I do n't like to tie scropca. 
Xi^fe-Dbn'tbcEtupia. Take tbat tlilug oS f oui beua and look at me. 

Jdlai CdoS-Iwon 

Mia» Cod*— Well, It 1 am only a machine, I do u't Ilka to be tilsUtoiii^d. 

Miss Cook, who as yet had not been entranced by the spirit, 
said that the spirit's head and shoulders were materialized ; 
but below, her form melted into tliin air. Katie would ba 
eonietlmes high up and sometimes low down, so that tlie bust 
nearly touched tlio floor, in which position slie loolteU " mo>t 
unearthly." It sometimes appeared as if a liead were " wan- 
derinfi about with no legs or body, visible or invisible." 

At the next sitting Miss Coot was entranceil by the spirit, 
ami a little benzoiine lamp was used lor seeing the material- 
ization. The spirit would cry out " higher," or " lower," as 
she wanted the light adjusted. Mr. Harrison gives the fol- 
lowing interesting account of what occurred : 

" Katie's face came out, all the rtet of the head being ban- 
daged round with wlilto, 'in order,' she said, 'to Iteep the 
power by which she materialised herself from passing away 
too iiuickl^.' She said that only her face and not all Uit head 
was materialized. This time all present had a good look at 
her, and saw her features. It was remarked that her eyes 
wore closed. Each time thefaeecameoutfor, perhaps, half 
a ntinutc. Afterwards sho said, ' Willie, see me smile,' and, 
again, 'see me talk,' suiting the action to the word. Then 
she paid, 'Now, Cook, turn on the light.' 

"The light was turned fully up. sending a bright glaro 
upon the face for an instant, and for the first time Katie King 
was clearly seen. She had a younR, pretty, happy face, and 
sparkling eyes, with somo little mischief in them. It was not 
gbahtEy, a.1 when Mrs. Cook and family saw il^ on April 22d, 
'because,' said Katie, ' I know now how to do it better." 

"WlLcn her face in its natural colors was seen in full 
light, nearly all the observers said, ' We can see you all right 
now, Katie.' 'Well, then,' said she, 'clapl' Accordingly, 

^d by Google 

B2 KATIE AND HEB MEDIUM. 

there was a sliower of applause, In wliich Katie joined by 
thrusting out her arm and hand, liolding a fan taken frocn the 
mantelpiece ; with the /an she beeaH to gleefully beat the 
nail outbide the door, aod to ilng the bells hanging above the 

"During the interval of one hour for supper, Mr. Thomas 
Blyton came In, and lie was present at the next sitting. Katie 
showed herself as before. Onee she saiil, ' Pat out the light, 
and strike a match when I call.' This was done, and at tlie 
moment of the striking of the match, her face was again seen 
for an instant in a full light. She sliowed her face a second 
time in the same way. Oncesbesald, 'Cook, don't gaze at mo 
tooflxedly; Itbuttsine.' On another occasion she said, 'The 
llglit hutis me ; It makes me feel tired.* All along she was 
very careful in adjusting the amount of light, aud the dis- 
tance of the sitters from the curtains. Now and then she 
said, 'Sing, sing, all of you.' Singing evidently helped her 
as much as at an ordinary stance. 

"She threw out about a yard of white fabric, but kept hold 
of it by the other end, saying, ' Look, this is spirit drapery." 
1 said, ' Drop it lnt« the passage, Katie, and let ua see it melt 
away; or let us cut apieceotf.' Sbereplied, '1 can't; but 
look-iierol' She then drew back her hand, which was above 
tlie top of the curtain, and, as tlie spirit drapery touched the 
curtain, it pasted right tkroagh, just as if there were no resist- 
ance whatever. . 

"She then threw it out atrain, and again the yard of 
drapery passed through the curtain. It was a clear ease of 
sometliing which looked like solid matter passing tliroui^b 
solid matt«r, and we all saw it. I thii^k that at first there 
was friction between the two fabrics, and that they rustled 
against each other: but that when she said 'Look here!' some 

3aality which made the drapery common matter was with- 
rawn from it, and at once It passi'd through the eoramon 
matter of the curtain, without experiencing any resistance." 
Mr. Blyton, in a published communicatioa, confirms all that 
ia reported as occurring in his presenee, by Mr, Ilarrlson. 
"At times, when speaking," says Mr. Blyton, "Katie's fea- 
tures were very natural and human. On our requesting to 
see a piece of the white drapery, the spirit held out a strip 
from the opening, resembling muslin In appearance. On her 
withdrawing her arm and hknd, this white spirit drapery dis- 
appeared through the curtain. This passing of the drapery 
through the curtain was repeated several times." 

As Miss Cook's medlumship grew in power, she was placed 
above the temptation of exercisiug it for gain. Mr. Charles 
Blackburn, of Manchester, with a wise liberality, and In tlw 
cause of science, supplied the means for this. 

^d by Google 

KATIE WALES FORTH. 63 

For a long time onty a feeble lifilit was permitted at the 
manifestatious o( spirit forma. Tlie face of the spiiit would 
be coveted witli white drapery, tlie cliiel use of wliieli was 
said to be to economize tbe power by enabling tlie spirit to 
leave part of tlie bead immaterial izeil. 

As tlio developments went on, Katio began to exhibit not 
only tbe whole of her bare face, but her bands and arms, in a 
strong liglit. In these early stages, Miss Cook was almost al- 
ways awake during the manifestations ; but sometimes, when 
the weather was bad, or other conditions were unfavorable, 
Katie would entrance ber, tlie purpose of which waa simply 
to increase tbe power, and to prevent the mental activity of 
the medium from operating as an interference. After a time 
Katie never appeared without the medium being in a trance. 

Some sittings for recognizable faces were bad In the pres- 
ence of Miss Cook ; but tbcy began, as did Katie's manifesta- 
tion, iu a weak light, and were imperfect. Tliey were aban- 
doned, therefore, for tbe more marked phenomenon in which a 
certain success had been won. Two Instances, liowever, la 
whiok recognizable laces were presented tbrougli Miss 
Cook's mediumship, occurred, and seem to have been well 
autlienticated. 

At a sitting at Ilackney, Jan. 2l)th, 1873, Katie changed 
her face from white to black in a few seconds, several times ; 
and to show that her hands were not mechanically moved, 
she sewed up a hole in tlie curtain. On the I2th of March, 
at Hackney, Miss Cook's bands being tied and sealed, Ka- 
tie, witk her hands perfectly free, walked out of the cabinet. 
A month or two later, several photographs were taken ot 
Katie, under strictly test conditions, and by the magnesium 
light.* 

Thus it was not till after many imperfect trials and partial 
materializations, accompanied with very gradual develop- 
ments of increasing force, that the spirit Katie, in the full 
human form, and habited in white, as represented in her 

^d by Google 

B4 BE. GULLY'S TESTIMONY. 

lihotograplis, came forth in the light from the cabinet, and 
walked about the room before a semi-circle of spectators. 

Dr. J. M. Gully, formerly of Great Malvern, England, a 
thorouglily experienced physician and a careful investigator, 
nnd(T date of July 30th, 1874, writes me as follows : 

" To the special question which you put regardinj; my ex- 
periences of the materialization of the spirit-form, with Miss 
Cook's medlumship, I must reply that, after two years' ex- 
aminatiou of the fact and numerous stances, 1 have not the 
smallest doubt, and have the strongest conviction, that sucli 
materialization tates place, and that not the slightest at- 
tempt at trick or deception la fairly attributable to any one 
who assisted at Miss Cook's stances. 

"That the power grows with use was curiously illustrated 
by the fact that, for some time, only a face was producible, 
with, occasionally, arms and hands ; with no hair, andsome- 
tiracs with no back to tho altul! at all— merely a mask, with 
movement, however, of eyes and mouth. Gradually tliainhoU 
form opjiMre*— after, perhaps, some five months of seances— 
once or twice a week. This ap;ain became more and more 
rapidly formed, and changed, in liair, dress, and color of face, 
as we desired. 

•'The voice came long before the whole form of the body, 
but was always husky, and as if there was a whispering ca- 
tarrh ; save when she Joined us in singing, when she gave out 
a most lonely contralto. 

" The feel of the skin was quite natural, soft and warm ; 
her movements were natural and graceful, except when she 
stooped to pick up anything from the Hoor, when It seemed 
as if her legs as well as her trunk bent backwards. 

" When that pliotoRraph* was taken, I held her hand for at 
least two minutes, three several times, for we sat three times 
for it on one and tho same evening ; but I was constrained to 
close my eyes by reason of tho intense magnesium light 
which shone directly upon me ; moreover she desired that 

.lo-.iL.... mritii tir. (iullvBiUlnBatliersiacaudlioiUiQU lier liaud. 

Id b, Google 

DK. GULLY'S TESTIMONY. 6i 

none of us would gaze at her whilst tbe lena was directed up- 
on her. 

" I believe that much information might have been obtained 
from her concerning the outre-icrmie, but the circle seemed al- 
ways bent on talking cSajT to her, complimentinH her, and in- 
dulging tn ordinary Inconsequential conversation ; for only 
on one or two occasions wasi (wlio hate all the nonsense 
that was said to and by her) able to put a few questions on 
the subjects about which every thougbtful Spiritualist is nat- 
urally anxious, 

" It may be questioned whether these spirit beings can con- 
vey anything like an accurate idea of their state and powers ; 
but I believe that, just as their power of physical manifesta- 
tion augments with use, so would their power of mental com- 
munieation increase were an intelligent curiosity always pre- 
sented for their sympathetic reply. In fact, I believe tliat if 
less Idle and more serious curiosity was felt by tlie circles, 
spirits of a higher and more powerful character would sym- 
pathetically come and teach by vocal words, written words, 
inspired words. 

" So soon as a man has convinced himself of the reality of 
the spirit-presence, and the absence of all deception, he 
should, I think use all his will power to place his own spirit 
in a state of recept on for sp r t knowledge and feci assured 
Le will get it. Pbys cal man testations are the alphabet of 
the subject, and f Spirt al sm went no further it would do 
but little for h a an ty 

" But I quite bel eve in your suggest ou that carried out 
to its consequences in thougU an 1 ympatl y ts destined to 
abolish a thick cloud of darknesawhieh at present renders all 
religions more or less superstitious, and all philosophy a mere 
circle; and to substitute a light which will enable the mind in 
a body to hold communion with minds whoso freedom enables 
them to see the workings of Great Cause and Great Effect, 
and so to bring forth a philosophic religion ; whilst philoso- 
pjiy itself will be able to look ever onwards instead of going 
round and round, as it has done from Tiato to Mill, tedious 
lo study, and barren of result." 

^d by Google 

66 ME. COLEMAN'S TESTIMONT. 

SiraLlar uiaterializatiODS to those through Misa Cook had 
tafeen place not unfrequently in America, at s<;ancc3 where 
tlie light was very dim. Mr. Home, Mrs. Mary Hardy, 
Messrs. Bastian and Taylor, Mrs. Maud Lord, Mrs. Jennie 
Lord Wehb, and others had, while sitting in the dark or in 
twilight, satisfied many ot the presence of materialized spirits, 
wlio made themselves felt and hoard, if they could not be dis- 
tlnctly seen. The materializations through Miss Kate Fox 
had satisfied Mr. Livermore, Dr. Uray, and Mr. Groute of the 
objective reality of the appearing forms. 

But tile hold and startling manifestations through Miss 
Cook, occurring in the light, and in the presence of a dozen 
or more spectators, were peculiarly impressive and satisfac- 
torj and I give prominence to her case on this account. The 
manifestations, after the Initiatory expetiments had been 
mide w re conducted under strict test conditions, and in the 
presence of persons o£ well-known character and intelligence, 
wl ose s ngle object was the establishment of the truth ; the 
apl ant on being visible under tke most powerful light, and 
sol d t( the touch, could be subjected to tests which were 
eventually supplied by scientific men and found satisfactory ; 
and tl e me"aium, being exempted from ali necessity of asking 
pay from the investigators, was comparatively independent 
and free in allowing the manifestations to taketbeir course. 

At a sitting at Mr. Luxmoore's, Nov. I8th, 1873, a witness, 
well known to me personally, Mr. Benjamin Coleman, was 
present, and from his account I have abridged the following: 

The si5ance was given In the large drawing-room, in which 
an ordinary fire was kept burning throughout the evening. 
The small drawing.room, separated by slidinj; doors, was ap- 
propriated as a cabinet, and a dark curtain was hung between 
the open parts, by which allliglit was excluded. A lamp was 
placed on tho table of the audience room, where there was a 
fire, and at no time was it dark. The fourteen ladies and 
gentlemen, who formed a liorse-shoe circle in front of the oab- 
iuet, could see each other the whole evening. 

A low chair was placed in tlio cabinet, upon whieh Misa 

^d by Google 

MR. COLEMAN'S TESTIMONT. Bl 

Cook, the medium, was seated ; and Mr. Coleman and Mr. 
Blackburn were invited by Mr. Luxmoore to see her secured. 
Her bands were tied together with tape, tlie ends of wliieli 
were sewn and sealed with was ; and then the tape was 
passed around her waist, and tightly knotted and sewn, and 
sealed again. The tape was then passed through a staple in 
the floor, leaving a slack of about a foot, and there knotted 
again. Tims it was impossilile for Miss Cook to move from 
her seat more than a few inehes. 

The ties were all found secure, and the line of tape undis- 
turbed, after the stance ; and even had this precaution not 
been taken, the fact that, the instant Katie disappeared, the 
medium was found tied and differently clad, and asleep in her 
chair, would have satisfied any reasonable person that there 
was no trick or attempt to deceive. Whatever the figure of 
Katie might he, it evidently was not Miss Cook. 

The figureof Katie entered the room. She was clad in 
8 loose white dress, tied in at the waist, having long sleeves 
terminating at the wrists, with a close hood on her head, long 
lappets hanging over her shoulders, and her hair closely 
banded 

She at once saluted each of the company in turn, first ask- 
ing the name of the only stranger unknown to the medium, 
Mr. Coleman asked Katie if she had shoes and stockings on. 
Slie said, "No," and at once drew aside her dress, and show- 
ed that her feet were naked ; and to satisfy all, she raised one 
foot on to the dress of Mrs. Comer, in the most natural man- 
ner, and said, "Now you can all see that I have bare feet, 

There were pencila and sheets of writing paper on the ta- 
ble, and Mr. Coleman asked her if she would be good enough 
to write something for him. "Yes, I will," she said, taking 
a chair, and sitting down on it. " What shall I write ? " Mr, 
Coleman said he was engaged in getting up a testimonial to 
Judge Edmonds, and perhaps she might have something to 
say to him. 

Upon this Katie raised one knee, and commenced writing; 

^d by Google 

S8 PRINCE EMILE'S TESTIMONY. 

but, finding the position uncomfortable, asked for something 
hard "to rest the paper upon." Tlils being supplied, sbe 
wrote off the following letter : — 
" My DeaI! Priend-You bavo aaked metowrltcarewwortatOTon. 

19 eolDB, BO with every good wish, 

The letter was handed back to Mr. Coleman, who read It 
aloud, a lid then said to her, "I see you have notaddrcsKed 
it;" she took it back and deliberately folded it upon her knee, 
and wrote on the back, "Mr.' Coleman." 

On his reqaesting her to let him feel the texture of her 
dress, she replied by coming round past the back of Mr. Lus- 
raoore'a chair sideways, as there was barely room to pass, and 
holdinR up the dress to Mr. C; he took it witli both hands, 
and pulled it, and It was to all appearance. In substance, as if 
it were made of strong white calico. She then passed round 
the circle and shook hands, by gently touching the hands of 
each. Both her hands and her face throughout the seance 
were of a perfectly natural color, the reverse of pallid ; her 
cheeks were red, and hands decidedly so ; in fact, her whole 
appearance was that of a gentle and graceful young womaJi. 
She stooped down to pick up two sheets of paper which were 
in her way whilst crossing the room, and stepped aside to lay 
them on the table. 

"This completed," writes Mr. Coleman, "the impression, 
which all must have felt, that we had been for an hour and a 
half holding intercourse with an intelligent living woman, 
who glided, rather than walked about, and who showed by 
Aer constant watchfulness of the medium, that there was the 
tie to which she was bound. It was altogether a marvelous 
exhibition." 

Prince Emile of Sayn Wittgenstein, who was present at a 
stance at Mr. Luxmoore's, December 16th, 1873, published in 
the Bemie Spirite, of Paris, an account of It, which was trans- 

^d by Google 

PRINCE EMILE'S TESTIMONY. B9 

iated by Dr. G. L. Ditson, from whose version I quote most 
of the following : 

" The gauze curtain of the cabinet was agitated, and a 
naked arm was thrust forth and made a sign. Then the right 
aide of the hanging was opened, giving us a view of an appa- 
rition of ravishing beauty. She stood erect ; the right arm 
was across lier Ijreast, the other fell at her side, liolding the 
curtain. She seemed to review tlie persons present. Jt was 
tlie iipirit ol Katie, a, thousand times more lovely than her 
pliotoin^aph. 

"I had before me ft young lady Of an ideal beauty, supple, 
elegant, and clad in most graceful drapery, witli chestnut 
locks visible tlirough her white veil. Her robe, trailing like 
tliat of an antique statue, entirely covered her natied feet. 
Her arms, of surpassing beauty, delicate, white, were visible 
to the shoulders. Their attachment to the body was finely 
statuesque ; and the hands, a little large, had long, tapering 
angers, rosy to the ends. 

"Her faee was pale and rather round than oval. Her 
mouth, smiling, slicwed beautiful teeth. Her nose was aqiii- 
line; lier eyes were very large and blue, almond-shaped, 
shaded by long, heavy eyelashes, and Laving eyebrows deli- 
cately arcTied. And, to conclude, tlietewas in this apparition 
the grace of a Psyche descended from her pedestal. 

" Yet this rare feminine embodiment, this faithful repro- 
duction of one many years dead, was soon to evaporate and 
disappear like a iireatli I One might mistake her, seen from 
adistance, for Miss Uook; but theapparition was large, with 
slender waist, while Miss Cook, though pretty, Is much small- 
er, and liei Landu are not as large as Katie's. There could be 
no mistake : they were two distinct pei-sonalitle.B. 

"The apparition seen)ed to regard me with curiosity, and I 
saw In her something that reminded me of a spectre, and that 
was the eye. It was as beautiful as possible, yet it had a 
ha^rd, flxed, glassy eicpresslon ; but in spite of that, with 
mouth smiling, with bosom iieaviiig, she seemed to say, ' I am 
bappy to be a moment amoug mortals." She tlien remarked, 
in a sort of tremulous whisper, but with influite grace, ' I can- 
not yet go far atvay from my medium, but soon I shall have 
more force.' When she was not fully understood, she repeat- 
ed her words with Infautile impatience. 

" I asked to be favored with aslghtof her foot; she grace- 
fully raised her robe to comply witli my request, and, wlien 
being solicited to show more of it, the robe was lifted to tlie 
aukle, and I saw a delicate foot, like that of an antiqui 
statue, white, plump, lovely as a child's, high and arclied, the 
toes finely attached, and of a purity of design Irreproachable ; 
but all this ensemble was as if of one piece, and the real life 
was wanting. 

" Katie King talked, laughed, chatted pleasantly with those 
present,, ealiiiig each one by name with a roguish, infantile, 
defiant vivacity ; gesticulating with her right iiacd as do the 
women of the Oiiisnt, with the movement of the fingers and 
curvature of the hand peculiar to that people; accenting her 

^d by Google 

GO , DE. SEXTON'S TESTIMONY. 

worda with the most gracions movement of lier bead ; often 
with gentie modesty fitttlieriag lier veil about lier nock ; iu a 
woiii, in everytliing, ii) lier features, lotiu, costume, gestures, 
giving an iiupresaioa of the women Of the Levant Unit could 
not bt* mistaken. 

" A mnn of little inf^lligence, who was present, having ad- 
dressed some rude words to Katie, she crumpled some paper in 
lier hand, and threw it at him witi) an expressiun of disdain." 

As an evidence of the spirit's clairvoyant powers. Prince 
Wittsgensteln sends tlio following to the London Spiritualist 
of July 10th, 1874, in a letter from Nieder Wallut, on the 

"A very striking fact, in direct writinR, was recently ob- 
tained by Miss Cook, at my request, putting my sealed letter 
at night on lier dressing table, with some pencils and sliceta 
of paper near it. The letter, closely sealetl by nie, was fur- 
ther put into a second envelope by Mr. William Crookes, wiio 
idso sealed it several times with liis private signet. 

" When it was sent back to nie with Katie's answer, his 
seals, as well as mine, were quite Intact. 

" Katie copied the contents of my sealed letter to her, word 
for wonj, without a mistake or omission, on a separate slieet 
of paper. She also wrote an answer to me, with the follow- 
ing postscript : 

have neier done aiirlllLng like Ihis beforo -A Morgnn, or K^tiB KLdb- ' ' ' 

Dr. George Sexton was for many jears one of tlie moat 
earnest of the secularist teachers, and an energetic lecturer 
against Spiritualism and all other forms of belief In a future 
life. Aftei fifteen years of akeptlcl^m, dnrmg which, how- 
ever, he did not disdain to investigate, the needful evidence 
came. In his own house, in tlie absence of all mediums other 
than-those members of his own family and intimate private 
friends in whom mediumistic powers became developed, ho 
got evidence of an irresistible character that the communica- 
tions came from deceased friends and relatives. 

Dr. Sexton's Erst atter dance on the manifestation through 
Miss Cook, toot place at Mr. Luxmoore's, Nov. 2Bth, 18T3. 
The usual precautions for the satisfaction of skeptics were 
taken. Tied as slie was, it seemed to him Impossible for Miss 
Cook to remove from lier seat more than a few inches. We 
quote the concluding portion of his testimony : 

" The stance commenced, as is usual, with singing. The 

^d by Google 

DK. SEXTON'S TESTIMONY. 61 

lights were turned down, but not so low as to prevent onr see- 
ing each other most distinctly, and being «ye- witnesses of all 
that was taking place in the room. Tlie medium speedily be- 
came partlatlyentranced, bands were shown at asinallaperture 
at the top of the cabinet^ and Katie gave indications of being 
present. Soon after, the curtain was moved aside, and the 
full form of the spu.it, dressed in white, was distinctly seen 
hy all present. 

"Katie requested me to ask her questions, which laid eon- 
thiually for at least half an hour. These questions were 
mostly of a semi- philosophic character, havina reference 
mainly to the laws and conditions under which spirits assume 
materialized fonns, and such, therefore, as It Is very question- 
able wlieHier a young lady like the medium would have been 
able to answer. They were all replied to so satisfactorily 
that more than one wfll-known and hialily-educated Spirlt- 
walist present stated that they had obtained information 
which tliey had previously often wished for, but could not 
procure. 

" The spirit form came out of the cabinet several times dur- 
ing tiie evening, and walked about amongst tho audience. 
She showed her feet, which were perfectly naked, and stamped 
them on the floor to prove that she was not Btandiiig on tip- 
toe, this latter fact heing a very important one, seeing that 
she was at least four inches taller than Miss Cook. Her fig- 
ure and complexion were almost totally unlike those of the 
medium. She came across the room to me, patted me on the 
head, and returned. I then asked her if she would kiss 
me. She replied she would try to do so. In a few minutes 
she again crossed over to me, and kissed me on the forehead 
three or four times. I may here remark that although the 
sound of the kisses were distinctly heard by all present, and 
the attitude of the figure seen, I felt no pressure of the lips 
whatever, 

*' Toward the end of the seance the spirit requested me to 
examine the cabinet to see that the medium was still fastened 
Inlier ebair. Mr. Luxmoore lifted the curtain, and said, 'She 
is still there, lying down in the corner." The curtain was 
tlien dropped again, and 1, being on the opposite side of the 
room, had, of course, not seen into the caljinet. The spirit 
Immediately inquired, 'Did Dr. Sexton see that?' I replied, 
'No, I did not.' 'Then,' she said, 'come and look; I want 

" I at once crossed over to the cabinet, raised the curtain, 
and looked In. There I saw Miss Cook, sitting, or rather ly- 
ing, in a trance on the chair in which she had been fastened, 
knots, seals, and all Intact. The seance continued for some- 
thingoveranhour. I mayremark that the spirit in thocourse 
of the evening wrote several short notes to persons present. 
The following was the substance of the one ^ven to me : 

• Mr DEAE Dr. Seston— I am pleftsed you have aakea rnsqucaMons. 

•yours, truly, Ab.mk MOBGAH.' 

,t which 

^d by Google 

63 DE. aULLT'S TESTlMONr. 

Dr. J. M. (Jully, from whose letter to myself I have al- 
ready Btven an extract, was for many years at the head ol 
the well-known water-cure establishment at Great Malvern, 
Sngtand, and is known to thousands of Americans as a. skill- 
ful and scientiGo physician and a thoroughly estimable gen- 
tleman. He satisfied himself of the genuineness of the mani- 
festations througli Mr, Home, several years ago. The 28th 
of November, 1873, he was present at Mr. Luxmoore's, at one 
of Miss Cook's stances, of which he gives the following ac- 
count: 

" The spirit, Katie King, appeared tkis time dressed in a 
longer and more flowing white dress than usual, ttie sleeves 
reaching to the wrists and bound tliere, whilst over her head 
and face a beautifully transparent veil fell, giving to the 
whole Sgiire an appearance of grace and purity which Is not 
easily conveyed by words. 

"I'lie spirit greeted every one in the circle by name ; then 
retired into the dark room, where she was heard moving 
heavy furniture about, and talking to the medium who was 
sealed and bound as usual, bho then brought a large bowl 
into the circle and gave it to the bauds of a sitter. After' 
wards she brought a low chair, or prie-dicu, out of thedark 
rooiiK and placed it wholly in the circle, sat down upon it, 
and desired that the sitters should sing, but not loudly, as 
she would try to join them, which she did with the clear con- 
tralto voice which she has several times exhibited. It is im- 
possible to convey the impression of that voice issuing from 
an inhabitant of the outre- tcmte/ 

Shetlien begged that all wouldjoln hands in order that she 
might get all the possible power for wiiat she wished to do, 
and whilst we, the sitters, did so, she retired for a minute or 
twotoget fresh power from her medium, returned, and then 
deliberately walked around the entire circle (composed of 
fourteen persons) and touched eacli qne in turn, some of the 
ladies on the cheek, the men on the hands ; one man she told 
to pat out his hand and she would show hira that she could 
press it, which she did. The circle occupied a great portion 
of a large-sized drawing-room. She then desired to be ques- 
tione-i, and sometbinglike this colloquy took place: 

" ' Is it possible for you to explain to us what are the pow- 
ers or forces you employ in materializing and dissolving your 
form?' ' 2fo, it is not.' ' Is it electriolty^ or does It bear any 
resemblance to itV 'Ifo; it is all nonsense uhal thi^talu 
about electricity. ' 'But have you no name or mode of con vey- 
ingit?' 'Itumore likt wilt-pewer tkan anything else; tn 
ftict, it is the Kill lehiehit at tM bottom <if the povurJ exercise.' 
'When you disappear where Is it to?* ^ Into the medmtm.fiiv- 
Jng her hack all the vitality 1 took from her. Wh^n I haw got 

•}/ much power from her, if any o»w of you wtrre to take her 
denly round i/ie waist and try to carry her, yoa might kill 

Kiddenl; 

^d by Google 

THE FACTS TOO MARVELOUS. 

a deal »f rubbish c^ut doubles; I am myself all th» time.' 
len you dissalvc, wliicli part disappeai-B the first, the body 

'Whenyi_ ,._ .._,. . ..... ... 

or thedresa?' ' The boiy, of emirse; iU maleriat ptnmr qoe» 
back to her, and theit the otsm goes into it» elementt. 'Doyou 
thiiikotiein the flesh can ever appreciate the powers yoo. use 
ill manifesting 7' 'No; yeunenerEa'a.' 'Touapeak of being 
yourself, and not a double of the medium— who were you 
whenlu the flesh?' ' Iviaa Annie Margan.' ' Wereyou mar- 
ried?' ' Tes; but don't talk of that.' {At this she retired be- 
hind the curtain, apparently either hurt or grieved at the 
question, a state she has exhibited before when questioned 
about her married life.) She speedily returned, and was 
ashed, 'Have you a husband now 7" ' Ofeourselhacie.' 'Can 
yougiveusanv idea under what reign you lived?" ' I left 
the body when Iviai tieentyone years ola, and I lived in the 
latter part of the reign of Oharles I., during the Oommomeealth, 
Ofod to the early part ^ the reign of Gharks IT. I remember 
the h^hnet^ed hats of thaUommon^eallh and the broad hats of 
Vharles 7. and II.; (Aa sMrt hair of the men, but OTOimeelPa 
waa not short,'" 

" At this point the time which had been agreed on as the 
utmost tliat could be given, having the health of the medium 
iu regard, was reach^, and, although the aplrit expressed a 
desire to remain longer, she reUred on Mr. Luxmoore's insist- 
ing on it, and the stance terminated. 

" It Is not always, nor even often, that the spirit Katie is 
In the humor to give us information of herpresent and past 
history, such as the above, and it has occurred to me tliat slie 
declines It because she liaa been accustomed— too much, in my 
opinion— to jokes, and what might be ealled ' eha^ng ' from 
the circle, and this probably la more to the taste of a spirit 
who, as she has herself stated, is not by any means in a high- 
ly spiritual sphere. But tlila may be mere speculation on my 

Notwithstanding the coufidenee of these and many other 
intelligent parties In the genuineness of the manifestations 
through Miss Cook, the phenomena were so extraordinary 
that doubt, even among confirmed Spiritualists, would fre- 
quently be excited. That a spirit, palpably materialized or 
reincarnated, could come into the presence of mortals, that 
she shonid be undlstingulshable in appearance from a liuman 
being, that she should allow herself to be touched, write let- 
ters before the spectators, converse fluently and audibly, and, 
in fact, show all the traits of an average and aomewliat petu- 
lant young woman, and then disappear at once, on reentering 
tlic cabinet, naturally awakened an amazement akin to dis- 

^d by Google 

61 SEIZURE OF THE SPIKIT-FORM. 

AlthoHgh the faces of Miss Cook and Katio were much 
alike, it was found, on close examination , tliat there were 
marlteiJ differences, varying in degree at different times. 
Tlie liair o£ the two was decidedly unlike ; that o£ Miss Cook 
being dark, and tliat of the spirit of a light auburn or brown. 
Tliat the hair of tlie latter was not false was proved by trac- 
ing it back to tlie scalp. This was done by Prof. Crookea, 
and also by Mrs. Florence Marryat Koss-Church. Specimens 
of the spirit hair have been subjected to the microscope, and 
found to he genuine hair, though rather coarse for a woman. 
The spirit-fovm was repeatedly measured and found to be, in 
its bare feet, taller by from two to four inches than Miss 
Cook. Other points of difference were noticed; hut it is un- 
necessary to dwell upon them here, inasmuch as the distinct- 
ive individuality of Miss Cook and Katie was suhsec[uenUy 
proved by irresistible tests. 

Mr. Coleman suggested the theory that Katie was the double, 
or, as the Germans' call it, the doppelganger, of the medium ; 
but he was soon led by Prolessor Crookes's decisive experi- 
ments to abandon the idea. 

While even among Spiritualists the element of skepticism 
was tbus at work, an incident occurred at a seance at Mr. 
Luxmoore's, December 9th, 1874, which seemed to be, for the 
moment, a triumph of the skeptics. In violation of the condi- 
tions of the seance, Mr. Yolckman rose from his seat and at- 
tempted to seize the supposed spirit. She glided from his 
grasp, however, and Miss Cook was soon afterwards found 
tied as she had been left. 

This occurrence served only to confirm belief in the genu- 
ineness of the phenomena, for it drew forth testimonials from 
many in behalf of the reliability of the medium, Mr. Ilenry 
Dunphy, a barrister, and well known man of letters, wlio 
was present at the attempt, published in the February num- 
ber ol London Society (1874) an account, from which we 
quote the following ; 

us seated between Lady Caithness and Mr. Klackburn, 

^d by Google 

MK. TAPP'S TESTIMONY. IJS 

rayed In a Iohr white dress with a double skirt, had naked feet, 
and wore a veil over the head and falling down bi-low the 
waist. Count de Pomar asked wliether he iiiiglit approach it : 
and, having obtained permission, left tlie circle and walked 
straiglituptoic. Katie held out her hand, which be took, 
and Bubsequently returned to bis seat. 

" The appantion tlien advanced to the portion of the room 
farthest from the cabinet, when a person, who to me was a 
perfect Btranger, jumped up, caught the figure round tlie 
waist, and Ldd it, esclaiintiw ' It is tlie medium V Two or 
three gentlemen preaeni; rushed forward and caught him, and 
a struggle ensued. I watched the result with considerable In- 
terest, and observed that the figure appeared to lose its feet 
and legs, and to etude the grasp, making tor that purpose a 
movement somewhat similar to that ot a seal in the watpr. 
Although the person who made the attempt was apparently 
well able to hold on to anything he might happen to elutch, the 
apparition glided out of liia grip, leaving no trace of corporeal 
existence, or surroundings in the shape of clothing." 

Mr. (ieorge Henry Tapp, of the Dalston Association of In- 
quirers, added his testimony to that of others on tiiis occasion, 
and tlirow light on some mooted questions. He says that the 
points of difference hetween Katie and the medium were often 
remarkable, not only in regard to features, but as regards 
height, bulk, &c. The resemblance between the two was at 
times hardly perceptible. When he first saw the full form of 
Katie she stood five feet six inches high, with her naked feet 
flat on the floor. She was stout and hroad across the waist 
and shoulders, quite a contrast to her medium, who was much 
shorter and petite in person. 

Katie has frequently stood by Mr. Tapp, and leaned against 
him at seances for several minutes togethei', permitting liim 
to thoroughly scan her face and figure in a good light. Once 
she laid her right arm in bis outstretched hands, and allowed 
him to examine it closely. It was plump and shapely, longer 
than that of the medium. The liands, too, were much larger, 
withbeautifuliysbapednails, unlike those of Miss Cook, who 
was In tlie bad habit of biting her nails. 

Holding the arm of Katie lightly in one hand he passed his 
other hand along it from tho-shoulder. "The skin," be says, 
'■ was beautifully— I may say, unnaturally— smooth, Ufce wax 
or marble ; yet the t<>mptrature was that of the healthy human 
body. Therewaa, howecer, tto butte in the wrist. I lightly ftlt 

^d by Google 

66 ME. TAPP'S TESTIMONr. 

round tlie wrist again, and then told Katie that the bone was 
wanting. She laughed, and said, 'Wnit a hit,' and after go- 
ing about to the other sitters, came round and placed lier arm 
in my hand as before." 
This time Mr. Tapp was satisfied. Sure enough, the bone 

lu two instances be saw Eatie with long ringlets reaching 
to lier waist, the liair being of a light brown color ; while the 
medium'shairwas cut short, and was not curled, its color be- 
ing a very dark brown, almost black. Katie's eyes were 
sometimes a light blue color, sometimes dark brown ; and this 
difference was frequently noticed. 

On one occasion Katie, on coming out of the cabinet, held 
up her right arm, which was of a dusky black color. Letting 
It fall by her side, and raising it again almost instantaneously, 
it was tlie usual flesh color like the other arm. 

One evening Mr. Tapp made some jesting remark to Katie, 
when she suddenly struck him heavily in the chest with her 
clenched list. lie was startled, and, indeed, hurt by the un- 
expected blow ; so much so, that be Inadvertently caught hold 
of her right arm by the wrist. 

"Her wrist," he says, "crumpled in my grasp like a piece 
of paper, or thiti cardboard, my fingers meetiny through it. 
I let go at once, and expressed my regret that I had forgotten 
the conditions, fearing that barm to the medium might ensue ; 
but Katie reassured me, saying, that as my act was not inten- 
tional, she could avert any untoward result." 

In conclusion Mr. Tapp l>ears the fullest testimony to the 
good faith and integrity of Miss Cook and her family. 

That some abnormal power was at work in tlie manifesta- 
tions through Miss Cook, no intelligent investigator seems to 
have denied. Katie would not be gone more than forty sec- 
onds at most from the circle, when the curtain of the cabinet 
would be drawn, and Miss Cook would be found waking from 
her trance. It was manifestly a. physical Impossibility for 
her to have changed her gown, put on her boots, drossed her 
hair and altered the color of it, and, in addition to all this, 

^d by Google 

ME. CEOOKES'S TESTIMONY. OT 

destroyed all trace of the "spirit's " flowing white robes, in 
less than a minute. 

The question, therefore, reduced itself to this : Does the 
mysterious /aree do all bhese things, after having thrust forth 
the entranced medium to play the part of a spirit? Wliat re- 
mained now to do in this investigation, was to establish still 
more conclusively, and by scientific teats, the separate identi- 
ty of the two forms. 

CHAPTER T. 

Early in the year 1374, Prof. William Crookes, F. K. S., a 
well-itnown chemist, discoverer of the metal thaliura, author 
of several esteemed scientific works, and editor of tlie Quar- 
terly Journal of Science, undertook the investigation of the 
phenomena through Miss Cook. 

In a letter dated 20, Morn ington- road, London, Feb. 3d, 
1874, Mr. Crookes writes : " Miss Cook Is now devoting her- 
self exclusively to a series of private seances with me and one 
or two friends. The stances wili probably extend over some 
months, and I am promised that every desirable test shall be 
Riven to me. , , . Enough lias taken place to thoroughly 
convince me of the perfect truth and honesty of Miss Cook." 

Mr. Crookes began his Investigations of Spiritualism as 
early as 1809. He endeavored to study the subject In its sci- 
entific aspect solely, without any bias from its sentimental or 
theological bearings. Under date of Dec, 1871, he says : " 1 
wish to ascertain the laws governing the appearance of very 
remarkable phenomena, which, at the present time, are oc- 
curring to an almost incredible extent. That a hitherto un- 
recognized form of force— whether it be called psychic force 
or X force is of little consequence — Is involved in this occur- 
rence, is not vsith me a matter of opinion, but of absolute 
knowledge ; hut the nature of that force, or the cause which 

^d by Google 

63 THE DIALECTICAL SOCIETT. 

ifflmediflfcely excites Its activity, forms a subject on which I 
do not at present feel competent to ofEer an opinion." 

On the (itli of January, 1869, the London Dialectical Society 
appointed a committee to Investigate tlic plienomena. Five- 
sixths of the memhecs of it entered on their duties In the full 
conviction that they should detect a fraud, or dissipate a 
delusion. 

The theories of self-delusion and imposture were soon dis- 
missed by the committee as out of the question. The motions 
and sounds were undoubtedly real, and were certainly not 
caused by any trickery. 

The committees' third and last explanatory conjecture, 
that, namely, OC unconscious muscular action, which they 
had eagerly accepted on tbe authority o£ Faraday, they were 
compelled reluctantly to abandon, and to admit that there is 
a force, independent of muscular force, producing motion in 
heavy substances without contact or material connection, of 
any kind, between such substances and the body of any per- 
son present. 

This mysterious force was found to be frequently directed 
by intelligence ; and Sub-committee Number One reported 
unanimously that the one important physical fact tlius 
proved to exist, that motion may ha produced in solid bodia 
without material eontact, hymrae hitherto vnrceognited fores 
operating within an undefined distance from the 7i-uman erffon- 
iam, and beyond the range of raugcular action, should be sub- 
jected to farther scientific examination, with a view to as' 
certain its true source, nature and power. 

jUr. Crookes constructed an ingenious apparatus, whereby 
not only could the existence of any force be demonstrated by 
delicate t«sts, but the amount and direction of It measured 
with perfect accuracy. Prof. Ilare, of Philadelphia, and Dr. 
J. R. Nichols, a Boston chemist, had long before satisfied 
tliemselves, by similar tests, of the reality and independence 
of the force. 

In his London Quarterly Journal of Science for January, 
I8Ti, Mr. Crookes published the result of further investlga- 

^d by Google 

THE FACTS TESTED BY SCIENCE. b9 

tlons, from which it would appear that lie liad made great 
progress. Tlie occurrences to which he here teatifles took 
place mostly in Lis own house, In the liglit, and with only pri- 
vate friends present besides the medium lie classifies ome 
of the phenomena of whicli he became assured mderthe 
following heads : 

1. The movement of heavy bodies wilh contict hut with 
out mechanical exertion ; 2. The piienomem of pereus'' \e 
and other allied sounds ; 3. The alteration of w git of 
bodies ; i. Movements of heavy substances when at a dis- 
tance from thi> medium; 5. Tlie risingof tables and chairs off 
the ground without contact with any person ; 6. The levita- 
tion of human beings; 7. Movement of various small articles 
without contact with any person ; 8. Luminous appenraneoa ; 
9. The appearance of hands, either self-luminous or visible 
by ordinary light ; 10. Direct writing ; 11, Phantom forms 
and faces; 13. Special Instances which seem topoiut to tlie 
agency of an exterior intelligence; 13. Miscellaneous oecur- 
renees ot a complex character. 

The mediums for these phenomena were cliicfly Miss Kate 
Fox and Mr. D. D. Homo ; and Mr. Crookes toolt such pre- 
cautions as place trickery out of the list of possible explana- 
tions. Every fact, moreover, which he observed, is corrobo- 
rated, as he admits, by the records of independent observers 
at other time^ and places. 

"It will be seen," he says, " that the facts are of the most 
astounding character, and seem utterly irreconcilable with 
all known theorlesof modern science." Having satisfied him- 
self of their trutA, he saw it would bo moral cowardice to 
withhold his testimony. 

Mr. Crookes cautiously abstains from any confident theory 
in regard to the source of the phenomena. He is not yet pre- 
pared, like Mr. Wallace, to accept Spiritualism as the only 
theory that can cover all the facts. At first he was disposed 
to stop, in company with Serjeant Cox, at the half-way house 
of Psychic Force, or "at force," whatever that may be. We 

^d by Google 

;0 PSYCHIC FORCE. 

must not complain of him tor this, for nearly all earnest in- 
vestigators liave had to tarry at this point for a while. 

The theory of Psychic Force is by no means new. It was 
advocated, under tlie name of Odic Force, by the late Dr. E. 
C. Kogers, of Boston, with whom I had many discnssioos as 
far hack as the year 1852, at which time he published a book 
on the subject. The theory was subsequently urged by Prof. 
Maban and President Samson in America, and by Count 
Gasparin in France. Under Its present name it was put 
forth by Mr. E. W. Cox, serjeant-at law, a member of the Di- 
alectical Society, author of a pamphlet entitled "Spiritual- 
ism answered by Science," and of an interesting psychologi- 
cal work in two volumes, entitled, "What Aral?" 

The term "Psychic Force " may be regarded as a euphem- 
ism, useful in lessening the shock which the tacts might Im- 
part to those who are disaffected by the term Spiritualism. 
Psychic force, [f It means anything, means spiritual force, 
and the question, bluntly stated, is, whether spirits out of the 
flesh can have and exercise spiritual force as wellassplrltsiw 
the flesh. 

Does the medium und th ff t f un nscious cere- 
bration," send forth f om the human gan n a troop of 
visible, materialized f m that an wr t pi y on instru- 
ments, dance, sing, ad ti nally tl e medium the 
while, as in the ca f M A d f Moravia, being 
herself aware of wl t r ng n th t,l t that she her- 
self is doing it? Or a tl m t i 11 If ms what they 
by speech declare tl n 1 t b man f t tlons by some 
independent spirit opt? 

Was it psychic force that enabled Mr. Jencken's infant boy, 
when not sis months old, to write, in the chirography ot an 
adult, intelligible sentf'nces? 

Will psychic force explain an occurrence like the following, 
related by Mr. Henry E. Eussell, and published in the Lon- 
don Medium of July 17th, 1874, in a notice of the mediumsliip 
of Mr. Charles Edward Williams, of Londor 

^d by Google 

A PROOF DIRECT. 71 

" The writer has been often visited by Mr. Williams, andon 
many occa-ions wlien sittinfj wltli Ills family round a, harmo- 
niv/in, tlio Liiediuvii Ufinp; dotnly eiitianecU upon an adjacent 
coutii, and distinctly seen liy every one in llie room, tlie 
wiib'r's tatlier, mauy years since 'paused on before,' lias 
drawn up a cbair from a remote part of tlie room and joined 
tbe members of the circle, talking with them, slngin;; with 
thrni, and selecting pieces of musio to be played on the tu' 
stniment. He has knelt down beside the writer's motlier, as 
in prayer, has placed portions of his robes around the slioui' 
ders ut some, and bas drav n back their heads so as to lean on 
his brea.-<t, and Rtoonln^ down kissed each of them before 
floating up to the celling, wlsliing them good night, and then 
denialeriall^ing his form, or rather, apparently, vanishhiK 
froiii their sight, the medium at the same time being sei^n still 
extended on the couch. Onsuch occasions several recognized 
spirits liave been walking about and talking at the sanie time." 

Truly the psychic force that could accomplisli all this must 
be something more marvelous than the agency of a whole 
legion of spirits. 

Of Mr. Russell, the witness of this remarkable necurrence, 
my friend, Benjamin Coleman, writes me, (July Zlst, 1874); 
" Mr. Russell is a very reliable man, and the postmaster of 
Kingston, near Riclimond." 

Tlio theory of a force unconsciously exercised by the me- 
dium, andproducingaW the various phenomena, is based only 
on a portion of the admitted facts. The higher phenomena, 
manifested in the actual appearance and tangibility of spirit 
forms, and the preterhuman rapidity of spirit action, are not 
included in the synthesis on which the theory is built. The 
best answer to this theory may be found in the facts to which 
I shall soon return. 

Before I do this, however, let us consider what light, If any. 
Spiritualism throws on the great question of the ages, What 
is meant by ipirit, and what by matter? 

By tubstaneo, in metaphysics. Is meant, not the equivalent 
of matter, but that which stands under phenomena. It is 
the fundamental fact of all exist«ncc. Spinoza defines it as 
self-exlstence ; Leibnitz, as an active force like that of the 
strained how ; while Berkeley ironically tells us that it Is the 
tortoise that supports the elephant that supports the world. 
We can never know It, for we know only phenomena, which 
are iU appearances. 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT AND MATTER. 

CHAPTER TI. 

"What do you mean by spirit?" is the question with which 
the sanguine Spiritualist ia often checked. 

To reply intelilgently he ouslit to know something of the 
effiirtx of human thought to throw light on tlio pioblem ; but 
this knowMge can be had only by patient attention to eert^in 
results of philosophical speculation. These I will endeavor 
to present as briefly as possible ; but the reader, it not in a 
miHxl for meditation, will do well to postpone thair considera- 
tion for a more convenient moment. 

Man has been described variously as a trinity, a duality, and 
a unity of two parts, physical and psychical. 

Arc there two substances ? 

" The arguments for the two substances," says Alexander 
Bain (1873), " have, wo believe, lost their validity ; they are 
no longer compatible with ascertained science and clear 
thinking." 

This sweeping declaration Is by no means admitted by 
many of tlie profoundest thinkers of the age. 

Are there, then, simply degrees of one and the same suli- 
stanee? Or, are matter and spirit distinct entities ? 

The question is at the bottom of nearly all the controversies 
In phiiosophyand theology that have vexed human brains the 
last two centuries ; and from the solutions, arrived at by dif- 
ferent minds, emerges either Theism or Pantheism, 

According to Mr. Herbert Spencer, the disputants on both 
sides are "equallyabsurd;" for they are both trying to fathom 
the "unknowable." 

Cut oneouglit toknowa good deal to have a right to say 
Uiat. 

My present object is to leara how far the question is affect- 
ed by Ihe facts of Spiritualism. Do we get from that quarter 
auy new light? 

^d by Google 

SPIRITUALISM IN THE BIBLE. 7S 

Is immaterial [ty a necessary quality of spirit ? Lccke says 
It U not; tliatthe tliinking substance in us, whetlier matter 
or not matter, is a spirit. This was tlio notion of fJie ancients, 
and Is still tlio belief of uncivUizecl men. To their concep- 
tions, naught is immaterial but wliat is naught. 

Dy sout, and its coirelative words in otlier languages, has 
beeii understood, generally, the epiril wlUh animating a hu- 
man Ji>%, and by spirji.tlic same soul as it is after that body's 
dissolution. But the use of the words is arbitrary and far 
from uniform. 

Cicero and Tii^il regard the soul as a subtllo matter which 
might come under the name of aura (breeze), or ijnis (fire), 
or (EiSer, and this soul they both of them called spiritus (a 
breathing). In tho Bible we lind the same conception of 
spirit ; though, that sometimes the scriptural use of the word 
will bear the interpretation of Immateriality, Is not denied. 

Immortality Is taken for granted, both In Oio Old Testa- 
ment and in tlie language of Christ. Warburton's specula- 
tions to tho contrary are now regarded as worthless. Belief 
In Immortality entered into all the science, customs, actions 
and thoughts of the Egyptians. Could Moses, brought up in 
the palace of the Pharaolis, could the Israelites, so long dwell- 
ers in the land, have escaped tho influence of the belief? Not 
only historical Induction, but the text itself, refutes the sup- 

Kepeatedly we find it prohibited in the Pentateuch to evoke 
tlio dead. In the Book of Samuel, the Witch of Endor calls 
up the shade of the prophet. Belief in spirits is cquolly im- 
plied in all tho accounts of vLiions, spirit writings, hands and 
voices, apparitions, levitations, ascensions, and other preter- 
human phenomena, so like those of Modern Spiritualism, 
tlirougliout the Bible. Even Job, who often speaks as iC tho 
future life were left out of his calculations, lias a spirit pass 
before his face, and hears a spirit voice. 

Spiritualism does not use the terms epirit and soul as hav- 
ing only a negative meaning ; as merely implying non-cor- 
poreity. Tertullian gives an account of a female laediura 

^d by Google 

74 SPIIIIT AND HATTER. 

who described a soul as corporeally eshlblted to her view, 
and as being " tender and lucid, and of aerial color, and every 
way of buman form." 

Others, botli seers and tlieologians, among the ancients, 
rrgarded man aa a trinily of earth-body, spiritbody and 

The Spiritualism of many of the early Cliristian Fathers 
seems to have been a sort of Organicism, explaining life by 
the properties of organs, and regarding matter, once organ- 
ized, as sufficient to explain all the phenomena of man, 
whether we consider him as existing in the natural or in the 
spiritual body. 

The primary conception of spirit seems to have been that o( 
an attenuation of matter. Men must havo becomo early 
awaro that there arc certain invisible essences of things. If 
wine is subjected to a boiling temperature, there is a separa- 
tion of elements ; but tho finer part, disengaging itself from 
the grosser, may not bo distinfiulshed by all the senses until, 
by the aid of a distiiiinjt apparatus, the escaping spirit is 
liquefied and made visible. 

Thus, the earliest conceptions of the relations of body and 
sonl amounted to a sort of double materialism. Among primi- 
tive and uncivilized races this notion Is universally prevalent. 
(See Tyler's "Primitive Culture," possim). We find it com- 
mon when we go back as far as history and tradition extend. 
It was the belief of the Assyrians, the Babylonians, the 
Medes, and the early Christians, as it is now of the North 
American Indian, tho Australian, tho Hottentot and the Es- 
quimaux. To its prevalence, all the traditions, all the reli- 
gions, and all the narratives of navigators testify conclusively. 

Among tlio Christian Fathers the conception of a sou], 
body, involved, larvaliko, in the earth-body— a conception 
simple, obvious and aboriginal— was generally held up to the 
time of Gregory of Kyesa (331-354) and of Augustine 
(35t-430). Before this, neither from Judaism nor from 
Christianity had the doctrine of immateriality received much 
countenanca 

^d by Google 

DESCARTES AND SPINOZA. 76 

Even Augustine, embarrasswi to decide how the imniat«- 
tial soul can act on tlie dense matter of tlie body in producing 
movement, postulat^id a subtle corporeal substance, cquiva- 
Icnt to a soul-body, whlcb, as intermediate, may be affected 
and put in action by the mind. 

TertuUian argues that what is Iwdiless la nothing ; he predi- 
cates corporeity of Deity itself. Tbe modera Christian no- 
tion that tlie soul Is perfectly simple, incorporeal, and imma> 
tcrial, was unknown to the early church. 

It was not till Descartes (IGIO) tanght the dogma of the im- 
materiality of the soul, that It began to supersede the common 
belief. "To the best of my knowledge," says Coleridge, 
"Descartes was the first philosopher who Introduced the 
absolute and essential heterogeneity of tho soul as intelli- 
gence, and tlio body os matter." 

" It is manifest," says Uallam, " to any one who has read 
tho correspondence of Descartes, that the tenet of the soul's 
immateriality, instead of being general, as we are apt to pre- 
sume, was by no means in accordance with the common 
opinion of his age." 

And Descartes, let It be noted, in the effort to he consistent 
with his philosophy, made the declaration, still acquiesced 
In by many "Orthodox" teachers, but rejected totally by 
Spiritualism, that there are no valid proofs of the soul'i vmmor- 
taltti/ Miwpf those founded on revelation. 

Spinoza, (1(165,) wlio was largely under the influence of 
Descartes, having identified mind and matter, God and tlie 
universe, seems to have regarded the phenomenal facts of 
witchcraft, somnambulism and Spiritualism, as fatal to his 
Pantheistic system; and so he repudiated them all. 

The soul, according lo Spinoza, is nothing but a conscious 
body, and the body nothing but a soul having extension. 

In his dread of dualism he rejects the positive facts, indi- 
cating pretermundano power, which were well known to 
many of his contemporaries. He might have admitted them, 
and still clung to liis theory of a single substance, if tho Car- 
tesian notion of the soul's immaterial it j' had not driven out of 

Id b, Google 

78 SPINOZA OPPOSES SPIRITUALISM. 

his head tlie doulDlo raaterialism of t^e early Christians. For 
there may be grades ol matter, and stii! a single substance. 
Bnt ho strove to make everything tally unequivocally with 
his Pantheistic scheme. 

Body and aonl being, In Ills system, identical in substance, 
wo may understand how tliey should bo united in the terres- 
trial life, but how tho soul, bodiless and nusubstantlal, and 
parted from the one only substance, is going to get along any 
better under "the aspect o( eternity" than under "the as- 
pect of time," he does not make clear to us ; nor does he 
explain why, the substance being one, death should not 
destroy soul aa well as body. 

In Spinoza's scheme the departed soul is indeed poorly off. 
The senses, the imagination, the liuman aEEections, all be- 
come annihilated with the death of the body. Reason only 
remams, there is light, hutno warmth; intellect, but no love. 

Thus, by depriving us, at death, of all that we have acquir- 
ed, through the senses, during the earth-Uto, Spinoza virtual- 
ly destroysour individuality, and leaves the soul, after separa- 
tion from the body, equivalent, as Emile Salsset remarks, to 
"little more than a nated syllogism." 

In failing to see that there may be, though impenetrahle to 
sense, a duplicate and permanent ground of being in m^n, in 
which memory, affection and all knowledge may organically 
Inhere, Spinoza was obliged to strip man of all those constitu- 
enta essential to a conscious inftnortailty. A glimpse of the 
spiritual body beyond the material would havo saved him 
from many Inconsistencies. 

Among Spinoza's letters are several that passed bftweon 
himself and a Spiritualist, though not a very enlightened one, 
of his day. To the phenomenal facta adduced by the latter, 
Spinoza replies petulantly : " 1 am indeed confounded to dis- 
cover men of i^arta and ingenuity misusing their powera in 
attempts to persuade mankind of tho truth of audi ahsurdi- 
ties." 

Here Spinoza loses hia temper, and scolds like a Cambridge 
professor at the thought of a spiritual manifestation. 

^d by Google 

THE GREAT PBOBLEM. 77 

"Had I only," lie writes, "aaclearaconcpptionof a spectre 
as I have of a triangle or a circle, I should not hesitate to ac- 
knowledge that it was created by God." 

To this Lis correspondent replies with some point: "Tell 
me, 1 entreat you, wliether you have as clear an idea of a God 
as of a triangle ?" 

And Spinoza's answer is ; " Yes ; but if you ask whether I 
cau form an image or picture of God as clear as that I form of 
a triangle, I answer No. For wo cannot picture God to our- 
selves, but we can verily understand lijm." 

This Is a subterfuge unworthy of the great Spinoza; but with 
all hlshair-splittinghedoes not parry the thrust of his cor- 
respondi'nt. The latter, when pressed to explain his concep- 
tion of a spectre, might liave replied in words very like those 
of Spinoza himself, when qualifying his remark in regard to 
his conception of God. The retort would have been perfect- 
But let it bo remembered that Spiritualism, in Spinoza's 
day, had to bear tlie burden of many gross superstitions, evi- 
dent in the burning of witches and tlie prevailing dsmonpho- 
bia; and it is not surprising that, in his contemptfor such 
wrongs and such cowardice, he should have undervalued and 
gradu-tUy taught himself to discredit the phenomena on which 
the belief in the agency of spirits was founded. 

I come back to the great discussion stigmatized by Spencer 
as "absurd." 

If the question is put, "What do you mean by spirit?" tlie 
obvious retort is, " Wlrnt do you mean by matter ?" 

Materialism regards matter as the firot and only existence, 
end mind as one of its modes or properties, like heat, elec- 
tricity, or clicmical action. 

Idealism regards mind as the first and only existence, hav- 
ing matter for one of its modes ; the conception of matter be- 
inj[ only a mental synthesis of qualities. 

Realism denounces the Idealist's notion of the non-realily 
of matter. "Metaphysics, in all its anti-realistie develop, 
ments," says Herbert Spencer, "is a disease of language." 

^d by Google 

78 SPIRIT AND MATTEE. 

Even nelmholti, the great German scientist, wLo criticises 
tlie human eye as a very bad piece of work, wliich lie should 
have sent hack for alteration if it had been produced hy a hu- 
man artificer, teUs us that our senses report arifiht, and that 
tilings are what they appear ; all which, considering the low 
character of Hie Maker in Uelmholtz's estimation, would 
seem to be somewhat contradictory. 

On the contrary, Plato, Flotinus, Kant, Hamilton, and other 
profound philosophical thinkers, tell us that we eamiotknow 
things in themselves ; we can perceive only the appearances 
of things. 

Mr. Spencer says that these great men did not believe their 
own speculations. Perhaps not ; and yet there may have 
been some truth in them. We may be often wiser than we 

The stupendous phenomena of Modern Spiritualism make 

ns pause, and ask once more : What, then. Is this mystery 

called matter? 
All the conceptions of matter we get through the senses 

are modified, if not contradicted, by some of the well-attested 

proofs of spirit-power. 
The materialized figure of Katie has been known to dlsap; 

pear instantly on reentering the cabinet where Miss Cook was 

lying entranced. 

In describiuKtberemarkable phenomena through Mrs Anna 
Stewart at Terre Haute, Ind., Mr, Theodore F. Price of Mon- 
son, Ind., under date of March 4th, 1875, writes : " The doora 
of the cabinet were thrown opou, and the spirit appeared 
holding the medium by the hand. Both spirit and medium 
advanced from the cabinet, now vacated by all things visible 
save the chair in which the medium previous to this had been 
seated. Said the spirit : ' Can you now all see the medium, 
and distinguish us both clearly 7 Are you all satisfied now 
that there is no deception about this ?' Both spirit and me- 
dium remained standing in front of the cabinet for some 
minutes, the former asking that all should closely scriitinize 
the features of each." The light on this occasion was ''clear 
and satisfying." 

^d by Google 

ASTONISHING FACTS. ''9 

The spirit Florence that came through Misa Showers, at Mr. 
Lnsmoorc'a house, in London, April 11th, 1874, dematerial- 
Ized Iiersell and lier white rol)e3 almost instantly, so as to he 
invisible, and tills three times in qnick succession. 

Mr. Alfred It. Wallace, in his "Defence of Spiritualism," 
gives the following account of some of the phenomena through 
Miss Niehol (af terwarda Mrs. Guppy) : 

"The most remarltable feature of this lady's mcdiumslilp 
is tho production of flowers and fruits in closed rooms, ilie 
llrst time tills occurred was at ray own house, at a very early 
Htaee of lier development. All present were my own 1 riends. 
Miss Nicliolliad come early to tea, it belnKinid-winter, and 
Klie had been with U3 ina very warm, gas-lighted room four 
lioura before the flowers appeared. Tlieessential fact is, that 
upon ftiiare table, in a small room closedauddark (thoafljoiu- 
ine room and passage being well lighted) , a quantity of flo wurs 
appeared, which were not there when we put outtheeasa 
few minutes before. Tliey eonsistea of anemones, tulips, 
ehrvsanthemums, Chinese primroses, and several ferns. All 
were absolutely fresh, as If just pathe red from a conservato 
TV Tliey were covered witli a fine, cold dew. Not a petal 
was crumpled or broken, not tlie most delicate point or pin- 
nule of tliu ferns was out of place. I dried and preserved the 
whole, and have, attached to tlicm, the attestation of all pres- 
ent that tliey had no share, so far as they know. In l>ringlnK 
theflowers into the room. Ibelievedat the time, and sHil 
believe, that it was absolutely impossible for Miss N. to have 
concealed them so Ion (t, to have kept them so perfect, and, 
above all, to produce tliem covered throughout with a most 
beautiful coating of dew, just like that which collects on the 
outside of a tumbler when filled with very cold water on a 
hot day." 

At a meeting of the Marylebone Association of Inquirers 
Into Spiritaalisra, in London, March 18tb, 1874, Mr. Thomas 
Everltt said that he had known as many as nine hundred and 
(hiTty-m: teords to be written in a second by spirit-power. A 
pencil was used in this work ; and that the writing was not 
done by some process analogous to lithography was rendered 
probable by several specified tests. 

The flowing white robes of the spirit Katie would disappear 
instantly with tho spirit- form, andyet, as wo have learnt, she 
cut stiips from her tunic and distributed them, and these have 
remained materialized, though the cut places were instantly 
made whole by the spirit. 
Not only have inanimate objects been brought through 

^d by Google 

30 SPIRIT AND MATTER. 

walls and ceilings into closed rooms, but living things, la 
the London Medium (Dec. 30tli, 1870), a case is mentioned 
in wliich a dog and a eat were brougbt from Mrs. Guppy'a 
house by the spirits, a distance of two or three miles. The 
names of eight witnesses to the occurrence are given. 

The floating of the human body in the air has been a very 
common phenomenoa. Dr. Davies narrated, at one of the 
narley street meetings, in Loudon, how ho felt Mr. Home ail 
over, while he was floating about in a semi-darkened room. 
Mr. E. B, Tylor (author of Primitive Culture), gave, in a lec- 
ture at the Eoyal Institution (1S71), several instances of 
statements in historical records, that certain of tho early 
fathers of the church were very often fioated in the air. 
While holding the hand of a medium, in the dailt, I have my- 
Belf known her to be lifted in her chair and placed on the ta- 
ble. In tho London Spiritualist (June 16th, 1871), will be 
found an aceount of a sitting at which Mr. Ilerne was float- 
ed in the air in the light. 

Spirit music, in the absence of all human instruments, has 
been heard, not only by mediums, but by several persons at 
once, who were in their normal state. 

Solid objects have been introduced in some unaccountable 
manner. " I have been present," says Mr. W. 11. Harrison, 
"often in broad daylight, with Messrs. Ilerno and Williams, 
when solid objects, such as books and flowers, have fallen on 
us from above, where nothing but the whitewashed ceiling 
was to be seen." 

Spirit photography, thougli genuine specimens are easily 
imitated, is now an admitted fact. I have received a remark- 
able photograph got by Mr. John Beattie, a retired photog- 
rapher of Clifton, England. He had his own plates and appa- 
ratus, and superintended the whole process liimself. A me- 
dium present would describe the form of the spiritual pres- 
ence, and then tho photographic impression would confirm 
tho report. The figure in my copy, though almost grotesque, 
is yet human in its features, and sufficiently distinguishable. 
Mr. Alfred E. Wallace gives his testimony explicitly to tha 

^d by Google 

A LETTER CARRIED BY SPlIilTS. 81 

reality of spirit- photography. Lady Caithness, whom I knew 
in London, vouches (July 24th, 1874) for five recognizable 
spirit-pliotographs slie and her son got through Duguet, the 
Parisian, to whom they went perfect strangers. Buguet took 
too many genuine spiritphotographs in London to leave it 
doubtful that he was a medium. Unfortunately ho was 
tempted by want of money to supplement with fraud his in- 
BufBcient and variable medial power, and subsequently, on 
being arrested in Paris, to abjure his mediumship. Onee safe 
in Brussels, he addressed a letter (Sept. 3Tth, I8T5) to the 
French MinLiter of Justice, confessing his apostasy. 

In a letter from Florence, Italy, April 4th, 1872, to Professor 
Crookes, Baron Seymour Kirkup, an honorable man and sin- 
cere student of Spiritualism (see Ilawthome'saccount of hira), 
relates that on a certain occasion he asked Annina Carboni, a 
spirit, to take a letter to lier sister, Teresa, still in the earth- 
life, and residing at Leghorn. Paollna Carboni, another sis- 
ter, was the medium. The Baron made a sketch of the letter, 
and Paolina copied it. In this letter Teresa is told to note 
the ixcact minute of its arrival, and to mention In her answer 
the exact time of sending it. "When Paolina," says the 
Baton, "had finished her letter, she went away, and I shut 
the door and remained alone. I folded the half sheet, and 
placed it at p. m. on the piano, unsealed, and without an en- 
velope. I watched it, expecting to see it go ; but after two 
minutes, finding that it remained, I took a book, and after two 
minutes more I looked, and the note was gone. The door re ■ 
mained shut, and no one entered the room. At eight minutes 
past seven came three loud raps on the sofa. 1 went to the 
piano, to sec— nothing. I rtturned to the table, and there on 
my book was a little triangular note, like Paollna 's. It was 
n punctual answer to it, and I called Paolina to read it. The 
spirit had made two journeys of sixty miles each, besides 
waiting for the writing of the answer (fifteen lines). In the 
short time of one hour and fifteen minutes. As I remained 
on purpose totally alone, there could be no trick, no smug- 
gling a pTei)ared letter. , . . Another witness of my dear 

^d by Google 

82 SPIRIT iND MATTER. 

Annlna's exploit. Is her mother, wife of a former Eoglish 
Tice-consul at Rome. Sliehas just come from Leghorn, where 
she wag present when her daughter Teresa received and an- 
swered the letter of Paolina." 

Subsequently to this. Baron Eirkapreceivedstill more strik- 
ing evidences of the speed of the actual transmission of real, 
objective letters, to great distanees, by spirit power. 

TIio venerable S. C. Hall, honorably known in English lit- 
erature, referring to the mediumship of Mr. D. D. Home, 
writes (1871); "I have held an aecordiou (my own property) 
in my hand, when delicious music was played on it, lasting 
several minutes. It has been tabcn from mo, and carried to 
the end of a large room, playing there ; I saw the stops mov- 
ing and heard the music : I could only not see the power that 
produced tlio sounds. , . . Since this was written I liava 
seen a hand moving the accordion up and down, and another 
hand acting on the stops. Two other gentlemen saw these 
hands also. The room was well lit. ... I have seen a 
man (llr. Home) taken from his seat by some power invisi- 
ble, and conveyed about the room ; and he has marked on the 
ceiling with a pencil, a matlt that Is stUi there. A red-hot 
blazing coal has been taken from a Serce lire, and placed (by 
Home) on my head, without singeing a single hair. X have 
seen nearly a hundred flowers — among them two large 
bunches of apple-blossom— thrown on my table i the medium, 
» lady (Hiss Nichol), having been previously examined by 
two ladies on entering my house. I have repeatedly grasped 
r spirit-hand. I have seen lights that seemed phosphoric, to 
tlie number of, it may he twenty, at once, floathig in all parts 
of a room. I have seen a heavy table floated to the celling. 
A grand piano has been raised from the floor, no visible per- 
son being within two yards of it. I have seen a hand-bell 
raised by a shadowy hand, and rung over the head of each 
person in the circle." 

Mr. W. H. Harrison relates that on one occasion Katie, in 
tlie dark, gave the persons present sometliing to feel, saying, 
"That is wliat wemake thefaceaof. Do not pinch it." It felt 

^d by Google 

SPIRIT POWER OVER MATTER. 83 

like a. piece of damp wasii- leather. Next slie salii : "Feel 
this i it Is true spirit drapery." The texture was certainly 
rem ark able. As it was drawn over Ibo lingers it felt as light 
and fragile as a spider's web ; line silk would ho coarse and 
heavy in comparison, "Now feel it materialized," said 
Katie, and it felt like the heavy white drapery which ordina- 
rily adorns the spirit heads. 

Bat I need only refer to the facta I have already given in 
til narrative parts of this work, of the matenallzationand 
dematerlalization of hands and entire human forms ; of the 
extemporaneous produetion of appropriate clothinR, orna- 
ments, flowers, etc. ; the passage of articles through solid mat- 
ter ; the production of drawings and writings with incon- 
ceivahle swiftness the motions Iitt rally equal ng the quick- 
ness of thought the apparent maatery of all material 
Impediments. 

It may be infprred from these phenomena that matter Is to 
spirits something \erj different from what it i^ to mortals in 
the flesh ; that our knowledge of it is as Ihe liigheit philoso- 
phy often assert simply relative and phenomenal ; that a 
change in our organs of sense and perception wonid make 
matter other tlnn whit it now ippiars to us 

Leibnitz concluded tliat space is not something real, but 
only a subjective representation. Kant teaches that space 
and time are forms of our sensibility, pure intuitions, and 
have no corresponding objective reality. Do Eemusat, J. S. 
Milt, Bain, and others, believe that extension is a coneep< 
Uon derived from our muscular sensibility. 

These views, bo astounding and even absurd to thinkers 
who liavo not yet risen into this rarefied air oC speculation, 
accord with tlio teachings professedly got from personal com- 
munion with spirits hy Swedenbotg, the great Swedish me- 
dium and seer. But Swedenborg further teaches that the 
only possible existence, the sole ground of consciousness, for 
finite and derivative beings, must be phenomenal. 

Mr. ncrbert Spencer thinks that the experience hypothesis 
better explains tlie genesis of our conceptions of space and 

^d by Google 

84 SPIRIT AND MATTER. 

time. Whatever may be the genesis, the tact of their relntw- 
ity may he realized by a few simple cons iilerat ions :* 

Suppose that while you are unconscious of any change, the 
whole world and all its contents should become enlarged a 
hundred times. Imagine the foot measure to be a hundred 
times longer, and everything increased to correspond. 

When consciousness should return, things would appear to 
you just 03 timy did before their- enlargejnent. Ton would 
perceive no change. Tour senses would be the measure o( 
things as before. The relations and proportions of things 
would bo the same. The whole outer world would be the 
same ; lioin, then, to ym can it be »aid to Iiave any other eziit- 
ewe or place than wJuil your senaations and thoughts asHgn to it ? 

It our organs o( sensation, with the brain and the nerves, 
were fonned and proportioned otherwise than they are, the 
whole visible world would not appear as It does now. If our 
eyes were so formed as to linvo telescopic and microscopic 
powers, or if they were as sensitive to Impressions as the 
photographer's prepared plate, the whole creation would as- 
sume new aspects Troximity and distance would affect us 
very differently and spiritual bcmgs might be plainly seen. 

A knowledge of optics soon teaches us that the report we 
get through the senses Is often merely relatively correct. 
Yesterday I looked out of my window at a church steeple, 
which, iua peoulnr light, just before an August sunset, and 
whllea thunderstorm was brooding in a background of ebon 
cloud, appeared ot a pure, snowy white. Uy wife and her 
brother looked also ot the steeple, and It appeared a pure 
white to them ; and yet we all knew it was of a rather dark 
drab color. 

Ever to the senses the limitations ot the seeming are the 
end of all things. We iee nothing leave the body nt death, 
and, therefore, we fancy that nothing leaves it. The delu- 
sion is an Inseparable accompaniment of our llniteness. Thus 
all human systems are necessarily imperfect. Wc can only 
make approximations to the tiuth. 

'TtielufluilOBuUUiuriiillB," byT)lcopliUual'»rbuu3. fioaujii; \mi. 

Id b, Google 

SPIKIT AND MATTER. 

CHAPTEE Vir. 

Only no wlio can see a,11 things in 
sec any one thing in its true relations and, therefore, in the 
light of absolute truth, an(J as it actually is. 

But because we do not see things as a Supreme Power may 
see them, or as spirits may partially see tliem, it dues nut 
follow that we do not see tliem aright under liio limitations 
and relations to which we are here subjected, and so far as 
our external senses can aid us. Our mistalie lies in supposing 
that these senses teach us all ; that their report is a finality ; 
whereas there are supersensnal faculties In man, as indicated 
in the phenomena of somnambulism, clairvoyance, prevision, 
medlumship ; and it is llie business of man's aspiring intelli- 
gence to acquaint himself with these faculties, to study and 
Interpret their revelations. 

Thus one purposeof our subjection hereto these limitations 
of sense and matter may be in order that, by our own efforts, 
we may rise abore tliem into a liigher atmosphere of truth. 
This discipline may be necessary to the growth of our epiritu- 
(il and thinting faculties, since life without thought is a ru- 
dimental stage. 

Materialism says truly fliat It Is contrary to sound phi- 
losophy to introduce two entitles to explain the phenomena of 
;ifo when one will answer. It asks ; As the vibrations of the 
light produce color, wliy may not the movements of the mole- 
cules of the brain generate thought and consciousness? 

To this the Spiritualist may reply : Since we are as ignorant 
of the substanceof matter as we areof that of mind, of course 
wo cannot say that tliey may not be one and the same sub- 
stance, supporting two very different sets of properties. Only, 
if this lie BO, then must matter have properties directly tiio re- 
verse of those we usually ascribe to It. Even Hartley admits 

^d by Google 

66 MAN A TEINITT. 

that it is the same thing whether I suppose that matter haa 
properties and powers unlike tliose wliieli appear, and superi- 
or to them, or whether I suppose an immaterial substance. 

Whether we annihilate mind and make matter think, or 
whether we get rid of matter and substitute ideas, we aio in 
an equal dilemma. The Materialist is as helpless as the Ira- 
materialist ot the Spiritualist in respect to tJie use of words. 
Materialism mocks at philosophy ; but " to mock at philoso- 
phy," says Pascal, " what is it but to philosophise 7" 

Under the facts of Spiritualism we may regard it as still an 
open question, whether the unknown basis of matter may not 
bo equivalent to the unknown basis of mind. Each may flow 
into existence from one divine creative substance; but that 
they result in two exliibitions of power, distinct not only in 
degree but in kind, and justifying the trichotomy of earth- 
body, spirit-body, and soul, the facts of this volume tend to 

"To me," says Mrs. J. H. Conant, the well-known Ameri- 
can medium, "the soul is the inner life, the principle eternal 
with God, a part ot God ; while the spirit is the covering or 
body of the soul, the intermediate body acting between the 
soul and the physical body in this lite, and acting for the soul 
In the other life." 

This was substantially the notion of Plato, who regarded 
terrestrial man as a trinity of soul, soul-body, and earth -body. 

Such was the view of many of the early Christian Fathers, 
Including Clement, Tatlaii, and Origen ; and it is taught in 
the writings of Elvail (1804—1869), who, under the pen-name 
of Allan Kardec is identilied with the history of Modern Spir- 
itualism, and who derived his system from the teachings of 
spirits. 

Andrew Jackson Davis, while he holds that the human 
spiritual structure is a result wTOught out by the physical or- 
ganization, believes in an uncreated principle of spirit ; so 
Uiat liere, too, we have a trinity. The spirit's organism, ae- 
cording to Davis, is substantial and obeys laws, superior, but 
not antagonistic, to ordinary gravitation and tlie known phy- 
sical forces. 

Id b, Google 

SKEPTICAL SOPHISTRY. 87 

Judge Edmonds eaya : " There is in roan tiie emanation 
from God in tlio Boul, tlie animal nature in the body, and the 
connection of the two in what X will designate aa the electri- 
cal body. Jleno, man i» a trinity." 

Tiio notion that spirit is merely on cfGorescence of matter, 
that It is nothing until, in the. word* of Milton, "Body up to 
spirit work," is not consistent with these teachings, whieli re- 
gard spirit as tho liigher power, and matter as something 
which, M not distinct in essence, is at least snbordlnate, medi- 
ate and auxiliary. 

In Swedenborg'a system man is an organism, fitted liy an 
earth-body to live in this world, and by a spirit-lwdy to live 
simultaneously in the apirit-worid, and vivified by continual 
influx from the divine creative source. In the dissolution of 
tlic cartii-body tiie real man remains unimpaired in ids indi- 
viduality, except that his body and ids surroundings are spir- 
itual. Thus in this system, as in the others 1 havu named, 
terrestrial man has, besides his twofold body, a divine influx, 
the equivalent of a soul. 

" Eitiier all matter," says Alfred R. Wallace, " is conscious, 
or consciousness is sometiiing distinct from matter, and in tlie 
latter case," wliich he claims to be true, " its presence in ma- 
terial forms Is a proof of tlie existence of conscious beings, 
outside of, and independent of, what we term matter." 

Admitting Ihat " what we term matter " may not include 
all matter— since our senses do not tell us what matter is in 
itself, but simply what it is to us, constituted as we are— this 
view will l>e found not inconsistent witli the theories I have 
named. 

Tliere is a !>kepHcai philosophy sume what active in our day, 
which would treat (he subject of man's destiny as if all no- 
tion of causation could bo excluded without doing violence to 
our reason. This school asserts, that tor aiight that we linow 
to tlio contrary, anything may produce anything ; astonish- 
ing phenomena may occur without basis, cause or reason, 
outside of some antecedent phenomenon ; matter may pro- 
duce mind since there is no need that a cause should he ade- 

^d by Google 

88 SPIRIT AND MATTER. 

quate to the production ot an efEeet. " Every objectively real 
thing," says a writer of tills school, " is a term In numberliiss 
series of mutual implications, and its reality outside of tliese 
scries is utterly inconceivable." 

But what scientilio validity has an hypothesis like this? 
Does it not simply amount to a declaration that the problem 
is nnsolvable and " untliinkable," and that we must abandon 
tlie attempt to meet the mind's legitimate demand for some- 
thing to explain the derivation of jntelligeiice and other phe- 

"Itisjmpossible,"sajs the same writer, ' to construct mat- 
ter by a mere Eyntliesl>> of forces " 

Bat this, and his previous assertion, Spiritualism, by ex- 
tending, or rather duplicating the realm of causation and in- 
troducing new and transcendent facts, consigns to the limbo 
of exploded dogmas. 

Spiritualism gives us proofs of an intelligent Force, exert- 
ing itself both centrifugally and centripetally, repelling or 
attracting what, to our senses, is matter , using this matter as 
Its slave, its toy, its vestment, and its ready instrument ; find- 
ing in it, whether solid, fluid, or gaseous, no impediment ; 
mailing It the plastic recipient of astonishing activities that 
seem to be independent of space and time, and ruled by an 
understanding will. 

" Among the unquestionablo rules of scientilio method," 
says Jevons, "Is tliat firot law that wJiatever phenomenon is, 
ia. We must ignore no existence whatever ; we may vario a- 
ly interpret or explain its meaning and origin, but if a phe- 
nomenon does exist, it demands some kind of explanit on 
If, then, there is to be a competition for scientific recogn t on 
the world without us must yield to the undoubted ex steuce 
of tlie spirit within. 

" A phenomenon which entirely fails to beexpHnel ty 
any known laws may indicate the interference of some vl oily 
new series of natural forces. Thus the doctrine of tl e load 
Stone was anciently thought to contradict the law of f, av ta 
tion ; but there is no bn-ach of that law." 

^d by Google 

SPIRITUAL CAUSES. 89 

nence we may see how irrational are the notions of those 
who say that tlie law oC gravitation is violated when a man is 
lifted by an unseen force, spiritual, but still natural, to the 
ceiling of a room. Tlie phenomenon plainly has a cause, and 
the inquiry, What is that cause? is perfectly legitiiiiate ; 
although certain skeptics, when driven to tlie wall, reply, 
"Well, it proves nothing; there are plenty of tilings quite as 
myatcrioua J" 

It proves this much at least: Tlie limit which an atheistic 
■.r_..^,i!„. — mi^ get up for us is swept away lite mist by 
1 IV new realm of causation is reveaJed for tlie 
;]iought. Science can no longer deny the exist- 
3 and things because they cannot be seen, 
leasured. 

eattie, whose investigations I have already 
of opinion that " spirit substance " is never 
photographed. His reasons are, that the spirit has power to 
attract to itself material envelopes or forms, upon which light 
may Impinge, and which, in some cases of darkness, are self- 
luminous ; that these exteriors only are photographed ; that 
all forms of matter ate merely the equlvalenti ot motion- 
producinj! force; not compositions of final atoms, but coordi- 
nations of forces which may be re-combined or changed into 
their equivalents ; and that tlius the most enlightened Klateri- 
allsm must, when it arrives at its last analysis, merge in Spir- 
itualism, and confess that behind all mateiial play there 
exists the source of all force, namely. Universal Mind. 

This last was tbo opinion of Plato, Plotlnus, Bruno, Leib- 
nitz, and many of the greatest thinkers. 

The present tendency ot science is to confirm their view by 
proving the unity of all forces and phenomena. But to this 
subject 1 shall again return. 

" Instead of regarding spirit," says Fernand Papillon, " as 
a property of matter, wo should regard matter as a property 
of spirit. Uaterialisui is falso and imperfect because it stops 
short at atoms, in which it localizes those properties for which 
atoms supply no cau^e, and because it neglects force and 

^d by Google 

90 SPIRIT &.yD mattek. 

Fpirit, wliLch are the only means we have, constituted as our 
Boula are, of conceiving the activity anil the appearinRs of be- 
lufis. It is false and imperfect, because it etops halt-way, 
and treats compound and resolvable factors as simple and 
irreducible ones ; and because it professes to represent the 
world by shows without attempting to oxpIaiD the productioo 
of those shows. . . . The source of differentiations can- 
not be in energy itself; it must be in a principle apurt 
Iroiu that energy. In a superior will and consciousness, o£ 
which we have doubtless onlya dim and faulty Idea, but as to 
which we can yet affirm that they have some analogy with 
the Inner light which fills us, and which we shed forth from 
us, and which teaches us, by its mysterious contact with the 
outer world, the infinite order of Uie universe." 

Science tells us that the microscopic germ which evolves 
into a human Iwing does not differ from the germ of the net- 
tle, the reptile, or the beast. The chemical constituents are 
the same r oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon, with about 
four per cent, of other elements. 

What, then, causes the one germ to issue in n man and the 
other in a weed? "An wiknotun somethinff," says Dr. Hitch- 
man, "must be posited in addition to tiie physiological pro- 
cesses accompanying the phenomena." Since tlio differ- 
ence is not ill the maUrktl properties, it must be in wba); 
manifests itself as the yeycAJcnij" in something not explained 
by the word matter unless we make that word aoraprehend 
what we mean by spmt. 

Thus the ultimate form is predetermined in the embryo ; 
and this fact harmonizes with the Hegelian doctrine of Nature, 
which teaches tliat for every form of existence we may find 
the motive in that which apparmitig follows. For example, 
we may say that matter exists as a tlieatre for life, and life as 
a manifestation of mind. But that tor the sate of which a 
plK'nomonon, takes place, mus*be, in truth, though not in ap- 
pearance, prior tj thepheiioroenon.and.morcover.it must be 
thesubstanceand the truth of the phenomenon, Tht^psycliiatl, 
then, is tlie prior, the real, and the suusiantial ; tlio physical 
Is the dependent, the phenomenal and the changing. 

Id b, Google 

SPIRIT FIRST. 91 

St. Paul speaks from appearanees when he says, " That was 
not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural." On 
the contrary, spirit is the senior, the causative and the 
essential. 

" The demonstration," says Mr. G. n. Lewes (1873>, "that 
thinkins is a eeriation, and that a series involves time, dis- 
proves tlie notions of ultimate unity and simplicity applied 
tc a Thinlcing Principle." 

But the facts of clairvoyance shiver this assumption. Not 
long since a peasant in Germany gave the following test ; he 
would let you grasp a liandful of heans from a bag, and then 
he would tell instantly t!ie exact numlwr in your hand. 

The marvelous and instantaneous solution of complicate 
arithmetical prohlema hy Zerah Colbum and other mathe- 
matical "prodigies" cannot lie explained by the theory of a 
seriation of thought, as we mortals understand the word seri- 

The hypothesis of a spiritual organism is "untenable," ac- 
cording to Mr. Lewes, because it is the Introduction of an ««- 
known to take the place of the knoinable. 

Bat is not this a begging of the question ; an assumption, 
contravened by the facts of Spiritualism ; the assumption, 
namely, that our physical senses must be the measure of our 
entire organism? 

Wlien an inexplicable phenomenon is presented, what says 
the Materialist ? Why, that we do not know all the resoi^rces 
and powers of Matter I 

I readily admit the suggestion. We will suppose that it is 
unaided Matter which not only sees, feels, and thinlrs, but 
which produces the phenomenaoEclairvoyanee levllation in 
dependent movement, materialization and demateiialization 
of forms. 

Dere, then, is a supposed particular matter esprp««ing \t- 
self in phenomena, of wlileh we liave no reason to believe 
that matUr in general Is capable. This particular matter, 
therefore, is truly " unknown " to us, so far as its power to 
produce the phenomena is concerned. Sounknoitm is it, that. 

^d by Google 

92 SPIRIT AND MATTER. 

la order to distinguish It from matter comparatively known, 
we call it by the name of epirit. 

Isi'cause we do this, it is not correct to say that we introduce 
an unlcnoien to take the place of the known; for the matter 
that can produce the phenomena Ihave specified is not a mat. 
ter that is known to ua, and wo aro justified in distinguishing 
it by the name of spirit from the matter that we know. 

The question whether this spirsfis not a higher, subtler, and 
nnknown form or grade of matter is distinct and perfectly 
legitimate. 

But thoohjeetions which men of science often raise to tho 
use of the word spirit willbe found, under a strict analysis, to 
apply equally to the use of the word mattm: 

The late James F. Ferrler, though an acute metaphysician, 
nsed to lose his head when arguing against Spiritualism. In 
his day (18D1) the phenomena had not attained their present 
development. Of Spiritualists, he says : " Oh, ye miserahle 
mystics! have ye bethought yourselves of the backward and 
downward course which ye are running into the pit of the 
bestial and the abhorred ?" 

These are but wild and whirling words. Ferrier's mistake 
was In imagining tliat there is such a chasm between the mor- 
tal and the immortal, that spirits are not human still, taking 
with them the characteristics which constituted their individ- 
uality while in the earthly body. 

Of matter he says : "It is already in tho field as an ac- 
knowledged entity. Mind, considered as an independent en- 
tity, is not so unmistakably in the field. Therefore, as enti- 
ties are not to be multiplied without necessity, we are not 
entitled to postulate anew cause, so long aa it is possible to 
account for tho phenomena by a cause already in existence ; 
which possibility lias never yet been disproved." 

But the matter which sees without material eyes, and hears 
without material cars, and manifests supersensual knowl- 
edge, is not in the f.elA as an entity. A simple fact of clair- 
voyance confutes Ferrier's assumption, and reintroduces tho 
question which he would bar out. 

^d by Google 

METAPHYSICAL PROBLEMS. 93 

Having a solid basis of facts on wliich to rest, Spiritualism 
can well afford to concern itself but little about tlie meta- 
physical disputes that have alv^ays agitated the human mind 
as to the nature of matter and spirit ; as to whether there are 
two entitles or only one ; as to whether there is an underlying 
substance, apart from inhering qualities, or whether sueli a 
substance is a contradiction In thought, and only to bo con- 
ceived of as inconceivable ; as to whether time and space are 
forms of onr sensibility, pure intuitions, or real things ; as to 
whether extension is a conception got from our muscular sen- 
sibility, or something as real as it seems to us. 

All these high and subtle questions do not affect the one 
dominant proof o£ man's continued existence. There are 
phenomena in abundance, which, If they do not enlighten us 
as to the nature of matter in itself, at least show that matter 
has its master in what wo are obliged, in the poverty of !an- 
guafie, to distliigulsli by the name of spirit. 

One single decisive fact, says Dr. J. B. Buchanan (1873), 
" illustrating the mind's capacity for action independent of 
the brain, or its capacity for anything after the dissolution of 
the body, is worth a whole library of metaphysics." 

What spirit is in itself, or in its substance, may remain one 
of the Inscrutable secrets of Nature ; but of spiritual power 
we may know something, just as wo may know any natural 
fact. We know that a spirit can materialize and dematerial- 
izeaform, so as to manifest Itself obji'ctiveiy to mortals in 
the desh ; and that it can do many Inexplicable things with a 
celerity that can he only described by the word masical, 
though the process Is undoubtedly in strict conformity with 
natural laws. 

To the skeptic's (luestion, "What do you mean by spirit?" 
we need therefore merely replj r " We mean by it some- 
thing that wo cannot mtelligeutly express by the word 
matteT." 

Whether this something is simply some unknown matter, 
or whether its subhtanco Is diatinot from that of all matter, 
are questions still open. 

^d by Google 

M MISS COOK'S ACCOUNT. 

That spirit though it maj employ m tter for individual!- 
zatiou ond rainife tition 13 esse nt all j distinct from it and 
an entity iu dependent cf tliu conditmns ot t.pace and time, 
seems, however to be tlio helief of mo&t Spirituali-.t3 and 
so, unless they lapse Into IilealUn and le^ard mittir as 
something unreal the Pantheistie view of things can lii. ac- 
cepted only In company with a still higlier truth. 

Tlius Spiritualism, It it neitlier discredits nor coiiflrms the 
doctrine of two substances, at least makes douhly distinct llie 
sejjaratlon between the phenomena of so-called matter and 
tlio phenomena of so-called spirit. The two in one have been 
compared to the convex and concave of tlie same curve. 

Plainly the domain of science does not extend to the region 
of first causes ; and Spiritnatlsm, though byils proofs of what 
inferior spirits can do, It helps us to the grandest conceptions 
of a Supreme Spirit, to wliom all the facts of the universe are 
fenown, is yet unable to lift the veil from that Power which Is 
at once Ground and Cause of the universe and its phenomena; 
impersonally immanent, (intra- mundane), automatic, evolu- 
tionary, and seif-limlted ; personally transcendent, {.«upra- 
mundanc), conscious, omniscient, absolute and omnipotent ; 
the God In whom we live and move and have our being, 
and Our Father in Heaven ; the God of Pantheism and, in 
his higher liypostasis, the God of Theism also. 

CHAPTER YIII. 

From tlieso abstruse though not irrelevant considerations, 
the course of our narrative leads us back to Miss Cook. 

She had begun to exhibit medial powers as early as 1870. 
In a letter to Mr. Ilarrlsoti, dat<d May, 1873, she writes : 

"lam sixteen years of agi'. From ray childhood I could 
see spirits and hear voiees, and was addlettd to sittinn by 
myscK talkinK to what I di'dan-U tu be living iwople- As no 
one else eould see or bear anything, my parents tried to make 
me believe it was all imagination, but I would not alter my 

^d by Google 

HER DEVELOPMENT. 95 

belief, so was loohed upon as a very eccentric child In the 
spring of 1870 I was invited to tlio lioiiso of n school-frienti, 
whose name I am not nC liiierty to iiientlon. Shu nskuil me if 
I liad ever heard of spirili raiiplng, milling that her father, 
motlier and self had sat at atahic, andRut moveiuent^, aud 
that if I lilied, they would try that oveninj^." 

Miss Coot, though at flret somewliat "horrifisd" at the 
idea, !;ot her motlier's consent and sat with lier friends. She 
soon found that the raps followed her. A nieasage was given 
to her from what purported to be the spirit of her aunt ; and 
then, elie being left by herself at the table, it rose four feet- 
Miss Cook continues : 

" I went home astonished. Mamma and I went a few days 
after. Wc liad some excellent tests of spirit identity given 
us ; glili MS did not bslieve in spirits,* At last it was spelt out 
tliat It wo would sit in tiie dai k I shonld be carried round tlie 
room. I Jautthed, not tliinkiug it would bo dono, and put out 
tlio llfiht. The room was not perfectly dark, a Uslit carao in 
from tlic window. Soon I felt my clialr taken from nie. 1 
was lifted np until 1 touched the celling. Alt in the room 
could see me. I felt too btartled at my novel position to 
scream, and was carried over tlie heads of tlin sitters, and put 
gently 'in to a table at the other end of the room. Mamma 
asked If we could Ret manifestations at our own home. The 
table answered, ' Yes,' and that I was a medium. The next 
evening wo satat home ; a table and two chairs were smashed, 
and a great deal of mischief done. Wa said we could never 
sit again, but wo were not left in peace. Books and otlitr 
ai-tlcles were thrown at me, chairs walked about in tho light, 
the table tilted violently at meat-times, and great noises wi'ro 
Bom(<time4 made at night. At last wo sat again; tlic table be- 
haved bptter, and a communication was given to the elTeet 
that wo were to go to 74, Navaclno-road, and tliat tbcro was 
an association of Spiritualists tliere. Outot curiosity mam ma 
and I went, and found wc had been told quito correctly. Mr. 
Thomas Blyton came to a seance at our house ; he invited me 
to a seance at Mr. VVitkes's library, in Dalston-lane. Therii 1 
met Mr. Harrison. Ho came to see tlte manifestations at my 
liomi'. liy this tlino we were convinced of the truth of spirit 
communion. Ahuut this time I was first cntrauceil; a spirit 
spoke through me, telling papa that if I sat with Ifessrs. 
Ilerue and Williams 1 sliould get tho direct voice. I hod sev- 
eral sittings with tbem, and Anally succeeded In getting the 
dircctvoicCfdirectwritlng, and spirit touches. The presiding 
spirit of my circles Is Katie, John King's daughter." 

of Natl 

jDMnrceFiiQiiii 

Id b, Google 

96 AN UNSPIKITUAL SPIRIT. 

Of the siibstquent developments, tho sittings witli Mr. 
Ilerne, and tlio flnal appearance of Katie in full form, I Iiavo 
already given an account. 

Mr. Ilonry ST. Dunphy relates that on one occasion, at a 
stance, Katie called for pencil and paper, saying sJic wanted 
to write a note. He produced a gold pencil-ease with a 
double movement, ono lor producing tlie lead, and the otlier 
a pen. 'Wlienliaiided to Katie, slie unscrewed tlie little cap 
at the top, so as to scatter the leads on the carpet ; slie laughed, 
scTOwed on tlio top aRain, and then wrote tlio following mes- 
sage on a sheet ol note-paper and threw it out : " I am much 
pleased that you have all oome to-night at my Invitation.— 
Annie Morgan." 

On another occasion Mr. Dunphy inq'ulred whether Eatie 
would put on a heavy gold ring which he took ofi his finger 
and offered to her. This sho immediately took out of his 
hand and placed on her own wedding linger, saying naively, 
" We are now engaged." On his subsequently reaching with 
Lis hand to receive the ring, Katie allowed hlra to toocli hers, 
and afterwards told him to touch her lips, which he did with 
his hands, and she Imprinted on them a kiss. 

At another sitting, a passing remark having been made 
about lawyers, Katie asked whether her hearers knew what 
the Irish usher said when ho was ordered to clear tJio court. 
"No," was the reply. "Well, Uien,"said she, "ho shouted, 
'Now, then, all you blackguards who arc not lawyers, leave 
the court.' " 

Trivial and unspintua! as some of tliese acts and expres- 
sions may setm I quftL them as having a bearing on the 
question of the intellectual calibre of these materialized 
spirits. 

Miss Emily Kishngbury, who has gn en considerable study 
to Miss Cook a modmmship, in a description of a stance at 
which she was present, Feb 22d, 1873, remarks: "When 
Katie liei-selt came and showed a fair complpxloned, largo, 
massive lace, and mouth set with brilliantly white teeth, I 
failed to see in it -inj nscinbUai-e to her medTum ; and my 

^d by Google 

PHOTOGRAPH OF KATIE. BT 

mother, who saw Kntle for the Srst time, expresseiil lier sur- 
prise tliat u comparison should ever have been made between 
tlicra. I have, however, under more strict test conditions, 
seen in tlie spirit face a very striliing resemblance to Miss 
Cooii. ... 

" A slow tunc was piayed witli great expression inside tlio 
cabinet. . , . Katie asked me, to my astonishment, to 
BinR tlie song beginning 

'DuWatdleKun', aerFrloaamlld,' 
and she wouid foiiow me. ' But,' said I, ' Katie, you cannot 
sing the German words.' 'Oil, can't 17' she said. ' My me- 
dium can't, but I am not so stupid ; you try mc.' I sanR the 
song through, and the same clear, bel Ml Uo voice again fol- 
lowed mine, pronouncing the German perfectly." 

In the spring of 1873 a series of sittings was held for the 
purpose of getting a pliotographic likeness of Katie. The 
photograplilng was done by Mr. Harrison wliose close and in- 
telligent study of tills remarkable case of materialization 
seems to have aided largely in tlie right development of Miss 
Cook's extraordinary powers. On the Tth of May a success- 
ful sitting was liad, and no less than four pliotographs were 
taken. It is from one of tlie best of these Oiat Oio engraving, 
which forms the frontispiece of tliis voEiime, was copied. 

"In the photograph Itself," says Sir. Ilarrison, " the fea- 
tures are more detailed and beautiful, and there Is an expres- 
sion of dignity and ethereality in the face which is not fully 
represented in the engraving, which, however, has been exe- 
cuted as nearly as possible with scientific accuracy, by an 
artist of great professional skill." 

In a statement signed by Amelia Comer, Caroline Corner, 
J. C. Luxmooro, G. R. Tapp, and W. II. Harrison, we have a 
clear and Interesting account, which I here slightly abridge, 
of the process of getting aphotograph of Katie by the magne- 
aium light : 

"The cabinet doors wei-e placed open, and sTiawis bung 
across. The seance commenced at six p. m,, and lasted about 

^d by Google 

98 PHOTOGRAPniNG A SPIPlIT-FOKM. 

and in a few minutes Entie stepped out into the roi>m. The 
sitttrs, ill nddition to the iiiidiTsi fined, were Mrs. Cook and 
lier two cliildri'n, wlio^o deljfilit at Katie's famiiiarity witli 
tliem WHS nioHt nninsiiig. 

" Kftlie T;a» ilresai'il in pure white, except thnt her rohe was 
cut low, with short Pleeces, nllnwing lier Ix-aiitiful nupic f.ntl 
arms to bo seen. ITor lipnd dress was ocuaslonaily puulied 
back so as to allow ber linir, wliicli was brown, to Ixt visible. 
Ilor eyes wero Jarge and brlgbt, of a dark blue or pray color. 
Her countenance was animated and lifelike, her cheeks and 
lips rnddy and clear. 

"Our expressions of pleasure at seeinR her tbns before us 
seemed to encourage licr to redouble her efforts to give a good 
stance. By the light of it candle and a small lamp, durin;! the 
tnt('rvBlsoiip.''ot<^raphy, she stood 01 moved about, and chat- 
ted to us all, keeping up a lively conversation. In which sho 
criticised the slttciii, and the llteiary photographer and his 
ananaements very freely. By degrees she walked away from 
the eabinet, and camo iHildty nut into the room. 

"Katie usually leaned on llio shoulder of Mr. Luxmoore, 
and stood np to bo focusseil seveml times, on one occa>i)n 
holding thn lamp to tllomluflte her face. Once slio looked at 
the sitters fhrough Mr. Lnxmoom'S rye-plass. She patted his 
head, and pulled his hair, and allowed him and Mrs. Comer 
to pass their hands over her dress, in order that they might 
satisfy themselves that she wore only one robe. 

" As one of tlio plales was taken out of the room for devel- 
opment, she ran a few feet out of tho cabinet after Mr. Harri- 
son, snyinit slio wished to see it; and on his return it was 
shown to hiT, ho ttandlns close to her and touchinR her at tho 
tim^ While ho was absent nhe walked, np to tho camera and 
inspectPil f hut 'queerinachlne,' as she called it. 

'JJust tiefoTGonc of the plates was taken, as Katie was re- 
poAinf! herself outside tlie rabinet. a long, sturdy, mnsculloo 
right arm, bare to tho shoulder, and moving its fingers, was 
thnist out of the oprninR at llio tap of tho cabinet. Ratio 
t»meil round and iipbmided the intruder, saying tliab ' it was 
a shame foranother spirit to tnterposcwhile she stood for her 
likeness,' and she bade him ' pet out." 

" Toward tho close of the stance Katie said that her power 
v^s going, and that she was 'really melting away this time.' 
The power being weak, tho admission of ligiit into the cabinet 
seemed gradually to destroy the lower part of her figure, and 
sho sank down until hernccktouchedthe floor, the rest of her 
body having apparently vanished, her last words being that 
wo must sing, andsitslili for h few minutes, 'for It was a sad 
thing to have no legs to stand upon.' This was done, and 
Kntio soon camo out again, entire as at first, and ono moro 
photograph was sueocssfHlly taken. Katie then shook hands 
witli ilr. Luxmoore, went inside her cabinet, and rapped for 
us to take tho medium out. 

"Tho stance had been given nnder strict test coudltions. 
The only stipulation Katie made throughout was, that the sit- 
ters would not stare fixedly at her whilst she stood for hei 
photograph. 

^d by Google 

PEEGAUTIONS AGAINST FRAUD. 99 

"Bcforecommencing, Mrs. and Miss Corner took the me- 
iliiiin to lier bedrooiu, and, liavinpr taken off lier clothes and 
tlioi-ouglily aeatolipil tliera, dressed lier without a cowd, but 
simply withncloakot dark (jray waterproof clotli over her 
imdorelotljinfi. and at once led her to tlie H&ineo room, where 
her wrists were tied tigliUy togetber with tope. The knots 
weis examined by the sitfors respectively, and sealed with a 
signet rln«. She was then seated in the cabinet, wliicli Itad 
heeii previously examined. The tape was passed throu"Ii a 
brass bracket in tho floor, brought under the i-hawl, and^^tled 
securely to a chair outside the cabinet, so that the slightest 
movement on tho part of tlie mediuiu would have been at 
onco detected. 

"Durinfftho interval of half an hour, Mrs. Corr'*r took 
charge of the medium, whilst she was out of the cabinet, and 
did ni)t lose sight of her for one minute. The tying and seal- 
ing were repeated before tho second part of the seanco, and 
on each occasion of Ihe medium leaving the cabinet, tlie 
knots and seals and tape were duly examined byallthesit- 
ters. and were fonnd intact. The medium was tied and seal- 
ed by Mr. Tiuxmoore, wliose signet ring was used." 

In a separate communication Mr. Luxmoore writes : 

could irossibly have been concealed there without my discov- 
ering it. I should also mention, that, soon after one of the 
photographs had been taken, Katie pulled back the curtain, 
or rather n^, whicli hangs (n front, and requested tis to look 
at her. when sIio appeared to have lost all lier body. She bod 
amostourions appearance; she seemed to be resting on noth- 
ing but her neck, her head being close to the floor. Her white 
robe was under her. " 

Phenomena like these, as Dr. Wm. nitchman aptly re- 
marks, present a question " not to be settled at all by leadiag 
articles, but by positive experimental testimony." In this 
case such testimony has been given in abundance. 

Previous to Prof. Crookes's taking the case in hand, Dr. 
Gully, Mr. Blackburn, Mr. Luxmoore, Mr. W. H. IlatriBon, 
and many other competent investigators had, at numerous 
seances, satisfied themselves fully that Eatle and Miss Cook 
were distinct personalities. 

"All mho attended these stances," says Dr. Gully, "are 
aware with what anxious eare arrangements were always 
made by which th" smallest movements by t!ie medium with- 
in were rendered detectable by the sitters outside, by meana 
of tapes attached to the medium's body, aud extended along 

^d by Google 

100 THE ELECTRICA.L TEST. 

the floor, and held by some one present ; and, on one or two 
occasions, by the extension of the medium's own dark hair, 
nottomentiontheprecisotyinR and sealing of the wrlsta. . . . 
These tests have abundantly satisfied me that the form which 
appears is not Miss Cook, but has a totally separate exist- 
Notwithstanding these well-founded convictions there was 
a natural wish among Spiritualists that assurance should be 
made doubly sure, and in this wish no one joined more readi- 
ly than Dr. Uully. 

To determine tlie question whether Miss Cook was lying at 
rest inside the cabinet while Katie in iicr flowing robes was 
ontside, Mr. C. F. Varley, F. R. S., the electrician of the At- 
lantic Cable, noted for his skill in testing broken cables, con- 
ceived the idea of passing a weak electrical current through 
the body of the medium all tlie time the manifestations were 
going on. He did this by means of a galvanic battery and 
cable-testing apparatus, whioli was so delicate that any move- 
ment whatever, on the part of Miss Cook, would be instantly 
indicated, while St would be impossible for her to dress and 
play the part of the spirit without breaking the circuit and 
beinR Instantly detected. 

Tet under these conditions the spirit-form did appear as 
usual, exhibited its arms, spoke, wrote, and touched several 
persons ; and this liappened, bo It remembered, not in the me- 
dium's own house, but in tliat of Mr. Luxraojre, at the West 
end of London. For nearly an hour the circuit was never 
broken, and at the conclusion Miss Cook was found in a 
trance. Thus it was clearly proved that Miss Cook was not 
only in the cabinet, but perfectly quiescent, while Katie was 
visible and moving about outside. 

Similar tests were soon repeated by Mr. Crookes in his own 
house with equally satisfactory reanlts. Early In Marr* he 
reported ; " As far as the experiments go, they prove conclu- 
sively that Miss Cook is inside while Katie is outaida the cabi- 
net," and be further testified to Miss Cook's perfect honest j, 
truthfulness, and willingDess to submit to the severest t«sti 
that he could approve of. 

Id b, Google 

MR, CKOOKES'S TESTIMONY. 101 

But the crowning proof was yet to pome. On tlie 13th ol 
March, 1871, during a stance at his own liouse, Katie came to 
thecuitain, aucl called him to her, saying, " Come into the 
room and lilt my medium's head up ; she Las slipped down." 
Katie was then standing hetore him, clothed in her usual 
white robes and turban head-dress. He walked into Ihelibra- 
ry up to Miss Cook, Katie stepi>i Kg aside ta aliowhimtopiiss. 
He found that Miia Cook had slipped partially off the sofa, 
and tliat her head was hanging in a very awkward position. 
He lifted her on to the sofa, and in so doing had satisfactory 
evidence, in spite of the darkness, that Miss Cook was not 
attired In tlie Katie costume, but had on lier ordinary black 
velvet dress, and was in a deep trance. 

On the 29th of March, at a seance at Hackney, Katie told 
Mr. Croohes that she thought she should be able to show her- 
self and Miss Cook together. Turning the gas out, he enter- 
ed the room used as n cabinet, bearing a phosphorus lamp. 
This consisted o( a six or eight ounce botUe, containing a 
little phosphorlzed oil, and tightly corked. 

It being dark, he felt about for Miss Cook. lie found her 
crouching on the floor. Kneeling down, he let air enter the 
lamp, and by its light saw the young lady, dressed in black 
velvet, as she had been in the early part of the evening, and 
to all appearance senseless. She did not move when he took 
her hand and held tho light close to her face, but continued 
quietly breathing. 

The remainder «f the narrative I give In Mr. Crookes's own 
words : 

" Raising the lamp, I looked around and saw Katie stand- 
ing close behind Miss Cook. She was robed in flowing white 
drapery, as we had seen her previously during the Keanoe. 
Holding one of Miss Cook's hands in mine, and still kneeling, 
Ipassed thelampup and down, soaati> illuminate Katie's 
whole flgure, and satisfy myself thoroughly that I was really 
looking at the veritable Katie, whom I liad clasped in my 
arms a few m omen tsl>ef ore, and not at the phantasm of a dis- 
ordereil brain. 

"She did not speak, but moved her head, and smiled In 
recognition. Three separate limes did I carefully examine 
Miss Cook, crouching before me, to be sure that the hand I 
held was that of a living woman, and three separate limes did 

^d by Google 

102 SPIRIT DRAPERY. 

I turn the limp to Katie, ami examine lier with steadfBit 
scrutiny, until I liad no doubt wliatevet of iier objective 

Of the points of difference between the two, Mr. Crookes 
says: 

"Katie's heislit varies; in ray house I have seen her six 
ioelies taller than Miss Cooh. Last ninht, with bare feet and 
rot lip-toems, she was four and a half inohea taller than Miss 
Cook. Katie's neck was bare last night : the skin was per- 
fectly smooth, both to touch and si«ht, whilst on Miss Cook's 
neck isa large blister, which under similar circnmatances is 
distinctly visible, and rouph to the touch. Katie's ears are 
unpierced, whilst Miss Cook habitually weara ear-rings. 
Katie's complexion is very fair, while that of Miss Cook is 
very dark. Katie's fineers are niuehlonger than Miss Coolt's, 
and her face is also lareer. In manners and ways of expres- 
sion there are also maiiy decided differences." 

The exceeding whiteness of the drapery with which Katie 
came clothed was always noticeable ; reminding the Scriptu- 
ral reader of that passage in Mark: "His raiment became 
shining, exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller on earth 
can white them." The dress would vary in shape nearly 
every evening. 

The fabric felt material enough. It did not melt away and 
disappear like the spirit fabrics felt by Mr. Livermore and 
Dr. Gray in the presence of Kate Fox. Miss Douglas took 
a specimpn of the cloth to Messrs. Howell and James's, Lon. 
don, and asked tbcm to match it ; they said tliat they could 
not, and that they believed it to be of Chinese manufacture. 

Whence came this white drapery? As we proceed !n our 
narrative, it will be seen that Mr. Crookes satisfied himself 
thoroughly thai it could not have been brought Into his house 
and used by the medium. 

Katie had announced, on several occasions, that her materi- 
alizations through Miss Cook would cease the 2ist of May, 
J874. At one of her farewell stances, my friend, Mr. Oole- 
mon, whom I had some years before introduced to certain 
phenomeuf, in Boston, was present. He took from his pock- 
et a photograph ; Katie received it from Ins hands, and 
esclaimed, "This is Dr. Gully and my likeness. What do 
you want me to do with it?" " Write," said Mr. Coleman, 

^d by Google 

CUT PLACES MADE WHOLE. 103 

"your name, and any message you have to give me, on tlie 
bact of it, that I may keep it in remembrance of this even- 
Ing." Borrowing his pencil she wrote: "Annie Morgan, 
usually known as Katie King. To lier dear friend, Mr. Ben. 
May ath, 1874." When it was read aloud some one Said, 
"That Is too familiar," and she was remindiid that tliere 
were others of the same name known to her ; upon which 
sheaiked for the card to bo returned, and wrote ; "Mr. Ben is 
B. Coleman, Esq." 

" During the evening," writes Mr. Coleman, " she frequent- 
ly went belilnd the curtain to look after her K-Hium, and 
once whilst she was there, Mr. Croobes raised the curtain, 
and lie and I, and four others who sat by me, saw, at one and 
the same time, the figure of Katie, clad in her -white dress, 
bending over the sleeping form of the medium, whose dress 
was blue, with a red shawl over her head." This exhibition 
was then repeated, and Mr. Coleman was fully satisfied that 
he saw both the living form of Miss Cook, and the material- 
ized spirit-form of Katie. 

Tlie following remarkable incident, which Mr. W. H. Har- 
rison and Mrs. Koss-Church (Florence Marryat) both con- 
firmed in subsequent narratives, indicates the thaumatur- 
glc power that was at work : " Taking up her skirt iu a 
double fold, Mr. Urookes having lent her his scissors, Katie 
cut two pieces out of the front part, leaving the holes visible, 
one about an inch and the other two or tiiree inches in cir- 
cumference, and then, as if by magic, but without the conju- 
rer's double boxes, or any attempt at concealment, she held 
that portion of the dress in her closed hand tor a minute or 
two, and showed that the holes had disappeared, and that the 
dress was again entire. The pieces, a portion of whicli I 
Lave, are apparently strong ordinary white calico." 

Of the repetition o( this marvel at a subsequent stance, 
Mr. W. n. Harrison writes ; "After she had thus cut several 
great holes in her dress, as she sat between Mr. Crookes and 
Mr. Tapp, she was asked if she could mend It, as she had 
done on other occasions ; she then held up the dilapidated 

^d by Google 

104 THE FAREWELL SEANCE. 

portion in a good light, gave it one flap, aniS it was instantly 
as perfect as at first. Those near the door of the cabinet ex- 
amined and liandlcd it immediately, with her permission, and 
testified there was no hole, seam or joint of any kind, 
where a moment before had been large holes, several inches 
in diameter." 

Mrs. Eoss-Church (Florence Marryat), a danghter of my 
Oldacquaintanee, Captain Marryat, author of "PeterSlmpIe," 
&C , was a witness of the same incident, and mentions It in 
an account of her experiences, which I shall soon quote. 

The following isMr.W.n.narrison'saccountof the farewell 
Stance, Xay 21st, 1874, in London, at which Katie appeared. 
There were present Mr. Crookes, Mrs. Corner, Mrs. Eosa- 
Church, Mr. W. H. Harrison, Mr. (J. R. Tapp, Mr. and Mrs. 
Cook and family, and the servant Mary : 

" Mr. Ccookps, 7.23 p. m., conducted Miss Cook Into the 
dark room used as a cabinet, wliere she laid herself down up- 
on the floor, with her head restinK on a pillow; at7.28 Katie 
first spoke, and at 7.30 came outside the curtain In /ull form. 
She was dressed tn pure white, with low neck and short 
sleeves. She had long hair, of a light aubnm or golden color, 
which hnnjt in ringlets down her hack, and each side of her 
head, reaching nearly to her waist. She wore a long white 
veil, but this was only drawn over her face once or twice dur- 
ing the seance. ., 

" The medium was dressed In a high sown of llaht blue me- 
rino. During nearly the whole of the seance, while Katie was 
tiefore us, the curtain was drawn back and all could clearly 
see the sleeping medlnm, who did not stir from heroriainal 
position, but lay quit* still, her face being covered with a red 
shawl to kepp llfiht from it. There was a good light during 
theentire seance. 

"Katie talked about her approaching departure, and ac- 
cepted n bouquet which Mr. Tapp brought her, also some 
bunches of lilies from Mr. Crookes. 

"All the sitters in the circle clustered closely round her. 
Katie ashed Mr. Tapp to take the bouijuet to pieces, and lay 
the flowers out before her on the floor; she then sat down, 
Eastern faahloo, and asked all todrawaround her, which was 
done, most of those present sitting on the floor at her feet. 
She llien divided the flowers into bunches for each, tying 
them up with blue ribbon. She also wrote parting notes to 
some of her friends, signed ' Annie Owen Morgan,' which she 
stated was her real name wlien la earth-life. She wrote a 
note for her medium, and selected a fine rosebud for her as a 
patting gift. 

'■ Katie then took a pair of scissors and cut off a quantity of 

^d by Google 

TESTIMONT OF MES. EOSS-CHUEOH. 100 

her hair, RivlnR everybody present a liberal portion. She 
tlien took tlio nrin of Mr C'rookes and walked all round the 
room, shaking liand J with each. She again sat down iind dis- 
tribiited some of her hair ; and also cut off and presented sev- 
eral pioces ol Iier robe and veil. . , . 

"She then appeared tired, and Mild reluctantly that she 
mast [fo, an the power was falling, and bade farevreil In the 
most affectionate way. The sitters all wished her God speed, 
and thaiiked her for the wonderfal manifestations she iind 
elvei). Looking once more earnestly at her friends she let 
the curtain fall and she was seen no more. She vies lieard to 
wake up the medium, who tearfully entreated her to stay a 
littlo longer, but Katie said, 'My dear, Ican't. My work is 
done. God bless you," and we lieard the sound of her parting 
hiss. Tlie medium then came out among us, lookiug much 
exhansted and deeply troubled. 

" Katie said that she should never be able to speak or show 
iier f aofl airaln ; tliatshehadliada weary and sad three years' 
life ' worhinR off bet sins ' In producing these physical luaui' 
festations, and that she was about to rise lilgher in splrit-llfe. 
At long intervals she might be able to com municate with her 
medium by writing, but at any time her medium might be en- 
abled to see her clairvoyantly by being mesmerized." 

Mrs. Ross-Church (Florence Marryat), who had been pres- 
ent at three of Katie's last stances, on the 9th, 13th and 2lst 
of May, 1874, In a letter to the London Spiritualist, wrote as 
follows : 

" I will not recapitulate what so many have told of the ap- 
pearance of the spiiit 'Katie King." nor of the means taken to 
prevent any imposition on the part of her medium. This has 
all been repeated again and again, and as often disbelieved. 
But I Tiud Serjeant Cox, in Ills late letter on the subject of 
Miss t^honers'H mediumuhlp, saying that could such an end 
be attained as a simultaneous sight of the apparition outside 
the curtain and the medium within, ' the most wonderful foot 
the world has ever witnessfd Vfoul'l be established beyond 
controversy.' Perliaps Serjeant Cox would consider a siglit 
of both medium and spirit in the same room nnd at the same 
time as convincing a proof of stem truth. I have teen that 

" On the evening of the 9th of Mav, Katie Kinit led me, at 

n request, into the rooiii.wltu her beyond the curtain, 
wasnot sodarkbutthat I eould distinguish surround- 
ing objects, and then made me kneel down by Miss Cook's 
piostrale form, and feel her hands nnd face and head of curia, 
whilst she (the spirit) lield my other hand in hers, and leaned 
against my shoulder, with o.ne arm around my neck. 

" I have not the slightest doubt that upon that ooea^on 
there were present with mo two living, breathing Intelli- 
gences, perfectiy distinct from each other, so far at least as 
their bodies were concerned. If my senses deceived me; if [ 
was misled by Imagination or mesmeric influence Into believ- 

^{,3 

Id b, Google 

106 TESTIMONY OF MKS. EOSS-CHUECH. 

inc that I touelied and felt two bodies, instead of one ; if 
'Kritie Kinff.' wlio grasped, and emijraced, and spoke to 
me, Is a projection of tlioufjlit only — a will-power — an in- 
stance of miltnnwii force— then it will be no longer pos- 
siMe to know ' Who 's who. In 1ST4,' and wo Bimll liesltato to 
turn up the Ras incautiously, lest bal( our friends should 
be but projections of thought, and melt away beneath its 

"Whatever Eatia Kinawas on the evening of the 0th of 
May, she was not Miss Cook. To tliat fact I am ready to 
take my most solemn oath, tjhe repeated the same experi- 
ment with me on the 13th, and on that occasion we had the 
beni'fit of mutual sight also, as tlifl whole company were in- 
vited lo crowd around the door whilst the curtain was with- 
drawn and the gas turned up to the full, In order that we 
might see the medium, in her blue dress and scarli't shawl, 
tylnc in a trance on the floor, whilst the white-robed spirit 
Btood iKslde her. 

" On the 21st, however, the occasion of Katie's last appear- 
ance amongst us, she was good enough to give me wliat 1 con- 
sider a still more infallible proof (If one could be needPii) of 
the distinction oC her identity from that of her medium. 
When she summoned me In my turn to say a few words to 
her behind the curtain, I again saw and touched the w 

" I felt her heart beatln;( rapidlyl)eneath my hand ; and 
passed my Angers through her longhair to satisfy myself that 
it grew from her head, and can testify that it she be ' of psy- 

chic force,' psychic force is very like aw 

"Katiewas very busy that evening. To each of her friends 
assenib1e<l to say good by, she gave a bouquet of flowers tied 
up with ribbon, a piece of her dress and veil, and a lock of her 
hair, and a note which she wrote with lier pencil before us. 
Mine WHS as follows; 'Fi-om Annie Owen oe Morgan {alias 
Katie King) to her friend, Florence Marryat Koss-Church, 
with love. Pentezamoi. May21st, IWi." I must not forget 
to relate whatappeared tome to tmone of the most convinc- 
ing proofs of Katie's more than natural power, namely, that 
when she had cut, before our eves, twelve or fifteen different 
pieces of cloth from the front of her white tunic, aa touvsnirt 
for her friends, there was not a hole tii be seen in it, examine 
it which way you would. It was tlie same with her veil, and 
I have Keen her do the same thing several times. 

"I think If in the face of all this testimony that lias 1>een 
brought before them, the faithless and unlielievinB still credit 
MIssCook with the superimman agility required to leap from 
the spirit's dress into her own like a flash of lightning, tliey 
will hardly suppose her capable of re- weaving the material of 
her clothing In tiio same space of time. If they can lielieve 
that, they will not fiud the spiritual istin doctrine so hard a nut 
to crack afterwards. But I did iiottakiiup my pen to argue 
this point, but simply b) relate wh^t occurred to mySelf." 

^d by Google 

PHOTOGRAPHS OF KATIE. lOT 

During tlie week before Katie toult lier departure, she Ravo 
stances at Sir. Crooltes's house almost nigliliy. to pnable liim 
to photograpli her lay artilicial tight. In a letter dated July 
21.st, 1874, and enclosing two pbotogra;)lia, lie writes mo: 
"Tou may be interested In seeing one o( my pliotoRraplis of 
Eatie, as slio stood liolding my arm ; also one In wliiclj she is 
stanilingbylierseif." In the former of these the person of 
Katie, nearly to her ankles, dressed In her white robo, In 
taken; in the other, not quite so much of the figure is sera. 
In both photographs, the drapery is gracefully disposed ; the 
countenance is placid, and the features finely [otzp-A. though 
it might not require much imagination to discover in their gen- 
eral expression a spectral look ; the figure has all the distinct- 
ness of a veritable human being, there being uothmg shadowy 
In the outlines 

Taken in his own laboratory, and under conditions the 
most satisfactory and unquestionable, these and some forty 
other photographs nhich lie took some inferior, some indif- 
ferent, and some excellent, confirmed all the previous tests 
which Mr Crookes had got of the genumeness of the phe- 
nomenon Frequently, at his own house, lie would follow 
Katie into the cabinet, and would sometimes spe lier ind her 
medium together, though generally he would find nobody but 
the entranced medium lying on the floor, Katie and her white 
robes having instantaneously disappeared. 

Dorlng a period of six mouths Miss Cook was a frequent 
visitor at Mr. Crookes's house, remaining there sometimes a 
week at a time. She would bring nothing but a little hand- 
bag, not locked. During the day she would be constantly in 
the presence of Mrs. or Mr. Crookes, or some other member 
of his family ; and, not sleeping by herself, there was no con. 
Cftivable opportunity for any fraadulent preparation. 

•Ttwas a common thing," says Mr. Crookes, "for the 
seven or eight of us in the laboratory to see Miss Cook and 
Katie at the same time under the full blaze of the electric 
light. We did not on these occasions actually see tho face of 
the medium, because of the shawl (which had been thrown 

^d by Google 

108 MR. CEOOKES'S TESTIMONY. 

over to prevent tlio liglit from falling on the faci'.), but we 
saw her liands and feet, we saw lier move uncBsily under the 
influence of the intense liglit, and we heard her raoin occa- 
sionally. I have one photograph of the two together, but 
Katie is seated in front of Miss Cook's head." 

On one oocnsion Mr. Crookes was photograiihed with Katie, 
she having Iier hare foot on a particular part of the floor; 
their relative height was ascertained. Mr. Crookes was then 
photographed with Miss Cook under precisely similar condi- 
tions, and while the two photogrnplis of hlmselt coincide ex- 
actly in stature, etc., Miss Cook's figure is found to be half a 
bead shorter than Katie's, and looks small in comparison. 

" Photography," adds Mr. Crookes, " is as Inadequate to 
depict the perfect beauty of Katie's face, as words are power- 
less to describe her charms of manner. Photography may, 
Indeed, give a map of her countenance ; hut how can it re- 
produce the brilliant purity of her complexion, or the evci- 
varying expression of her most mobile features, now overshad- 
owed with sadness when relating some of the bitter experi- 
ences of her past lite, now smiling with all the innoceuce of 
happy girlhood when she had collected my children around 
her, and was amusing them by recounting anecdotes of her 
adventures in India." 

The following particulars given by Mr. Crookes, as to the 
differences between Katie and the medium, will be found of 
interest : 

" Having seen so much of Katie lately, when she has been 
illuminated i>y the electric light, I am enabled to add to the 
IKiintsof difference between her and her mediucu which I 
mentioned in a former article. 1 have tlii) most alHOhiloci-r- 
tainty that Miss Cook and Katie are two separate inilividiiaU 
as far as their bodies are concerned. Several little marks on 
Miss Cook's face are absent on Katie's. Miss Cook'K liair is 
BO dark a brown as almost to appi'ar black ; a. lock of Katie's 
which is now before me, which she allowed me to cut from 
her luxuriant tresses, having first traced it up to tlie scalp 
and satisfied myself that it actually grew there. Is a rich 
golden auburn. 

" On one evening I timed Katie's pulse. It beat steadily at 
75, while Miss Cook's pulse, a little time after, was goina at 
Its usual rate of 00. On applying my ear to Katie's cliei.t I 
could hear a heart beating rhythmically inside, and pulsating 

^d by Google 

MR. CROOKES'S TESTIMONT. 109 

even more slwidily Uian did Mias Coot's heart when she al- 
lowed mo to try n similar cxperiraeut alter Hio seance. Test- 
ed 111 tlio same nay, Katie'i* lungs were found to be sounder 
tliau her iiiedium's, for at tlio time I tried my expeilmenG 
Miss Uook was under medical treatment for a severe cough." 
Of tlie final patting of Miss Cook and Katie, Mr. Ctookea 

" Ilavlng conoluded her directions, Katie invited me into 
the cabinet with licr, and allowed me to remain there tu tiie 
end. After oloslnj;; ttie curtain she conversed with me for 
aonie time, and then walked across the room to where Miss 
Cook was lylnc senseless on the floor. Stooping over her, 
Katie touched her and said, ' Wake up, Fiorrie, wake np 1 I 
must leave yon now.' Bliss Cook then woke and tearfully 
entreated Katie to stay a little time longer. < My dear, I can't ; 
my work is done. God bles.'i you !' replied Katie, and then 
continued spealdn^ to Miss Cook. For several minutes the 
two were conversing with each other, till nt last Miss Cook's 
tears prevented her speafcinj;. Following Katie's instruc- 
tions, £ then came forward to support Miss Cook, wlio was 
falling on to the floor, sobbing hysterically. I looked around, 
but the wlilte-robfd Katie had gone. As soon as Miss Cook 
was aufflciently calmed a liglit was procured and I led her out 
of the cabinet." 

Thus ended Ihls extraordinary series of seances, verifying 
the stupendous fact of the power of spirits to manifest tliem- 
eelves In a temporarily materializcct human form. To Miss 
Cook's houMty and good faith Mr. Crookes bears witness in 
the strongest terms. Every test he proposed she readily sub- 
mitted to ; she was open and straigiit forward in speech, and 
never did ho see in her conduct anything approaching the 
slishtest symptom of a wisli to deceive. 

"To imagine, "he says, "that a school-girl of fifteen should 
be able to conceive and then successfuUy carry out for three 
years so gigantic an imposture as this, and in that time should 
submit to any tests which might be imposed upon her, should 
bear the strictest scrutiny, should l}e willing to be searched 
at any time, either before or after a stance, and should meet 
witli even better success In my own house than at that of lier 
parents, knowing that siio visited me with the express object 
of submitting to strict scientific tests— to imagine, I say, the 
' Katie King ' of the last three years to be the result of im- 
posture — does more violence to one's reason and common 
sense tlian to believe her to be wiiat she herself affirms." 

^d by Google 

110 IMMORTALITY. 

When to these considerations Is added the fact that the 
pbenomenn through Miss Cook have been recently iMiralleled 
nnd even surpassed by numerous similar well- attested phe- 
nomena, not only in England, but in America, what esuape 
Is there from the conclusion that tlieyare wholly inexplicablo 
under any tlieory ol imposture or delusion 7 

CHAPTER IS. 

By immortality I mean thatexemptionfrom death, of which 
we have the assurance in the spiritual body as a groiind of 
continuous life. The spiritual organism is demonstrated iiot 
merely In the proof palpable, presented In the appearance of 
spirits In tlio human form, and by the attestations of spirits 
and mediums, but In the facts of clairvoyance, showing pow- 
ers in the human being independent of the corresponding 
physical organs and requiring other nnd supcrsensnal organs.* 

Proofs of a future existence do not necessarily Involve 
proofs of a perpetual existence. A discussion of tlie latter ia 
not pertinent to mj- present purpose. But I may here remark 
Ihat faith in our own everlastingness must depend largely on 
faitli in the eternity of a supreme benign intelligence whence 
comes the order of the universe. 

If we are at the mercy of blind, unconscious cosmic forces. 
Of a mere "orrery," in the working of which neither mind 
nor love is active, wo may feel, in the next stage of beinjj as 
well as In tills, that life is no assured possession. But to this 
subject I hope to return before I close. 

The phenomena being admitted as actual and genuine, is it 
consistent with the taws of science to seek their cause? 

"Of the efBcient causes of phenomena," says J. S. Mill, 

•PornnatiunilaHcoot facts proving PlMrvoy»nfle. prevision, .mil many 
otber 8upQrsennuiilr'>eiioidpnn, eae "Plancbcttc.llioPespiilrot Science" 

Id b, Google 

PHENOMENON AND CAUSE. Ill 

"or whether any such eanses esiat, T am not called upon to 
give ail opinion." 

Mr. Mill aclcnowlpilges empiiical causes only. 

■VTell : the phenomena of Spiritualism force upon us theqnes- 
tion of empirical causes ; of causes fairly within thedomain of 
science and experiment. When a solid ilguro in the human 
form, elotlied and manifesting life and intelligence, melts 
away and disappears, and subsequently rc-fonns, before our 
flight, surely the phenomenon is one, the consideration of the 
cause ot which is a legitimate inquiry of science. The philos- 
ophy of experience ts the last which should deny this declara- 
tion ; for to refuse to admit that there may be an empirical 
cause for the phenomenon In this case Is purely an a priori as- 
sumption, to fall back on which is to abandon the whole 
philosophy of experience. 

As the testimony in support of this amazing phenomenon 
cannot be too complete, I will quote, in addition to what I 
have already given, a description of their experiences by two 
highly competent witnesses. The first, Mr. A. B. Crosby, of 
Gold Hill, North Carolina, Is, as I learn from my friend and 
neiEhbor John Wetherbee, a man scientifically educated, a 
graduate of Watcrvillo College, and a careful observer. lie 
writes to Mr. W., under date of August 7th, 187*, the follow- 
ing very clear and concise description of t!ie phenomenon : 

" I stopped on my way, at Plilladelphia, and while there I 
saw the 'Katie KinR' manifestation, at No. 60 North Ninth 
street. There were about thirty persons present at the st- 
ance. The cabinet was a wooden partition across one corner 
of the TW)m, thn carpet of wbich extended to the extreme cor- 
ner. There was ii door In the partition and two apertures. 
Hr. and Mrs. Holmes, the mediums, sat onlfide the cabinet, 
and next to it, and were both In sight alt the time. It is ne- 
cessary for you to remember tliat, and also that tlie room was 
IJRht enough all the time to see distinctly the persons present 
—about thirty. Tliey sat In the form of a horse shoo, nt each 
end of wlilcli sat a medium, Tvhich would bo at each side 
of tho.cabinet. After some music and singing—about twenty 
minutes — wo saw two delicate hands appear at the npertiiro 
over tho door, then a face, rather dim, at the other aperture. 
After a short time, devoted to gatlierinR strength from the 
circle, tht door of the cabinet opene<l and a beautiful yonn^ 
lady.dressed in white, with a dark girdle and slippers, walked 
out into the centre of tills circle. She had in her hands hou- 

^d by Google 

113 MORE TESTIMOWT 

qiiets of flowers, w)iich she lield to the noses of many of the 
audience. She spoke to several In a weak voice. Slie went 
Intnandontot the cabinet several times; Anally, she retired 
tothedoorof the cabinet and disappeared, gradually, until only 
ahrisht^potconldbe seen on the carpet In lesH thou a minute 
Bbebe^ian to reappear, and In a short time naJfced out into tlia 
room apparently a. verilablo living person, as palpable as vou 
or I ; I think, for the time we sawlier, that she was flesh, like 
US. I tliouglib her person had a slight phosphorescpntnlow, 
because the slmdows of the folds of her (Tress were very feeble, 
more of the character of a difEusedllght. I cannot conceive 
of what I saw being any trick ; I know it was not, and yoa 
know what tliat means when I say It, and 1 am now a Spirit- 

Dr. Eaue, of Pliiladelphia, a physician of the highest stand- 
ing, was present at the seance of August 9th, 1874. He as- 
sured himself byacloseexamination that there was no inlet or 
outlet to the cabinet. The two mediums remained outade 
among tlio spectators. After some music the curtains of the 
holes ill the partition were raised, and several hands became 
visible. Soon a whole arm appeared,.and as in salutation was 
waved to and fro in a graceful manner. Katie shook hands 
from the window with those who went up to it. She talked, 
too, repeatedly ; for instance, she answered the question of 
"How do you like the present company?" by "I '11 tell you 
after awhile ;" and, later, "Hove you ail," At another time 
she said, " I feel now as natural as when I was in eartli-iife." 
Her voice was mild and somewhat whispering. Of her Issu- 
ing from the cabinet in a full materialized form, Dr. K. says : 
"Tlie door opened and Katie appeared, slowly moving her 
hands, as though saluting or declaiming, and clad in a taste- 
ful while robe, and a mantilla of jtauze or lace, Uer waist 
was encircled by a belt, fastened with a gold clasp or 
buckle. At her throat appeared a gold cross, or similar orna- 
ment. Afterwarrla she emerged entirely from the closet, sat 
down upon a. chair next to bits. Holmes, rose and receded 
slowly into the closet again. 

" The question was then put to her whether she could not 
BhowusfiowshematerlalizidlirrK'll, and was again answer- 
ed by 'I will try.' After awhile the door of the closet open- 
ed once mor(>, and we saw, In the right corniT of it, a kind ot 
grav mist, or clond, from wlilch, within a short time, Katie's 
whole figure was developed In a wonderl'u I manner. Ilerriis- 
appeamnco was similar: It was a gradual fading and dissolv- 
ing. "Chn yfhW^* Snuiv. was not itliiiained bg e^xtsTTiolUght, but 

' ' - pteuliarblJi-Uk-whUenndbrilliaal t^'—"— "-' -" 

e from witkiit. I do not believe tl 

^d by Google 

THE PROOF PALPABLE. 113 

earthly colors would be ab1o to produce the same effect. Tho 
poJd of liiu liolt-bucltin mid the ueeltlace appeared more gold- 
cu than tlie GnesC gold." 

Ilere was a proof palpable— but of wbat ? Surely of im- 
mortal spLrlt, whether we call It paycliic force, or independ- 
ent spirit power. Admitting that there was no delusion — 
and the reader who baa carefully weighed the testimony I 
have adduced will hardly adopt so lusufBclent a theory as 
lliat of fraud or deception— what can it be but ati inteUigenca 
and a will, (XceTeising, through soma eeatripelat and centrifu- 
gal me of the infiigible comiitumis if ™ntter. the astonishing 
power of malerializing and de-materializing a human farm 
■ailh its appropriate clothing f 

An intelligence and a will! And this intelligence pro- 
claims Itselt a spirit I And this will proves the claim by 
causing nn animated body in human shape to vanish and re- 
appear! If such a power does not answer the full signiQca- 
tion which men in all ages have attached to the word spirit, 
as representative of the iifo of a man after tlie dissolution of 
his earth-body, I am at a loss to know what further evidence 
can be given under the present limitations of our human fao- 

Dut this spirit, we are told, is very unspiritual, and does 
not always speak the truth. 

If a man having the Caucasian features and form, and 
speaking our languace, were cast u[ion our sliores from the 
sea, wc should readily take his word for it that he was an es- 
caped English or American mariner. lie might prove in 
many other tliings untruthful and inconsistent, but wo shonid 
have little doubt that he was a man, and of n certain nation- 
ality. 

So when a man in the human form presents himself as a 
materialized spirit, and proves it, not only by the intelligence 
of his conversation and acts, but by dissolving and re con- 
creting his corporeal envelope beforo our eyes, and by mani- 
festing bis poivers, in otlier ways, as invisible force and intel- 
ligence, surely we have here a proof palpable, which no mis- 
representations or mistakes, on his part, in regard to other 

^d by Google 

114 ME. OWEN'S TESTIMONY. 

questions, could impair, tliat he is what he claims to he, 
namely, what wo understand by a spirit. 

Skepticism, it is true, can find room for cavil even here, bnt 
so it can And room to cavil at the reality of our own terres- 
trial esisteace ; and yet we go on, and eat, drink, sleep, 
think, and enjoy ourselves, in spite of all the subtleties by 
which it would prove tliat we are under a mistake. 

That the phenomena have a cause, must be conceded as a 
postulate of human reason. The theories of imposture and 
delusion betas dismissed, what sufQcient cause can be assign- 
ed but tiiat whicli the spirits themselves bear witness to, and 
that wlilch human esperience, in all ages of the world and 
among all tribes and nations, lias accepted ? 

Although in December, 1874, charges of fraud were brought 
against Mr. and Mrs. Holmes, in couse(iuence o£ which Mr. 
Owen and Ur. Child withdrew their confidence, the phe- 
nomena through Sirs. Ilolmes were satisfactorily tested 
throughout the year 1875, not only by Messrs. LIppitt and 
Olcott, but by Mr. J. M. Roberts, all gentlemen personally 
known to me. A Mrs. White, Instigated, it is believed, by 
persons wishing to throw discredit on the phenomena, de- 
clared that she had b^en engaged by Mr. Holmes to play the 
part of Katie King. That she stood for a photograph of 
the spirit was true. Certain letters in Mr. Holmes's hand- 
writing, which were not at first satisfactorily explained, gave 
color to her other claims. But it was in the end conclusively 
proved : Jir«(, that Mrs. White's word was entitled to no 
credit ; eeecJiHy, that the manifestations could bo produced 
without her or any other confederate ; and thirdly, that the 
evidences of fraud were incomplete. For these reasons, and 
because the testimony of Mr. Crosby and Dr. Eauo has not 
been retracted, I have allowed it to stand as it appeared in 
the first edition of this work. Even Mr. Owen, after with- 
drawing the testimony he liad given in behalf of tho fhc- 
nomena, declared that "the Dolmes case, instead of disprov- 
ing or casting doubt upon the phenomenon of mater iaJiiation, 
does prove it conclusively. " 

^d by Google 

MR. KELSO'S TEbTlMON5'. 115 

The Holmes case made a gf^at noise at the time, and was 
looked upon by tho larger part of the uninformed piihlieas 
invalidatinK all the plienomena ; hut it owed its irapoctaiico 
to the reputation of Mr. Owen as a public man of tried in- 
tegrity and an author of note. He had testified so earnestly 
to the facts that, altliough he remained aa firm a believer as 
ever in the truth involved, the hostile newspapers, when he re- 
pudiated the manifestations in this single case, were jubilant 
over the event, and it was regarded as conclusive even against 
Spiritualism itself. Subsequent developments have shown 
how unwarrantable and exaggerated was the importance 
given to the affair. The matCrializatiou phenomena have so 
multiplied, have grown to be so complex and common, tliat 
the detection in fraud of any one medium, however conspicu. 
ous, cannot invalidate the general fact. 

As our experience in dealing with these novel phenomena 
increases, moreover, we begin to learn tJiat susceptible me- 
diums, through sinister mesmeric induences exerted upon 
them either by operating spirits or by persons in a circle, may 
automatically do things wliieh unskilled investigators at once 
set down aa frauds sufficient to invalidate all proofs, however 
ample, of previous genuine phenomena. 

These considerations may explain wliy it is that there are 
so few mediums who have not, at some time in their career, 
been charged with imposture. 

Under dat« of Terre Haute, Ind., Oct. 27th, and Nov. 10th, 
1875, Mr. Isaac Kelso, a well-known Unitarian clergyman, 
and an experienced student of the phenomena, gives aa ac 
count of a sitting, at which Mrs, Anna Stewart was the me- 
dium, no says : 

" The light is turned down, but not so far as to mate It pos- 
sible for any c.mii-deratB to enter llio cabinet witliout beiuR 
seen. By and- by one wing ot fliu cabinet door slowly oiH-ns, 
and out sttpsa slight bun beautiful figuvf , robed in pure white 
fiarmtnts, fboking a niil of about seventeen ; not quite so tall 
aalhemedium, but with a step more elastic. Pausing nil in- 
stant near the threshold, she says, 'Good evening,' in the 
soltest imaginable tones, thtn, turning round, throws open 
the other winR of the cabinet door, shominK us the medium 
sitliuK in a chair, apparently asleep, and deadly pale." 

^d by Google 

116 THE PROOF PALPABLE. 

A stranger suggested to Mr. Kelso tbat it was a deception; 
ivbereupon (he entranced medium lilted !ier arm anil waved 
a wliite liandkercliief. "All, tho thing is a machine, moved 
by ivires," persisted tlio skeptic in aniindertone. Going at 
once to the medium tbe figure in white raised her to lier feet, 
brought her out of the cabinet, and stood side by side with 
her. After describing a second apparition, that of a tall male 
figure, Mr. Kelso resumes ; 

"Finally tbe liguro in white came out again. I requested 
her tit Rive us tiie beet proof she could that she was not a 
mortal like ourselves. Alter expressing a willingness to try, 
she called for a pair of scissors, wlilcli, being f urnislied, she 
lianded tome; then kneeliuR down before nje, requested that 
I sbouldcut a lockof hairlrom lierhead. . . . Tlieap- 
parltion tbrewher long raven tresses forward, allowing in ' 

remained in her kneeling posture close by me. Taking Ibo 
liair into her hands, stie stretched it out, laid it on a white 
handkerchief right under my eyes, aud In lull view of all the 
company,tlienJoided Ibo handkerchief over it. Ilavingdone 
this, she retired witliin Ibucabinettinil closed tbe door, which 
placed lier at thedistancd of at least nine feet from the hair. 

" While tho door was yet closed the handkerchief deliber- 
ately unfolded as if liftfd by Invisible fingers, aud tho hair 
began to move. I no«ir placed tlie fingers of my right hand 
upon tho carpet, slowly and carefully sweeping thetn entirely 
round the handkerchief, thus making itdoubly sure tbatno 
fine thread or wire connected the hair in any way with the 
being from whose head I had clipped it. Very soon the lock 
of hair bounded from the handkerchief on to the carpet, and 
began moving toward the cabinet. Before It reached the 
threshold the apparition opened llie door and cameout. The 
hair leaped upon lier white skirt, and slowly climbed to her 
elionlder ; thence it spranR to her crown, and seemed to plant 
itself upon the very spot from which it had been taken. 

A lady of my acquaintance, Mrs. H. E, Webster, a daugh- 
terof Croly, tho poet, author of "Catiline," &c., after de- 
scribing some phenomena that took place in Florence, Italy 
(July, 1S74), through the medlumsbip of Mr. D, D. Home, 
remarks as follows ; 

" One asks one's self, of what nature can be the eyes and 
ears and the fl' s-h and blood of tho individual who can see 
eight or tin hands como out from under his own dining- 
clolh, while the hiinds of every visible individual- present are 
staring him in the lace, and can feel the living pressure of 

^d by Google 

CEEDULITT OF SKEPTICISM. IIJ 

tlie flexible Jfoman fingers clasping liim, and qnestion for ft 
single instant wliat tliey nre? True it Is tliat tliero are jier- 
sons, clever and intelligent in all other lesijtets, who, when 
their pifjndioes or preconceived ideas nre thwarted, seem to 
Itave UiQ faculty of shutting their eyes to otl facts, and their 
mlnila to alt logic, no iiiatter how palpable. Thus a very dis- 
tinguished andglfted EiigUsbman tnld me the other evening, 
in the presence of several others, that at a seanee with Mr. 
Home a hand and arm projecting from a wblto cloud de- 
Bcended from above in the full view of seven or eight i)pr- 
eor.s, and urst touching Mr. Home's head, then touched liim' 
self on the forehead. 'But,' said the gentleman In con- 
clusion, ' What doe» that pnrceT The hand might have been 
a foTBo. Who assures me it came from a spirit?' Tn argu- 
ing of this description there is no answer possible, except, 
perhaps, that of Mr. nume Iiimself, who remarked that in 
such a caia we may all be, owreel/ees, notMng fmt forem alto/" 
Ilome's reply is apt and sufBcient. To suppose that a mere 
force, independent of the will or knowledge oC the medium 
exercising it, announcing itself as a distinct individuality 
and conducting like one, and yet nothing all the while but an 
m I f timdm gftlfmtl litter, in- 

l« t If I t lly wl 11 1 tl it If pp oprlate.ly 

d i ta t 

tl 

tl 

f 11 
pe 
I 

t3 w 

B w 11 
Id ly 

PI 
d 

i 1 
b 
dbl 

Uy out of 
w Lte, play 
S I the medi- 

te 

h f It 

Ity- 

d 

kl g on and 
ly t suppose 
tl a direct 

m til 1 
m if taU liy t 1 g p t 

Itmyb ked U 1 tl tl j f p it Ibodyco- 
existeut wilh the natural, may not the spirit of a person still 
in the earth'lifemnnifest itself thus objectively?" That it ean 
doso wehavogood reason to believe ; but if it can thus separate 
itself from the living earth'body, why should the dissolution 
of the latter limit the spirit's power of manifestation? Ought 
not its power to be increased rather than diminished by the 
severing of a tie wliicli must be more a limitation tlian a 

The proof palpable of Immortality Is the culmination of 
other cognate proofs, in themselves a sufiicient assurance of 
tbe existence In man of a supersensual, spiritual nature. 

^d by Google 

118 PHENOMEKAL PROOFS. 

Death is not dlsorganizaiion, but ehanRe. The caterpUlal 
docs not lose himself in passing to the butterfly, neither does 
man lose himself In leaving a pliyaical orfianism for a spirit- 
There Is undoubtedly a force, call it psychic, odle, or spirit- 
ual, which is a property of man's duplicate organism. It 
may ho man fested in var ous wiys d iiing the earth 1 fc of 
the Individual it miy be the ag nt m miny phenomena not 
csplicablo by the agenny t E tiio normal powers of terrestrial 
man; but there is a large class of pUnomcna nhich are 
raoro rationally explained by tho interrention o( spirits that 
have parted from their moital bodies 

Thetcstimrny of the spirits themsehes and of entranced 
and clairvovant mediums fiom whose orgin sms they bor 
row a certain power tacilltat ng manifestation must carry 
some welglit nor is the fact that 1 otli spirits an i m diunis 
arc falliblo and often deceptive oufflcient to imp ilr wholly 
the value of "iuch assurance 

But apart from th s testimony we hive i\\ the proof that 
our senses can give, and in addition, the proofs of an intelh- 
gence and a power that cannot be credited to our known and 
normal faculties. 

Mrs. Louisa Andrews, from whose testimony In regard to tho 
materialization phenomena I have already quoted, records the 
following incident: "At a lato sitting in Moravia, wh?re 
there were many in the circle anxiously hoping to see friends 
and relatives, a young man appeared whom no one tnew. 
After showing lilmselt for a moment, lie spoke, giving his 
name as Freeman Kelly. No one recognized the name or tho 
face, ne then spoke again with apparent effort, saying, ' I 
passed away in Jtliaca ;' and he added, in n low but very im- 
pressive voice, ' Let all man ktioiB that lhi> is true.' 

" On my return to Ithaca, I found, on inquiry, that a man 
bearing this name, and described as resembling the spirit we 
had seen, died last spring (1R72). lie had promised some 
friends living in this place Umt if ho should ro first, and if 
spirit returns were possible, hi' would conie and testify to tha 

^d by Google 

MENTAL AND PHYSICAL PEOOFS. 119 

fact. Tlieae friends were not present when he redepmed his 
promise, but rpceived liis eommunication tiirougli tlic lips of 
those wlio heard it." 

Dr. Edwin Lee, in his " Report npon the Phenomena of 
Clairvoyance" (London, 1843), mentions the case of the pre- 
diction of the death of the King of Wurtemherg hy two differ- 
ent somnambuiists ; the one having foretoid the event four 
years beforehand ( the otlier, in the spring of the same year 
liaving mentioned tiie exact day, in the month of October, as 
also the disease (apoplexy). " The exact coincidence," says 
Dr. Lee, " of the event with the predictions, ia not doubted at 
Stuttgard ; and a fortnight ago Dr. Elein, who is now in Eng- 
land, accompanying tlio Crown Prince of Wurtemberg, hav- 
ing been introduced to me, I took the opportunity of asking 
him about the circumstance, whicli he aclinowiedged was as 
has been stated, saying, moreover, tliat hfa father was physi- 
cian to the King, who, on the morning of tlie day on which 
tlie attaek occurred, was in very f-ood health and spirits." 

Mr. Clark Irvine, a respectable lawyer of Oregon, Ilolt 
County, Missouri, of whose visit to Dr. Slade I have already 
spoken, In the third chapter of this work, writes me some 
particulars of this and other experiences, which include some 
noteworthy facts. He was wholly unknown to Dr. Slade, the 
medium, and came upon him unprepared. While he sat in a 
chair in the light and Dr. Slade sat at eotue distance from him, 
Mr. Irvine felt an invisible spirit hand which he grasped. lie 
hold on to it tightly, and the hand, after pulling violently, 
gave a few spasmodic jerksand then seemed to melt away, hia 
fingers gradually closing together as though holding some dis- 
solving substance. 

Wliile himself holding a slate close up under and against 
the top ot a small table, Mr. Irvine got "almost immediately, 
wi(h more than mortal speed, in writing," a communication 
signed " Your grandmother, Tabitha M. Irvine." I( he had 
evc^r known that she had an M in her name, he had surely for- 
goltim It ; but on reference, some days after, to an old family 
Bible he learnt that the M was correctly inserted. Bear in 

Id b, Google 

120 POESOMENAL PROOFS. 

mind tbat all the ■wliile the writing was Koing on, Sla<Ie was 
sitting at some distance and did not even know the name of 
his sitter. 

■White Mr. Irvine held an accordion, in broad daylifiht, in 
Bucli a way that he could loolt closely on (he keys, the side of 
the instniinent opposite hia hand began to be violently pulled 
out and pushed back with great rapidity, the keys rose and 
fell, and the tune of " llome, Sweet Ilome " was played. Mr. 
1. could not himself play tlio instrument, nor could he have 
even started the tune. Stade sat some distance opposite with 
his Lands clasped behind liis head as a spectator. Mr. I. then 
requested, menially, that the tune should be changed to " Hail 
Columbia," and this was done without a word having been 
uttered. 

"From the most positive dist>elief in a future state," writes 
Mr. Irvine, " I was converted by the overwhelming tests I re- 
ceived on this occasion ; 

. " On the evening Of the same day I visited Mr. Charles Fos- 
ter. At his request, while bo was in another room tiansact- 
ing some business, 1 wrote down about twenty names of vari- 
ous persons dead and alive, butaniong the names four of dear 
friends deceased and mndi thouglit of, and folded tlie paper 
closely m I had given Foster niy name on enteiing the 
room. lie placed hiahnndon tliepaper, and exclaimed, 'The 
spirit of Leonard Bartlettu Is stAndinftthere. Ilesaysheis 
an uncle o( yours.' Tills was in truth one of the names I had 
written, though why I should have done so was singular, as I 
had not In many years thought of It. 'Whatwas the cause of 
hiAdeatli?' 'He says he fell fi'ora hiawaRon.' 'Thatwas 
not HO.* ' now then?' 'IIo was killed by a saw log rolling 
down on to him ns he was walking along a bank." Foster 
laughed. 'What do you laugh at?' 'Why, this apirit pays he 
himself was on the pround find knows all about it, ami you 
wereii^t. Are you quite sure you are rirht?' 'Tes, assure 
as a mftn con he of things he pi'ta from the report of friends." 
Some acquaintance of Foster's had entered duriue the sSanco ; 
anil tliiii man now exclaimed : ' Charley, you old hunibujf, jou 
are caught this time, and I era filaui of ft.' Foster fco'krd 
serious and said: 'I can't hilp it; mistakes nre made, and 

liPS are told, but ' And then bric;hteiiing np, and spi'iilt- 

In.ijwUhrcnewHl confidence, hit said: 'Seehiro; tbist^pirit 
|[now^< what hn l.s about ; he Is truthful ; yon are wrong, and 
heHrlpht," Hethi'i) deserlbrd the man a appearance aceu- 
rnt'Jy. and BKkcdmotolcBinlrlwerenot in error. 

"i'n rotiivntiig to Missouri. I htupped in Ohio, and askid 
my niijlbur the cause of her brother Leonaid'a di-ath. She re- 

^d by Google 

MATERIALIZATION'S. 121 

piled: 'Why. he fell (icim liis waaon of eonrset' After fu!L 
invest I (ration it appeared tliat I liail never heard a, true aC' 
count of tlie acci<t<jiit. It tuolt place some twenty years ago, 
nlien 1 wa» In Louisiana ; a friend wrote me tliero that my 
uDcle had been killed hy a saw log, and this statement I had 
never thought to question." 

Whence, under the circumstances, could Foster, ignorant as 
ho was, have got his information If not from the spirit whose 
appearance he accurately described 7 

The Rev. Samuel Watson, of Tennessee, a well-known cler- 
gyman and author, says (18T1) : " In full daylight, at three 
o'clock in tlie afternoon, I have seen the materialized spirit 
forms of my former wife, with whom I had lived twenty-six 
years; and the father of my present wife, wlio had been a 
Methodist preacher ; and I saw a number of other spirits, 
somo of whom wore also recognized as friends, I insist upon 
the reality of these fact% and upon their value as Indicating 
the communion of the departed with those still on earth." 

I have Just had an Interview (Sept. 2d, 18T4) with the Rev. 
E. 8. Pope, of Ilyannis, Mass., onewhoinhis very aspect and 
presence brings the credentials of a man of ample intelligence 
and perfect truthfulness He tells me that he was at Uoravia 
wltii his wife, both of them strangers to all the persons there, 
and their very names unknown. They saw his motlier and 
his two sons, all deceased. The last two came night after 
night every evening for a week. They spoite to litm, they 
proved their Identity to the complete satisfaction of himself 
and his wife. "I saw them," says Mr. Pope, "face to face as 
distinctly as I see you now. Tlieywere visible to all the spec- 
tators. There could be no delusion. It was a reality. My 
mother, who came first, proclaimed to the company my name 
(tin then unKnown to all) ; and my son Milton said, ' Preach 
this trulh when you go liomo '—thus revealing my profession. 
My mother had on her head a cap of a luminous whiteness. 
Solid liyht will best express its appearance." Sir. Pope was 
a total disbeliever in Spiritualism when he weut to Moravia. 
He came home thoroughly convinced of its fundamental truth, 
and he proclaimed his experiences publicly to his people. 
Pref lous to sitting for the phenomena he had satisfied himself 

^d by Google 

122 SENTIMENT AND FACT. 

thoroughly, by examining the room and tlie cabinet, that no 
human contrivanco could produce the manifestations. In the 
course of his conversation with me, Mr, Pope said : " As I 
could not believe these things on any man's t«stlmony, bo I do 
not ask you to believe tliem on mine." Three of his parishion- 
ers, ho told me, had been to Sloravia and satisfied themselves 
by similar objective phenomena o£ the survival of deceased 
friends and relatives. 

Facts like these, combining the proof palpable of immortal- 
ity with those Inductive proofs derived from the exhibition of 
mental and physical powers wholly transcending all that is 
known to belong to mortal man, must be considered in con- 
nection with a vast collection of similar facts, attested by 
many thousands of sincere, Intelligent persons in all parta of 
the world, not only at the present time especially, bat in all 
past times. 

When so considered they lead irresistibly to the conviction 
that the disioluHon of the earth-body leaves a man unimpair- 
ed in all those essential qualities and characteristics which 
constitute his identity and his Individuality. 

If this view contradicts some of the exalted ideas wo may 
have formed of the spiritual state, let us not therefore shrink 
from the facts. Mere sentiment will soon reconcile itself to 
the actual. 

" Suppose I do find the unseen to be the haunt of ungram- 
matical ghosts," says Mr. St. George Stock, "what then? It 
has its high lite, 1 suppose, as well as its low. This world it- 
self Is vulgar or practical according to the light in which we 
look at it. Do not reject well attested narratives merely be- 
cause they sound grotesque. lie is not a faithful lover of 
trul:h who would not go through dirt to meet her. ' One vision 
of her snowy feet is worth the labor of a life.'" 

"True fortitude of undprstauding," saysPaley, "consists 
in not sufiering wTtat mb knovi to bo disturbed by what wo do 
moi know. The uncertainty of one thing does not necessarily 
affect the certainty of another thing. Oiir ignorance of many 
points need not suspend o 

Id b, Google 

ROBERT CnAMBERS'S TnEORY. 

Thi3 advice cannot be too closely pondered by S' 
The one great fact that they Snmo must not bo disturbed by 
the innumerable questions which even a child's skepticism 
can raise, and satisfactory answers to which cannot be readily 
givei. Remember that this is a rudlmental stajte of being, and 
that we liave all the future before us in which to tliiolc, study 
and work. Wo have reached the sublime summit from which 
we can surely see that man survives the corporeal dissolution. 
Let that immense and ever-fettilo truth enter into our convic- 
tions, and possess them tborouglily, and help to shape our 
every act, thought and affection, and we may well be content 
to postpone all minor problems. 

CHAPTER X. 

The late Robert Chambers, the well-known Scottish pub- 
lisher and author, was a thoughtful Investigator of the spirit- 
ual phenomena. Durlnghis last visit to America, I introduced 
him to the seances for physical manifestations, given by Miss 
Jenny Lord,* and he was thoroughly satisfied as to their re- 
marliable and genuine character. 

In his Introduction to the autobiography of Mr. D. D. 

•Now Mrs. J. T., Webb, ■niltesiaent In Chliago. She gives wmartt- 

liitongh nerqnilii iBoenliy, Mr. 8. 8. *«aeB, of'tbo BeilBlo-'phliosSnu!™! 

ijlHiolherB Kltanfleflonoot Mis. Webb's bSbiicbei, Tnronelibcrmeaiutu- 
BhlpftsplmwiiUnateriHlliBa hanil. sort wrtte by it vIbIdTt. DiiiinKtbe 

fliirtli'aonlUfiiour baiifl, 1 nuuerl Intel i-, MuHiar inlrirroncrolllnff Bfra 
Webri's organs of speech, adclrrsseil us by nanie, nayuig, ' Tbere is ii fi 'lil t 
s^"''nB'w'^". '"'!■ '■■'■""►"•" 'fl"' WHS Bevcuty or fl«bfyj-«arac.li! when 

BUiiiitdllTei-emjMoCoplnbiul iT5ulrtnsln*nHr trn'ShkliKw^^^^^ 
'W.?ev5ni'/BVrr°Kr Kii will''nB[!a.T?f'^»«^' r«ul anf.iUon-si 

^d by Google 

131 

PACTS FOR IKDUCTIOS". 

Home, the well-known medium, Mr. Chambers has the fol- 
lowing preffnant and suggestive remarks: "Tl;e idea is now 
arising tLiit the cause of the undiminished <latknessoverliang- 
ing all that relates to a state of existence after this life, may- 
be, that the right Crack hai never yet been entered on ; that iha 
facts really affording in this direction materiala for induction 
have hitherto been digregarded; tliat they nevertUelesa abound ; 
and that a higher enligbteniuent will cause attontion to ba 
turned to them and reveal tbeir profound significance." 

now true is all this I In aneient times, before the positive 
and inductive wh h tl t lb t iry has de- 

veloped, bad p j1 w Im f tl ght d discovery, 

menbardlydse tel b tw tb d 
of Nature an I tl se wh b dlcate di 
BoUi classes f ph m b g q Uy 

J phenomena 
t pirlt origin. 
) be lous to the 

ipiorant, amladg i tt ftlt 
gress, drew m y f ra tb t 1 

11 entifie pro- 
pi ration and 

study of oceurr 1 11 t g p t p w 
We must exc pt b g eat th k rs PI t 

A totle, Cice- 

ro ana Pluta 1 b t tl g 1 i tlfi 

It re was not 

sufficient to m k tb i pi t 1 It 

tb po.iular un- 

derstanding. 
In mediffiV 1 t m wh wltcl ft w 

mpaut, men 

werenobette tt A rrwb t mpe u. 

tl logy, and a 

state-eratt, b d p 1 tly f tter« m d t d gerous for a 
man to prose te se 1 i t tb 11 f med land of the 

marvelous." 

If even in our own day so enlightened a man as Professor 
Tyndall* is yet so besotted with prejudice as to attempt to warn 
off investigators by denouncing Spiritualism as "degrading" 
(as if the knowledge of any fact of God's universe were de- 
grading I'ythrivi can we wonder at Uio persecution which 
checked all rational inquiry into splritoal phenomena two 
centuries ago ! 

ffin. "who snaps yoawlth uni)hiii>sophlialt'''' ««■■ 
jarieii'i aat-offeorb, died tu ttaapi ifcteciioB. ' ' 

/ dRaroA' 

Id b, Google 

SCIENCE AND MEDIUMSniF. 125 

There truly has not been a time In the world's history till 
now when it was wlioliy sate for a man to investigate the 
facts, really afEocding, as Rohert Chambers remaris, maie- 
riaUfoT induetion in relation to a Hale of existence after thi» 
life. 

Bear in minil, and leain humility from the fact, ye scien- 
Msts of the year 1975, that, even in our day, the four leading 
professors of Harrard University tried to put a stop to all in- 
vestigation into these astounding and now established phe- 
nomena by denouncing " any connection with spiritualistic 
circles, so-called " as corrnpting the morals and flHcrading the 
intellect; as tending "to lessen the truth of man and the 
purity of woman;" that Professor John Tyndall, as latoas 
1874, spoke of Spiritualism, (a Teritohle sciente, by the testi- 
mony of sneh men as Wallace. Fiehte, Flammarion, Varley, 
and Hare,) as "degrading;" and that Professor T. 11. Hux- 
ley, as late as 1869, wrote a letter to the Dialectical Society, 
in which he says : " Supposing the phenomena to be genuine, 
they do not interest me." 

If leanied professors, in the full blaze of the science of the 
latter half of the nineteenth century can be so befogged by 
their petty prejudices and preconceptions, as to try to blot out 
the fact» of Spiritualism, surely it will be easy for us to find 
charity in our hearts for the clerical and legal authorities who 
advocated the slaughter of witches, l)ut little more than a cen- 
tury ago I 

Before concluding the testimony of our day as to the materi- 
alization phenomena, I must not omit an account of the Eddy 
family. Some ten years ago I satisfied myself by personal 
investigation of tiie genuineness of their medlumship, and my 
convictions were not impaired by subsequent reports that two 
of them liad turned against Spiritualism, and were professing 
to make antagonistic exposures. 

It appears that in some Western town, finding themselves 
utterly destitute of money and of tiie means of raising it, 
friendless and longing for home, they were tempted by some 
unscrupulous adviser to give exhibitions for the "exposure" 

^d by Google 

I2ii TUE EDDY FAMILY. 

of the phenomena of Spiritualism. Tliia tliey did, and they 
ROt audiences and funds from tlie foes of Spiritualism, which 
they could not get from t!ie friends. But the poor mediums 
were as lielpleas as was the ancient heathen medium, Balaam, 
wlieii called upon to curso; "How shall I curse wliom God 
hath not cursed, or how sliall I defy whom the Lord hath not 
defied?" 

No one of the marvels wrought by spirits could be exposed 
or explained by any practical exhibition oftrlckorskillonthe 
part of the two Eddys ; and those persons who had hoped to 
see Spiritualism finally shown up and exploded, went home in 
a sadder but wiser mood. 

\Ve must exercise the largest charity for the moral weak- 
ness that led to such an attempt by the mediums. Only he 
who has experienced the suffering of extreme destitution is 
qualified to estimate their temptation. 

In a letter to the N. T. Sun, dated Chittenden, Termont, 
the village where the Eddy family reside, Sept. 2, lB7i, Col. 
Henry S. Olcott, a well-known journalist of New York, gives 
an account which carries internal evidence of sincerity, com- 
petency, and careful observation of the phenomena. The 
diagram on the followinfi page will give an idea of the room 
where most of the occurrences which he relates took place. 

Tlie apartment is forty-eight by sixteen feet, with three 
windows on each side. At the west end Is a raised platform 
thowidtii.of the room, about two feet high by four brond, 
reached by three steps of about ten inches rise. Between the 
kitchencliimney, which is In the middle, and the ri^bt hand 
wall is a small cupboard or closet, lathed and phislered. with 
a very narrow door, six feet and one Inch high, oiwning from 
the platform, and a single window for purposes of vfiitiinr 
tion. This closet is the cablnetin which the mpd:um sits. A 
light hand-rail runs from side to sidL of tin- looiii at tlie edge 
of the platform. 

The Eddy family, originally thrive in uumbir, are now 
reduced by marriagp aiui death to five— three soiii and two 
daughters. The gient-eraudmotlm uii Ihi' fi niali' skIi was 

^d by Google 

COL. OLCOTT'H STATEMENT. 127 

condsraned to death in Salem in 16!)2, for witchcraft. She es- 
caped the galiows, however, hy being rescued from tlio jail 
by her tcle.Aa. 

-^\ — r 

nel;- 

Chlttenden, where the Eddys reside, Is seven miles north 
from Butland, and they live la a gloomy farm-house a cen- 
tury old, shaded by trees whosedense fo)laj;e makes the dark 
brown structure appear more sombre and inhospitable. 

" There is nothing about the Eddys or their surroundings," 
says Col. Olcott, " to Inspire confidence on first acquaintance. 
The brothers Horatio and William, who ate the present medi- 
ums, are sensitive, distant, and curt to strangers, look more 
like hard-working, rough farmers than prophets or priests of 
a new dispensation, have dark complexions, black hnlr and 
eyes, stiff joints, a clumsy carriage, shrink from advances, and 
make new-comers feel ill at ease and unwelcome. The house 
is dark, rough, and uninviting, the appurtenances of the 

^d by Google 

las THE EDDY FAMILY. 

rudest, the astounUlng stories of what tlie Eddys do excte 
BUspiclon and invite distrust, and it would not be strange iE a 
majority of persons attendiiig only one seance sliould leave, 
as did a gentleman who came hero witli me, persuaded tliat it 
was a colossal liumbug. 

' ' I tliought about as nincli myself at first, and it was not until 
a second and third opportunity had been afforded me to enter 
the circle room, to inspect the cabinet before and after the 
performances, and I had informed myself from perfectly 
trustworthy sources as to their antecedents, that I became 
willing to put my name to this tale and say that, whatever 
tJie source of the marvels may be, it is certainly not the chi- 
canery or legerdermain of a pair of expert thaumaturgists. 
It suffices to leave each to form hisown doctrine and]oin with 
Cicero, who in deaeriblng tlie different kinds of magic says : 
' What we have to do with is the facts, since of the cause we 
know little. Neither are we to repudiate these phenomena, 
because we sometimes find them imperfect.' " 
Col. Olcott says: 

■' The Eddys can get no servants to live [n the house, and 
aobavotodoallthe housework— cooking, washing, and^every- 
tiling— themselves, and as they chaise nothing for seances, 
and bat tS per week for board, there Is small profit and much 
work In taking boarders. They are at feud with some ol 
their neiglibors, and as a rule notllfced either in Eutla,nd or 
Chittenden. I am now satisfied, after a very careful sifting 
of the matter, that thishostility and the ugly fatorleatoldabout 
them are the result of their repellant manners and tho 111 
namethattholrgtio^t-room has ainiinga simple-minded, preju- 
diced people, and not to any moral turpitude on the patt,oI 
the mediums. They are in fact under the ban of a public 
opinion that is not prepared or desirous to study the phe- 
nomena as either scieutiflo marvels or revelations from an- 
other world. , ^ . i, 

" Many points noted In mv meraoiandura book as throwing 
auspicUm upon tho Eddys I'obniit, because upon siftitig «iem 
I found there was ftu easy explanation, and I clieerfully ad- 
mit that my impressionsof tlie brothers, as to their honesty 
in the matter of the manifestations, a* well as thelrpersnnal 
worth, have steadily improved since the llrstday. I am satis- 
fle<l nioi Oliver, that they have not the ability to produce them 
if tliey should try, whiehtheydonot, nor tlie wardrobe nor pro- 
perties requisite toclothe the multitude of forms (estimated at 
over a,000) that durlne the twelvemonth last past have 
emerged from the cabinet and stalked tho narrow platform. 

^d by Google 

COL. OLCOTT'8 STATEMENT, 129 

"After some singina; and dancinKi the persons present at 
the Runnce are Invited to seat themselves ou the 6enc]ii.>», and 
William Eddv banps a thick shawl over the door of the cabi- 
net, wlilph ho entera, find sita on the chair G. The lamp ia 
turned down until oa\y a dim ll^hb remains ; the sitters in 
. fiunt join liandH, and it violinist, placed at the extreme right 
of the row and near.'st the platform, plays on his instrumeaC. 
All l9 then anxious exjiectation. Presently the curtain stirs. 
Is pushed aside, and a form steps out and faces the audience. 

"Seen in the obscurity, silent and motionless, appenrina '■> 
the character of a visitor from beyond the grave, it is calcu- 
lated to arouse the most intense feellntp of awe and terrorin 
the minds of the timid; but happily Uie idea is so iucompi'e- 
liensible, the supposition so unwarrantable, even absurd, tliat 
at iirst moat people choose to curiously inspect the thing a^ a 
masqueradinii pleasantry on the part of the man they saw a 
moment before enter the cabinet. That the window oC hia 
closet is twenty feet from the ground; that no ladder can be 
found about the premises ; that there is no nook nor corner of 
the house where a largd wardrobe can be stored without de- 
tection ; that tlie medium totally diilors In every material par- 
ticular from the majority of tlie phratomn evoked; that the 
family are barely rich enough to provide tliemselves witli the 
necessaries of life, let alone a multitude of costly theatrical 
propertien, avails nothing, althougli everybody can satisfy 
birasclf upon these points as [ did. 

"TheflrHtimpressioufslhat there Is some trickery; for to 
think otlierwisQ ia to do violence to the world's traditions 
from the lieginning until now ; besides which the feeling of 
terror Is lessened by the apparition being seen by each person 
In company with numerous other mortals like himself, and 
the locked fmnds and tonching shoulders on each side soon 
beget confidence. If the shape is recognized it bows and re- 
tii'es, sometimes afler addressing words in an audible whis- 
per or a natural voice, as the case may be, to its friends, 
sometimes not. 

"After an interval of two or three minutes the curtain is 
again lifted, and another form, quite different in sex, gait, 
costume, complexion, length and arrangement of liair, height 
and breadth of bodv. and spporeut age, somes forth, ti) lie 
followed in tnrnhy others and othent, until afteran hour or 
10 the session iabrouglittoft close, and tlio medium reappears 
fflth haggard eyes and n " '■ —'— ■■ '■ ' 

" In the three nfancea 

of Indian men* and v . _ __ . , _._ 

young, each in a different dress, to the numlier of tliirty- two ; 
and I am told by respectable persons who have been liere a. 
long while t'lat the number averages nbnnt twelve a night. 
The Eddys have sat continuously for nearly a year, and are 

^d by Google 

130 THE EDDT PHENOMENA. 

wearied in bcNjy and mind by the iucessant drain npon their 
vital lorce, wliJcli Is said to Im) Inevitable In these plionomena. 
"For want <if a better rx plan nli on 1 may as wi-ll state Uiat 
they claim lliat tlje manifest a! Ions ere produced by a band of 
spirits, organized witli a special director, mistress of ceremo- 
nies, cliemist, assistant chemist, and dark and light circle op* 

Col. Olcott describes these spirits, and of one of them, an 
Indian girl, he says r 

"Honto is about five feet fivo Inches high, a well-made, 
buxom Rirl, of dark copper complexion, and with long black 
Lair. She is very agile and springy In gait, graceful In move- 
ment, and evidently a superior person of lier class. At my 
second seance, she In my presence reached np to the Iwire 
vthlte wall and pulled out a piece of gauzy fabric nbout four 
yards long whiuh parted from the plasterinu with a click, as 
if the end had been glued to it. She bunfr it over the railing 
toshowuaitstexture, and thin threw It iiito the cabinet. At 
either end of the platform she plucked, as if from the air 
Itself, knitted shawls, which she opened and shook, and 
passed liehind the curtain. Then descending the steps to the 
Boor of the room, she pulled another from under Horatio Ed- 
dy's chair, where I had seen nothing but the bare floor a 
moment before. Then returning to tlie platform, she danced 
to the accompaniment of the violin, after which she reentered 
the cabinet and was gone. Let it be noticed that Ihiscreature 
had tlie shoulders, bust and hips of a woman, a woman's hair 
and feminine ways, and that she was at least four inches 
shorter than William Eddy, who measures five feet nine 
inches, and weighs one hundred and seventy-fiiur pounds." 

Col. Olcott here quotes what was certified to by Mrs. Cleve- 
land, an old lady of the neighborhood ; but as there has tieen 
a misunderstanding about money between her and the Eddys, 
and she has since spoken equivocally in regard to her experi- 
ences, I have ruled out her testimony as of no importance 
either way, though her original declarations were probably 
true, as any one may learn on close inquiry. 

The testimony of Mr. E. V. Fritcliard of Albany is of a 
very difEerent weight. For months ho pursued his investiga- 
tions at Chittenden. Kepeatedly, day after day, the mate- 
rialized figure of his deceased mother, an aged woman, would 
come out, put her arms about his neck, kias him audibly, and 
lead hlni to a seat. Mr. Pritehard testifies that ho could see 
every wrinkle of her face, th3 color of her eyes, and all tlie 
details of her dress, to the very ribbon in her old-fashioned 
cap. Once, as she receded toward tliu curtain, she began to 

^d by Google 

THE EDDY rHENOMENA. 131 

sink to the floor just as "a piece of butter would molt down 
on a liot plate," and her iigaro dwarfed lili it was not above 
eighteen inches ia licigiit. Mr. P. liad seen the same thing 
linppen once to nonto. 

Since his loog-continued experiences Mr. Fritchard lias had 
no cause to have any missiving as to the genuineness of the 
phenomena. To satisfy myself of this, I requested Dr. G. L. 
Ditson of Albany to call on him and iearn what he could. 
Under date of Jan. 18th, 1£76, Dr. Ditson writes roe : 

"Neither Mr. Prilcbard not his sister, Mrs. Packard, haa 
had any misgivinga in respect to the genuineneBS of tiie Wil- 
liam Eddy manifestations. Lately Mr. Pritchard lias been to 
'Ca&cade.' Mm. Andrews's home, and lias had his faitl) con- 
firmed— liU faith in the actuality of the materialization ot bis 
epiritfriends ; for ki» toother appeared there exactly as »1ie bad 
at OAff&m^ni, wearing the same capand ribbon, and thesame 
dress in wliich she had so often showed herself at the Eddys'. 
Mr. P. staid about a month at Mrs. Andrews's. In the 
circle he was only about five or six feet from bis mother's 
apparition, and, as the liplit was good (much better than at 
Chittenden), he could see her quite distincily. She bowed to 
him also, and when he was quite satisfied that it was his 
molhei, he said, ' Is that you, mother?' She replied in a loud 
whisper, 'Yrs, my son.' Keitlier Mr. P. nor Mrs. Packard, 
who lived in the Eddy hou>^e for months, lay any stress on 
the reports from Mrs. Cleveland. They saw nothing that 
looked like fraud, and their opportunities were unequalled." 

Col. Olcott resumes his nanative : 

"Of the Ihirty-two spirit forms T have seen, more than 
three.fourthswerd recognized by persons present as near Tela* 
Mves. The first evening, my eyes not being accustomed to 
the light, nor tuy powers of ubservation trained to watch de- 
tails, the spectral shapes came and went in a com using man- 
ner 1 liut the second and thinl stances found me prepared to 
scrutinize the phenomena with deliberation. 

"The reader will pleasuremeiuber that owing to my inhos- 
pitable reception, the suspicions tscited by ihe place and its 
suironndings, and the astounding claims put I'urtli by the 
spiritual press as to the Eddy manifestations, I was on Ihe 
alerttodetcct fraud and exposelt. Ascaeh phantom came 
into view I obberved iCH height against Ihe door jamb, its 
probable weight, its movemeuLs, apparent age, style o{ wear- 
ing the hair, and beard If a man, the nature and elaboi'ate- 
ne^sof lis costume, and the eiitemat marks of sex, as regards 
lorm— all the while having in mind the square, Dutch build 
and heavy movements of William Eddy. Isaw men, womin 
and children come one after another before me, and in no one 
Instance delected Ihe biightest evidence of trickery. 

"Among Ihe nmarbable tests of Identity coming under my 
notice was the appi'aiance of a young soldier ot about twenty 
jears o( age, the son of Judge Bacon ot Hb Johnsbury, Vt., 

^d by Google 

132 THE EDDT FAMILY. 

whose death occurred under painfnl cireumstnnces in the 
army, and whose name or existenco even Ii art not been men- 
tioned by liis father to any per.-Min about the place. Tlie 
spirit was clothed in a dressinc-gown, light trousera, and a 
white shirt with turn-down collar. lie was instantly recog- 
nized. The night that llr. Frit^haril was sitting on the chair 
n, two of his nephews, dressed differently, wearing tlieir 
beards in different ways, differing in height and appearn nee 
in a marked dejjree, stepped fortli and shook hands with him. 
Isat within five yards o£ them, and saw them with entire dis- 
tinctness. 

" The gentleman of whom mention has been previously 
made, Mr. E. V.Pritcliard,*of Altmny, Isare.tlred merchant, 
wliose credibility must lie well known in that city at least. 
lie camo to the Eddys' in May, eicppetlnft to remain only a 
few days, hot hiapxpeiiences have been so satl.sfaetory that 
he is still here. He first saw the spirit of ills brother's son, 
who was killed in the army, and afterwaid his mother, hia 
sister's husband, two of Her sons and one son-iii law, and his 
brother's son. tie has seen four or five female spirits carry- 
ing children in their arms, and, setting them on the Huor, 
lead them about by the hand. He has seen the children in 
Bomecasesclnsp their nrmsahonttiieir mothers' necks. Once 
an Indian woman broiieht in her papoose, swaddled in the 
Indian fashion, and he heard It cry. An Indian ^irl brought 
in a robin perched on her finger, which hopped and chirped 
as naturally as life. 

" Mr. P. saw a mother spirit walk to the front of the plat- 
form and hold her babe over the railing toward the audlujir«, 
so that they could see it kick its little legs, move iti arms and 
hear It crow. Again, on another evening, tliree little girls, 
apparently four, six and eight years of ago respectively, stood 
side by side in the door of the cabinet, and the eldest calling 
to her motlier in the audience, spoke her own name. ' Min- 
nie.' No William Eddy in this Instance, surely. Mr. Pritcli- 
nrd has heard the spectres speaklii all voices, from the faint- 
est whisper to a full, iiatnral voice. As regards costumes, lie 
has seen tlie forms clothed in what appeareil to be silk, cot- 
ton, merino, and tarletan, soldiers in uniform, one navy cap- 
tain in foil uniform, and wearing his side armn, women lu 
plain robes and richly embroidered, Indian warriors In a 
great variety of costumes, some barefoot and others shod in 
moccasins. Once a pipe was lighted and handed to Hon to, 
wlio walked abont smoking it, and at each whiff 1)er bronze 
face was Illuminated so that every lineament was slirtwn. 
She camo and smoked in his very face to give him a perfect 

" Out of the mass of testimony I have noted In my memo- 
randum I will orly quote In addition what Mr. Baci>n says, as 
this, added to what lias preceded, should suffice to at least 

•Dr. O. L. nitsnn, ot Alhanr, the welt-kuomn mrlterainlSplrltiiaUsr, 
Um Eddys'; ■■HiavenKityaud Kood luOeiusnt no ouewlilaiieatluawlic 

^d by Google 

WORDS FROM A SEEK. 133 

clear William Eddy from the suspicion of prodiiclne; the phan- 
tom shape* by chaufies of voiot: and dress. John Bacon 2il of 
St. Joluisbury, Vt, Is an associate Justice of tlie county court 
of (Jaledonia county. He camo here August a2d, 1S74, to see 
the phenoicena. The fiist evening he saw the spirit of his 
father, who died forty-eight years ago. Hecognized hira by 
his shape. The form was dressed in dark clothes, with a 
standing shirt collar and white shirt. He was bare-headed. 
Standing erect he towered to the height of six feet one inch, 
and called his son by his Christian name, speaking in his fa- 
miliar tones. His breathina was distinctly perceived in the 
act of sneaking. Besides him the Judge has seen one sister, 
fifty-three yrars of age at the time of her decease, and anoth- 
er of only three years ; his wife's father and mother (the lat- 
ter wore a light dress and a white cap ; she Is a very short 
woman, not above five feet in height); and finally his own 
son, wliose deiith has elsewhere been alluded to. By actual 
count kei.t he has seen sixty-six different spirits to date (.bept. 
2d, 1874)." 

According to Col. Olcott he had an interview with Andrew 
Jackson Davis before going to Chittenden, and in reply to 
Col. Olcott's question how he could account for the iraparta- 
tion of life to these temporary organisms, so that the heart 
can be felt to beat and the other physical operations be car- 
ried on, Mr. Davis said he had no explanation to ofEer, and 
left the riddle for the disciples of Comte and Tyndali to solve. 
He said that Tarley, the English electrician, wrote to him re- 
cently to ask where was the connecting link between matter 
and spirit. He replied that It was just upon the plane of 
the^fl materializations, where spirit descended toward matter, 
and matter ascended toward spirit, the point of contact would 
be found. There are : I, solids ; 3, fluids ; 3, atmospheres ; i, 
ethers i 6, essences (the Imponderable distilled out of the 
whole universe of matter). Hatter Uat its climax of progress 
there. Then takes place the alliance of spirit, and at this 
sensitive place occur all these apparitions. The spirit lifts 
matter up to this point, and by reducing its temperature and 
motion lie evolves the apparition. The reversal of this action 
produces the vanishment of the shape. All forma and poten- 
cies exist in the atmosphere, and hy the action of spirit upon 
Hiem all tliese and any other desired results are attained. 

Mr. Davis is disposed to regard all tliese materialization phe- 
nomena as "feats of jugglery by expert spirits, numbers of 

^d by Google 

IM SEEKS AND SPIRITS. 

whom are deeply versed in chemistry and the other natural 
" The phenomena, lie thinks, are "necessary to 
nine-tenths of tlio world's people, that death rf<ws not 
kill a man." He considers Katie King and the Eddy ghosts 
as of no importance as individual identifications ; they are 
simply important as establishing the general doctrine of im- 
mortality. 

But Mr. Davis does not regard himself or any other seer as 
infallible. Ilis opinions must be taken with the qnalilications 
he liimsetf suggests. There are many intelligent witnesses 
who wholly dissent from the notion that there are no " indi- 
vidual identifications" in tliese materialization phenomena. 
They see no reason why the proofs of identification are not as 
strong in the case of materialized spirits as in the case of those 
spirits wlio manifest themselves only to the clairvoyant vision. 
The question of Identification is equally difficult in all its 
phases. 

"Vain Is It," says Dr. John P. Gray, "to rely on the integ- 
rity and ehildlilte honesty of the seer's outer-life character 
as a protection against illusion on this topic of identification ; 
the world's history is full to overflowing of the recorded con- 
tradictions of seers." 

There is still a long distance, it would seem, between the 
highest spirits and the Infinite Intelligence ; and it Is time 
that we were made to realize this important truth. In ex- 
posing the error of the common notion as to the infallibility 
of men when they have passed out of their earthly surround- 
ings. Spiritualism is doing a service next to that of proving 
immortality. Ttie hiatus caused by passing from the mortal 
to the spiritual state is not so serious as is generally supposed, 

"Tou complain," says Shorter, "that the spiritual com- 
munications you receive are not to be implicitly trusted. 
"Well, perhaps that is the very lesson they are chiefly designed 
to teach you." No one has done more than Mr. Davis to guard 
US from too hasty a confidence ; and liis cautions as to the ma- 
terialization phenomena should be carefully heeded. 

^d by Google 

THE SPIEIT-BODT. 

CHAPTER xr. 

In this chapter I propose to consider the spirit-body; lie 
testimony which seers and others offer on the subject, and 
which the phenomena of Spiritualism seem to cunfirm. 

But some preliminary observations in regard to the weight 
to 1)0 attached to the revelations of seers are liere in place. 

Experience In Spiritualism soon teaches us to regard no 
spirit, seer, or revelator as infallible. There have been great 
mediums who have believed themselves the direct vehicles of 
the highest divine Inspiration! but it would seem to be a di- 
vine law that human reason must be left free. The seer who 
plays the theosophlet, and claims infallibility, is often blind- 
est when he thinks liimaelf most illumined. Ilumility Is 
ever the best ground for our high researches. To get a sight 
of the Stars by daylight we must go to the bottom of a well. 

Swedenborg (1039-1772) was a great medium and seer ; but 
I cannot believe he wholly escaped the influence of some of 
the d luding spirits, against whom he warns us. When he 
d ibes Quakers and Moravians as lingering In infernal 
W t h dn 1 the other world, merely on account of certain 
p lat b I efs held in this, I can see only inconsistency 
w tl t1 t achings which he gives us in Iiis humbler yet 
hgi m d 

But Swedenborg's testimony, when it accords with reason 
and wltli facts, must not be regarded as weakened, becauise 
be sometimes seems to en and give way to fantasies the most 
revolting. Though not infallible, he Is oftentimes a divine 
teacher. It is when be claims infallibility, and threatens 
those who discredit iiim with some nameless spiritual injury, 
insanity, or loss, that we must question his 11 luminal ion. 

The imperfection of all individual revelations, through 
Messiahs and seers, is well explained by tlie Itcv. James E, 

^d by Google 

136 NO PERFECT REVELATION. 

Smitli* (1S''4), who says; "Though the works of God are 
perfect In universals, they are not so in particulars. This 
glonoua truth contains tlie very seed of wisdom. Tlie super- 
ficial opinion is, that every individual, or particular divine 
production, must he perfect, in the common sense of the 
viord and what is not perfect, men ascribe equivocally to 
Nature, or any other cause hut God— a habit of mind wliieh, 
li^icallydeveloppd, leads aman to its natural ultimate, prac- 
tical and tlieocetical atheism ; for, seeing nothing around him 
that -is absolutely perfect, or freo from defect, he seeks for 
the cause in an imperfect agent, and goes no further when he 
has found it. 

"Were God's partleuiar works all and alike perfect, there 
would be neither learning nor progress, no improvement, no 
amendment, no dcaire to improve or amend, and therefore no 
industry, no activity, no motive whatever even for action. 
God's works are a graduated scale of better and worse. Per- 
fection belongs to the whole collectively ; never to any of the 

" No iiictividMal revetation whalBner can he perfect, any mora 
than any other individual or particular work of God. There 
never was an age witbont prophets. They exist now, as real 
and genuine, though not as eminent and authoritative asever. 
Prophets abounded Id Israel. Prophecy then ceased, or rath- 
er they ceased to compile prophecies. Not understanding the 
nature of the mystic phenomena, they established a crsed, 
which prevails to this day, that revelation hai ceaaed, and that 
modem pretenders to Inspiration are either madmen or im- 
postors— the only intelligible mode of avoiding the difGculttes 
wbich presented themselves to their minds— a mode still re- 
sorted to by Jews, Christians, Philosophers, Deists and Athe- 
ists, to account for all spiritual visitations, such as the mis- 
sion ot Mahomet or Swedenborg, which they cannot under- 
stand for the reason above given, their belief being that even 

•norn In Olossow, IMl, died In ISST. He waa a fiplrltuallst lonK be- 
pliBiicnii'liH. innnigli Mrs! iLj-cleii, the OKCinienl Amfflean m-illiini'. Ha 

^d by Google 

THE SPIEIT-BODT. 137 

a particular and local revelation from God can never be char- 
aeterized by any imperfection or any contradiction." 

"Some persons ask," says Kardec, "Of wliat use are the 
teachings of tbe spirits if they offer to aa no greater certain- 
ty than liuman teachings? The answer is easy; As we do 
not accept the teachings of nllmen witbequal confidence, nei- 
ther must wo the teachings of all spirits. God has given us rea- 
son CDd discrimination to judge of spirits as well as of men. 
Surely the fact of our mseting in the world with bad men is 
not a reason for withdrawing ourselves from society. There 
are spirits of all degrees of goodness and of malice, of knowl- 
«lge andof ignorance, all subject to tbe law of progress." 

We must judge ot their communications precisely as W9 
would of those that come through channels mortal and terres- 
trial. We must learn to separate the wheat from the chaff, 
tlie spirit from the letter, the essentially divine from the en- 
veloping finite. To ask why men were not created perfect. 
Is equivalent to ashing wliy they were created at ail. 

Among the truths to which Swedenbonf, in company with 
all great seers, bears wil^ess, is that of the spirit body. He 
tells us that thought implies a thinking substance, as much aa 
sight or hearing implies a seeing and hearing substance ; that 
It Is as absurd to contemplate tliought assomethingindepend- 
ent of the substance of the soul or spirit, as it is to contem- 
plate sight or hearing independent of the substance of tbe eye 

It is remarkable witli what unanimity mediums everywhere 
and at all times have insisted on describing spirits as in tbo 
human form, and in representing man, in all tiie stages ot his 
e]fist«nce, as an organized being. This doctrine of a spirit 
body seems to be inseparable from all forms ot Spiritualism. 
Tbe oldest Magi, the wise men Of Persia, bf-lmed in it. 
Hesiod and Homer teach it. Sureij tbe attributes of mind 
will not be lessened in dignity by being Indie^olubly connect- 
ed with an organism. 

A spirit body, composed of elements imponderable and in- 
visible in reference to our physical senses, is, as wo have seen, 

^d by Google 

138 THE SPIRIT-BODY. 

in the second chapter of this worb, a legitimate scientiGo con- 
ception, Involving no chemical difficulty. Even all the con- 
stituents of our present eartli-body may be iieid in solution. 
In a state invisible and impalpable, in the atiuosphere ; and 
how far matter may gain new properties or part %vith old ones 
by dilTerentiationa and transformations, ruled by spirit power, 
wc are yet to learn. 

"Let us distrust," says Chaseray, "our imperfect senses, 
since there are so many substances which wo can neither feel 
nor see. Let us not be precipitate In denying the duality ot 
the liuman being because tlie scalpel of the anatomist cannot 
reveal to our sight a principle eminently subtle. Man is not 
driven to annihilation even under the hypotliesis of material- 
ity." Chaseray tiiinks that tlie spirit Iwdy may some day tw 
proved by science. 

Even Cabanis (1757-1807), the great physiologist of France, 
who sees notliing but organism, who regards the brain as " an 
organ specially designed for the production of thought as tho 
stomacli and intestines are for digestion, and the liver for the 
filtration of the bile," and from whom CarlVogt has borrowed 
some ot his own rash expressions in opposition to the immor- 
tality of the soul— even Cabanis eonciudesby admitting that 
"a principle or vivifying faculty" is needed to account for 
the phenomena, He elsewhere tells us tliat for those who 
would establish the persistence of this principle or "cause," 
after the destmction of the living body, it may suffice to know 
that "the contrary opinion cannot be demonstrated by any 
positive at^uments." 

Spiritualism proves that the "contrary opinion " is wholly 
untenable ; that there is a someicltal, not explicable by the 
hnown qualities of matter, which is tlie amtacedsnt of the 
organisation; that there can be no such thing as a gradual 
transition from linnwn matter to thought, seeing that life 'u 
in every case jjrior to organization. 

The notion of certain Spiriliiallsts that the spirit b jdy is 
evolved out of the physical is therefore a reversal of the order 
of things. " To make A the ofiPpilDg of B, when tlie very 

^d by Google 

THE SOUL. 139 

existence of B as B preeupposes tlie existence of A, is prepos- 
terous in the literal soose of tlio word, and a consummate In- 
stance of t!iH hysteron proteron In logic."* 

It is due to tlie memory ol Cabanis to add, that in apostliu- 
mou3 letter, publisted by Dr. BSrard, be abandons bis niate- 
tiatistlc opinions and recognizes formally tbe necessity of a 
spiritual or immaterialt principle. 

Dr. lieorge*, another celebrated French materialist, author 
of the " Physiology of the Nervous System" (1821), was led 
by the phenomena of clairvoyance and somnambulism, to re- 
verse bis whole philosophy and to proclaim, in his will, that 
he had arrived at a "profound conviction, founded upon in- 
contestable facts," that there exists "an intelligent principle, 
altogether diSerent from material existences ; in a word, the 
BOul and God." 

The examples of Professor Hare, Dr. Elliotson, and many 
Others, converted by tbe phenomena of Spiritualism from a 
life-long adherence to materialism, are further illustrations 
of the power of facts. 

To name tbe great men, ancient and modern, who have en- 
tertained a belief in a corporeal principle surviving the physi- 
cal body, would be an interestlnfj but an endless task. Plato, 
in strict conformity with Modern Spiritualism, declares tiiat 
"the apparitions of the dead are not mere groundless Imagina- 
tions, bnt proceed from souls themselves, surviving in luci- 
form bodies." 

Wo have already seen that the Cliristian Fathers were di- 
vided In opinion in respect to the soul ; some, who were Pla- 
tonists, maintaining that it Is an immaterial principle, devoid 
of all concretion, but invariably associated with a thin, flexi- 
ble, and sensitive body, visible to the eye ; while others, 
among whom TertuUian may be regarded as the chief, main- 

• Coteridge'B Blogniptilit LllenuiB. 

t Onsiit HffDiT Mnre 

lertal rtsnlfiei iinf bliif 

tlcle, lu ooiiiDUHllInn wltUftworrk tiiHtdeuntiii fmni^i'fiwiioit. ....,...^.. ,...„. 
ttvenKB una porTpfltliiii. Aft In tnjtvi'e, tmmortaL null thn like: tlies 
reinoiB the ImnerlMlUms In fintleneng nnd mnrla'itv. fliiil Imply Home 
thUiitDOsillveor a better nature. Anrt so rtnes immnlirlnt rfmnvBlh 
Inipprtecaoas at dlacei-piumiy sad Impeaetrablllty, auU implies tJic cua 

Its (USB) tells him tbattbevord 

^d by Google 

140 TUE SPIKIT-BODT. 

tainefl that the soul 13 simply a second body. This they did 
to serve tlieir theological notions in regard to the future pun- 
ishment of the unregenerat*. The abler writers, including 
Clement and Origen, taught tlie Platonic doctrine. Both par- 
ties, liowever, concurred in the fact of the spirit body, 

"Even here in this lite," says Cudworth, "ourljody is, as 
it were, twofold, interior and exterior ; we having, besides 
the grofsly tangible bulli of oiir outward body, another inte- 
tibr spiritual body, which latter is not put into the grave with 
the other." 

" The primitive belief," says Ilerbert Spencer, " is that 
every dead man becomes a demon (spirit), who remains some- 
where at hand, may at any moment return, may give aid or 
do mischief, and is continnaily propitiated Hence among 
other agents whose approbation or reprobation is eontem 
plated hy the savage as a consequence of hla own conduct, 
sre the spirits of his ancestors." 

Tills was meant as a reproach to Modern Spiritualism 1 I 
accept it as a confirmation that its fundamental fact is well 
known to men in a savage as well as to those id a civilized 
state. 

In his " Pliysical Theory of Anotlier Lite," Isaac Taylor 
says; "Wliat the Christian Scriptures specifically affirm is 
the simple pliysiological factof two species of corporeity for 
man : the first that of our present animal and dissoluble or- 
ganization ; the second, a future spiritual structure, imper- 
ishable, and adorned with higiier powers and many desirable 
prerogatives." 

Thus the pneumatology of the New Testament aa well as of 
the Old teaches the tact o£ a future spirit-body, and I may 
add that in many passages it assumes tliat the spiril^body is a 
present fact; as wlien the damsel Rhoda (Acts, xii.) told liow 
Peter stood before tlio gate, and her liearers would not be- 
lieve it, but replied, "It is his angel"; and as when Paul 
eays, " There ia a natural body and there is a spiritual body " 
—is now, not shall ic. 

The heathenish doctrine of tlie resurrection ot the natural 

^d by Google 

THE SPIRIT BODY. 141 

body, solongan excresceuoe on rational Christianity, is now 
rarely preaclied except in a guaiiSed sense tliaC makes it less 
repulsive to scientific tliouglit. 

"The soul," says Lavater, "on leaving its eartlily frame is 
immediately clothed in a spiritual frame witlidravrn from the 
material. The soul itself, daring its earth-life, perfects the 
facultie of th p' 't 1 b Ij by m n f mh' h 't w*li p 
prehend f 1 ud acl t xi t 

It is n t imp b bl tl t m tt as ts 1 m t «• m 
more subtil i ulC 1 f I g1 ga i f m Tl 

body wl li i unf 1 1 I by n lur I p f m gg 

coDUin in itself n 1 f tb h II k 1 m 

cal substances wliich no test can discover in the egg or in the 
air. May there not be in man's constitution au anterior germ 
of spiritual vitality, from wliieb, cotemporancous with the 
growth of the physical, a spirit- body is developed 7 

"By the facts of somnambulism," says A J, Davis, "the 
double nature of man is proved to a demonstration. From 
the universal exhibitions of a system of duality or twofold 
organization, it is but common sense to infer that the outer 
organs of vision, lilte all the other senses, are but tlie external 
form of interior correspondimtiai principles, as words arc the 
forms of thought." 

The true and genuine body must be that which retains and 
preserves its organlcal identity amid the changes and the flux 
of matter, wliich the physical frame Is constantly undergoing. 
The power which connects the gase' earths metil'', and 
salt into one whole which penetrating them keeps them to- 
gether, or dismisses some and attracts others must be that 
divine an 1 forming principle the soul binding the seeming 
duality of plijsical body and spiritual body in tin stricti-st 
unity, so far as the exterior whicli clmige'' decays and pass- 
es, can be bound to the interior which abides as the cimtinent 
of man's individuality for the next stage of being. 

But why not a duality of Ijeast and plant, as well as of 
man? What of the lower animals? Do (ftey have (his inner, 
invisible body, tlie abiding principle of their eiiternai frames? 

^d by Google 

112 THE SPIRIT-BODT. 

res, the psychical principle is that whicli controls all organic 
forms. But as to what becomes ot the psychical Individuali- 
zation when organisms lower than the liumau are dissolved, 
we have only speculation and analogy for our guide. Seera 
and spirits are at variance on this inscrutable question. Ac- 
cording to some the psychical element Is permanently Indi- 
vidualized only in man. As unripe seeds do not germinate, 
80 the Inferior forms of intelligence render up the psychical 
element at death to return to that source from which it was 
separated in organization. 

But the higher Spiritualism teaches, that the psychical ele- 
ment of all animals, it not of all plants, Is imperishable in its 
Individualization. It is not necessary to suppose that the 
lower animals will have, in their remote future states, the 
same forms they had here. They may rise to higher forms of 
bcinj!, and, in some mysterious way, there may be a progress 
for them having some analogy with our own. 

There is surely room enough for all, since the capacities of 
God's universe are limited only by his own infinity. Even 
for the innumerable f(erms that teem to perish, and of whoso 
apparent waste atheistic Skepticism* has so much to say, 
there may be a provision by which all that isessential In theia 
is not wasted, but returned with improved power to Nature's 
measureless receptacles. 

Sir J. E. Smith (1759-1838), the distinguished botanist, was 
of opinion that in the vital principle we have a glimpse of 
the immediate agency of the Deity. He says : " I can no 
more explain the physiology of vegetables, than of animals, 
without the hypothesis ot a living principle in both." What 
can this principle be but tliat one deiflc force, to which uni- 
versal science Is conducting us? 

Charles Bonnet (1720-1793), the gi-eat Swiss natnralist, 
says ; " The common opinion which would consign to an eter- 
nal death all organized beings, man alone excepted, would 

V'i^^'kii"rih.mJ'^rR'^aVlV'3l'fl"E"i™?lih^"tfal^ru^ 

^d by Google 

THE SPIHIT-BODT. 143 

Impoverish the nniverse. It would precipitate forever into 
tho abyss Of nothingness an innumerable multitude of sen- 
tient creatures, capable of a considerable increase of happi- 
ness, and which In repeopling and cmhellishing new eartlia, 
would exalt the adorable benefteence of tlie Creator." 

This, I am disposed to think, is tlio general sentiment of 
Spli'ltaalUts, as it was of Leibnitz, Bishop Butler and Agas- 
Biz, on the subject of a future for the lower animals. 

Bonnet believed further, tliat man's future body exists al- 
ready with the body visible ; and he Irelieved that science would 
some day have instruments which would enable It to detect 
this body, formed as It probably Is of the elements of ether or 
of light. Is not his prediction partially verified In the power 
of the photographer's apparatus to catch the impression of 
spiritual forms which our normal vision cannot detect ? 

This spirlUjody, according to Bonnet, will not require 
those dally reparations which the animal body exacts, but 
will subsist undoubtedly by the simple energy of its princi- 
ples and its mechanism. It will be superior to those laws of 
gravitation which Hm It grosser bodies. It wilt obey with ease 
and astonishing promptitude the slightest behests of the soni, 
and will transport us from world to world with a facility and 
a speed equal to that of light By its superior powers we 
shall exercise with t fatig all u fa ulties, because the 
new organs thr gl wh h th 1 will unfold i(s motive 

force will be bett p p rt □ d to th rgy of that force, 
and will not he bj t to th fl f those disturbing 

causes which c nt n lly co p to 1 k and impede our 
activity in our p ntphy 1 holi Our attention will 
seize at once and with equal clearness a very great number of 
objects, more or less complicate ; it will penetrate them inti- 
mately, separate partial impressions from a general knowl- 
edge, and discover without effort resemblances the most deli- 
cate. Our genius will then be proportioned to our attention, 
tor attention is the mother of genius. 

Hut the development of these enlarged powers will proba- 
bly be vpjy gradual ; it will be in proportion to our own ef- 

Id b, Google 

144 THE SPIRIT-BODT. 

forta, onr own aspirations and attainments. IC wo liave leiJ a 
BlugRlsli, sensual life on eartli, wc must not liopo llmt tlie 
Bpirit-boiiy will at once make up for our dclimnLencies or 
convert a sinner into a saint, a blocliliead into a Kepler or a 
Newton. 

Tlie student o[ spiritual phenomena is continually aston- 
ished by the vast amount of testimony, past and contempora- 
neous, in confirQiation of them. The testimony of Hie past 
has a new interest and signiflcance now tliat it is confirmed 
by marvels of daily oceurrence. 

In his remarkable account of "Spirit-rapping, healing, mu- 
sic, drawing, and other manifestations in Sunderlanr], Eng- 
land, in 1840, tlirough Mary Johson,"* my friend W. M. Wil- 
kinson oteerves : " Enougli tliero is to prove that alt natural 
objects exist only by reason of a spiritual creative force, 
which projects and sustains them in the realm of matter, 
wuich we call the world, and that to have a manifestation of 
this spiritual force, it isonly necessary that some conjoint 
conditions of mind and body should be so arian^d as to bo 
favorable to that end. The person in whom this occurs is 
called a medium." 

ITolanctlioHt says: "Ihavemyself seen spirits, and Iknow 
many trustworthy persons who affirm that they Iiave not only 
seen them, but carried on conversations with them." Luther 
bears testimony equally strong to the existence of the depart- 
ed in spiritual forms; so do Calvin, Knox, Wesley, Obcriin. 
St. Augustine mentions saints by wliom he was visited, and 
states that he himself iiad appeared to two persons who had 
known him only by reputation. At another time he appeared 
to a famous teacher of eloquence in Carthage, and explained 
to liim several most difficult passages iu Cicero's writings. 

• aea llio London Pplritiifli Magazine, Saptnmbor, IKl. 

' BveilaaCInz lEem, Chaji 7} 

eayu: "Yea, onodly, eolwr Hit 
ai.iibreu'te?tl^y°ut thS'tniil 

^d by Google 

THE SPIRIT-BODY. 14B 

Thus Augustine's testimony Is in support of thetlieorythat 
the spirit-body can be separated from the pbyslcal, even dur- 
ing the earthly lifetime of the inaividual. 

Accounts, like (lie following, of the action of spirits in in- 
terposing to influence mortals at critical times, are very nu- 
merous. A famous German jurist. Counsellor llellfeld in 
Jena, an lionr before midnight was on the point of signing 
the death-warrant of a cavalry ofBcer. DEis clerk was present. 
All at once they both lieatd heavy blows fall on the window 
Its it the panes were struck with a cavalry whip. The judge 
delayed his actiouiu eonsequeuec, and substituted a minor 
punishment ; and before the year closed a criminal was 
caught who volunteered the confession that he was the per- 
petrator of the crime for which the innocent cavalry ofBcer 
had been punished, and had been near to being executed. 

It is not true that the Intellisence exhibited by the supposed 
spirit is always measured by that ol the medium. Tho In- 
stances to the contrary are innumerable. Witness tho case of 
Mrs. Fos-Jeneken's infant boy, less than six months old. 
Among the Camisard prophets (1G8B-1T07) were many in- 
fant trance-mediums, who spoke in languajte altogether ahovo 
their capacities. We hear of a boy fifteen months old who 
spoke in good French, " as though (Jod were speaking through 
hismoutJi." Jacques Dubois says he has seen more tlian 
sixty children between three and twelve years of age, who 
exhibited similar powers. " I knew at Tyia," says Pierre 
Charman, "a, man whoso little boy, only five years old, 
prophesied, predicted disturbance In the church, exhorted to 
repentance, and always spoke in good French." The annals 
of wilehcraft are crowded witli similar phenomena, perfectly 
welE authenticated. 

Mr. E. B. Tylor, in his "Primitive Culture," shows how 
ancient are tho phenomena of the instantaneous untying of 
complicate knotsby spirit skill. This preternatural unbind- 
ing is vouched for by no less a personagts than tho crafty 
Ulysses himself on board the ship of the Thesprotians : 

^d by Google 

TBE SPIRIT-BODT. 

In Ills "Theory of a Nervous Ether" (1873), Dr. B. W. 
Eichardson suggests that there exists, in addition toa nervous 
fluid, a gaa or vapor, pervtuIiDg the whole nervous orKanism, 
Burronnding as an enveloping atmosphere each molecule of 
nervoua structure, and forming tlie medium of the influences 
transmitted from a nerve-centre to the periphery, and from 
the periphery to a nerve-centre. 

Here we are brought by the latest Inductive science close 
upon the confines of the spirit body. Every investigator 
whose prejudices do not incapacitate him from looking; into 
the facts, beslns to see that sorao higher aeries of causes, 
hitherto denied by modern science, must be conceded in order 
to account for those phenomena of Spirituajism, inexplicable 
on any known principles. 

" I have come to the conclusion," says J. n. Von Fichte 
(Stuttgardt, 1S71), "that it is ahsolutcly impossible to account 
for these (the spiritual) phenomena, eave hy assuming the ac- 
tion of a superhuman iiijluenee." 

"The spirit body," says a spirit communicating through 
H. A. (Oxon.), "is tlio real individual; and though for a 
time It is clothed with fluctuating; atoms, its identity is abso- 
lutely the same wlien those atoms are dispensed with It Is 
preserved after the death of the earth-body in precisely simi- 
lar sort as t exists now, veiled in grosser matter." But these 
ehang ni, atoms, which the spirit-body attracts to itself, are 
accord ng to this authority, jio real part of the personality. 

Sp r tual sm makes us realize that we areunder the scrutiny 
of any pirit who, from curiosity or affection, may desire to 
hno T our leeds and our thoughts. In this tremendous fact, 
is there no incentive to right thinking and right doing ? 

"There is a wonderful world of spirit," says Lclfciiiid, 
" and there are hierarchies of ministering spirits. Surely 
they form a great cloud of witnesses, who, though they sit 

^d by Google 

KARUEC ON THE SPIKIT-EODT. 147 

aloof, intently watch our earthly course, and encourage ns by 
llieir unseen Imt not always unfelt presence. With the speed 
of thoufiht they interfuse tlieir holiness into our Uiouglits. 
They shine into our earthly homes lilte morning beams, and 
tbcy beautify our departure in death withtlie heavenly splen- 
dor of an evening Alp-glow. 

" Blessed and blessing hierarchies I Not one of your in- 
numerable cohorts can be subject to annihilation. You mul- 
tiply by human death, you Increase by spiritual selection, 
you obtain litferty through the grave, you gain light by look- 
ing on the countenance of the Divine. Notonesingle actot 
your beneficent ministry to man is altogether lost ; every one 
is a celestial force. You have been often misapprehended 
and not seldom vulgarized. Distorted Science has denied 
you, scornful Naturalism has derided you, foolish Supersti- 
tion has degraded yon. Nevertheless you live, and you live 
for us. Were our eyes duly purged, wo should behold you 
daily i were our ears rightly attuned we should listen to you 
hourly," 

In Kardec's system the spiritbody is a fluidic vaporous en- 
velope which ho calls the perupnt. This, he says, he has 
neither invented nor supposed in order to explain phenomena; 
Its existence has been revealed to him by spirits, and obser- 
vation has confirmed it. It is supported, moreover , by a study 
of the sensations among spirits, andaboveall by the phenome- 
non of tangible apparitions, which would imply, according to 
the contrary opinion (that, namely, of the identification of 
tho spirit-body with the spini or soul), the solidification and 
disintegration of tho constituent parts of the soul, and conse- 
quently Its disorganization. It would be necessary, besides, 
to admit that this matter which can fall under the scrutiny 
ofthe senses is itself tho intelligent principle; which is no 
more rational than to confound tho body with the soul, or tiie 
clothing with the body. As to the intimate nature of the 
soul, it is unknown to us. 

"When we call it immatenal," sayBKnTii&c, "we must un- 
derstand the word in llio relative and not in tho absolute 

^d by Google 

148 BACON ON THE SPIKIT-BODT. 

sense, for absolute immateriality would be nothinfrness ; now 
the spirit is surely something, one ralRht say that its essence 
issosupcrior that it has no analogy wi th what we call matter, 
and that for us it is intmaterial." 

Bacon's theory of the aoul Is like that of nearly all the 
great seera and mediums. [See page 86.] He, too, regards 
man as a trinity of earth-body, spirit-body, and spirit. As Is 
<io^, so also, according to Bacon, is the spirit (splraculum), 
which God has breathed into man, eaiEntijieaUy incognizable ; 
only the physical soul, which is a thin, warm, material sub- 
stance, is an object of scientiGc knowledge. 

"Two different emanations of souls," says Bacon, "are 
manifest in the first creation, the one proceeding from the 
breath of God, the otlier from the elements." No knowledge 
of the rational soul (the spirit) can be bad from philosophy ; 
but In the doctrine of the sensitive, or prodnced soul (the 
spiritual body), it/en iU tubatance, soys Bacon, moy be justly 
inquired into. " The sensitive soul must be allowed a corpo- 
real substance, attenuated by heat and rendered invisible, as 
a subtle breath, or aura, of a Hamy and airy nature, and dif- 
fused through the whole body." 

Thorougiily acquainted with the spiritual phenomena of 
his day, and of antecedent times, Bacou teaches unequivocal- 
ly tlie doctrine of the spiritual body and of the three-fold na- 
ture of terrestrial man. Ho says; "But how the compres- 
Bions, dilatations and agitations of the spirit, which, doubt- 
less, is the spring of motion, should guide and rule the corpo- 
real and gross mass of the parts, has not yet been diligently 
searched into and treated." 

"And no wonder,"lie adds, "since the sensitive soul it- 
self," by which he means the spirit body, "has been hitherto 
taken for a principle of motion, and a function, rather than a 
substance. But as il is now known to be material, it becomes 
necessary to inquire by what eflorts so subtile and minute a 
brea;h can put such gross and solid bodies in motion," 

"This spirit o( which we speak," continues Bacon, "it 
plainly a body, rare end invisible, quantitative, real, not 
witlistanding it is circumscribed by space." 

^d by Google 

PLUTARCH ON MEDIUMSHIP. 14! 

Bacon admits the facts of clairvoyance, or divination, and 
distinguisiies between tliat proceeding from tlio internal pow- 
er of tlie soul, as " In sleep, ecstasies, and tlie near approach 
of death,"andtliat which conies from influx through "a sec- 
ondary illumination, from the foreknowledge of God and 
spirits." 

Never was I more impressed by Bacon's greatness as a sa- 
fjacious interpreter of natural facta, than when I found him 
thus anticipating the highest conclusions of ilodem Spirit, 
ualism, both on the subject of tlio spiritual body ainl on the 
distinction between the knowledge that Is explicable by a 
theory of psychic force, and that knowledge wbich must 
come from "the illumination of God and spirits." 

The questions raised by Dr. Rogers, Count Gasparin, Ser- 
jeant Coi and others, as to wlietlier odic force or psychic 
force may not explain all the phenomena of Spiritualism, are 
Iiere, with the discrimination of one who Lad studied all the 
facts of divination, and who speaks with unquestionable nu- 
tliorlty, decided in conformity with the views of Spiritual- 
ists. 

It is true that Bacon adopts orreiinnounoes opinions on tliis 
subject that may be found in Plutarch ; but this does not de- 
tract from his merit as an original observer. lie had verified 
the facts whlcli Plutarch know. In regard to mediumship, 
Plotarch explains liov/ the violent ecstasy of inspiration re- 
sults from the contest of two opposito emotions, the higher 
divine or spiritual emotion communicated to the medlnm, and 
the natural one proper to the medium himself ; jtisi as an lin- 
easy struggle betwsen the natural and (ft* communicated motion 
is prodveed in bodies to lehich, while by their nature they groTti- 
tale to the earth, a ijyratory morretiierit has been communicated, 

"Everything pertaining to the Deity," says Plutarch, "in 
and by itself, is beyond our power of perception, and when it 
reveals itself to us tlirongli some otiier agent (or medium), it 
misea itself vp with t!ie proper nature of tliat medium." 

Ilere we have it explained why Swedenborg, Harris, Davis, 
and all other mediums, as well as inferior spirits, mix up 

^d by Google 

150 THE CKEATION OUT OF NOTHING. 

errors with their communications of trutli. Were it other- 
wise (could we accept any teaclier as really iofallible), 
would not our mental freedom be impaired, and much intel- 
lectual effort paralyzed? 

Kardec'a spirits merely repeat the teachings of Ba'jon as to 
tlie nature of tlie pirisjtrit, or spiritual body. It constitutes 
for the spirit a. fluldic, vaporous envelope, which, though in- 
visible to us in iti normal state, and in mtr normal state, docs 
not the less possess seme of the properties of matter. A spirit, 
then, is not a point, an abstraction, but a being, limited and 
circumscribed, to whom aro wanting onlj the properties of 
visibility and palpability to resemble human beings. Why, 
then, can It not act on natter? Does not imponderable light 
exercise a chemical action on ponderable matter 7 

Newton tells us that the effluvium of a magnet ean be so 
rare and subtle as to pass, without any resistance or any 
dimhiiitlon of its force, through a plate of glass, and yet be so 
potent as to turn a magnetic needle beyond the glass. Why, 
then, may not the vrill-power of a spirit sufSee to produce (as 
we l;now that it does) the most amazing effects upon matter? 
We can now realize the profound meaning in that remark 
of Joubert : "To create the unimrm an atom of matter suffced:' 
Xfolhing is ma^e out of milling; but the sovereign power 
of God is not nothing : it is tie source of matter as well as of 
spirit. 

Even 80 orthodox an authority as the Catholic World (New 
Tork, 1ST4,) says : " Nothingness is to he considered, under 
God's hand, as a negatiee.pots7icy of aamelJiinj real." 

And if an equally high Protestant authority were needed, 
I might quote Christlleb (1S74), who says: "Althongli God 
Is spirit, ho has, nevertheless, a nature which we may term 
substantial. It U designated as light andjire." 

Tlie creation out of nothing is virtually abandoned by ad- 
missions like these ; and they render some form of Panthe- 
ism inevitable. It must he a form involved in that of The- 
ism, as the less is in the Rreater. Bruno, the martyr philoso- 
pher, who was burnt at the stake ill 1600, tells us truly: "If 

^d by Google 

THE SPIRIT-EQI'T. 101 

yon think arifiht you will End a divine essence in all things." 
Kut he adds tliat, tHougli it is impossihle to conceive Nature 
separated from God, wo can conceive God separated from Na- 
ture. God, ho tella vis, is mipereaaeihtialU, eupersubstardialis. 
Thougli ilc caused the universe, He is not limited by it. In 
this conception lies the truth which must reconcile the pan- 
tlieistic demand of science and tlie tteistio demand of theol- 
ogy and faith. 

According to SwedenborR, that which underlies matter and 
is Its substance, flows ioifb from the Divine substance. But 
mind causes, or rather cooperates to cause, the form, inci- 
dents, and appearance, under which we give to this substance 
tho name of Matter. Tliis is not a false appearance ; it is a 
reality, but of it we can know nothing, save from tho action 
of mind on the impressions made by this substance on the 
mind through and by means of the senses. Tho importance 
of this truth hes in the rational belief it permits us of a body, 
a home, and a world, when we leave this world. If material 
snhstance is but the efluence from and of the Divine sub- 
stance, caused to affect us in a certain way in this world, the 
same effluence may provide for U3 a spiritual body and a 
spiritual world.* 

The matter of the spirit-body is flesible and expansible ; it 
changes at the will of the spirit, who ean give himself such or 
such an appeai-ance at his pleasure. It is because of this 
property of his lluldic envelope that tho spirit who wishes to 
be recognized by friends on the eartli can present the exact 
appearance he had when living ; re-producing even tho bodily 
sears or malformations by wbicli he was marked. 
Spirits, says Milton, 

• ' — In what ahnpo tfcey plenss, 

And works otlcva or cnmlly tHlflll." 
"It is an extravagant conjecture of mine," says Locke, 
that splriw can assume to themselves bodies of different bulk, 
figure, and conformation of parts." 
-aee- ' TUB Inflnlte and tUe rinlle, • ' by Tbeophiliis Psrsons; p. W. 

^d by Google 

182 THE SPIRIT-BODY. 

Spirit hands may be the visible and tangiblo parts of an ift- 
visible intangible being ; but sometimes tliey are tangible 
without being visible, and sometimes visiMo ivithout being 
tangible. The Instantaneous disappearance of material lied 
bodies or parts of the bodies, proves that the matter of which 
Uiey are composed is eminently subtle, bearing some resem- 
blance, perhaps, to tlioso substances that can pass alternately 
from the solid to the fiuid, or gaseous state, and mce versa. 
Ilere a new order of facts is introduced, and science may 
some day discover anew law lor their explanation. 

"Is it not in the most rarefied gas, In the most imponder- 
able fluids," aslcs Kardec, "that industry finds its most 
powerful motors ?" What is there, then, strange In admitting 
that a spirit, by the aid of his spirit-body, can raise a table ? 

"Being able to ta,ke all appearances," says Kardec, "the 
spirit presents himself under that by which ho would be most 
readily recognized, if such is his desire, ^sop, for example, 
as a spirit is not deformed ; but if he is evoked as .^sop, ho 
will appear ugly and liumpbacked, with the traditional cos- 
tume. . . , Ifthesimpiyvisualappaiitionmight be attributed 
to illusion, the doubt is not permitted when you can grasp it, 
handle it, when tt seizes you and holds you fast. However 
extraordinary these phenomena may be, all the marvelous 
disappears when we learn that far from being contrary to 
Nature's laws, they are only a new application of them." 

By its nature and In its normal state, the spirit-body is in- 
visible, and it has that property in common with many fluids 
which we know exist, and yet which we have never seen ;but 
it can also, the same as other fluids, undergo modi Heat lous 
that render it perceptible to the sight, wliethcr by a sort of 
condensationorhy achange in the nioieculir disposition ; it 
then appears to us under a vaporous form. 

By further condensation the spiril>body mayactiuiro tho 
properties of solidity and tangibility; but it can instantane- 
ously resume its ethereal and invisible state. 

We can understand this state by comparing it with that of 
invisible vapor, which can pass to a state of visitile fog, then 

Id b, Google 

SPIKIT ACTION ON MATTER. 153 

beeome liqnid, then solid, and vice versa. These different 
states of the spiriUjody are the result of the will of tte spirit, 
DDd not on exterior physical cause, as in our gases. 

According to Kardec, when the spirit appoars to us he puts 
Hie spirit-body Into the state necessary to render him visihlo. 
In order to do this, his will is ordinarily insnfHcient ; for the 
modlGcatlon of the spirlt-botly is effected hy its combination 
with the fluid of the medium ; hut this combination is not al- 
ways possible, which explaijigjehy the tiaibility of ipiritsia not 
getieral. It is not enonj;h tliat the spirit desires to be seen ; 
tt is not enough that a person desires to see him ; it is neces- 
sary that the two fluids should combine, and that the medium's 
supply should be guSlcient; perhaps, also, that there should 
he other conditions to us unltnown at present.* 

Another property o( the spirit-body and which pertains to 
its etliereal nature, is penetrability. Matter is no obstacle to 
its passage through everything, even as the light passes 
through transparent bodies. This is why no closing can shut 
out spirits i they visit the prisoner in liis cell as easily as they 
do the man in the open Gelds. 

la regard to the materialization of articles of clothing, or- 
naments, flowers, Ac, Kardec questioned the spirits closely, 
and hero is tlieresult : The spirit acts on matter; ho draws 
from the universal cosmic matter tho elements necessary to 
form, at his will, objects having the appearance of various 
bodies which exist on the earth. IIo can also by his will 
effect an intimate transformation of elementary matter, and 
impart to It certain properties. This faculty is inherent in 
the nature of tho spirit, who often, when necessary, exercises 
it without thinking, as an instinctive act. Tho objects formed 
by the spirit have a temporary existence ; he can make and 
unmake tliem at veill. These objects may become visible and 
tangible to earthly persons ; and Muld be made to have a 
oliaracter of permanence and stability ; but this, according 
to Kardec's informant, Is contrary to order, and is not done. 

^d by Google 

164 THE UNITY OF FORCES. 

It was done, however, in the experiments at which Protess- 
QT Crookea, Mr. llatTison, and many others were present ; 
and some oC tlie ciotli whLoh Katie cut from her tunic still re- 
mains materiaiized. It was said by the spirit, however, that 
a special effort was needed toglve the cloth this character o( 
stability. 

From the facts here brought together, it may b 1 f rred 
that the spirit-body is not a mere hypothesis ; It p y 

the phenomena and the inductions of Spiritual h 

objective appearance of spirits themselves in bo h 

testimony ol clairvoyants who can see spirits in m n 

form ; by the phenomena of somnambulisin and c 
indicating supersensual powers, requiring organ h n 

those of the physical body ; by all the analogies w n 

and experience supply ; and by tlio belief of men ges 

and climes, a belief founded en the actual r p rt ce 
after death of deceased relatives and friends. 

Add to theie considerations the facts of dout 
ness, pointing to a doub'e organism; also th m f 

memory, in which faculty liopresaions inhere and persist 
which are inexplicable ijnder the theory of materialism, In- 
volving a constant flux and removal of the molecules of the 
organs of thought Only the exiitence of a spiritual body 
can account for these things. 

cnAPTER XII. 

The existence of a single elempntary substance or force, 
from which, by differentiation, transformation and the ad- 
justment of proportions, all thp varieties and properties of 
matter are produced is an hypothesis to which the whole 
drift of contemporary science is bringing us nearer with 
every fresh accession of knonledge 

Weknowtliat a very slight chan,^e in the arrangement of 

^d by Google 

ORIGIN OF FORCE. IBS 

elemental particles converts wholesome food into poison. Two 
Iiariiiless substances, combined In certain proportions, can 
produce a deleterious one Without cliangiuj tlie propor- 
tions, a siislit cliange in the molecular arrangement changes 
properties ; makes tUoopaqae transparent ; the palatable, un- 
savory. 

" Si nee the spirit," saysKardec, "has by his simple will so 
powerful an action on elementary matter, it may be conceived 
tliat he cannot only form substances, but can denaturalize 
tlieir properties, will having herein the effect of a re-agent," 

If, as LiebiR, Dumas, and other ciiemists have asserted, all 
plants and animals are solidiDed air, why may not all matter 
be the product of solidiBed forces, having their origin in the 
essence and ultimate reason of things— in that force and ne- 
cessity which derive all their virtue from the Divine Idea? 
Tills !s no fanciful inquiry ; its practical interest and impor- 
taneo are brought nearer to U3 every day by the advance of 
science. 

The phenomena here recorded sliow that matter is not ai- 
together the stuff wliicli our senses would mafeo it appear, 
" The force which every being is possessed of," says Vera, 
"as wellas tiie/ojvn or law according to which it acts and 
displays its powers, lies in its very nature, ». e,, in its idea. 
The difference of forces is owing to the dtiTerenco of ideas. 
Matter is a force, and the soul is a force, and, as forces, 
they are the product of one anj the same idea, and both pro- 
duce similar effects ; for instanso, the soul moves the body, 
and a body moves another body. Their difference is to be 
found in tlieir specifti elements, or in what constitutes their 
special idea ; for instance, space, and time, extent, attraction 
ftnd repulsion, &c., for matter; imagination, will, thought, 
&c., for the soul."* 

As idea is force, and the source of all forces, so if there be 
no diminution in the quantity of force, it is because its princi- 
ple, its idea, suffers no deterioration. 

^d by Google 

156 SPIEIT PRIOR TO MATTER. 

If a materialised spirit— by which I moan a spirit animat. 
ing a visible, tangible body— can make the matter thii3 cm- 
bodied dissolve and then at ouce reapp.;ar by an effort of tho 
will, it is not diffloiUt to conceiTC that the universe itself may 
be a concretion ol forces, the tmnk-force of which Is in the 
Divine Idea. 

While Spiritualism is in harmony with many of the facts on 
which the Darwinian theory is based, it supplies a new order 
of facts from whicli we infer that the idea must ever precede 
tlie organism ; and that tho attempt to prove that this idea is 
developed UirouRh immense periods of time by purely physi- 
cal means and processes is a fallacy. " Living beings," says 
Stirling, "fio exist in a mighty chain from the moss to the 
man ; but that chain, far from founding, is founded in the 
Idea, and is not tho result of any mere natural growth into 
tbis or that That chain isitself the most brilliant stamp and 
sign- manual of design." 

"Even granting." says Vera, "that the germ be endowed 
with an inexhaustible power of begetting similar individuals, 
or that it should contain, like some inflnitesiraal quaiitity, an 
infinite number of gercns. such hypotheses will explain neither 
the Initial germ, nor the unity of the species, nor even the 
grown.up and complete individual. . . . Tho idea must 
oonstitnto the common stoolt, and the ultimate prineiple to 
v>hioh the individual, tlie species, aud the genus, owe their 
origin and existence." 

" Thought is a motion of matter," says Moleschott. But 
this Is no more of an explanation thaii it would bo to try to 
account for tho sentiment and the charm in a melody of Mo- 
lart'a by saying, "It Is a motion of matter." All that science 
can fairly liypotheeate is, that Thmtglil is accompanied bg a 
motion of matter; for, were the head and brain so transparent 
tliat this motion could be seen, the mystery of thought would 
be as far as ever from being solved. 
"So thought mthout phoaplwrus," says Moleschott.* lie 

^d by Google 

TTNDALL ON ATOMS. 167 

niiKht as reasonably have saia, So tlimgM mthout rhubarb. 
Spiritualism proves tiiat there can be thougUt without any 
brain which a mortal chemist can analyze. Liebig's sarcasm 
Is perfectly just when ho says, that the bones should produce 
more thought than the brain, if Moleschott's asseveration Is 
true. " The lienor of the discovery that phosphorus exists in 
tlio brain," says Liebiff, "bclongsnot tome, but toDr. Mole- 
schott ; and In my Chemical Letters I have declared it to he a 
mistaken Idea, not based on a single fact." 

To Liebig's rematlc, "We know nothing of the origin of an 
Idea," Buchner's reply Is, that "None but a mind prejudiced 
In tavor of a superstition" could make such an assertion; and 
yet all the light which Biichnrr liimself can throw on the ori- 
gin of an idea is to repeat Molescliott's assertion, that tTwught 
is a motion of matter ; an assertion which, whether true or 
false, could never be proved, even If we were to exclude those 
spiritual facts which disprove it utterly. 

"Wo do not know," says Materialism, "all the powers of 
matter, its magical and spiritual nature, and its life eternal." 

Then it wo do not tnow thcra, how can any one say that 
they aie not what is meant by spirit ? The physiologist of 
mind, who would trace it to simpls irain motion, is compared 
by Ferrier to the viiiheeding woodman who severs the bough 
on which ho stands ; for " Mnj cannot be meaningless; its 
essence must be conscious intelligence." 

Mr. Tyndall would trace all the phenomena of mind and 
matter to the potencies of atoms. lie allows Theism, how- 
ever, to entertain its little hypothesis, and leaves it an open 
question whtther atoms may not have ha^l a Divine Creator. 

" Abandoning all disguise," he says, "the confession I feel 
bound to make before .vou is, that I prolong the vision back- 
ward across the bonndaiy or tiiu experimental evidence, and 
dlseem in that matter wliicli we. In our ignorance, and not- 

pUunifl In the btaiu 1 

^^S'."",'." 

^d by Google 

158 CAN MATTER ETOLTE MIND. 

withstanding onr professed reveteaee for its Creator, have 
bltlierto covered witli opprobriam, the promise and potency of 
e^iery form and quality of lifs."* 

I agree wltli Mr. Tyndall tbat there is nollilng very alarm- 
ing in the mild and contradictory materialism that would not 
esclude tho postulate of a Creator hehlnd and beyond mat- 
ter. Ills "confession" la not a startling one, either to tho 
Materialist or the Spiritualist j for it is an attempt to sit at 
the same lime on the stools of both ; nor !s it strikliij; for its 
novelty. 

Spiritnalism casts no "opprohrium" on matter, since it 
holds that individualized mind must, in the next stage of be- 
ing, continue tfl manifest itself through an organism, and 
this organism must be something. 

If Mr. Tyndall means merely to repeat Locke, and say that 
all that lie would suggest is, that matter may be divinely im- 
pressed, ivltii tiio power of generatiog mind then ho at once 
spiritualizes matter, and lowers the flag of materialism 

Cut this is not what he means. When lie tell< u-i that 
matter may contain "the promise and potencj of every 
form and quality of life, " what he moani obviouslj l3 
tlut, among other qualities of life which mete matter may 
evolve, is that of mind. Now tiis idea has b en often put 
forth, long before Mr. TyndaJI's day, ond as often an^wertd 
By no one has it been answered better than by Schelllng 
(1775-1B54), who said o( the attempts, in his (Jay to m iko 
matter account for all the phenomena of Ufo ' To explain 
thinki7t{/ as a material phenomenon, is possible onlj in tins 
way : that we reduce Matter itself to a spectre— to the mere 
modification of an Intelligence whoso common functions are 
thinking and matter." 

Coleridge, who was accustomed to borrow from Schclling, 
expresses tho samo idea thus, and liis words fully answer all 
that Mr. Tyndall has to say about matter : " As soon as ma- 

•Oti renonsWerallon ProrBEaor Tjnaal! mocllflpcl tain oppression. Tho 
opprubrlum, the :fftamiae »ail poieacs ot'a'u'Untttrial lifi." 

Id b, Google 

ATHEISM UNSCIENTIFIC. J59 

terialism becomes intelllRible, It ceases to be materiaUsm. lu 
order to explain thinldng as a material plienomenon, it is ne- 
cessary to rcflite matter into o. mere modification of Intelli- 
gence, with tlia two-fold function of appearing and percew- 
ing. Even so did Priestley, in his controversy witl) Price." 
(Even 30 would Tyndall do nowl) "He stripped matter of 
all Its material properties ; substituted spiritual powers ; and 
when TOO expected to find a body, behold t we bad nothing 
but its ghost— the apparition of a defunct snbstance !" 

"To say that matter is the principle of al! things," re- 
marks Paul Jauet, " is simply equivalent to saying, Wo do 
not know what is the principle of all tilings— a very luminous 
science indeed 1 Even in its claim that matter is eternal. Ma- 
terialism has to beg its premises, and to proceed wholly on a 
metaphysical, a priori assumption. If Materialism does not 
explain matter, much less does it explain mind and thought." 

The ignorance which philosophical science is always com- 
pelled to avow, in regard to first causes, makes dogmatic 
atheism impossible for tlio truly scientific mind. Tbe skepti- 
cal attitude Is legitimate ; the coarse confidence which de- 
nounces all belief in a Supremo Being, is the proctaimer of 
its own Insufficiency and charlatanry. Mr. Tyndall Is far 
from tills." If he chooses to call by the name of Matter 
the unknown iomething that produces Mind, he is nt perfect 
libiTty to do 80. Others may prefer ti> call it by the name of 
Spirit. In the " prolongation of his vision backward" he has 
got as far as atoms. Cut we have seen that tlio Materialism 
which stops at atoms is false and imperfect, since it would 
localize, in them, properties for wliich atoms supply no 
cnuse. If atoms are the ultimate reality, the ono real sub- 

tflno'o? niB(«-toi^?i".!i'ii!«^r'i.prin"™v iilTeBSi!ca iii^eht i.'*. Pi.ilaliW 
Hicj-Ti.nUl IwYBiyBiiciiia, Bnl, mltl', ILiue iioilceJ, Jm-lnB \eaj-» irf 
self^iiBisnaiiiiN. iliat IcTs nnl ni Iioura of ci''OTiieeH ai,<LvieoTiliat ilils 
i1i>ohnin«uiiiuenilg Itrett loin; mluO: l bat In Hie prpsenc.iiiC Klrunser 

«if.tp.i»lUoiil 

Ho,t,db, Google 

160 THE UNITY OF FOECES. 

stance, tlien tliere is no place for spirit, no Euture fur man ; an 
assumption wholly disproved by !Iie laets of this volume. 

In tlie fullness of time Modern Spiritualism has come forth 
to di^moastrote Ibat the atomic theory must be supplemented 
hy the spiritual fact. That same Spiritualism which Mr. 
Tyndall, in Ills nasclentiflo spleen, dismisses as " degrading," 
Ehows by its phenomenal evidences, as here recorded and au- 
thenticated, that tliere is a power using tliese atoms at its 
pleasure, ruling them, instead of being ruled Jy them. - 

jrr. Tyndall refers to certain "rash and ill-informed per- 
sons" as " being ready to hurl themselves against every new 
ficientifio revelation." Alas I Is he himself one of these 
Toah, Ul-informEd persons? So it would seem ; for, chafe as 
he may, and sneer as be may, the facts of Spiriluatiam are 
luno faetief Science; and be is so "ill-informed" as not to 
have found it out, and so "rash" as to put himself on the rec- 
ord against them. 

lie conducts ns as far back as atoms, and there sets up his 
board, labeled, No Thoroughfare. Hut Spiritual Science dis- 
regards his warning and passes on ; vJhilker, the next chap- 
ter may show. 

CDAPTER XIII. 

Modem Science, including, as it does. Modern Spiritualism, 
helps us to a conception of a force behind and beyond atoms.* 

The unity of all phenomena was the dream of ancient phi- 
losophy. To reduce all this multiplicity of things to a singiB 
principle has been, and continues to be, the ever- recurring 
i»rohlem. Water, air, Are, the primary elements, were sever- 

tliin orMatffr''«fFBrMudFun1LloiiiBnatlieliBpWao«'-' Mattel-, Ellipr, 
Q.i^irrKrly'juurual ut Spiritual Science. U; pvlnolpai ladebtediuias li t* 

Id b, Google 

CHEMISTRY TENDS TO UNITY. 161 

ally and eollectivKly Imagined, by the great thinkers of anti- 
quity, 2.S the original factor. 

To tlic question of a unity o£ aubstance, Greet scieneo re- 
peatedly applied itselE. 

The innumcrablo varieties in forms, qualities, and habits, in 
both the vegetable ani animal klngdo:::'- -'iggest the cxlst- 
enco of forces adequate to the priduction of all tho dillcr- 
cntialions in nature. Ilenco to mount to the sclentiflo con- 
ception of a single force as the originator and regulator of 
all these minor forces is the legitloiate effort of all profound 
tliought on the subject. 

It was this craving for unity, which led the white men of 
Asia, theanoient Aryan race, to the conception of God as the 
one substance. Immanent In tlie universe. At first they were 
pojytheista, but with the progress of tiiouglit their number of 
gods diminished, and tho authors of tho Veda at last arrived 
at tho conecpUon of a unity of forces, o£ a Divine Power as 
the u!tiraate sabstratum of things. They regarded the beings 
of the world as, In effect, composed of two elements ; the one 
real and of a nature permanent and absolute, and tho other 
relative, flowini;, variable, and phenomenal ; tho one spirit, 
the other matter, but both proceeding from an Inseparable 
unity, a single substance. 

The unity of physical forces is the point on which Science 
has Its eyes now fixed. Materialism is not more eager than 
Spiritualism for the proof. Already has it been dt-monstrated 
that heat, electricity, light, magnetism, chemical attraction, 
muscular energy, and mechanical work, are exhibitions of 
one and the same power acting through matter. That all 
these forces may be transformed into motion, and by motion 
reproduced. Is now something more than an hypothesis. 
Jhtice ths dsdaciioii that all phi/sieal pTumontena have one ami 
tho same primordial agent as their original generator. 

Chemistry, by its theory of equivalents, is tending tonnity. 
Few intelligent chemists now regard the elements ranked as 
simple as being simple any further tlian the present imper- 
fection of our instruments compels us to class Ihem as sucb 

^d by Google 

163 THE UNITY OF FOP.CES. 

Tliocmployinentoftlie balance has demonstrotfd lliat in the 
chemical transformations of bodies, nothing is created, notli- 
ing is lost. 

IlencQ llio sunn of the material elements is constant, and, 
as it is impossible to concoivo a limit to the universe, this 
sum is infinite ; ond tlius the aspects so various which matter 
presents consist only in the forms it successively takes on ac- 
cording to the combinations of its chemical elements. 

But the snh'tance of things evades all chemical testing; 
and so the simple bodies of chemistry ore themselves only 
forms, more or less elementary, the agglomeration of which 
produces eompounda. 

If by the theory of equivalents these forms should be some 
day reduced to unity, clicmistry will be entitled to infer, with 
some reason, the substantial unity of tlie universe. 

Neither tbo primitive cell, regarded as an elementary form 
of life, nor any prineiplo known to science, suffices to explain 
life itself, or that power of action which is in the living being 
at all the epochs of its existence, and consequently in the 
cell. In addition, therefore, to tho material and sensible ele- 
ments, there must bo in it a principle inaccessible to observa- 
tion ; and it is this principle which is the agent of life, the 
Impelling cause of vital motion and of all differentiations. 

But the reduction of all living forms to unity, that is, to the 
cell, Is an indication that the vital agent is itself a form of 
the one primitive force, and thus phyHology tends to unity 
by the way of morphology ; and this reduction of organs to 
unity may be proved for plants as well as for animals. 

The unity of the p 'n "pie of life and thought is another 
conclusion, to which n i t nd ng m th d pa tn nt of 
physiology. Every pmaygmw t Itint Ihe 

spirit or idea involved If th 11 1 tl m t I u ntary 
form of the living being tho p n iplo of 1 f wl i h t en- 
closes cannot be dev 1 p d x pt in o f tl f m at 
whlchitousbttoart zA. t al adj th t t of 
fcfca. This Idea expand wltl tl If amifi w tl it a m- 
modates itself to the n na and nd t n wl 1 h th g n ral 

^d by Google 

SPIEITUALISJI SUKUESTS XINITT. 16S 

order of tliouDiverse Imposes; smithm the etudyef thepsj/- 
eJiical nature of man points also in the (Jirection of unity. 
Spiritualism, throufili all its facts, Is su^cstivo of unity. 

The embryo is preserved by intellrgcnt processes oE ivhlcb 
neither itself nor Its parent knows anything. TLis iiitelli- 
genco l3 a property of the lite by which they Jive. 

This life, what Is it but the pervading cfHux of the delfio 
love and lite vivifying all nature and sustaining the animal 
and vegetable world as well as the world ot mma? 

Should it bo objected that this proves too much ; that it in- 
volvcs the identity of the vital principle of animals and veg- 
etables, let us not shrink from tlie conclusion. The essential 
unity of all spiritandali life with this exuberant life from 
God is a truth from which we need not recoil, even though it 
bring all animal and vegetable forms within the sweep of Im- 
mortality. 

The universe is not dead. Thinkyou thisearthof oursisa 
lifeless, unscntient bulk, while the worm on her surface is in 
the enjoyment of life ? To an inquiry whether the sou] is im- 
mortal, Apollonius, one of tlie greatest of the ancient medi- 
ums, replied, "Yes, immortal— but like everything." 

These suns, systems, planets and satellites are not mere 
mechanisms. The pulsations ot a dlvino life throb lu them 
all, and make them rich in thesenselhat they too are parts 
ot the divine cosmos. Dissolution, disintegration and change 
are not death while an immortal principle survives, 

"Science," says tlie Dukeof Argyll, "in the modem doe- 
trino of the conservation of energy and the convertibility ot 
forces, is already getting a firm hold of the idea, that all kinds 
of force are but forms ot manifestations of one central force 
issuing from some one fountain liead of power. Sir John Iler- 
Bchel has not liesitated to say, tliat ' it m Inii rcasonahle to re- 
ffard tJie force of gravitation as the direct cr inMrecl resaltof a 
eomaiouaness or a leill existing aomewhera.' " 

In support of the identity of Ufa and spirit, the Spiritualist 
will find some unexpected allies. Even so orthodox o teacher 
as President Noah Porter comes up to the vindication of llie 

^d by Google 

104 THE UNITY OF FORCES. 

grant! ttutli, and in vLiidieating it lie has to lend Lis support 
to the inevitable doctrine of a spiritual body. 

"The soul," ho says, "beginning to exist as tie principle 
of 1 ife, Tooji lime tlie power to create other bodies titan the physi- 
cal for itself, or it may already Kare formed another medium 
or body in (Ac ffcmt, and may hold it ready for o.eupaUon and 
me m »oon a» it sUmglm off the one which connects it vnlh the 
earth. . . . The cvidciieeof observation andoffactaisde- 
clslve that tho soil! begins i(s txistenee as a vital agency, and 
emerges by a gradual waking into the conscious activities o( 
Its higher nature." 

The soul which has had enough divine Intelligence to pre- 
pare for itself a body iu this world may ho trusted to have 
ready aflttiDg substitute when deatli loosens the pliysical tie. 
If from a little microscopic cell, by successive dilTeientiatioas, 
It may evolve man's complex organism, surely it may, from 
its liigher point of being, evolve future organisms suited to its 
more advanced states. 

But it is not merely Protestant theology that concurs in tliis 
view of the soul as the vivifying principle, active not only in 
the formation and functional processes of tho body, but in 
the exercise of man's conscious activities. Tho highest Cath- 
olic authority teaches the identity of the vital and the p; y- 
chieal principle. By a brief dated April 30Ib, ISliO, the Pope 
declares that tlio doctrine of the substantial unity of tlio prin- 
ciple of life and that of thought is according to faith, and he 
condemns any contrary opinion as inconsistent with Catholic 
teaching. 

Both Plato and Aristotle had taught this doctrine. They 
teli us that tlie life comes from tho soul ; from tliat which 
feels and thinks, "No," says Descartes; "the soul is that 
which thlnts ; consequently we must not attribute to it vltai 
phenomena of which it has no consciousness." To this objec- 
tion Leibnitz replies that we certainly do have confused, In- 
distinct perceptions of which we aro not conseiousat the time. 
Leibnitz plainly refers to what in our day Dr. Carpenter calls 
VAconsdbua cerebration. 

^d by Google 

REASON SUGGESTS UNITY. 1G5 

G. E. Stalil (1630-1734,) going somewhat Xurther Wian Leib- 
nitz, and anticipating the doctrine of unconscious cerebra- 
tion, shows that there aro mental operations independent of 
conacLousness. He teaches that the true principle of life is 
tlin soul. Were this sou! blind and unintellifient, It woalil 
do no mora and no better than matter itself ; but if it is cap* 
ble of directing the mcirements of tlie body towards an end, 
It is because It is intelligent ; in what then does it differ from 
the rational soul or spirit? True, la our norma! "tate, it 
may not have a consciousness of all its acts ; but from tliis it 
docs not at all follow that It may not perform them. 

The facts of double consciouaneas, apparent in the phe- 
nomena of somnambulism, mesmerism, and Spiritualism, con- 
firm these views. They show tliat the nature of the soul is 
complex ; that this complexity may include the vital processes; 
and that both intelligence and lifo may be the resultants of a 
single force. 

"No proof of the soul's Immortality," says Papillon,")s 
so strong as that we draw from the necessary simplicity and 
eternity of all the principles of force. Notlilng bears witness 
HO powerfully to the majestic reality of a God as the spectacle 
of those diversities, all harmonious, which rule the infinite 
range of forces, and bind in unity the ordered pulses of the 

There is a prlncipleof moral and intellectual unity, and we 
call it reason. Were all the facts of observation established 
as absolute truths, admitted by science, discussion would 
cease and there would be no more diversity of opinion. Now 
ptychology demonstrates that the two or three general formu- 
las or principles of reason are but the analytical development 
of one single idea, to which we may give what name we see 
fit, but which religion and philosophy almost unanimously 
call (Ac id&i of Qod. 

"This idea," says Burnouf, "constitutes the basis of 
thought ia all Its degrees. In man it leads to the highest re- 
gions of speculation ; to all animals it gives the means of 
motion, of alimentation, of reproduction; to every living 

^d by Google 

160 THE UNITY OF FOKCES. 

tiling UfilveatliP general form of life. It resides in the cell; 
it gives unity to llio iiifiiiitu movements and to the innumera- 
ble sliapea of llw univeroo." 

"All existence," says Oersted, "is a dominion of Reason. 
Tbc laws of Nature are laws of reason, and oil together form 
an endless unit; of reason, one and the same throughout tho 
universe." 

Thus in pliysical science, in astronomy and chemistry, for 
the inorganic world, and in physiology and psychology tor 
tho world of living beings, the tendency at this moment is 
toward unity, and all the analyses of science, physical and 
psychical, converge in this direction. 

"What do wo know of an atom, apart from force?" a^ks 
Faraday. "Ton conceive a nucleus, which may he called a, 
and you surround it with forces, which may be called m ; to 
my mind, your a, or nucleus, vanishes, and substance con- 
sists in tho energy of m. In fact, what notion can we form 
of anncleu?, independent of its energy^" 

Thus is sclentiflc thought forever sliadowing forth the liy- 
poUiesis that matter, in its last analysis, must he resolved 
into force ; and thus wo find it is no chimerical dream to sup- 
pose that the deiQc idea constitutes at once the essential ftrm 
and the substance of things. 

If the prospect is that In this ali-embraGing unity matter 
and spirit will be made to appear as phenomenal manifestv 
tions of one divine substance, let us not be alarmed. Pan- 
theism is true as far as it goes, but It must be supplemented 
by Theism before the whole truth can be apprehended ; nor 
is there contradiction in this. Tho notion of a creation ont 
of nothing is now so modified by the most advanced Ciiris- 
tian theologians, that it is virtually abandoned. At once 
intramundane and siipramundane, immanent and transcend- 
ent, God appears, more and more to the modern conception, 
as both automatic Hature and absolute Spirit. 

"The difficulties of thouglit," saj^ Picton, "the silence of 
the heavens, tho actual breathing, dentliless beauty of crea- 
tion, command us, with an inspiration which the age will not 

^d by Google 

SPIItlTUALISM AND THEISM. 167 

resist, to see God not so much as tho meditative Designer wlio 
makes, but mtlior as the Eternal Power wliich constitutes 
and is the All in All." 

As wo draw nearer to a principle of unity, we draw nearer 
to a conception of God. Wliat relations lias Spiritualism to 
this conception ? The answer was given wiien we found tliat 
Spiritualism, like every other science, teaches the unity of all 
forces and all phenomena. But the question shall have a fur- 
ther consideration. 

CHAPTER XIT. 

The thinking spirit being itself of a divine, an immortal na- 
ture, the search after God seems inseparable from the devel- 
opment of our moral and intellectual faculties. Having, at 
least in our lower and normal state of consciousness, no es- 
planation within ourselvesof our existence, we rise to the con- 
ception of an infinite, uncaused, intelligent Power, having his 
reason for being within himself, and from whom the principle 
of our limited being is mysteriously derived. 

What bearing do tlic facts of Modern Spiritualism have on 
this theistic conception ? 

D'llplbach (1723-1789), author ofLaSystfeme deiaNature," 
ondstillperhapstheniost famous of all atheistic writers, says; 
" It is necessary to fall back on the doctrine, so litUe proiable, 
of a future life and of the immortality of tho soul, in order to 
justify a belief In Divinity." 

Even in D'Hoibach's view, the one belief necessarily involved 
the other. Ho could not well see how a Spiritualist could be 
an atheist. But lie did not make allowance for all the incon- 
Bistencies of human thought. 

"That wo are to live hereafter," says Bishop Butler, "is 
just as reconcilable with the scheme of atheism, and as well 
to be Bccounted tor by it, as that we are now alive is : and 

^d by Google 

163 BELIEF IN OOD. 

therefore notliiiig can be more absurd than to argue from that 
BChiime that there can he no future state." 

Bishop Butler is right. Strange as it may seem, there are 
atheistic seers and atlieistic spirits. 

At the first glance a helief in spirits wouldseem to facilitate 
belief In a Supremo Spirit, author and ruler of all; and so it 
does. For one of the principal argumeots of speculative atLo- 
Ism Is annihilated by the very fact of the existence of a spirit, 
exercising clairvoyant powers, and Independent of tlie mate- 
lial Impediments of space and time. But history shows that 
a sincere belief inspirits and a future life may exist Independ- 
ently of any belief In a God. The old polytlielsm was large- 
ly a belief in mero spirits ; and tlio uncivilized tribes who be- 
lieve fully in spirits arc often found without a notion of any 
other deities tlian their departed ancestors and great men. 

Man, however, as ho advances in culture, is forced to strug- 
g!e with the theistio idea. Tliat such a problem as the exist- 
ence of a God is placed before him Is itself an earnest of 
his immortality ; a promise written In the very texture of 
his being that his profound questionings shall some day be 
answered. 

" Great," -eays Aime-Martin, "is the creature to whom it 
is allowed to imagine questions to which a God only can 
reply." 

So stupendous seems tho question of a God in its propor- 
tions to our faculties as normally limited, that it is not sur- 
prising so many reverent minds should shvinic from It alto- 
gctlier. "It is when we acknowledge that wo do not !;now 
God, that we know him best," says St. Denis, the areopaj?lte. 
"That which I conceive," says Fichte, "becomes finite 
through my very conception of it ; and this can never, even by 
endless exaltation, rise into tho InQnlte," 

But hroader views of man's complex nature load us to real- 
ize that the unfathomable exists in the human soul as well as 
In the nature of God ; that wo do not sec the whole of man in 
his normal and material limitations ; that he lias powers and 
a hidden intelligence, altogether unexplained hy any experi' 

Id b, Google 

FINITE AND INFINITE. 169 

ence-tlieory, or any theory of hereditary transmission, or of 
kDOwladge got tliroiigli tho physical senses ; and wo hcgin to 
liavo glimpses of actual relations of tlie rniite to tlie Infinite. 
We learn, upon reflection, that it is not less difljcult to cora- 
preheud how a Qnite, derived and dependent heing can exist, 
than to form a conception of an absolute, omnipotent and om- 
niscient God. 

To say that we brinR God down to some measure of anthro- 
pomorphism Ijy tho very conception of him, is simply to beg 
tho whole question, and to deny the inference which the phe- 
nomena of clairvoyance and Spiritualism abundantly author- 
ize—the inference, namely, that man has in himself an ele- 
ment relating him to tho liiUnite. 

The same motive that would keep us from studying llie 
infinite, ougiit ta deter us from studying the finite, since thein- 
finite is everywhere involved in it, and both are, in themselves, 
Inscrutable. In every hud there is a mystery. Nothing, in 
Its essence, can be known. The growth of a blade of grass 
is as unintelligible to us as tho existence of a Supreme Being. 
From our own Imperfections wo are Jed to ask. Does not 
the finite and dependent require tho infinite end absolute? 
Does not derivative being require tlie conception of the Un- 
derived? Does not an effect require a cause; and, in tho 
regress of causes, must we not stop at the uncaused Cause, 
l.bo one Being who lias within himself his reason of exist- 
In the elo<iuent words of Descartes: "We are the Imper- 
fect ; wo oro tho flnito ; wo are tho caused. Tlieto must he 
One who is tho complement of our being, Ihe infinity of our 
finltude, tho perfection of our Imperfection ; a mind which 
gives us that which we have not from ourselves." 

Tho late Emilo Saissct has given so beautiful a paraphrase 
of these ideas, that I cannot resist the temptation of trans- 
lating it hero from the French : 

"Iturn my thoughts in upon myself, and I say. Whence 
comes it that I cannot lielp thinking on God? I exist, I live, 
I love to exist and to live ; I find around me thousands of ob- 

Id b, Google 

170 BELIEF IN GOD. 

Jeets capable of pleasing and of Interesting me ; what need 1 
more for satisfying my soui, and why do I search for aome- 
thinff beyond ? 

" Why ? It is, too well I see, because I am imperfect, and 
surrounded by imperfection. Wlien I consider my being, I 
see it flow on like a rapid wave ; my idaas, my sensations, my 
desires all change from hour to hour, and around me I find no 
being that does not pass from movement to repose from pro- 
gress to decline, from life to death. Amid these vieias tudes 
even as one wave is pushed on by other waves, I roll onward 
In the immense torrent which is sweeping all lliings to un 
known shores. Change, unceasing change. Is the un veisal 
law, and such is my condition. 

"And tiio more I reflect, the more I see that this cond linn 
attaches to the very nature of things. Within me and w th 
out, all being is changing because it is limited. Here am I 
shut up in a comer of space and time ; in vain do I strttch 
all the springs of my frail corporeal machine ; I can take in 
only the small number of objects which are propoitionod and 
sear to me. I think ; but among the innumerable truths of 
which I catch a, glimpse, I can seize only a few, and even 
Hiose on condition of concentrating my thought in a narrow 
circle, outside of which I see confusedly, or see not at all. I 
love, but my power of loving, which goes forth easily toward 
everything suggestive of some perfection, open or secret, can 
attach itself only to objects fragile, changing and perisliable, 
none of whicli give me what they had promised. Every- 
where is limitation. Within me is an indefinite power of de- 
velopment which aspires to display itself in a thousand dif- 
ferent senses, and which, encountering everywhere limita- 
tions, sometimes strives vehemently to overleap them, and 
sometimes falls back weary, sinking and discouraged. This 
is why I change unceasingly, and wliy everything aronnd me 
changes : it is because we are all— guests of this world, great 
or small, thinking atoms, or blades of grass, or grains of sand 
—we are all, in different degrees, and under forms infinitely 

^d by Google 

MAN A EELATITE BEING. 171 

variable, incomplete boingi, strLving for completion, and ap- 
proacliing It only partially and ini perfectly. 

"Eutwbyam I incomplete, and wbyunder such aform, 
to SHcli a desiee, in such a time, in snoli a place? Why, in- 
deed, do I exist. Instead of not existing? I am ignorant. 
And tliia prmei to me imincUily thai I ham not within myself 
my reason of existeruii; that my being Is not tho primal and 
absolute being, but a being relative and borrowed. 

" Now, every time tliat I regard my being as radically in- 
complete and Ineapabio of existing by itself, I see dawning 
upon my soul the idea of iha perfeel one. I conceive of liim 
as accomplished in all the Infinite powers of his being. WJilla 
I strive to reassemble, in this brief, fleeting span of time, tho 
dispersed fragments of my life, and to develop some of my 
faculties, lie, concentred in an immutable Present, enjoys the 
absolute plenitude of his being eternally unfolded. Every- 
where I meet limits, whether in the beings who surround and 
press upon me, or in the number, form and degree of my own 
faculties. But he is the being without limitations, the being 
unique and above all, tho being to whom nothing can be 
wanting. All the potencies of life ore In liiin— not only tliose 
Of which I know something, but the infinite number of which 
I hnow nothing. Unequal and bounded in incomplete beings, 
they are there, the prey to struggle, to negation and to dis- 
accord. In him, all is infinite, positive, full, equal, unique, 
harmonious. This plenitude, this liarmony, this unity of all 
the potencies of being— this is the good supreme, the first, the 
absolutely fair, the being of beings, God. 

" This Idea of the perfect being commands my admiration. 
How vast it is— how sublime I But is it not too far from mo ? 
Not at all. It is intimately near, riunged in the movement 
of things that pass, I yield for an instant to the seduction of 
their attractions. In the spirit of pride and self-reliance, I 
may at times be dazzled and misled by the sentiment of my 
energy, of my knowledge and my powers ; but tliis is when I 
regard only the surface. As soon as I enter into and examine 
aiyscif intimately, I am dismayed at my utter feeblness, my 

^d by Google 

173 BELIEF IN UOD. 

Inconsistency, the incurable ftaKility of my being ; and I feel 
tliat it would vanish away, liad it not its support In tlie ona 
veritaWe being. There is In ibis no effort of mind, no circuit 
of tliougbt, no rsasoiiing ; it is a sudden, spontaneous, irre- 
sistible sense of ray imperfect soul, referring itself to Its eter- 
nal principle, feeling itself to live and to be through him. 

" When I come to reflect and to reason upon tliese two ob- 
jects of my thought, the being Imperfect that I am, and the 
being perfect by whom I exist, I see that to suppress either 
one of these two terms would be an insensate enterprise. I 
find them at the end of all my analyses, at the 1: 
all my reasonings. They form, in their li 
the permanent ground of my consciousness. 

" Can I think of the duration that Is flowing, always pre- 
ceded and always followed by another duration, without con- 
ceiving of eternity? Can I represent to myself a certain 
space, enveloping a smaller space, and enveloped by a lai^er, 
without conceiving of immensity? Can I contemplate the 
finite being, the mobile, the developing, without conceiving 
of the infinite, the immutable, the accomplished? These two 
ideas suggest, the one the other, and are enchained by a ne- 
cessary relation. Prior to the being imperfect, there is the 
being perfect ; prior to that which exists only in a manner 
temporary, local, relative, there is that which exists fully and 
absolutely. Behold that which is simple, clear, evident ; it 
is a. natural axiom, the first of axioms ; it is the supreme law 
of my reason. Shall I attempt to destroy by an artifice of 
my reason what Nature iias so profoundly graved in my con- 

"No I Man without God is an enigma, an inexplicable 
chimera. He has no longer a mission on this earth, nor a 
hope in worlds beyond. In losing his divine ideal, in essaying 
to take himself for his ideal, he falls below himself, and in 
having wished to make himself God, he ceases to bo man." 

But all theistic speculation is dismissed as unscientiric and 
unprofitable by the experience -philosophy of J. S. Mill, Her- 
bert Spencer, G. H. Lewes, and others. They tell us thai 

^d by Google 

THE EXPEBlENCE-PniLOSaPOY. IT? 

science deals only with observed phenomena ; tliat cause, la 
the scientific sense, ia the name given to tlie required condi- 
tions tiiat antedate phenomenal changes i and that thehuman 
mind liaa no right to reason about real cause and final pur- 
pose tu the universe. 

But the experience- philosophy is shattered, from turret to 
foundation-stone, hy the facts of clairvoyance and of Spirit- 
ualism; for the experience-philosophy rests oa the assump- 
tion tiiatwe Mm no idsaa inAapendent of experience; whereas 
the facts of this volume demonstrate at every step* tliat we 
have Ideas that come to us through no gate of the senses, 
tltrougli no experience, and through no "inheritance from 
preceding organisms." 

In regard to tills last expression, It should be borne in mind 
that in the philosophy of both Mr. Speneer and Mr. Lewes, 
the imtateneta of ideas that are seemingly Independent of ex- 
perience, is explained by tlie doctrine of Inherited forma of 
thought, shaped by the accumulated experience of preceding 
organisms. Spiritualism accepts this as a partial, but not as 
an entire truth. 

Innumerable well-authenticated instances of prevision and 
clairvoyance liave been cited, in which a knowledge trans- 
cending all that mere experience could supply Is clearly 
manifested. Spiritualism opens to usa new world of observed 
phenomena, Indicating supersensual powers ; phenomena 
that have been scientiQcall; tested and proved by thousands 

> Pbenomena oC dsUj oscniTBDna prova mTpoeltlon. Rnrdly waa the Ink 
drT on tbB sl>uTe eeuleniia, vbcii I recslTCIl » letter fcum a alster In llsien- 
p»rt. luHA, luwlilibatae-wrltei (Sept. Ktli, ]8.~4),->'JlIsbupl.M diedua 
tbeiSlbltiat. Hcime two niontbi Hea be bdE tin la the nlshc. uia took a 
b»t11. InretnnilugloliliiroaiubaiteppeaoffBlanKfliElit ol eKllrs.)>na 

vnasllghtlTbriilaed.iuidhlarielitliimaiinltlaliiiiea. Mr. H. unci' eut- 
8el(caJiBdonlilintivnd»v»»fler,iir" -'•"■■*"'" .-'.h-f-n ^x^-i^tA. 

Jaoi>lticl[lence» U«ha<ln letter In lilali 

I liUlianil. JUEt received 
huBClraainllescllstanl). 

fi^mLlHsunlleory, IWIIiiaEKsnanaCltfCeeifnil 

Die, I benril it ctush. nudetnndlnicunHaliltnliiy Vfife. Bid vpuhear the 
traiht IdreataedthatfathtrhndafallaTiiltimi dead. leo[niiuii< 
InuRed gtiiiynatcb, anil liwaHtwu o'ototA; I oi.uM noi sleep anuln. n 
vtyidwaBtUBarsam.' 1'Le li aliop vemmlmcl UinC Uib dremnmiist liav 
oenurrc'lHtthevervbDnriirtbeBume nlglit of lUe Rccldcnii for bia on 
watihslinwedauiirterjMJthBD, inakliiic U>t tna same moment, bHow 
liigfordlBerenceoCtliue. Tbe mil floally c3.uBed tbe blsbop-H dentb 
His band beitiiiue luteiisely pnlnful, andganirreneBetln. trblch, atrertn 

byblsoinnrienee-iiiiUoaopbr, buw llcary Leo waa madp aware ol itieM 
efdent la bli father F 

Id b, Google 

174 THE SUPREME QUESTION, 

of comretent mitneases. Tlie sphere of Causation mnst be 
enlarged to take in these new facts, or rather these old facta 
confirmed in the light o( moderm science. 

So inevitahle is tliis conclusion, so astounding is the pros- 
pect of the introduction of a hody of phenomena which must 
revolutionize philosophy, and awaken many self-complacent 
scientists to a raortif jine sense of their stubborn isnoranee, 
that the Tyndalis, Iluxleys, ond Carpenters of our day can 
underraliie our facts only by denying them outright; a 
mode of warfare which may serve our assailants for a time, 
but wliich must terminate in their utter discomfiture at some 
not distant day. Through Dr. Buchner ot Germany, Ihe 
Materialism claiming to be scientific tells us that " the phe- 
nomena of clairvoyance are now proved to be idle fancies ; " 
that " the perception of external objects witiiout the aid of 
the pliysical senses is an impossibility," and that " all that 
we know oonfes through those senses." 

Tims one of the leading representatives of the atheistio 
Materialism of our day bases his theory largely on the denial 
of facts which all Spiritualists know to be true, and which 
are already in the keeping of experimental science I 

The limits, then, which are set up by that system of phi- 
losophy that has regard solely to experience and to associa- 
tions got tiirough tho physical senses, arc found to be arbi- 
trary, and contrary to known facts. Spiritualism, by Its in- 
ductions, leads us to realize that the visible universe is not 
all ; that the unseen must vastly exceed the seen. 

But does Spiritualism prove a God ? 

Spiritualism is science, though science of a unique and 
transcendent character; and "Science," says Clievreul, 
"can neither prove nor disprove a God; tliough the reason- 
ing by which it would prove a God is more in conformity 
with its own experimental methods than that by which it 
would disprove a God." 

Since God lias in himself alone tho reason and necessity of 
his .own being— since he is the one absolute substance— he 
cannot be proved, for the proof of a thing must be in some- 

^d by Google 

BELIEF IN GOD. lln 

thing higher than itself. " If the existence ot God could he 
proved,"says Jacobi, "then God would be derived from a 
ground before and above him." 

We must accept Ilim, then, as a postulate of the reason 
and of the heart i of the reason, hecause of the intelligence 
In Nature and ia the mind of man, and because the produc- 
ing Cause of the Universe must be higher than any of its 
manifestations ; of the heart, because of the love which 
mounts from the endeared finite objects on whom it is tender- 
ly fixed, to One in whom those objects have their rcasou of 
being and theh: only earnest of unending life. IIow many, 
after a great bereavement, can say, "Never was faith in 
Providence, never was the hope of anotlier and a higher life 
so clear a certainty, so intense a reality as it has become since 
sorrow made it, to me, a spiritual necessity 1 I want no argu- 

A knowledge of immortality cannot be barren in its rela- 
tion to the iiuestion of the divine existence. " It is an error," 
saysFiclite, "to say that it is doubtful whether or not there 
is a God. It is not doubtful, but the most certain of all cer- 
tainties, the one absolutely valid objective truth, ikat ilure is 
amoral oT^r in the world." 

"A single aspiration of the soul," says Ilemsterhuis, 
" after the future, the better, the perfect, is a demonstration 
more than geometric of Divinity." 

"To tell me that I do not and cannot know what suhatance 
is, that I never can tnow anytliing but phenomena, neither 
convinces me of illusion, nor drives the thought of ultimata 
eternal reality from my mind. My ignorance ia precisely of 
that kind which asserts its own incomprehensible object. . . 
We cannot mark phenomena without thinking of substance. 
We cannot feel the world's heart beat in the ceaseless energy 
of living things without adoring an all-pervading Life."* 

"The unity whicli we seek behind the diversities of the 
visible world cannot be physical, because out ot merely phys- 

^d by Google 

176 TDE SUPREME QUESTION. 

teal unity the diversity of tliiuga could not have been evolved. 
There must have been a primary differentiation, not involved 
m the laws of matter as such. Simple, nalied, materialistic 
Atheism— that Is to say, the system which would resolve all 
into the laws of mere matter— is thtis ahiMn to he aeknfifleally 
false; and this from data afforded hy the sciences of matter 
alone, without referring to those of life and mind. The ulti- 
mate unity must tie spiritual. In the sense, at least, of not 
being material."* 

" Before one can assert," says Christlleb, " that tlio world ia 
without a God, one must iirst have Ijeeome thoroughly con- 
versant with the entire universe. One must liave searched 
through ail the systems of suns and stars, as well as through 
the history of all ages he must have wandered through the 
whole realm of space and time in order to be ahle to assert 
with sincerity, 'Nowhere has a trace of God been found I' 
He must he acquainted with e\ery force m the whole uni- 
verse ; for should oni escape him that very one might be 
God. Ue must be ihio to count up with certainty ail the 
causes of existence for were there one that he did not 
know, that one might be God He must be in absolute pos- 
session of ail tiie elements of truth which form the whole 
body of our knowledfie , for else the one factor that he did 
not possess might he just the vei-y truth that there is a God. 

" In short, to be able to afBrm authoritatively that no God 
exists, o man must be omniscient and omnipresent, that is, he 
himself must be God; and then, after ail, there would be 
one. Atheism, much more than Theism, depends on faith, 
that is, on assumptions wiiich cannot be proved." 

A scientific philosophy o£ ignorance tJius proves that dog- 
matic athebm has no basis In logic or in science. 

By inductive science we are brought to the conclusion that 
tlin universe and tiie race of man had their beginning in time. 
Tiie liistory of the universe is a history of the aggregation of 
matter. Geology tells us there was a time when man did not 

^d by Google 

MATERIALISM EXPLAINS NOTHING. 177 

exist on our planet. How did he get there? Materialism re- 
plies that he was evolved froiu the forces of mfitter. Spirit- 
ualism says, then those forces must be spiritual, for mind 
must come from mind; to which Materialism retorts, that a 
God uncaused, and existing from eternity, is fully as inoom- 
preliensible as Matter uncaused, and existing from eternity. 
And to this the conclusive reply Is, But you make your Mat- 
ter a God, if you make it the generator of mind and con- 
sciousness. 

If we use the a priori argaraent, and say that " Whatever 
begins to l)e, must have a cause," wc are met by the reply, 
" No, this notion of causation is a mere generalization from 
contiugent experiences, and not a necessary truth. The laws 
of Nature canuot account for their origin." 

But the idea of cause is irrepressible, and no logic can bar 
it out. " It cannot be abolished," says Herbert Spencer, "ex- 
cept by the abolition of thought itself." 

Materialism would still bo confronted by the same prott- 
lem, even If it were to discover a law that would explain the 
universe. For tlie law itself and the law-maker would have 
to be explained in their turn. Natural evolution through pe- 
riods of time not to bo recfeoned requires an intelligent Force 
to account for it, just as much as would an Instantaneous act 
of creation. Admit the facts of Spiritualism, and the Dar- 
winian scheme affords no ground for atheistic conclusions. 
The argument from design, based on analogies with the 
worlis of human artificers, is hot needed. We must learn to 
look for Divine perfection, not in the particular and frag- 
mentary tilings of time, but in the universals of etcrnily ; 
since here, conditioned as we are, there can be, in the very 
nature of things, no light without darkness, no good without 
evil, no truth without error, no progress witliout imperfection. 
The wise man says, " Trust and wait." The man not wise 
says, " Since 1 can see no sign that God has acted as I would 
have acted In his place, there can be no God 1" 

We have seen that spiritual and all other facts of science 
are tending to resolve our conception of matter into that of 
12 

^d by Google 

178 THE SUPREME QUESTION. 

force. Spiritualism proclaima tlirough its phenomena tliat 
tiiis force must be spiritual in its origio. Only by tlic analogy 
of our own mental activity can we arrive at a conception of 
causative force. Even Professor Huxley admits tbus mucli ; 
he saya ; " Undoubtedly, active force is inconceivable, except 
as a state of consciousness, . . . except as something com- 
parable to volition." 

The domain of science Is bounded by tlie refilon of second 
causes i and therefore the idea of a first cause, of God, can 
never bo scientifically excluded or repressed. " It," says Pro- 
fessor Le Conte, " In tracing the chain of causes upward, we 
stop at any cause, or force, or principle, that force or princi- 
ple becomes for us God, since it is an efficient agent control- 
ling the universe." 

The claim that Spiritualism is atheistic, has no authority 
either in philosophy or science. "Inorderto be something 
more than mereSkeptieism,an(l to offer a consistent theory of 
the universe, atheism must abandon its negative form, for a 
positive! and it cannot dothis except by merging Itself in tho 
materialistic theory." Thus it cannot logically claim Spiritu- 
alism as its ally, since in becoming positive, it repudiates the 
epi ritual fact. 

We assume that something or other unmade and without 
beginning lias existed from all eternity ; for whatever exists 
must have its sufficient eanse either in itself or out of Itself, 
since nothing can come from notlilng, whatever Sfcepticlsm 
may say to the contrary. 

This self-existent something, is it unorganized matter, or la 
it undirected force, or is it a combination of the two 7 

It is impossible to conceive of mind as issuing from unor- 
ganized matter ; and onsanized matter presupposes an Organ- 
izer. Explanation of the liigher by the lower, of thought by 
matter, must therefore be rejected as contrary to reason ; and 
equally to be rejected is the explanation by undirected, unin- 
telligent force. 

But what of matter and force combined ? Dr. Euchner has 
written a book to teach us that there is no matter without 

^d by Google 

MATERIALISM ON CAUSATION. 179 

force, and no force without matter, and that this unity in du- 
ality can do anytiiing. lie iwstulates lliem to account for mo- 
tion, and then he asica us to concede tliat matter, force, and 
motion aro adequate to tlie production of mind and aii the 
otiier phenomena of life. But if matter needs force in order 
txi be moved, and if force needs matter in order to produce 
motion, it is difficuit to see iiow In their combination they can 
produce the efficiency required, and emerge into an inteiiigent 

NoTertheless, if they do this, if matter and force, eternally 
inseparabie and self- existent, are sufficient in their union to 
produce mind, then (hey are an inteiiigent cause — tben they 
are God ; and thus the materialistic ttieory must be rejected 
as failing to meet the demands of a scientiQc analysis. 

When it aspires to reacli the last analysis of things, and to 
throw light on Causation, Materialism bos no advantage over 
the metaphysician whom it would deride. We have seen that 
Bhould the hypothesis of an evolution of high organisms from 
Inferior types be proved, it would bring us no nearer to a so- 
lution of the inflnite problem of the origin ot things. Nay, 
should Science do what Strauss wildly supposes It may yet 
do, achieve the creation of a man, it would still be utterly im- 
potent to explain the origin and nature of mind and matter, 
and to answer the questions, Why and Whence ? 

The Materialism on which positive atheism would rely, tells 
us that the universe is tho product of two factors, the atom 
and motion ; that these two factors explain ail ; that as for 
tho laws of the universe, they are simply tho necessary re- 
lations between forces, the expression of the necessity of 
things ; that hence it may be inferred how anti- scientiQc it ia 
to regard the government o( tiie universe as regulated in ad- 
vance by a spirit reconeiiinR itself to immutable laws; be- 
cause if the divine will governs, the laws are superfluous ; 
but if the laws govern, they exclude all foreign intervention. 
"Science," says Comte, "would now re-conduct God to the 
frontiers, thanking him for liis provisional services." 

Hut instead ot inferring, as Materialism docs, that theao 

Id b, Google 

ISO THE SUPREME QUESTIOTT. 

Immutable laws suffice to render an account of themselves, 
Spiritualism declares tliat the order which they reveal, sup. 
posca a, Supreme Ordainer.* 

Here a o two contrary interpretations of tlie same fact. 
W 3 the m r r asonableone? No experimental verifi- 
cat on can t ow ght on the problem ; and what it is tho 
bus n S3 of t e M terialism, on which atheism relies, to de- 
mons rate is the abs )Iute incompatibility between the idea 
of a lute Rent C se and the order of the world which 
maintains itaeil by the fixity of its laws. TMs demonstration 
cannot In had. 

Of what use, naka the atheist, is nn Idle God, of whom it 
maybe said, as of a constitutional king, "lie reigns, but it 
is the laws whicli govern"? lean best.answer the (luesUon 
in the words of tho Rev. John Caird, iu his Sermon on Spirit- 
ual Influence. IIo says: "A human mechanist may leave 
the machine lie lias constructed to work without his farther 
personal superintendence, because when he leaves it (Sod's 
laws take it up, and by their aid the materiats of wlilcli tho 
macblne is made retain tUeIr solidity, the steel continues 
elastic, the vapor keeps its expansive power. But wlien God 
has constrncted Uia machine of Iho universe, He cannot so 
leave it, or any the minutest part of it, in its imiaemity and 
intrir-Ky of notement., to itseif; for, if lie retire, there is no 
Bccord God to tube care of this machine. Hot from a single 
atom of matter can lie wlio made it for a, moment withdraw 
Ills superintendence and support. Each successive moment, 
all over the world, the act of creation must bo repeated." 

Upon what positive, demonstrable facts can Materialism 
maintain, at tho same tlmo with the negation of God, tho 
thesis of tho eternity of matter and its power of producing 
and transforming all things ?t 

If the universe had a commencement, this commencement, 

n Ind 

^d by Google 

MATERIALISM TESTED. 181 

by the very condition? of tiie ease, liad an Intelligent Cause ; 
lortlielawa of Nature cannot teniier an account ot tUeir 

True, onccansupposethat the order of material phenomena 
and their la Wa never commenced, and It is this supposition 
which constitutes dojmatic Materialism. liut what experi- 
mental verification can it claim? None whatever ! And 
TheUra replies to it hy another hypothesis which neutralizes 
it ; Theism supposes that the universe had a comraeneement, 
which amounts to sayinfi that the actual order of things has 
Tioi always cKisted. 

How can the Materialists prove the contrary ? 

By the esamination of the laws of Nature 7 But theselaws 
can render only an account of that which is, not an account 
of what, by hypothesis, has prccededthat which is. They may 
explain the actual form of the universe, not the mode of Its 
lormation, if we suppose that there was formation. 

"It will not avail to reply, that if there isa question of origin 
to posit, all experimental explication is powerless to resolve 
it r you must admit that nit experience can Hemansiraie that 
there it not a question of origin to posit. 

"Atheistic Materialism would explain all things by the 
properties ot matter, and in this it goes beyond experience 
and becomes a system. It indulges in mere speculation. 
Positive science has no other data than those afforded in the 
world which exists ; experience can give us only that which 
is ; no caie can tnow experimentally that which was before 
that wliich is," 

"Nay,"replle3 Materialism, "our facts may not suffice to 
resolve these questions positively, but they arc more than 
Buffieient to resolve them negatively," 

"But is It not to resolvo these questions very positively to 
resolve them thus? If you maintain that t/iers is not even 
platse to posit lite queelion of a God, do you not ofBrm that the 
world exists by itself, and Is not this a solution very positive? 
"Until Materialism can get out of this vicious circle which 
Logic traces around its fundamental conception, it cannot 

^d by Google 

163 BELIEF IN GOD. 

mate one step In advance towards affording to atheism any 
scientific comfort or support. It mayreason, after its fashion, 
upon tlic Irapossltiility of eoneeiving a commencement to tlio 
system of things ; totlio csistonceol matter and its proper- 
ties ; l>nt It will prove nothing experimentaUy; and, according 
to its own principles, that is tho only way of proving any- 
thing. It will specalatc, but that is very humiliating for the 
disdainers of all speculation ; it will venture on the meta- 
physical, but that is the last disgrace to these adversaries of 
alt metaphysics." 

So in order to arrive at a dogmatic atheism, one must not 
only discard science and fall back on a priori assnmptions, 
but must set aside those facts of Spiritnalism which prove the 
priority of spirit over matter. If an atheism based on Matfl- 
tialism has no scJentiHc validity, the atheism that would seek 
support in Spiritualism must be sanguine indeed. 

"Tho doctrine of Cnal causes," it is objected, "Implies con- 
trivance and therefore a limitation of the divine energy."' 
When It Is admitted that God may be j3J/-Ilmited in his mani- 
festations on this ultimate material plane, atheism puts forth 
Its moat determined eftort against tho marts of design in the 
universe. 

It tells us that Nature Is blind, immoral, irrational ; that she 
often gives birth to productions the most absurd, if we judge 
them as controllable by a rational will ; that she allows loath' 
some parasites to torture the nobler organisms ; tliat we often 
find lier powerless to vanquish the least obstacle in her way, 
and reaching the contrary of that which siie ought logically 
to reach. IIow can a cause which acts In a manner so me- 
chanical and blind, so contrary to benevolence and paternal 
goodness, be a Will, a Keason, an Omnipotent Being? 

"As for the mucli- vaunted design In Nature," says Profes- 
sor Ilaeckel, "it is a reality only for those whose views of 
animal and vegetable life are to the last degree superficial." 

All this simply amounts to saying that in an infinite num- 
ber of cases we cannot comprehend the ends which Nature 
pursues: a conclusion that is not to be disputed. But what 

^d by Google 

PROOFS OF DESIGN. 183 

esperiinenta! proof can Tue given that tbese ends which evade 
our compiehension do not exist ? 

"We admit tiiat tliey may be above and beyond our intelli- 
genoc i but this only tells against human reason, not against 
divine science, of which our reason surely is not to bo taken 
as the exact measure. The inexplicable abounds in tlio uni- 
verse ; it Is everywhere, under our eyes, within reach ot our 
hands i we meet it at every step. If tlie atheist would have 
God exist solely on condition of acting just as a man would 
act in God's place, wo are not of those wlio would conceive of 
God thus." 

We have no disposition to press the argument from design ; 
to bring down any oC the divine manifestations in Nature to 
an analogy with the liandiwork of a human mechanician. 
But it should be borne in mind that negalive facts pertaining 
to this (iuestion of final causes do not betray the absence o( 
God, since, experimentally considered, they merely signify 
our own ignorance, the limits of our own intelligence. 

"A positive fact has a wholly different value. It reveala 
to us an Intelligent Cause by a natural analogy which Is alaw 
of our reason. A fact like organism' places finality beyond a 
doubt. Now if finality exists in only one case, induetlon 
would lead us to conclude that it exists elsewhere, even where 
we are incapable of detecting it." 

To say that matter can account for these more obvious phe- 
nomena of finality, that the gases of pUospliorus can culmi- 
nate in consciousness, and that the vibrations of molecules 
can produce thought, Is, as we have seen, merely to spiritual- 
ize and deify matter and not at ail to dispense with ^Irit or 
With deity. 

The theistio argument from design is not needed by Spirit- 
ualism ; but it should be observed that the proposition which 
would exclude finality. from our consideration has no virtue 
except by condition of its being absolute. This it is not, and 
this it can uever be. It Is relative to certain parts of tne world, 
and ilrceases to bo applicable to otlier parts. "But if there is 
anywhere, in one single point of the world, sensible traces of 

^d by Google 

164 BELIEF IN OOD. 

finality, all leads as to bellevo that there ftte ends elsewhere, 
even in those places where they do not reveal themselves to 
our limited means of investlfiation." 

In opposition to the Divine Personality, Spiritualism has no 
word of authority to offer. 

Self-eonsciousnees must be an attribute of that two-fold ex- 
istence of God, at once supra-mundane and intra mundane, 
which combines the tbelstic and the pantheistic conception of 
his nature. How can personality proceed from an impersonal 
principle 7 Can God create forms of existence which tran- 
scend hla own ? 

To Slrauss's objection, that the more perfect the personality 
the greater tUo limitation, Froshammer replies : " Tlie essen- 
tial elements of personality are existence, consciousness of 
that esistenoe, and control over it. Distinction from and 
therefore limitation by others is not an essential element of 
personality, but an accidental si^^n of relative personality. 
An absolute personality cannot therefore be said to be im- 
possible, lor It masJtnd in itself the diUincUons necetsary for 
personal aiitsBiousnesa. It may be said that God is super-per- 
sona!. He is tlie supremo, the only real personality, since be 
is the only absolute, self-exletent being. If Stranss's notion 
were true, then a man, brought up in ignorance of the exist- 
ence of any being but himself, would not be a person f" 

Atheism is a charge often too hastily brought against rev- 
erent minds, discontented with allprevailing forms of Tiieism, 
and reaching out for wider truths. Let such minds not be 
confounded with those which would preach atheism dogmat- 
ically, as if it had any ground of science on which to rest. 

We all of us, I suppose, have our atheistic moods ; moods 
when we venture on the tlioughtthat a beneGeent, intelligent 
Will ought to manage tbo things of this world better, and 
help us and our friends to have a better time of it. With 
Bome this mood Is persistent, as witli Schopenhauer, Uart- 
mann, Togt, and Strauss, who cry out at tlie bad things of 
life liiie peevish, fractious children bewailing their stomach- 
aches and siiort allowance of taffy. 

^d by Google 

VEILS AND CLOUDS, 185 

"IfGod," says Hartmann, "previous to the creation iiad 
been aware wliat lio ivas doing, creation would liave been an 
inexplablo crime. " 

" The cosmos is something which had much better not liave 
existed," says Sehopeuhauer. 

"Llko cblldren crying In tbo nlgbt, 
LlkoclillUroH crying rota ilgbD, 

are the i h 1 ph their fretEul wliinings. They tell ns 

of tlio tl q 1 t rnadoa, volcanic eruptions, and mean- 
ingless pi t th t fa ct Immanlty— of the malformations, 
excresc m eptiles and monstrous diseases ; and 

they ask A II ti II ings divine Rifts ? 

They are truly the clouds and dartness which are about 
hia throne ; the mysteries by which lie is veiled from the in- 
quisitive understanding. But they are mere temporary ne- 
gations or obscurities, and do not counterbalance the positive 
proofs of his eternal existence whlcli wo End in the universe, 
lE Spiritualism, and in tlic soul of man. 

When we hear Spiritualists joining In these outcries against 
God, the question occurs : " If, as you say, dealli is tlie path- 
way to a higher life, how do you know tliat all these calami- 
ties which destroy or abbreviate human life or health, and 
wlilcii you affect to deplore so profoundly, and to use as an 
onxument against divine beneHcence, are not meant in mercy 
and in love 7 If to die is gain, as Spiritualism teaches, why 
find fault with the natural causes that seem to accelerate our 
departure ?" 

No anthropomorpliio argument from design is needed when 
the Pantheistic conception Is made supplementary to tbo 
Theistic. '* Analogies," says Picton, " which would turn our 
unspeakable worship of the Infinite One into the familiar ad- 
miration felt for the inventor of a new machine, are increas- 
ingly lelt, in these times, to bo two.edged weapons, with 
whicii Faith does ill to play. For only by the recognition 
that adaptation of means to an end, in order of time, belongs 
to temporal and fragmentary life— not to eternal Being— do 

^d by Google 

188 BELIEF IN GOD. 

wo prescrre the attitude of soul wtlcli is unassailable by the 
bcwildermeDts of false analogy or materialistic despair." 

Thus we feel that we aro surrounded, both on the material 
piano of being and on the spliilnal, "by an omnipresent, im- 
mutable Power, for whom nothing is too great, nothing too 
Inslfinificant, but which equally regulates the orbits of ivorlda 
and the position of an atom, and In whoso Divine order tiiero 
is nothing common or unclean, but its fitting place is found 
for the lowest as well as the highest In the palpitating life of 
the Universe."* 

The great teacher of scientific induction. Bacon, says : " So 
far aro physical causes from drawing men off from God and 
Providence th»t, on the contrary, the philosophers employed 
in discovering them can find no rest but by flying to God or 
Providence at last." 

"At last." There is a slgniScaneo in these words; for 
Bacon does not deny that science and philosophy, failing in 
extent and comprehensiveness, may incline to atheism. Our 
modern scientists leave out of thoir reckoning tliose facts oC 
Spiritualism which Bacon knew, and which guarded him from 
limiting his faith in Deity to deductions from second causes. 

The science that rejects the aillaaco which Modem Spirit- 
ualism offers is EuperGcial and incomplete, and must continue 
to grope in darkness whenever it would approach those ques- 
tions which relate to a future life and tbu divine spirituality 
Of the cosmic principle. A reconaideratiou of dogmas con- 
cerning the Divine Existence may seem a rash attempt, but 
their relations to the phenomena of tills volume arc a ques- 
tion full of interest. 

"The heart of man," says Picton, "recoils and always 
will recoil from that ghastly sense of universal death, which 
comes with the momentary imagination of a Godless world ; 
but tho mind of man is equally intolerant of obviously un- 
tenable propositions, maintained on grounds of supposed ex- 
pediency." 

Id b, Google 

THE DIVINB NATUKE. 18T 

"There is no resting-place for a religion of the reason," 
says Mansell, " liiit Pantbeism or Atheism." 

And yet for a religion that is not of the reason who can feel 
respect, and what certainty of enduring influence can bo 
hoped for it 7 

As atheism must bo reversed, and lost in that higher Pan- 
theism which regards tlio whole universe aa instinct with di- 
vine life and intelligence, so must this higher Pantheism be 
encircled by the still higher Theism which, while it regards 
God as in Nature, regards him at the same tiraeasJeyoKii Na- 
ture— at once the God In whom wo live and move and havo 
our being, the God of the material and spiritual u 
and the God transcendent, absolute, and infinite, the in 
prehensible Unity. 

now shall we approach the august problem ? llow ri 
cUe these seeming contradictions? 

CHAPTER SV. 

In the facts and analogies of Spiritualism no congrnity )ias 
tlmsfar been found with that form of Pantheism which de- 
nies personality to God and a conscious immortality to man. 

In the lower Pantheistic view, God is the universe Itself; 
beyond and outside the world lie does not exist, but only in 
the world ; he is the soul, the reason, and the spirit of the 
world, "and all Nature is his body ; he is everything, and be- 
side him there is nothing. 

But thece is a higher, an idealistic Pantheism, whicli makes 
the universe all spirit, and regards matter as a mere thought, 
or congeries of thoughts, so adapted to our sensations as to 
make us feel it real, at the same time that it is no independ- 
ent entity in itself. Of these two orders of Pantheism, the 
one Is without a real God, and the other without a real world. 

In the same mind we often see the Theistic and the Panthe- 

^d by Google 

ISB THEEE IH ONE. 

Istic idea asserting itself almost simuUancoiisly. Cbristianity 
ts nearly as full of Pantheism as it is of Theism ; tor If it re- 
cognizes God as our heavenly Father, it regards liim also as 
the one Life in wliicli wo live and move and have our being. 
Devotion cannot go far without running into language capa- 
ble only of a Pautheistic construction. 

Through our finite and fallible faculties wo may not hope to 
comprehend God ; yet Science may lead U9 to ever lilglier and 
more rational conceptions of his possible nature. The Coper- 
nioan system lias enlarged those conceptions, and Modern 
Spiritnalisra may enlarge them still more. It may lielp us to 
find trutli both in tlie Theistie and the Pantheistic idea, and 
thus to reconcile what may at first seem too antagonistic to 
be entertained togetlier. 

In his "Principles of Mental Physiology," even Br. Wm. 
B. Carpenter would seem to aim at sucii a reeoneiliatlon. Ho 
Bays ; " Altliough if God he outside the Physical Universe, 
those extended ideas of its vaatness whii^ modern Science 
opens to us, remove Ilim furtiier and further from us, s/oi if 
Se bs emhodki in it, every such extension enlarges our notion 
or nis being." Wliat good Pantheist eould ask more tlian is 
admitted in the words embodied ia it? They contain the very 
pitli of Pantheism. 

Spiritualism proves that the visible mortal body is not the 
whole of man, and hence lifts us to the conception that tlie 
Universe, as defined by Science, Is not the whole of God. 
Thus Pantheism, pure and simple. Is lacking in that import- 
ont part of the idea of God which recognizes his transcend- 
ent infinity, liis independent spiri'iuaiity, and his supreme 
personality ; while Theism fails to recognize his Immanenco in 
Nature, ills universality, and Lis mtiltiplieity in unity, God 
impersonal and circumscribed by the world, and God personal 
and unlimited by the world, arc but parts of tho ineffable 
truth that combines the two conceptions. 

" The universe," says John ScotusErigena <810-877), "has 
no existence independent of God's existence ; it is thercforo 
God, but not tlie whole o( Gud. Ue is more than the ui 

^d by Google 

THE DITINE PERSONALITY. 189 

yet the Divine Nature is truly and properly in all things." 
Wc liave seen (Cliap. XII.) that these were also the views ot 
Giordano Bruno. 

"All Nature," saya William Law, (1086-1761,) "is itself a 
birth from Uod. Creation out of nothing is a fiction ol mod- 
em theology. So far is Nature from being out of nothing, 
that It is the manifestation ot that in God which before was 
not manifest, and as Nature is the manifestation of God, so 
are all creatures the manifestation of the powers ot Nature. 
. , . Properly and strietly speaking, nothing can begin to 
be. The beginning of everything is nothing more than its 
beginning to be in a new state." 

"As the spokes in the nave," says an Oriental Spiritualist, 
"so all worlds and souls are fastened in Ihe One Soul." 

A writer* who accepts Pantheism in its spiritual sense, at- 
tempts to show that faith in the Divine personality is not 
necessarily lost in the Pantheistic idea. Uo says: "God is 
neither personal nor impersonal : lie is both, no is personal 
because our highest conception of being is a person. Only to 
the personal can wc ascribe reason, consciousness, freedom of 
action. And here our idea of God emerges as that of the 
highest personality. But Uo Is more than personal, and in 
this sense impersonal (super-personal?). Spiritual cxlstenes 
Is spiritual, individual personality. ... lie who has 
grasped this great truth of the impersonality of God, and yet 
recognizes the Divine personality, lias risen to that transcend- 
ental region where truth has its origin, and yet he has a foot- 
ing on the terrene where truth is known only under tlio lim- 
itations ot things finite, conceived through the medium of hu- 
man analogies and spoken of in the language of the sen- 

"Wemaydeny him will, andyet he wills. Iloisnotln- 
telligent ; ho is intelligence itself. Tie has no designs, for the 
Idea of infinite wisdom excludes tiiat of design ; and yet to ua 
He is the vast Designer. He is not hoary with time, for eter- 
nity is ever young, and yet He is the Ancient of Days." 
•TliaEev. John Hunt. Beelilo " Essaf on PanlbDlsmi Loudon: MM." 

^d by Google 

190 THREE m ONE. 

The secret things of God are past fiDding out, because, re- 
vise our conceptions of Ilim as wc may, there still remains In 
Lis nature tlic infinito and the unfathomable. Without Ir- 
reverence and with perfect liumility, therefore, may tho 
speculative faculty exercise itself la attaining to a conception 
in which reason and tlie heart's religious aspirations may 
draw nearer to a union. 

Nature is an organism tljiough which the Divine life is for- 
ever streaming, and imparting itself to all organic forms ; but 
this organism is only a temporary objective manifestation of 
God, and other universes may have preceded the present. 
Nature is subject to change, to the limitations of space and 
time, and to consequent imperfection. For in his manifesta- 
tions on this material plane of being, God is limited by his 
own "self-denying energy "just as a spirit is limited by di- 
vine laws on coming within the eartb-sphere. Tlierefore the 
divine life, witli which the whole universe throbs, is, in a 
manner, aufomatio in its developments ; and Nature, though 
full of signs of intelligence, seems often to be acting blindly, 
and as if good and evil were indifferent to her ; an appear- 
ance which results from the selMmposed limitations by which 
the divine action is subjected to unyielding low in expressing 
itself through matter in these Its ultimate evolutions. Tlma 
God in Nature becomes Relative to God the Absolute, as es- 
tsting in the highest of his three states. 

"To ask," says the late J. W. Jackson,* " why God did 
not make a perfect creation is equivalent to asking that God 
in ultimntcs, on tho plane of time and space, where he is to 
onr perceptions necessarily conditioned by the sequences of 
duration and tho limitations of extension, siiali be identical 
with God in first principles as tho eternal and intlnite." 

To attempt to authenticate this conception of God by any 
reference to human analogies may seem contrary to that ten- 
dency of science which would discredit as presumptuous all 
such comparisons. Gut it is not to limit Omnipotence by any 

the: phenomena ut Spiritualism. 

Id b, Google 

DOUCLE CONSCIOUSNESS. 191 

human 8tani3atd, to confess to tiiat amount of antliropomov- 
phism which is inseparable from the conviction that man, in 
a certain sense, hears tlie image of CoiJ. "Man," says St. 
Martin, "is a type which must have a prototype, and that 
prototype is God. Tlie hoiiy of man iias a necessary relation 
to everything visible, and his spirit is the type of every- 
thinff invisible." One may believe this without irreverence. 
Just as he may believe that the same law which moves the 
universe may move an atom. 

In man we find unmistakably the phenomenon of double 
consciousness. Even Professor Huxley, in his Address, Aug. 
25th, 187*, before the British Association at Belfast, describes 
a case in which two separate lives, a normal and abnormal 
one, seemed to be lived at inten'ais by the same individual ; 
and Dr. Carpenter, though his experience does not take in 
many Important facts now known to he true, admits the sep?i- 
rate states of consciousness manifested so wonderfully in 
Somnambulism.* He instances, in the case of Mozart, the 
proofs of the automatic action of the brain, as shown in the 
composition of the overture to the opera of " Don Giovanni." 
Mozart was probably a musical medium. His aptitude is in- 
esplicable except on the spiritual hypothesis. lie himself 
has said of his musical ideas, " Wliejice and Aow they come, I 
know not, nor can I force them. Those ideas that please me 
I retain in my memory." 

We have seen that man is described by the principal seera 
as a trinity of earth-body, spirit-body, and spiritual principle. 
The facts of somnambulism all tend to confirm this view, and 

111" elate of normal'cbBBci(iaHiw8B~~Wueu^» -_ _. »o., . ..^luitu n 
inpi-mrrnri-s of lUe (orlnlght Were an entire WimltloliHr. Hot 
■"-■ ■'■- "— -o of Uie interral (hat liaU ebpeeil. 

— . — ,_~„,^.o tbeabDomiiilsii 

tHIIieieiViMDOBn^wtolMBeen. Wbatvi 

liilglil, durlLg whldi si 

duoHiiesB. Wueu ahe «b 

rtnlght were an entire 

, 1 bave of Uie interna l-^. ...». ovin-. ^u 

BiipFmffilHliHiulBlilliavBlMen aaleeg sn^lioiu-. Tb* ^omid w»e (ie»v] I, 

■tcFOiali^Tie ,, , 

iiBtiniiBngltatFahcrEo, Ibst, liyBBtreuuouBCffiator «il1, 1 
liorlirrltlnloihB«oniuBmbnlio statu In order fu prepaie lier 

! ei»i" »iis Blwurn n higher, brighler, more ratioiiai stale 
r siiiiiflo! th«rrrorE8ncl miseoncepHouH by wbicb eba was In- 

Id b, Google 

192 THREE IN ONE. 

exhibit man In three states or degrees of consciousness ; first. 
In liis normal waklns state ; sceondly, in tlio state repicscntcd 
In lucid somnambulism, where tlie mind is active and clovatcd, 
and the faculty of siglit is vividly exercised without the aid 
of the physical eyes; thirdly, in the high state of ecstasy 
when tiicsubjcctseemsto be surrounded by spiritual realities 
and is anxious to quit the body. Tliese three states of con- 
sciousness are often entirely distinct, as experienced mesmer- 
izeis are well aware. I have frequently witnessed tiie two 
higher states, and satisfied myself of their reality. 

SwedcnhOFK also teaches that there are three natures, or de- 
grees of llfo, in man : the natural, the spiritual, and tlie celes- 
tial ; and that in the celestial, inen do not reason about the 
truth ; they see it, because it is a 'possession. 

A corresponding troth may be at tho basis of the conception 
of God as a trinity In his manifestations or modes of exist- 
ence; a conception of which Seheilingsays ; "The philosophy 
ot mythology proves that a Trinity of Divine Potentialities 
is tlie root from ivhicli have grown the religious ideas of all 
nations of any importance that are known to us." 

We may conceivu of the Supreme Being, first, aa God in 
first principles, tho Absolute, the iucomprchcusible TJnity, 
supremely personal and conscious, because possessing all con- 
ceivable perfections In their potency and all life in Its essence ; 
tlic impulse of whose developments and self-limitations is aa 
act of will ; ticondly, as God in liis relations to tlio universe 
of derived spirit and mind, and selMimil-ed according to the 
mea-iure of those relations ; thirdty, ns God In nltiniotes, im- 
manent or intra-mundauo, and still further limited by his 
descent into the environments of matter and his identification 
with the soul of universal Nature. 

Thus God, in his highest hypostasis, is the Absolute One, 
having within himself, in Idea and in essence, all tho poten- 
cies of Iw'lng, whether ultimating in what wc call spirit or in 
matter ; In his Intermediate hypostasis lie becomes limited by 
relations to the world of derived spirit and mind; in his third 
or lowest hypostasis he is the soul, the life, and the esscneo of 

^d by Google 

NATUKALISU AND THEISM. 193 

physical Nature wltli all her material limitations, her seeming 
Inconsistencies, immoralities and cruelties ; all which, how- 
ever, aro in liarmony witli his beneflceut purposes, one of 
which Is that of educating intelligent lielngs to comprehend 
and CDJoy what he has in storo for them ; in liarmony, too, 
■with bis own absolute inilependence of all evil, tliat being 
Elmpiy privation, negation and imperfection, without whifli, 
however, man could not be a progreaslvo being. 

In his "Tnio ChrisUan Religion " (33 and 47, V I.), Sweden- 
borgsays; "The common idea is, that, becanse what is 
finite does not coaiprehend what is inQnite, finite things can- 
Dot bo receptacles of tlio inQnite. Dut, from those tilings 
wliicli ate said in my works concerning the creation, it Is evi- 
dent that GoAfmt mads his infinity finiti hj tubsianeas emitted 
from Mms6if, from which exists his proximate encompas^ng 
sphere, which makes the snn of tho spiritual world ; and that 
afterwards, by means of that sun, ho perfected other cncom- 
passing spheres, oven to tlie last, wliieh consists of things 
quiescent; and that tlim, by means «f degrees, he made the 
viorld finite more and more. . . . The universe is a woik 
continent of divine love, divine wisdom and uses, and thus 
altogether a work coliereut from firsts to lasts." 

If it be said tliat a tri-nnity of beiag is inconceivable in 
God, I might reply that It is equally inconceivable in man, 
and yet facts and phenomena make us realize that It exists. 

■' The three fundamental colors, red, yellow and blue," says 
Chrlstlieb, "dissolve into the unity of white light— so that 
tliis may well bo called a trinity i« unity. Cut they coalesce 
in such a manner that each of tho three rays preserves its 
distinctive attribute. Ked is the caloric, yellow tlio luminous, 
bine tho chemical (actinic) ray. God is light ; and, verily, 
natural light, tho first of Iiis creatures, bears the Immediate 
impress of his triune being." 

negel calls the Idea of tlie trinity "the pivot of the world." 
According to Schclllng, God Is tlie perfect spirit in three forms, 
ftnd the true idea of God is a union of naturalism and theism. 

"Naturalism," he says, "seeks to conceive of God as 

^d by Google 

IM THREE IN ONE. 

ground of the world ([mmanent), while Theism would vtew 
him as the world's cause (transcendent) ; the true coiiriie Is to 
unite hoth determlnatlona. God is at the same time ground 
and eause. 

" It no wayeontriulicts the conception of God to afSrm tliat, 
so far as he reveals himself, he develops himself from himself, 
advancing from the Imperfect to the perfect; the Imperfect la 
in fact the perfect itself, only in a state of becoming. It is 
necessary that this becominK sliould be hy stages, iu order 
that the fullness of the perfect may appear on all sides. If 
tliere were no obscure ground, no nature, no negative prin- 
ciple in God, we could not speak of a consciousness of God. 

"Solongas theGod of modern theism remains tlie simple 
essence which ought to be purely essential, but which in fact 
is without essence, so long as an actual twofoldnesa is not 
recognized in God, and a limiting and denying energy (a na- 
ture, a negative principle) Is not placed iu opposition to the 
extending and ofHrming energy in God, so long will science 
be entitled to malte its denial of a personal God. It is univer- 
sally and essentially impossible to conceive of a being with 
consciousness, which has not been brought Into limit by 
BOmo denying energy witliin himself— as universally and es- 
sentially impossible as to conceive of acirele without a centre. 

" The fullness of God's being cannot be contained in an ab- 
strnct unity, and yet his absolute personality must have uniig 
for it$ fundamental aitribule. The conception of Ihe triune 
God famishes -us tuith the sole bridge that canJiU up the breach 
beiieeen Go^ and the «iorld." 

" If we separate," says Vera, " substantially and absolute- 
ly, God and the world, we do not only impair and curtail the 
being of tlie world but that of God also. We curtail the being 
of the world by separating it from its principle ; we curtail 
the being of God by admitting that tlie substance of the world 
is independent of God, and consequently by admitting two 
absolute substances. And the ereatio en nihilo could not lill 
up the gap, as the ereatio ex nihilo could not affect the prin- 
ciples and essences of things which, under any supposition, 
must bo coeternal with Cod. 

^d by Google 

GROUND AND CAUSE. 195 

" God is all things in their idea, and as a whole, and in the 
unity of their existence ; hut he is not all things individually, 
or in the ir particular and fragmentary existence. lie is not 
what the thing Is, of wliich he is the principle. God is tho 
thought, i.hc idea, the eaacnce of tlie universe. The thought 
of <iod, for the very reason that it is the essence, is the Provi- 
deneo of each heing particularly. Tho Provideni'Ji of the 
plant is its idea, according to which it Is horn, It fji-n^rs and 
dies. And so it Is with everything." 

The conception of God as brought into relativity hy an ob- 
jectivo nnivcrse, but at tlio same time existing in higher and 
discrete degrees of being, in the highest of which he is the ab- 
solute and perfect God, is, as 1 have attempted to show, not 
inconsistent with wliat we know of tho nature of man. It 
would be no irrational speculation to hold that the divine rela- 
tivity to the finite may, in its expression, vary with the char- 
acter of the diCEerent earths or planets fitted for intelligent 
beings while passing through the discipline of a material en- 
vironment ; that every planet with its climates and products 
is adapted to tlio state of its ration all nhabitan ts ; that what 
we regard as tho defects or evils of Nature as manifesting her- 
self through our planet, are merely tlie emblematic reflection 
of our own defects or evils ; and so that, as the race of man 
improves, the eartli itself will improve. 

The idea tliat God, as the life and iutelligenee of Nature, is 
self-circumscribed and reduced to relativity by his own "self- 
denying energy," leads to a view of the cosmos, in which all 
the objections of atheism are swallowed up. God is seen no 
longer as the provisional or constitutional monarch whose 
laws can rule tho universe without his aid, his functions he- 
ing merely honorary. At once ground and cause, Ms life be- 
comes the fountain of our life, and all Nature is transiigured 
■with divine possibilities ; man, derived and dependent as he 
is, becomes a free CO- worker with God; evil becomes a merely 
negative thing, liiving no real being or life; all imperfec- 
tions become transitional, a necessary phase of good in the 
making ; Ilunianity, with all its sellishness, i 

^d by Google 

196 THREE IN ONE. 

its arrogance, becomes ennobled when looked at from the 
side of its possibilities rather tiian its limitations and perver- 
sions, and takes on more and more the Divine Espresijioiu 
■We are helped to judge of mankind by its martyrs and salnta 
ratliev than by its tyrants and criminals. We fee! that God is 
not aloof from us but working in us, the very soul of this di- 
vine Nature by which we live, and without the light and life 
of whose sun we eonld not exist a moment. 

Nor let-it be said that God's circumscription as the life and 
soul of Nature removes God In the Highest fiom sympathy 
with our weaknesses and our wants. To sympathize with 
us f ally, to be Love and Providence, as well as Law and Wis- 
dom, he mnst be implicitly the Nature lie subordinates, be- 
sides a Power independent of it. It may be objected : God 
cannot be perfection, if, in his self -limitation as the sub- 
stance of Nature, he is also imperfection ; but to this it may 
be replied that the experience of Imperfection may be essen- 
tial to the very fullness of the Divine perfection ; that in or- 
der to be the perfect he must exist In a self-subordinated 
state as the imperfect also. 

Remember, moreover, that if God is a trinity, he is In that 
but the prototype of man, who, in each grade of his nature, 
la related to Uod in a, corresponding hypostasis. The tri- 
unity of earth-body, spirit-body, and spiritual principle, is 
paralleled In the tliree-fold nature of God ; and man, in each 
degree, and In all together, has God as his Providence, his 
spiritual Ideal, and his Infinite Father. The God of hia 
chiidUood's ti-nst and wonder is restored to him ; the God of 
his prayers Is an ever-present listener, it God Is-unyielding 
law, he is also maternal tenderness and love ; it he is the life 
of our life, he is also the moral order of the universe ; and 
faith is thus unchecked bj science, while reason is reconciled 
with faith. 

To many profound and to many superficial thinkers, all 
thelstic speculation is repulsive. They would say with 
Hooker: "Our safest eloquence concerning Him is our si- 
lence"; or with Sir William Hamilton, "The highest reach 

^d by Google 

PANTHEISTIU TUEISM. IW 

of human Bcience is tlie scientific recOKnition of liuman igno- 
rance." But tlio hoart ami tlie intellect continue, nevcrtlie- 
leas, to cry, " Oh I tliat 1 knew wliere I might find Him '." 

As on the nature of man new and important light contin- 
ues to be shed by ttie facts of somnambuliam, thought read- 
ing, and Modern Spiritualism, may we not hope that human 
thought will be helped to conceptions of Deity less at vari- 
ance with science, and that the atheistic oljjections which 
now oppress many sincere minds and devout hearts, will he 
gradually but surely lost iu tlie dawning light? 

The elements of this attempt to combine the Thelstic with 
tlie Pantheistic conception may bo found in all the great phi- 
losopiiies and tlieologles, not omitting those of Oriental 
origin. Plato distinctly teaches that the Soul of the World 
is a third subordinate nature, componaded of intelligence 
and matter. 

The eminent French eclectic, Cousin, (1792-1867) in sum- 
ming up his views of the Divine nature. Includes much that 
ia-in harmony witli the outline I have feebly sketched. ' He 
says; "Tho universe itself is so far from exhausting God, 
that many of tlie attributes oC God are there covered with an 
obscurity almost impenetrable, and are discovered only in 
the soni of man. God ia at once mibUance and eaum, at th» 
tammit of being, and at its humblest degree, i^|inile and flnifa 
iogetUsr, triple, in fine J that is, at once God, Jfature, and hit- 
manity. To say that the world is God, is to admit only the 
world, and to deny God However immense it mij be, this 
world is flu '" compared to ttod who i-, infinite and from 
his Ine'<[hau'>tib1e infinitude He is able to draw without 
limit, new worlls new beings nfw manifestations Invisi- 
ble and present revealed and withdrawn in himself, in the 
world and out o( the world eomrauniMting himself without 
cessatkn and remaining incom mum calil He is at once tho 
living God and the God concealed 

^d by Google 

MORALS OF SPIRITUALISM. 

CHAPTER STL 

What relation has Spiritualism to natural morality ? 
The mere knoinladge of a future life may have no moriil effl- 
caey In a mind that does not see tlie granJeur of the possibili- 
ties involTtd in tlie fact. The linowledgo must he spiritual- 
ized by meditation and by emotion before ib can assume its 
rightful authority in shaping the moral life and constitution. 
Being a demonstration of the cont iauous life of man through 
tlie association of a spirit-body, perfect in all its parts, with 
the material boay, Spiritualism has manifestly as intimate a 
relation as any fact of oarmortal existence can have, to natu- 
ral morality ; for it [3 as much related to the present as man- 
hood is related to youtli, or old age to manhood. It illustrates 
the laws that govern the relations of human life, because it 
explains innumerable occult facts in human history, tiirows 
D flood of light on psyeiiological questions, and lias a most di- 
rect practical bearing on our habits of thought, our affections, 
andour hopes, A moral science, in no wise based on spiritu- 
al facts, would bo as imperfect as a science of physiology that 
did not recognize the brain and the nervous system. 

"Theessential teaclilns of Spiritualism," says Mr. A, R. 
Wallace, " is, that we arc, all of us, in every act and thought, 
helping to build up a mental fabric which will be and consti- 
tute ourselves, more completely after the deatt of the body 
than it does now. Just as this fabric is well or 111 built, su 
will our progress and happiness he aided or retarded." 

Every mental affection wo experience, as it helps to mold 
the aplrlt-body, thus leaves its impress on our inmost charac- 
ter ; every thought we Uiint, and eveiT desire wo feel is in- 
delibly registered in the very constituents of our being, and 
becomes an integrant part of our individuality : what is onco 
in the memory is there forever; it maybe concealed from 

^d by Google 

8CIENCE THE AUTnOEITT. 199 

IS for awhile, but anniliilatecl never. Thua weH- 
ordered thoughts and a wdl-drdered life liisue in correspond- 
ing endowments of tho spirit-hody. 

These tacts have a most direct and unequivocal bearing on 
natural morality. They make us severally the authors and 
shapers of our own characters and destinies. They teach us 
that onr thoughts and our deeds, good or bad, have an imper- 
ishable element which incorporates itself with our very or- 
ganisms, and these become the expression of our actual inte- 
rior states. We gravitate where our affections carry ua. 

Spiritualism must exercise an unfailing influence for good 
through the afiections. Let a man or a child he thoroughly 
convinced that tlie deceased mother or father he reverently 
lovea is living a more intense life tlian ever, and can read hia 
every thought and scan liis every act, and such a conviction 
must liavo a restraining influence upon him, when tempted to 
evil ; an encouragement for him, when incited to some act of 
self-sacrifice or generous daring. The knowledge that we 
think and act in the presence of a cloud of witnesses, to wliom 
our very thoughts are as legible as our deeds, must have an 
influence upon us for good. 

"Wo sliould live, "says Seneca, "as if we were living in the 
eiglit o£ all men ; we should think as though some one could 
and can gaze into our inmost breast." Spiritualism makes us 
realize these as conditions literally existing. 

With (he eclecticism which must accompany all genuine 
science. Spiritualism accepts and assimilates, from all codes, 
creeds auu =jrt*ms, vthatever they may have of moral and re- 
ligious truth. It reduces all morality to its scientific valua- 
tion, and asks for no other authority than tho fact itself ; re- 
garding a revelation as in no wise true because authoritative, 
but authoritative only in so far as it is true ; because, as Mil- 
ton bravely says, " If a man believes things only because his 
pastor says so, or the assembly so determines, without having 
other reason, though his belief he true, yet the very truth he 
holda becomes his heresy." 

^d by Google 

(OO MORALS OF SPIRITUALISM. 

And this shows wby tlie dictation of all seera and all spirits 
must be resented as an insult to tlie understanding. 

Every thought leaves its trace, every sowing lias its proper 
harvest, and every act its fitting reward. If wo look for other 
salvation than tliat wliose fruit Is goodness, purity, love, and 
Epiritnal growtlj, we are groping unprofitably. lie who liaa 
these is saved already. Belief in salvation through another's 
merits or sufferings Is merely hope la a magical impossibility. 

" Hero heaven is not,"yousay, "butyonderlt sliall be." 
To this, Spiritualism replies in the words of the elder Fichte : 
"Nay, what then is that whieh can be different yonder from 
what it is here ? Obviously, only the objective constitution o( 
the world as the environment of our existence." 

But, by a law of our being, our objective environments in 
the spirit-world are tho reflex of our spiritual states ; and this 
shows bow grossly those persons misrepresent Spiritualism, 
who object to it that It promises every one a good time in tho 
"Summer-Land," with charming habitations and delightful 
ecenery ; as if such things could constitute a lieaven, inde- 
pendent of the dominant affectious and the ruling passions I 

Morality is action according to the laws of science and ol 
enlightened reason ; and only those laws have an absolute in- 
terior authority which aro in accordance with our sense of 
what is trae, and right, and of dlvlno validity. 

Eellglon is f altii in the moral order of the universe; it is 
particularly the reverent assumption, In tliought and feeling, 
of the esistence of an Intelligent Power beyond and above ws, 
that can influence us for good, avert evil, and listen to prayer. 
But religion, la the blgh sense, is not superstition ; it is not a 
cowardly dread of a mysterious Being who can barm or help 
us; it Isnotagroedforthesatisfyingthingsof our external 
life, having no correlation with the pure and generous affec- 
tions; it is not a craving for any selfish and exclusive sal vb^ 
tion ; it seeks a salvation from spiritual error, impurity, and 
l)lindness. Everything which wo feel and know aright is re- 
ligious. 
Religion, having in it an emotional element, may be lack- 

ed by GoOgIc 

BASIS OF MOLALITY. 201 

Ing in a pei3on otiieiwiso richly endowed ; just as a sense ol 
tbe beautiful in art may bo iacldng. And so there may be 
morality without religion, though there can be no rational re- 
ligion without morality. 

We find in spiritual science the elements of all morality and 
all religion ; and the task which the thinkers and moral pio- 
neers of the race have before them Is to place on a scientifia 
basis the great deductions of on absolute morality, that shall 
strike with axiomatic force every healthy, unprejudiced mind, 
and illumine all the intricate questions in social philosophy. 
And as these deductions cannot have their full sanction till 
we believe in a divine Moral Order and an Invisible world, 
there muft be a religion broad enough to gather all humanity 
within its fold, and having for Its simple evangel the procla- 
mation of a heavenly Fatlier, an immortal life, and a conse- 
quent morality. 

Morality being thus baspd on the facts of science, the laws 
of tlie human soul, and the proofs of a divine moral order, it 
follows tliat much in conventional and social morality, that 
may seem nuthoritatlvo to the unthinking many, becomes im- 
moral in the sight of those who are resolved, first of all, to bo 
loyal to what they esteem the laws ot divine order inscribed 
in tlieir very nature, and to be snperseded by no human codo. 

For the class-morality founded on class- interests, on mero 
social Actions, or on assumed religious authority, and wholly 
nnconfirmed by facts, spiritual science lias therefore littlo 
respect. It distinguishes between wliat J. S. Mill refers to 
aSJoa.'o pTohibita B-rtdmalainse; proportioning Its nncom- 
pTomlsing denunciation of the latter to its liberal charity and 
Its reserved opinions in regard to the former. 

For while the latter (.mala in se) give evidence ot intrinslo 
badness In feeling and character, and are wrongs wlilch no 
sano person questions, the former {mala proliibita) may bo 
violations of conventional order, la regard to the right of 
which good men may differ in opinion ; violations made im- 
perative often by a reason known only to the individual, who 
all the while may be a person in every respect honorable and 

^d by Google 

MORALS OF SPIKITUALISlt. 

, and actuated by a positive regard to tl.jse 
hlglier moral sanctions, the force of wliieli no Pharisaic clamor 
can make less binding on the courageona heart. 

Socrates teaches tliat knowledge is essential to virtue ; that 
no man is knowingly vicious. This is in accord witli tlie 
whole tone of Oriental wisdom, which assumes that whoso 
really sees vices must shun them ; that moral evil is from mis- 
conception, and to be cured by the pure vision of truth. So 
Spiritualism tells us that violations of moral parity and right 
leave their marks on the spirit body just as sins against the 
laws of health injure the rlirsical body ; and a sane man, 
knowing the one fact, would be as solicitous to escape spirit- 
ual deformity as a sane man knowing that a certain diet 
would harm him physically would be anxious to shun it. 

Thns all violations of divine law carry their penalties with 
them, and persistence in sin, when its dire consequences are 
made known, is simple insanity ; but God's processes toward 
the whole intelligent creation being remedial and never vin- 
dictive, the insanitiaa of men and spirits must have an end. 
Knowledge, !n its highest sense, is, therefore, virtue, and 
Socrates is right. "Satan's true name Is ignorance." All 
evil punishes itself, and thus tends to abolish itself. 

And thns, iu the light of Spiritualism, the moral law is not 
an arbitrary code, imposed by an omnipotent iaw-giver; 
lather is it a series of beneficent provisions which are simply 
" a formulated expression of the law of our well-being." Sin 
Is that abuse of our moral nature which injures and retards 
spiritual growth. An inttliigent spirit can at once read, in 
what we are, all that we have been ; for our whole moral life 
is revealed in our physiognomy. We cannot wrong another 
Without first wronging ourselves : 

" He tbit wTODgs bis friend 

His Nemesis attends him like his shadow, becomes a part of 
his very nature, never to be wholly separated from him, and 
to be silenced ouly when the necessity for rebuke is super- 

Id b, Google 

MAN'S DUAL NATURE. 203 

Reded by the penitence tliat Is niailo manifest in reparation 
and reform. 

It was the conciusion of that saintly man and deadly foe 
of witclios, Kicliard Baxter, as lie advanced in life, that the 
good are not as good, nor tlie bad as had aa we arc apt to KUp- 
oose. "Nearer approach and fuller trial," he says, "doth 
maKe iha best appear more weak and faulty than their nd- 
mirets at a distance tlilnli. And I find that few are so bad as 
censorious professors do imaRine. In some, Indeed, I find 
Uiat human nature Is corrupted into a greater liken?«s to 
devils than I once thought any on earth had been. But even 
in the wicked usually there Is more for grace to take advan- 
tage of, and more to testify for Uod and holiness, than I once 
believed there had been." 

Spiritualism enforces upon us this divine lesson of charity. 
That part of a man's nature which we encounter on tliis nor- 
mal plane of terrestrial life is not the whole of his being. 
The soul is three- fold In Its manifestations ; and conscious- 
ness is not limited by that lioi izoii within which it seems en- 
closed In our common waking state. 

In that Jiigh interior state manifest in lucid somnambulism, 
the intuitions that are ordinarily latent become often so active 
that the individual seems to reverse bis modes ot thinking on 
many snbjects ; his affections are wakened and touched, and 
his whole character is elevated. I have known a »<nnnambula 
in whom this difference between the two states was very 
marked. In her case conventional habits ot thought would 
seem last in the impulses of an enthusiasm tliat looked on all 
created things as divine, and regarded nothing in its place as 
common or unclean. Caterpillars, insects, and even reptiles, 
from which she would shrink alarmed when awake, would 
rouse in her, when somnambulic, the tenderest sympathy and 
regard. She would take them in her hands without the slight- 
est repugnance. Persona, who were objects of antipathy to 
her in her normal condition, would excite very different emo- 
tions in her when sho was placed en rapport with them, and 
eould scan them with her spiritual vision. Everywhere, even 

^d by Google 

S04 JIOKALS OF SPIRITUALISM. 

In the sinful and depraved, slie would seem to detect some 
sanctifyiuK ray o{ the divine splendor. 

In his "Facts In Mesmerism" Townshcnd relates a similar 
experience. Ills somnambulic patient, E. A., a French youth 
of Bfteeii, was, from early asscioiations in Paris, a thorough 
materialist, rejecting all belief in Uod and a future life. But 
In his state of lucid somnambulism all this was changed; nov 
must it be supposed tliat be hero merely reflected the views of 
his mesmerizer, for there was ample evidence to the contrary, 

"Utterly unsentimental in his natural state," says Towns- 
hend, "he seemed always, when somDambulic, to take pleas- 
ure in losing himself in imaginations of another world. All 
the hard incredulity whlcli characterized him when awake 
was gone. His willfulness was become submission ; his pride, 
humility ; and, in proportion as he seemed to know more, he 
appeared to esteem himself less. Often would ho regret Lho 
errors of his waking hours, and speak of his natural state as 
of an existence apart. Often would he exclaim, ' How I wish 
I could always see things as I do now r There Is not a per- 
son who saw him in the mesmeric state but remarked the 
change for the bettor his physiognomy underwent. His af- 
feetions, also, were enlarged. Egotistical In general, and dLi- 
playing but little sensibility, ho, in the mesmeric state, show- 
ed all the warmth of a kind-hearted nature." 

The state of lucid somnambulism must not be confounded 
with those imperfect developments in which some of the 
moral faculties seem paralyzed or perverted. Thus we bear 
of persons who, conscientious in their waking state, have, 
when somnambulic, been guilty of theft or murder. These 
are simply states of insanity, either produced by the obses- 
sion of malignant spirits, or by the predominance of the ani- 
mal nature during the abnormal lethargy of faculties that 
might exercise a restraining inauence. 

The teachings of Spiritualism thus !ead us to regard sin as 
spiritual disease, to bo remedied only by an entire reforma- 
tion of the will, the affections, and the habits ; and not as that 
mystic irreparable offence against an Infinite Being, which 

^d by Google 

SIN PUNISHIS ITSELF. 205 

only an Infinite vicarious espiation can atone for and remove. 
On tiiecoatiary.ain is an offence against tiio sinner himself, 
aud iiis punisiiment wiii he to realize tlie fact In ail its iiide- 
ousness ; and, as memory is everlasting, so, in a certain sense, 
liis sin and iU punisiiment liavo in tliem' an element o£ im- 
mortality, liov^ever purified lie may become by penitence and 
good deeds. What more fearful putiisbment for tlie evil doer, 
can be imagined? 

Many of the early Christian Fatliers toolt a view of sin not 
very diflerent from this. According to Origen, evil is the only 
tiling which has ttie foundation of its being ia itself and not 
in God, and which is, tlierefore, founded in no being, but is 
notiiing else than an estrangement from tlie true Beicg, and 
has only a subjective and no objective existence at all, and is 
la itself nothing. 

" It lias been asked," says St. Thomas Aquinas, " If there 
Is a God, whence comes evil ? We should rather conclude 
thus : If there is evil, there is a God, for evil would have no 
existence without order in tiie good, the privation of which Is 
evil." 

Such were also the views of Spinoza, in whose system God 
Is not a judge who inflicts punishment. The sin or crime 
punisiies itself. Sin is privation, and privation is nothlog 
positive, and is entitled evil in reference to our human «o- 
derstanding only, not to the nnderstanding of God. This, too, 
is the Buddhist notion of sin, according to which every act, 
word, or thought has its consequence, which will appear 
sooner or later in the present or some future state. Reward 
or punishment is simply the inevitable effect of Kam (fate or 
consequence), which works out its own results. 

Tlie facts of materialization show that after he quits this 
terrestrial splierc man retains his triune nature; that he has 
still a faculty relating him to matter and to earth ; a spiritual 
body ; and an Inscrutable spiritual principle. 

Tlie spirit-man, wiien brought within the material sphere, 
does not represent the spirit in the fullness of its faculties ■ 
lie is under the law of limitations ; in the lowest of his three 

^d by Google 

20e MORALS OF SPIRIT UALISM. 

Btatea. This may explain why there is so much that Is unsat- 
isfying in tlie conversation o( materialized or partially mate- 
rialized spirits. Tliomoretliey descend into the envltoninenta 
o£ matter tlie more do tiieir higher faculties hecome closed. 
Thus the descriptions they give us of the spirit- world are often 
conflicting and confused ; they mistake fantasies for reminis- 
cences, and even their recoiiections of tlielr life on eartli be- 
come mixed and inaccurate. 

Swedenhorg tells us that " such spirits are adjoined to man 
as he himself Is as to affection or love." He cautions ns, 
and witli reason, against tbe arts and deceptions practiced by 
the malignant and impure. I bave heard of a powerful me- 
dium for physical manifestations through whom Impure 
spirits, partially materialized, have come, and indicated their 
eharacterby theit acts. This shows tliat the repeated warn- 
ings of Swedenborg and other seers against low and unscru- 
pulous spirits should be carefully heeded. Purity of heart 
and purpose and an inflexible resolve to resist all promptings 
to evil, constitute the only state in which tho prosecution of 
spiritual investigations through mediuraship should he ven- 
tured on. Safety is to be found, not in ignoring the subject 
and refusing to Investigate, but In studying it under tlie 
right conditions and with a clean heart and will. 

As a general rule, lite attracts like ; but evil spirits may 
try to control a rightly disposed medium, and, in order to do 
tliia, may affect a purity which is foreign to their nature. 
The utmost caution should be practiced In all our dealings 
with these still fallible and imperfect beings. We should test 
them very much as we would strangers in the flesh, who come 
to us without satisfactory credentials. The best mediums, it 
should be remembered, are lensitivca, subject to impressions 
from both good and evil influences. That the evil sometimes 
prevail is not to be wondered at ; and wo should be prepared 
accordingly for fraudulent manifestations, mingled with the 

In the triune principle is the key to much that may seem 
incompreliensihle both in the microcosm of man and in tha 

^d by Google 

FINITE AND INFINITE. 207 

macrocoam of God. We have seen that for a spirit to mani- 
fest himself in the eartli-sphere there must be conditions; 
tliere must he a conditioned medium, and the spirit hiiuselC 
must undoubtedly como witliin limitations that make him 
different from what he is In his normal state, and these limi- 
tations may be adapted to the character and state of the me- 
dium. This triune principle extends through all degrees of 
being till it brings the Supremo himself Into relations to bis 
created unlvei'se, and these constitute liis state of limitation 
as expressed in Nature. 

In this principle man has his assurance of an unending es- 
Istence. He has been brought Into being by a power beyond 
himself, and that power must be the universal power of Na- 
ture, of which he is a part ; and the very essence and life o( 
this Nature Is the triune God himself in his self limited and 
relative state ; and since out of God's life no life can utterly 
fall, or be flung "as rubbish to the void," what wo call 
dissolution is change and progress, aud there Is no actual 

Recently at a meeting of the British Association, Dr. Hook- 
er exliiblted a plant which captured and digcst<id flies. Ke- 
ferring to this, a well-known secular leader, who prides him- 
self on his outspoken atheism, remarks: "The intelligent 
power which planned vegetable traps to catch insects, and 
stow them to death, would hardly he worth worshiping." 
ncre there is a double begging of the question ; first, we are 
called uiion to admit that there is a regular design or plan 
after the manner of human contrivers ; and secondly, that 
death is a calamity to Che insects, Instead of being what it may 
be for all that we know to the contrary, namely, the means of 
a rise in being. 

The higher Pantheism Is universal life, the life of God ; but 
to say that the universe Is God Is to admit the universe and 
to deny God. God Is something more than the universe, oven 
as man is something more than his mortal body. 

Spiritualism fixes no creed, but from all creeds adopts what- 
ever truth is reconcilable to the reason. Among the new re- 

^d by Google 

208 MORALS OF SPIRITUALISM:. 

liglous sects of Germany is one bearing tlie name of "C<nfes- 
sors of the Message o( Truth, Liberty and Love." Spiritual- 
lam would, Itliink,havelittle to find fault with in their creed 
(as far as it goes), which is as follows : 

"1. Weacknowledgetlieworlcllobeaunityof infinltespace 
ftnrt time, tile creativs enemy of wliicli we call World-Spirit. 
2. We acknowlwla? that liiiinantty is one of tlie innnmeralUe 
forms in wliich the AVorld-Splrit manifests himself in tlie 
series of his developments ; tliat humanity is progresslnp; ia 
nil ways, and tliat it should be every man s task to assist in 
this improvement with all his powers. 3. - We aeknowledife 
the indestructibility of E-sence in all the phenomena of tlm 
World Spirit, and, consequently, also in men, and we there- 
fore consider death to be only the transition Into a new form 
of temporal existence. 4. WeacknowiedKetliBttiieremustba 
a retrlbuti<m for all actions, but that this isonly of a temporal 
nature. 6. We actnowledee that all those actions are Rood 
which are In harmony with the principle of the Essence, 
eijuality of all men, and which tend to the progress of Im- 
nianily ; and that all actions not in accordance with this are 
objectionable. 6. We acknowledaio tlie notion of God, as the 
Idea of ab;<olute perfection, to bu a postulate of the hutnan 
reason. 

"Tlie ethics deduced from this are: 1. The commands 01 
Liberty : Be moderate, be true, be clean, be industrious, be 
economical, be free. 3. The commands of Justice : Offend 
not, ill-treat not, betray not, malign not, kill not, cheat not, 
steal not. 3, The commands of Love; Be courteous to all ; 
be charitable ; cultivate tliegood affections; befontlvlng; be 
compassionate with the unhappy ; be cheerful with the iiap- 
py; assist the poor ; tend the sick; protect the weak." 

All that is true in this, Spiritualism would supplement and 
render more positive and distinct. It would teach that in the 
transition through death we carry our liuman memories and 
afEcclions and all the knowledge that we have gained in the 
earth-life ; that the departed spirit lias the power and the 
privilege, under certain conditions, of revisiting earth, seeing 
those it left beh" d and communicating with them, directly 
in their high i d tly their lower states Of conscious- 

ness ; that w ff a Itat to what we find congenial ; that wo 
mold our sp t b d 1 y ry thought, act and affection of 
the earth-lif that th a principle in our very nature 

which puni h all latl of divine order, and, sooner or 
later, in tlii w Id i an thcr, works reformation without 
otlii'r compulsion than that of experience and knowledge ; 

^d by Google 

A NEW REVELATION. B09 

that all the truths and all the good exampltis and alt the rfll- 
gions of the past are our heritage, from which we may select 
and assimilate what we need foe our spiritual growth ; that 
good or had influences may he attracted by the state of the 
will and the affections ; that earnest prayer is no mere shout- 
ing into a void, answerless and echoless, but the expression of 
a true spiritual instinct, the very life- principle of religion, and 
having an efficacy proportioned to the tight spiritual condi- 
tions under which it is exercised ; tliat the highest wisdom is 
to trust rationally in God and to worship him especially by 
doing his will, as indicated in the laws of Nature and the hu- 
man soul, and by laboring for the universBl good. 

CHAPTER XVir. 

"Do we want anew revelation V" it is often objected; and 
to this some one aptly replies : " Yes ; what you want is a 
revelation that the supremo fact of your old revelation, the 
fact of immortality, Is an actual living truth." A tnowledge 
of this is what Spiritualism offers. It Is very near to every 
one of us, and yet we overlook it ; for, in the words of Schil- 
ler: 

Aiid tHe least aean Is tHat wUleh tUo eje oonBlantly seca." 

now much of discontent and of neglect of life's grand op- 
porlunKLes is traceable to unbelief in a future state t There 
are some persons so happily constituted that they " do not 
need the smart of gui^l to make them virtuous, nor the re- 
gret of folly to make them wise ;" persons who seem as If 
they needed not the spur of belief to induce them to cultivate 
their moral and intellectual natures ; who appear to inherit 
their morality as 'hey do their gentle manners, and to shrink 
from vice as naturally as they would from vu^rity. But 
these are exceptional natures. 
11 

^d by Google 

210 NOTIONS OF A. FUTURE LIFE. 

"lam always very much attached to tliis life," writes 
Alexander Humboldt to Vanihaaen, " liavlng Itarned from 
you tiiat, according to Kant's doctrine, there is not much to 
boast Of after our clisaolution."* And yet, with a strange in- 
eousiatency, this man, as lie lay on his death-bed, while tlio 
Euu'srays streamed in at the window, could sayr'TIow 
grand these royal they seem to beckon Earth tp IleaTen !" 
TLe heart was too strong for the speculative intellect ; and 
the great naturalist's last utterance was a realization of the 
idea of immortality. 

Wiillara Dnmboldt, different In manyrespects from his bro- 
ther Alexander, accepted the philosophy of Spinoza, and did 
not believe in the conlinuance of our individuality into an- 
otherlife. "Imust avow it frankly," said iie, "that, right 
or wrong, I do not hold much to the hope of another life. I 
would not make for myself another existence out of my hu- 
man ideas, and yet It is impossible for me to make it out of 
any other. I regard death with absolute calmness, but with- 
out desire or enthusiasm." 

Ilow soon a man's opinions get to be his loves 1 A man 
argues in favor of annihilation til! at last lie gets to hope for 
it, to eourt it ! Pride of opinion and other subtle forces help 
on the consummation. What powers o( acclimation in the 
hnman soul when it can tlins learn to prefer the air of tho 
charnel-honse to the breeze ou the living hills bathedin God'a 
sunshine ! 

Francis W. Newman, antlior of "Theism, Boctrinal and 
Pnictical," and many other estimable works, writes (1873), 
In regard to a future life, that his desire Is "here very feeble;" 
and he thinks that "either poetical fancy, or moral specula- 
tion, or both together, originated the conception alike among 
barbarians and civilized men t" 

•Attboneh Enntln hiBphllosopbj'nitrmws dnirn the sronnds of bellvf 

iteU))rent Hplrltiis 

i. Bloede. i>( Brook 

Id b, Google 

INDIFFERENCE TO LIFE. 211 

But Spiritualism allows tiiat no explanation of tlie belief in 
Iraiiiottality could be furtlier tlian tills from the practical 

David F. Strauss, autlior of "The OldFaitli and theNew," 
tells lis that the prospect of the "eternal persistence of life " 
would DIJ liim "with dismay." Innocent and intereating 
timidity I As If this good Mother Nature could not be trust- 
ed 1 As if sho will not proportion our future horizons to our 
future capacities and needs— taking care that, as our day, 
ouc strength shall Tie I 

Mr. Leon Case, in an extraordinary communication to the 
SprinfiBeld (Mass.) Republican of Oct. 30th, 1S74, in which, 
after an eight days' examination of the phenomena through 
tbe Eddy family at Chittenden, Vt,, he expresses his belief 
confidently in the genuineness of the manifestations, icniarks: 
" I cannot awaken in myself a single pulse of desire for im- 
mortality, however blest." But lie has naively admitted, 
just before : "I attribnto the fact of my lacking desire there, 
to my long convtetion tkat Aeatk ia the dmolvtion of all indi- 
viduality." He had held the opinion, and argued for it till it 
became liis love, and it was a serious disappointment to him 
to receive confirmatory and palpable evidence of a life be- 
yond tlie present. Wisely does Solomon warn us: "Keep 
thy heart with all diligence, for out ot it are the issues of 
life." As we think, we are. Dabits of thought in a eertaiLi 
direction will make even ghastly death appear more lovely to 
us than immortal life. 

Indifference to life, present or fature, is always an cxcpp- 
tionai, an artlGeial, a morbid state of mind. Often it may 
spring from the absence of those affections which play so im- 
portant apart in making a reunion with beloved objects an 
irrepicssible craving of the heart. Often it is a growth of 
forces and of habits, among which intellectual pride and a 
wish to diffor from the common herd of men are prominent. 

Thomas Buckle (1822-1EG2), eminent as a tliinker and 
author, and very near to being a Spiritualist when he died,* 

■see Iho Loailou Spiritual Maeazlno for March, 1373. 

^d by Google 

2ia MESSAGE OF SPIRITUALISM. 

rests the evidence of immortality mainly upon the universali- 
ty of the affections ; upon the yearninR of every mind to care 
for soniethini? out of itself. Tor him, as for most men, the' af- 
fections cry out for a future life, and he says, in words which 
every soui.d iieart that knows what it is to love profoundly 
will belikely to respond to— "The doctrine of immortality is 
the doctrine of doctrines ; a truth compared with which it la 
indifferent whether anythiuff else be true. It is a belief 
which, if eradicated, would drive most of us to despair." 

Spiritual iara, while it founds the fact of immortality main- 
ly on phenomenal proofs, shows that the affections and tlie 
moral nature ore prescient in their yearnings, and justifies all 
t?)elr demands. 

" If there Is no life beyond the present," says Edward La- 
boulaye, " then is this one a lie and a mockery. Immortality 
is something more than areeompeuse ; it is thefulfillment, the 
Justification of life." 

"We must be immortal," says Berthold Auerbaeh, "or it 
were a cruelty to let us men alone know that we must die. 
The moth does not know that he must die : he Ihinhs the 
burning light is a gay and brilliant flower, and he dies in the 
flowery flame." 

"The measaRe with which Spiritualism purports to be 
charged," says Mr. St. George Stoak, "is simply this— TA^ 
dead are still alive. Tims it addresses itself to the sociiU affec- 
tions; and turning to the self- regarding element in human 
nature, it says : 'As you make yourself, so shall you be, hero 
and hereafter. There is no magic of water, or faith, or an- 
other's righteoitaness to save you from the effects of your own 
conduct,' The belief in a future life Spiritualism professes to 
establish by the only method which can carry conviction, 
namely, by offering positive evidence." 

To refuse to loot into the strange and incredible is to neg- 
lect oftentimes the most precious opportunities of discovery. 
Hypotheses that have been jeered lit as wild and raonstraus 
by practical men have been a clew to the grandest results. It 
lias frequently needed a large amount of credulity to persist 

^d by Google 

MESMERIC PEECURSORS, 213 

tn txperimenta which, in tlieir success, have contributcil 
largely to human welfare. 

Seven years before the occurrence of the spiritual phenome- 
na at nydcsviUp, I had been introducecl to many cognate facts 
and plienomona through a senaiiive In whom I had induced 
the state of mesmeric somnambulism. In her highest statoof 
lucidity she would frequently profess to see and converse 
with spirits. Cut though I had tlie amplest reason to believe 
in her inte'.ligence and good faith, I was not sufBclently jws. 
scsaed by the spiritual hypothesis to devote myself to follow- 
ing the phenomenal vein out to satisfactory results. Ilad 1 
done so, I now sec that I might have anticipated many of tlie 
facts, at which I liavo since laboriously arrived. 

In 1778 Anton Mesmermade his appearance in Paris, and 
the phenomena by means of the mesmeric passes became 
tnown. In 178i the Marquis de Puysijgur showed that a 
state of somnambulic clairvoyance could be induced by mes- 
merism ; and many experimenters, both in Germany and 
Prance, caught glimpses of those further marvels which Mod- 
em Spiritualism has since made common. 

From a correspondeneo between two French mesmerizers, 
Billot and Deleuze, published in 183G, It appears Oiat they 
were well aware of nearly all Uie most extraordinary phe- 
nomena that have been repeated in our day. IJillot writes 
that lie has both seen artd fell tha ipirita; he (ind his co-secre- 
taries have seen and felt them, and ho calls God to witness 
the truth o( tlic declaration. Doleuzo replies that the im- 
mortality of the sou! and the possibility of eoramunicating 
Witli spirits Mve been proved to him ; he has not personally 
witnessed facts equal to those cited by Billot, but persons 
■;Torthyof all conQdence have made to him the like reports. 
no mentions the experience Of a distinguished physician 
who has clalnoyaati yiho " cause material objects (o present 
ihemselms." In regard to this, Deleuze says r "I cannot con- 
ceive how spiritual beings are able to carry material objects." 
Billot aptly replies, that " the question of Spiritualism is not 
one of opinions, but of facts r these are the thing? that lead 

^d by Google 

214 THE SEERESS OP PEETORST. 

to the troth." Obviously, to separate our factb fiom our cnn- 
jeetiires Is our duty in tills investigation. 

Bcrtrand, D'Ounin, PiiysCgur, Sfiguin, anJ otiier masnt't- 
Izers, who liad stood on tho very threshold of Spiritual iiiii, 
drew bat-lc in awe and alarm from farther InvestigatLon De- 
leuie fears that tho prosecution of inquiry may "Iroiihle 
hnman reason and lead to dangerous consequences." " Magic 
Is rediscoveK;d,'*8aid Dnpotet, who now (1874)- «t an ad- 
vanced oge, accepts the spiritual phenomena as the culmina- 
tion of his mesmeric researches. "The magnetic forces can- 
not he explained," said Puysegur. "We have no organs," 
said Morin, "for discovering spiritual beings." "Tho real 
causes of apparitions, o( objects displaced, of suspensions, 
and of a great portion of tho marvelous," said D'llunin and 
Eertrand, "arein-icrutahle." Seguin reports that "wisdom 
commands him to stop on the edge of an abyss which no man 
can pass with impunity." 

How far tho rcUq'uim of theologicai teachings may have in- 
fluenced these affrighted invcNtigators would be a curious 
subject of iwiniry. Obviously they were on the verge of the 
great proclamation of the facts of Modern Spiritualism, but 
they recoiled and left the further probing of the facts to the 
courage of a little girl nine years old, Miss Kate Fox, of 
nydesviUe, New Tork. 

It would be unjust, however, did I not pause here to recall 
the fact that Dr. Justinus Kcrner, chief physician at Weins- 
berg, In Germany, and who died In 1S59, has left In his " Life 
of Frederica Ilauffe, the Seeress of Prevorst," a record of In- 
dubitable spiritual phenomena occurring as early as 182G, and 
fully accepted by him. They include nearly all the most im- 
portant that have been developed up to tho present time : 
rapfings, movements of objects, levitations, apparitions, 
direct speech of spirits, thought-reading and clairvoyance. 

Eerner was of course ridiculed for what was looked upon as 
his "credulity." The editors and the mmnU decided, as 
usual, on these phenomena, without taking tho slightest 
trouble to investigate them ; but they found in Kerner a keen 

^d by Google 

COMMON OBJECTIONS. 215 

and intrepid champion of tlie trutli wlio !n literary skill was 
their superior, and in seienco was not larking Time has viu- 
dicated liis sagacity and liis truthfulness 

There is a class of opponents of Sp ritual n wh>, having 
been forced to admit the plienomena attemi E (o depreciate 
and nndervalue them. Their ohjectiona are snmmid up in 
tlio question Qui bono T For what good ? What Is the use of 
it all ? As if we were bound to answer the question when a 
laet or phenomenon of Nature is presented 1 As if tbe skeptic 
could not make precisely the same objection to the universe 
itself, and prove the nothingness of things by his Cui bono f 
ne who would set facts aside with a sneer may live to find 
them irrepreasible. 

One person, styling himself a medical professor, asserts that 
"there is no connection whatever between the phenomena of 
Spiritualism and the theory of Spiritualism ;" which is about 
as logical as It would be to say that there is no connection be- 
tween our solar system and Uie Copernican theory. And yet 
platitudes like this, uttered in the loud, confident tone of a 
professor, often impose on the timid and unthinking. 

The contradictory character of tlie communications from 
spirits is a stumbling-block to many. " Wliy do spirits talk 
commonplace and tell libs?" we are asked; and the reply is: 
" Perhaps to show us that they carry with tliem their mortal 
traits, and that the transition to a spiritual state leaves their 
individuality intact." 

To the just and reverent thinker the current objections to 
the facts of Spiritualism must appear as superficial as they are 
arrogant and rash. A fact of Nature can seem trivial only 
when our ignorance places it in wrong relations or overlooks 
its real significance. Nature does not equivocate, though she 
may seem to do so. The disposition to. slight these phenom- 
ena, to malign or misinterpret them, is merely a proof of our 
impotence to read and master them. 

As for those persons who admit the facts, but pronounce 
them diabolicat, and would drive us back from investigation 

^d by Google 

£16 PEAR OF SPIRITS. 

by tho erie$ of "dansec!" "degradation I" all sueli oiponents 
transcend the domain of science and enter that ol mere tlieol- 
ogy, where I cannot loUow them at present. The purpose of 
this exposition is to deal with the facta that have led to the 
spiritual hypothesis, and not to discuss the question how far 
the spirits manifcstiug themselves in these days are good or 
evil, harmless or dangerous, moral or immoral. Surely it ia 
something if we can prove to our modern Saddueees that 
spirits of any kind may exist. Even a " degraded " spirit may 
be a suggestive fact. 

Meanwhile all advocates ot the Satanic theory wilido well 
to ponder Locke's advice to those who, In his day, would 
frighten hiin fi-om the pursuit of truth hy this cry of dtnU. 
"It is very becoming," he says, "that men's zeal for truth 
should go as far as their proofs, but not go for proofs them- 
selves. Talking with a supposition and Insinaation that truth 
and tnowledgc, nay, and religion, loo, stand and fall with 
their systems, is at best but an imperious way of begging Hie 
question, and assuming to themselves, under the pretence of 
zeal for the cause of God, a title to In fallibility." 

The late Baron Ouldenstubbe, a friend too early lost to 
Spiritualism, in his treatise "La Eealitu des Esprits," re- 
marks: "The absurd fear of demons, prevalent especially 
during the middle ages, is precisely the principal cause of the 
unfrequeney of supersenaual phenomena, tiio spirits neither 
wishing nor being able to manifest themselves to people who 
lake them for unclean spectres. Surely there is aothiuft more 
fitted to alienate spirits as well as men and animals, than this 
Invincible repugnance, this shrinking horror, this utter laek 
of sympathy." 

"Tlio only true remedy,"aays James Martineau, "for the 
dark in 11 deli ty and cold materialism that tlireaten tho utter 
destruction of tlie religious life in a large portion of tho peo- 
ple, is to give them a living faith,— true to the conscience, true 
to the Intellect, true to the realized science of the age. The 
Spiritualist i;; professedly struggling for the realizafion of 

^d by Google 

LOGIC OP FACTS. 217 

this object, amidat the taunts of Orthodoxy and the execra- 
tions of Fanaticism."' 

Dr. Wm. B. Carpenter, In his Mental Physiology (pago 
627), is ready to admit all the phenomena that have come 
under the measuring-rod of his own experience. He can he- 
lievo that a table may move from unconscious maacular press- 
ure. But if it moves when nobody is touching it, then (he 
spectators, who think they see it move, are simply biologized. 
Tliey are " oblivious of the difference between external and 
internal evidence ; between the testimony of our eensea and 
tliatof oursen««." 

In other words, if we see a table rise from tlio floor to tlie 
ceiling, then, rather than believe our own senses and those ot 
any number of sane witnesses, we must accept Dr. Carpen- 
ter's a priori assumption, that there can be no such thini! as a 
spiritual force able to move a material object, and that con- 
sequently we must be deceived. 

Now which, in the light of that common sensB to which he 
appeals, would be the more reasonable of these two couclu- 
slons? 

I am sorry to see so erudite an Aristotelian as Mr. Thomas 
Davidson fallins Into Dr. Carpenter's word-trap for super- 
Ccial tbinlters, and charging Mr. A. R. Wallace with having 
"come to be a Ijeliever In ^\>\t\tiiaMsD\ on graunih entirely 
iHdjffai"— the lack of logic being in Mr. Wallace's trusting 
the report of his own senses and tliose of a million other wit- 
nesses, rather than shaping his belief to lit Dr. Carpenter's 
aprtori notion of what Nature ouglit not to permit 1 

If philosophy cannot bring more force than this against 
that It^ic of facts which makes men Spiritualists, it Lad bet- 
ter keep mute. Let it ponder what Lord Bacon says of such 
rash experiments before it tries to overleap stubborn facts 
from the spring-board of purely a priori assumptions. 

Another class of malcontents, looking at the phei 

•This remark was IntenilBilf or thsphlloBophkalSplrltnBUsIa, 

Id b, Google 

218 ESTHETIC OBJECTIONS. 

Spiritualism from an esthetic point of yicw, find tiiem "in 
bad taste." Tlie coarse, liard, unmannerlj- facts violate all 
their preeoneeptioua of what tlie spirit-world ouglit to be; 
ehocl£ all their notions of spiritual propriety, and contradict 
all tlie theories they may have inherited or formed of spirits 
as refined disembodied essences, freed from material sur- 
rouniliiigs and too pure to l)o brought in contact with them 

But Nature evidently does not consult the diiletanti in her 
operations. She does many things "in bad taste;" and a 
man, oppressed with a sense of his dignity, has to submit to 
many mortifying ciiccks and natural limitations. The very 
processes of birth and death, alimentation and elimination, 
are, esthctically considered, offensive. But, as Dryden says : 

An English clergyman of the radical school finds "much 
that Is repulsive in theso^called revelations of Spiritualism," 
and is led "to hope most earnestly tliat it may not be true." 
Uesays: "Spiritualists appeal to a vast portion of mankind 
who prefer seeing to believing, who are ever lianliering after 
signs and wonders, and whose materialistic notions of God 
and soul and lieaven compel them to seelc satisfaction in visi- 
ble proofs. We come into the field with very different weap- 
ons. ' Tlie weapons of our warfare are not carnal.' And if 
we cannot hold our ground with these, we refuse to adopt an 
inferior mode of warfare, or pander to what seems to us a 
morbid craving for hidden mysteries." 

Midden tnyUerics! So were many of the wonders of sci- 
ence at one time "hidden mysteries;" and the vulgar often 
tlioughttliat chemists and geologists were seeking after hid- 
den and forbidden mysteries. Is Superstition now driven 
from tiie hovel to the pulpit ? 

But what relevancy is there In this lofty talk of " carnal 
weapons" and "morbid cravings"? Tiie question is simply 
one of facts, not of processes of belief, nor of esthetic sympa- 
thies, nor of theological speculations, nor of "warfare" of 

^d by Google 

SENTIMENTAL OBJECTIONS. E!9 

Rnyliind, Aswellmight we accuse Euclid of " carnality" 
ill proving his propositions, as cliargo it on Spiiltunlists in es- 
tablishing theirs. And if, as tliis writer says, Spiritualists 
appeal to those "who prefer seeing to believing," what 13 
this but a proof tliat they are profoundly sincere in their 
knowledge, and that they are dealing, not with hazy abstrac- 
tions but witli things that may be tested and verified ? 

As to the imputation that they "pander to what seems a 
morbid craving for lildden mysteries," what is this loose 
phrase but the easy refuge of one too apathetic, too timid, or 
too preoccupied to face and investigate these extraordinary 
phenomenn? Is the geologist actuated by a "morbid crav- 
ing," when he pries under s!abs of sandstone and earthy lay- 
ers for the evidences of his science? Or shall the marvels 
that have relation to the existence of an Immortal soul in. 
ilian, be accounted as less legitimate and Important objects of 
study than thediscoveryofthefossilremalns of extinct varie- 
ties of animals? 

Mr. St. (Jeerge Stock has well replied to this class o( cen- 
sors, nesaya; " AnotherajimwobjeetionagalnstSpiritual- 
ism rests on our ideasot afuture state. But if the facts alleged 
are found to be facts, so mucli the worse for our ideas. Ilon- 
est old Whately could not bear the phrase, ' 1 should be sorry 
to think.' Let truth first be established, and sentiment will 
soon adapt itself to it." 

"Spiritualism, morally considered," says Hudson Tuttle, "is 
the highest aeientiSc conception of man's relations to himself, 
to his fellow meu, to the spiritual world, and to the divine or- 
deroflhings. It is theeaaenceof philosophy. Itasksnoth- 
ing without giving a reason, teaches notliing vfithout giving 
a cause. It urges the individual to become Just and pure, be- 
cause no other being in the universe will receive as great a 
reward for his right doing as the individual, and because 
every being in the universe vrHlbe better (or tliat right do- 
bag." 

^d by Google 

THE PROOF PALPABLE. 

CHAPTER XTIII. 

One ot the most common of the phenomena of Modern 
Spiritualism baa been the appearance o£ hands, believed to 
be materialized by spirit power, and therefore called spirit- 
hands. Every experienced investigator has been convinced 
of the reality of this manifestation. 

On tlie eleventh of January, 1876, 1 was present at a seance, 
where two spirlt-hands were molded in pataffine, Mrs. Mary 
M. Hardy, of Boston, Mass., belnfi the medium, and the con- 
ditions beiuK satisfactory to those wto sat near, as I did. 
This experiment had been several times performed in the 
presence of Prof. William Denton, by whom it was first sug- 
gested ; and we may liope it will eventually bo produced 
nnder conditions that will satisfy the most skeptical of its 
genuineness. Molds ot spirit faces have been got throufih 
Mrs. Hardy's mediumship. 

The experiment Is a step in the same direction with spirit- 
photography, of the reality of v»hich vue have ample proofs. 
Some of these will be found clearly sUted in Mr. Alfred R. 
Wallace's "Defence of Modern Spiritualism." Other and 
later proofs have been fiiven by my correspondent, the Rev. 
WiUUm Stainton.Moses, himself o medium, a scholar, and a 
careful investigator, in the record of his investigatons in " Hu- 
man Nature," a London publication. Mr. lieattie, William 
Howitt, Benjamin Coleman, M. Leymarie, M. de Teh, Prince 
Wittgenstein, Lady Caithness, and many others in Europe, 
and Prof. Gunning, Mr. Gumcy, Mr. Livermore, Mr. Luther 
Colby, and thousands of careful Investigators in America, 
have placed the fact of spirit. photography beyond a question. 
On the 25tl. of December, 1875, Mr. Jay J. Hartraan, a 
spirit-photographer at the gallery No. 100 West Fourth street, 

Cincinnati, stood the teat of a free public Investigation of 

his powers and of the reaUty of the phenomenon. Many per- 

^d by Google 

SPIElT-PHOTOGEAPnS. 221 

sons had got throufili him iinqiuesti enable likenesses of de- 
ceased relatives and frieuda ; still the skeptics denounced him 
as an impostor. But the result of this examination corrobo- 
rated all the evidences we had previously had of the fact of 
this form of mediumship. After three unsueccBstnl (rials, at 
the time fined, and in a gallery which he had never before 
entered, there was a, fourth trial, at which Mr. Uartman did 
not touch the plate or enter the dark room, and this trial vras 
successful. Messrs. J. Slatter, C. n. Huhrman, T. Cutter, 
J. P. Weckman, F. T, Moreland, and T. Teeple, all of them 
practical photographers, and two of them claiming to be ex- 
perls in detecting frauds, signed the following certificate : 

"We, the undersigned, having taken part in the public 
Investigation of 'Spirit-PhotoRraphy,' given by Mr. Jay J. 
na'rtman, liereby certify that vte have closely examined and 
watclied the n.aiiipulat ions of our own markwi plates through 
all thft various workings in and out of the dark room, and 
liaTB been unable to dfieover ary sign of fraud or trickery on 
the part of Mr. Jay J. Uartman ; and we further certify that 
durinsf the last sittina, when Ihe result was obtalnecl, Mr. Jay 
.J. Haitman did not handle the plate nor enter the dark room 

In the second edition of " Planchelte " I expreased a doubt 
of the genuineness of the spirit- photographs got through Mr. 
Mumler, of Boston. My doubt was founded on words of his 
own, reported to me hy hearers whose good faith I could not 
question. When taunted with trickery he had replied with- 
out resentment in language that left the impression that he 
was not guiltless. 1 am now convinced that the impression 
did him injustice. He knew that serious denial would be of 
no avail, and so he parried the chafEag of skeptias with words 
that were misinterpreted. 

Having satisfied myself by a^iundant testimony that Mr. 
Mumier had been instrumental in producing genuine spirit- 
, I stated the fact, and in a third edition of 
G charge of fraud. Kenewed in- 
vestigation has satisfied me that many genuine spirit plioto- 
graphs hove been produced through his mediumship ; and I 
am happy to have my opinion confirmed by Mr. Oumey, the 
experienced photographer of New York. In a conversation 

^d by Google 

232 PKOOFS PALPABLE. 

with Dr. Eugono CrowcU,* Mr. Guruey said tliat he had full 
faith In the genuineness of tlie photograplis ; that he visited 
Mumler's gallery for the purpose of investigation ; that he 
told Mumter the ohject of liis visit, liis namo and profession ; 
to iiU which Marnier replied that he was welcome to investi- 
gate the process in any way he chose. Dr. Crowell says : 

"Mr. Gurney then took clean platus and examined them 
with the closest scrutiny, and prepared them for the camera. 
The camera itself he took: apart, examining the Interior, the 
ohject-glass, etc., and when all was prepared for tailing the 

Beture— a friend of Mr. Gurney'a Iwing in the chair— Mr. 
amler placed liis liand upon the camera, the lens was un- 
covered, and in a minute or two the photograph was tafeeu. 
Upon proving the negative a spirit-form was visible upon the 
plate beside the likeness of the sitter. The process was re- 
peated with like results: Mr. Gnrney managing everything 
from beginning to end ; Mr Mnmler not touching an article, 
excepting when lie placed his hand upon the camera at the 
moment of taking the picture, 

"Mr. Gumoy sometime afterward, proiming himtdf viith 
plates and eh^ieaU of his eien, visited Boston again, and 
calling at Mr. Mumlei^B rooms again, went through the pro- 
cess, using only his own materials, with Hlmllar resnlts. lie 
spent Borao hours in scrutinizing everything about tlie room, 
and everything pertaining to the process, and he was perfect- 
ly satisBcd there was no deception. 

" I then Inquired tf lie— Mr. Gurney— could produce simi- 
lar pictures. He replied: ' fes, nearly similar; but it 
would require some days to effect the purpose, while Muinler 
produces them In three minutes.' " 

Dr. Crowell testifies in the most explicit manner to the 
facts of materialization. lie says : 

"Innumerable are the proofs that have been furnishi"d of 
the identity of ray spirit friends. Sometimes, when request- 
ed, they have given tlieir names, and at others liave unex- 
THctedly announced them. Many have presented themselves 
io mo visibly at Moravia, and at Dr. Blade's, some of them 
while visible conversing with me ; artd tteo of them I hata 
»een apart from, any medium. I have in hundr.ds of in- 
ptancea been touched by spirits; have been lovingly patted 
by tlieir hands, and have felt and heard the rustling of their 
robes. Many times I have heard music from material instru- 
ments, produced by spirit touches, and onco have heard it aa 
clearly and distinctly when no material instrument was In the 

"Tlie Identity "I Prlc 

^d by Google 

MORE TESTIMOSr. 223 

Wbilst I am brlufiing this volume U> a coiiclusiou, tlie testi- 
mony In regard to the materialization plienomcna crowds on 
mc so fast, and from so many trustworthy parties, that 1 
should be emliarrassed m my clioice did I deem that furthei 
facta were niieded Ool Olcott lias prosecuted his Investiga- 
tions at Chittenden, Vt , m the most tliorouyh manner, test- 
ing the Eddy plienomena in various ways, and satisfying 
himself fiii'j that tliey are genuine. In this he is supported 
by numerous competent witnesses, wtose names are published 
in the New York Graphic. Mr. Max Lenzberg, of Uarttord, 
Conn., In a letter to the Daily Times of that city, gives an 
account of his and his family's experiencesat Chittenden. He 
describes the battery test applied to Honto, the Indian spirit- 
maiden, by Dr. Beard, a skeptic. The full power of the bat- 
tery was let ou, and Ilonto received it without flinching. No 
mortal could have stood it. 

Mr. Lenzberg states that the spirit-form of his wife's brother, 
Abraham, who died seventeen years ago in Texas, appeared 
on the stage at Chittenden lu his shirt-sleeves ; and he adds : 

"My wife recognized bim at once, and said to him, 'Let 
me introduce yon to my hustKind.' I spofeetoliiraiEtJerman: 
hoanswered, 'Ja,ich bines: ich freusemichsehr'— ('Yes, it 
is I; lam much deliglited.') It was a very distinct appari- 
tion ; there could be no mistake as to the reality of the figure, 
and my wife said there was none as to identity. 

"AnoHiernightheeameagain.andspobe toils tn the i)ecu- 
liar idiom of that German dia leet which belongs to Westphal la ; 
I detected the idiomatic peculiarity and recognized tlin words 
as those nnmistaliably of a person from that region where my 
wife came from ; the word 'morfffln' especially— the German 
(or 'morreinj,' when he was saying 'to-morrowmorninz'— 
was beyond any mistake as to the part of Germany the sjjeaker 
had lived in." 

Mr. Lenzberg further saw the apparition of a little daugh- 
ter he had lost from earth when she was less than a year old. 
She was led in by the spirit of Ills wife's mother, and "ap- 
peared as a child of two years, but preserved her own look." 
He says ; 

" I went to the railing and spoke to her close by— 'Oh, my 
darling angel Sophie, I can see you ! ' She smiled, and danced 
to show her Joy at the recognition. My daughter Lena had 
also come to the railing, and said, ' Do you see me ? do you 

^d by Google 

224 FACT AGAINST THEORY. 

know me?' and the little fliild, laughing, rapped yes on the 
railincwitli her flnfiers. Iler mother sat as it spell-bound; 
Bhe recognized her child." 

Mrs. H. P. Blavatsty, a Russian lady, resident at 124 East 
Sixteenth street, New York City, having seen in tlie newspa- 
pers a letter from Dr. George M. Beard, wlio liad given less 
than two days to the investigation of the Eddy phenomena, 
declaring tliat the brothers are " frauds who cannot do even 
good trickery," generously replied to the attack by stating lier 
own most conclusive experiences in a letter to the piiblic, 
dated October 27th, 1874, She says : 

"I remained fourteen days at the Eddys'. In that aliort 
period o( time 1 saw and recogniied fully out of one hundred 
aud nlueteen apparitions seven spirits. Indmit that X was 
the only one to recognize them, the rest of the audience not 
havinv been with mo. in my numerous travels throughont the 
East, but their various dresses and costumes were plainly 
seen and closely examined by all. 

" The first was a Georgian hoy, dressed In the historical 
Caucasian attire. I recognized and questioned him in Geor- 
gian upon circumstances known only to myself. I was un- 
derstood and answered. Requested by me in his mother 
tongue (upon the whispered suRgestion of Colonel Oloott) to 
play the ' T*zguinka,' a Circassian dance, be did so immedU 
atelv upon the guitar. 

" Seeond—A little old man appears. He is dressed as Per- 
sian merchants generally are. His dress is perfect as a na- 
tional costume. Everything is in its right place, down to the 
'babouches * that are off his feet, he Pepping out in hi; stuck- 
ings. He speaks his name in a lirad whisper. It is ' Hassan 
Aga," an old man whom I and my family have known for 
twenty years at Tiflis. He says, half In Georgian and half in 
Persian, thatho has got a 'bigsecrettotellme.'andcomesat 
three diffi-rent times, vainly seeking to finish Ills sentence. 

" Third— A. man of gigantlo stature emer^eH forth, dressed 
in the picturesque attire of the warriors of Kurdistan. He 
does not speak, but liows in the Oriental fashion, and lifts up 
his spear ornamented with bright-colored feathers, shnklne ft 
in token of welcome. 1 recognize him immediately as SatCar 
All Bek, a young chief of a tribe of Kurds, who used to a»v 
company me in my trips around Ararat in Amenio on horse- 
back, and who on one occasion saved my life. More, he 
bends to the ground as though picking up a handful of mould 
and scattering it around, presses his hand to bis bosom— a 
gesture familiar only to the tribes of the Kurdistan. 

" Fourth— A Circassian comes out. I can Imagine myself 
at Tifiis, so perfect Is ills costume of ' nouker * (a man who 
either runs before or behind one on horseback). This one 
sneaks. More, he corrects his name, which I pronounced 
wrong on recognizing lilm, and when I repeat it he bows, 

^d by Google 

Mils. EDDY APPEAES. 323 

smilins. anH says in the pnrest Rnttural Tartar, which sounds 
so familiar to my ear, "Miocb yaelitchi* (all right), anil 

^""^^(A— An old woman appears with a Kusslan headgear. 
She comes out and addresses me in Kussian, callinK me by an 
endeariDR term that she used in my childhood. . 1 recognize 
an old spxvant of my family, a nurae of my sister. 

" Siteth—A ism^, powerful negro next appears on the piat- 
form. His head ia ornamented with a wonderful coiffure, 
Bomethinir like horns wound about with white and KOld. liis 
looks are^amlliar to me, bnt I do not at first recollect where 
I have seen lilm. Very soon he begins to make some visa, 
dons irestures, and his mimicry helps me to reooenize lilm at 
a glance. It is a conjurer from Central Africa. He grins and 

^'^vcnihandl,ut-A large, gray-lialred gentleman comes 
out attired In the conventional suit of black. Tlie Kussian 
decoration of St. Ann hangs suspended by a larae red moire 
ribbon with two black stripes— a ribbon^se very Russian wiH 
know, belonging to said decoration. This ribbon is worn 
around his neck. I feel faint, for I think of recognizing my 
fatlier. Dut the latter was a great deal taller. In my excite- 
ment I atl(lres,s him in English, and ask liim : 'Are you my 
father ?' He shakes his head in the negative, and answers as 
niainlv as any mortal man can speafe, and in Kusslan, Ko ; t 
am your uncle.' The word 'diaflia'has been heard and re- 
membered by all the audience. It means ' uncle.' " 

Among the materialized spirit-forms that appear at Chit- 
tenden is that of the mother of the mediums. Of her appear- 
ance Col. Olcott says : 

"Itnow the full value of words, and I mean to say une- 
quivocally that a woman-a breathing, walking, palpable w.> 
inan, as palpable as any oilier woman lu the room, recognized 
not only by her sons and daughters, but also by neighbors 
present, as Mrs. Zephaniah Eddy, deceased December 39th, 
1873— on the evening of October 2ii, 1874, walked out of a 
cabinet where there was only one mortal, and where, under 
ascertained cirouraslances. only this one man could have been 
at tlie time, and epoke to me pentmallv in audiBia voteel And 
nineteen other persons saw her at the same time and heard 
her discourse." 

Mr. Leon Case, a lawyer of Hartford, Conn., of whose ex- 
periences at Chittenden I liave already spoken, gives the fol- 
lowing description of the same apparition : 

" One night there came upon the platform, stepping vig- 
orously forth, a woman of apparently middle age. At once 
Mr. and Mrs. Brown (an Eddy) and Horatio exclaimed, 
'Mother!' and others present hailed her as 'Mrs. Eddy. 
She was dressed in white skirt witli dark colored sack, etc. 
She appeared very character-full. Her face was not very 

^d by Google 

226 WEIGHIN'G A SPIEIT-JFORM. 

dtsttnct to my eyes, save In profile, but it was to others. She 
bowed and answered her children's salutation pleasantly but 
rather ciirtly, as if she had sometliinu else on Uer mind, and 
ral.'iinK lier liands and slightly throwing back lier head she 
proceeded to utter, in full, strong voice, one of the most co. 
Kent, earnest and i»eautif ul prayers I ever licard. addressed to 
' Father of iliy Spirit '—which vrords, and no other individual 
appellation, she repeated three or four times during the 
prayer, and then withdrew behind the veil, but quickly turn- 
ed around, soquickly that theclnmsyTeilhadnothadtiroe to 
fairly fall into place behind her, came out, and posing herself 
like an accustomed platform speaker addressed us in a voice 
tooloud to be In good taste before a. limited audience, hut evi- 
dently at much expense of will force. Her gesticulation was 
Vigorous and appropriate. Dm remarlcs related to the 'new 
life ' priDcIpally, and she said some tilings tenderly of bor 
children—tltelr present works, etc. I think she might have 
been heard distinctly throughout a common size country 
meeting-house. Her language was well chosen, indeed ele- 
gant, and without graramatica! error— save one— the misuse 
of the verb ' lays ' for 'lies;' as ' lays along your path.' I 
was struck with the singularly forceful charaeter and perti- 
nence of the utterances of this woman ; because she was ihe 
mother of that brood of illiterate ' mediums," of whom I had 
heard so much, not having suspected that she possessed the 
graces she manifested." 

Mr. Case tells us that on one occasion Col, Olcott weighed 
the Indian spirit, Ilonto, on one of Fairbanks's platform 
scales. She was found to weigh eighty-eight pounds. She 
went behind tiie veil, reiippeared, and was weighed ag^n, 
this time ■weighing flfty.eight pounds. At another time she 
vras found to weigh sixty-five pounds. Her bulk at these 
several weighings was apparently unchanged. Honto is 
five feet three inches in heiglit, according to measures which 
Col. Olcott placed on either side of the closet door, and which 
all could distinctly see. William Eddy, the medium, Is five 
feet nine and a half inches high, and weighs one hundred and 
seventy-nine pounds. 

A highly intelligent investigator, Mrs. A. A- Andrews, of 
Springfield, Mass., from whose account of ber experiences at 
Dr. Slade's I have already quoted (Chapter III), has, at my 
request, kindly supplied the following description of what 
she saw at Chittenden, through the Eddys, during the au- 
tumn of 1S74 ; 

" During the five evenings that I was present at the s^ 

^d by Google 

INDIAN SPIRITS. 237 

onees, Isawagreat numbprof mati'n^lizelforms Saiitum, 
an Indian chief, six feet and three inches tall five or six 
inches taller than the medium of fine proportions and dress- 
ed in full national costume presented 1 imself also the 
Indian girl Ilonto, graceful lithe and wltli that peculiar 
ease of motion which we see in savages whose muscles have 
never been fettered by an unnatural dress She made her 
appearance every eveninR walking rapidly with noiseless 
steps, across the platform and often drawing from the floor, 
tbc bare wails, or from tlie person of a gentleman or a lady 
call d p f th i I t it r stand upon the platform, 
1 g 1 awl f I fE t 1 rs and textures which shawla 
li tlir th a I B losing the platform or held 

p i 1 t t tch d 1 1 o that all might see them, 

a d aft ward tl w to t! cab net lifting the curtain 
hgbf tftl pp I aUo saw hir give a look 

of her long black hair to a gentleman who had lately come 
on from Philadelphia to witness the manifestations On one 
occasion she took a pipe from a gentleman present, lighted 
it with a match, and smoked for some minutes with much 
apparent relish. 

" This form often dauces with a ladj (Sirs Cleieland), who 
Is a neighbor of the Eddyi, and who t Id me that In taking 
hold of the arm of the spirit it had sometimes seemed to crush 
up in her fingers, it not being fully materialized. 

" The first evening that I was present I complained of the 
darkness of tho room, saying that I could not see the spirits 
distinctly. The next night the spirit of an old woman, oall- 
Ing herself the 'Witch of the Mountains," s^d. In a distinct 
voice 'One of the ladies herecomplainedlastttme that she 
eould not see distinctly the faces of the spirits ; if she will 
come up to the platform she may see me, and take hold of my 
hair." I went up, as desired, looked into her face, which 
was utterly unlike that of tlie medium, though pronounced 
and rather coarse In feature, and having that peculiar pallor 
so often observable in materialized forms. She raised one 
hand, and drawing out a lock of gray hair from under a ker- 

^d by Google 

228 MAGICAL PHENOMENA. 

chief wliich partially covered her head, held it ont to me. 1 
took hold of It and pulled It, assuring myself that it grew up- 
on the scalp. It was harsh, dry and coarse, like that of one 
much exposed to the weather, and whose hair has not been 
taken care of. This old woman often spoke with us for ten 
or fifteen minutes at a time, alluding to her past life, and 
giving good moral advice. 

" On one evening she brouglit with hpr from the cabinet a 
alight twig or wand, which I at first took to be the sliaft of 
a small arrow. As she seated herself upon a chair placed for 
her upon the platform, she drew this wand back and forth 
through her hands, talking to us moanwhUe as usual. I ob- 
served that, ns she handled it, it gradually Increased In size 
until It became, after a few minutes, a stout staff upon which 
Ehe leaned in rising from her seat, and in returning to uie 
cabinet. 

"One of the female spirits, I think the one they called 
'Orandmother Eaton,' spoke painfully of the trials endured 
in the earth-life. I failed to catch all her words, but, while 
thus speaking, she opened her dress upon the breast, and, as 
ff from within it, there arose fluctuating flames, reminding 
me of some Catholic pictures which one sees of Jesus 
where th^ heart is represented as burning with flame. It 
was to me a most weird and painfully thrilling sight, made 
more so by the dreary voice and sad words which were uttered 

" I saw the mother of Mr. Pritchard of Albany, or a, spirit- 
form which he declared to be that of his mother, put her arms 
about his neck and embrace him ; I also heard her talk with 
him for some time in a low voice. Tiiis recognition of forma 
and faces goes to prove that there can be no deception, sincg 
strangers, going there nnbelieving, conid hardly bo deceived 
in such a matter. The dress, little peculiar ways and modes 
of expression, tho calling of sons and daughters In the circle 
by pet names, were spoken of by several as proving to them 
beyond a doubt the identity of those claiming to be relatives. 
I saw some six or eight spirit forms that were recognized by 

^d by Google 

PHENOilENA. THEOUGU MR. MOTT. 229 

persons in the circle wlio came tliere iiulte slteptical, and left 
convinced of the genuineness of Uie manifestations hj this 
recognition of friends and relatives. 

" I was entirely convinced, before leaving Chittenden, that 
the Eddy lirothers were honest as mediums, and indeed utterly 
incapable of such a fraud as their manifestations would be if 
not genuine. Such a deception would require fireat sliiil, in- 
deed a most remarkable talent, tlio possession of a theatrical 
wardrobe, and the aid of confederates, none of which, as any 
one staying a week in the house can satisfy himself, do these 
mediums have. They are simple and ignorant, their medium- 
ship having interfered sadly with their education, and their 
house is bare of all means and appliances needful lor the pro- 
duction of artificial phenomenaof this kind. Having remained 
only five days with them, I cannot give an adequate idea of 
the wonderful manifestations to be witnessed, both during 
the lisht and dark circles, in this old farm-bouse ; but I saw 
enough to feel assured that Col. Olcotfs very Interesting 
record ot the phenomena, as published in the New York 
Graphic, is nn exaggerated and every way reliable." 

Accounts of new mediums for the materialization phe- 
nomena reacli me from many quarters as I draw this work to 
a conclusion." Skeptics in r^ard to the manifestations 

• Amowc otlera 1 have reci^lyort fhronBh Dr.^ Henry Sj Cham of M.^Irfnils 

EftMl^twikeSti^Mia'pnwfr'oVsplrU ia^»Miy\liavaovQrin5tiiltli la 

''K^V^i^r!H^?t?BKf^.':'.S?Jf»?l;^U th. app«llloaot a».»p o( 
tot y. V mlnir BpaotHclBS. cailoU lor o roimiilaajr preBcnt, Mif« Itala 
tot1jBrl''OTewagliatwl, ardilopp»I,ccmft>BiilnKBUBwa8aft«ia,a^ 
Iho »™arnlan wept, Hiid betng ankHrt .why. b;iM, "Ohl " JuW" "o,S» 
Miink Cowllrtear <t lUKhtiT Is afmlil of m"." MIbb D. then want up, 
and iBiked with iheaplrli several nilnnif^bnt was greaHyovmome. A 
»hit^rohedfeinnlanpparlilouiuahea«^lb™™pm^io™rdHr. ih<'^^^^^ 
Foiich?il him, aTi'laaldshe waHlilBxnoThBT, A flash oe Jlglitolncc uimumefi 

wmtmi5«'^!Vffl^ti™[''°iaaVfo^ 

t^^ medlanf beli>ji( Esale Stor, Ihrea yBBra old auU iBiiorant a™ «' 

•"thriliVnisr" Was II the child's '"psycblcioi 

^d by Google 

230 THE PHENOMENA PROVED. 

abound not only among tte opponents of Spiritualism, but 
anionf! Spiritualists tliemselves, and stories of fraud and Im- 
postuie are rife. I bave endeavored to eonEne myself to nar- 
rations of those plienomena of the realitj of wliicli abundant 
confirmatory proof lias 'been offered In spite of all opposition 
and dispute. 

Eeferring to the "liadgeiing and tormenting of mediums, 
the nailing them to the floor, or sewing tliem up in sacks, or 
binding their Iiands, feet, neck and iimbs tightly witli cords, in 
order to keep them from clieating,"Tho3.B. Hazard remarks: 

" It seems to me that enouRli lias been conceded by spiritnal 
mediums in tlie way of permitting fnTestigators of ttie phe- 
nomena to pretcribu conoltions nnder wliioli our spiiitfrienda 
Bhall maoiiebt their presence. It Las been tried long enough 
to prove by its results that the gospel of Spiritualism, like 
that practiced and preaclied by Jeens of Nazaretli, is not 
adapted to minds so full of conceit and fancied knoniedge 
that there ia not room for anything now to enter them. As a, 
class, the most learned in the scienee.s and what is called di- 
vinity are the fiuthesl off from what relates to spiritual 
truths than all others. The most stolidly ignorant are in ad- 
vance of such, for, as the thoughtful llelvetius wisely says, 
'Ignorance is the middle point between true and false learn- 
ing. The ignorant roan is as murli above the falsely learned 
as he is below him o( real science ; ' and again, ' Ue who la 
falsely learned and has lost his reason when he thought to 
improve It, has purchased his stupidity at too dear a rate ever 
to renounce it' Exactly so ; and this is just the ground that 
most of the learaed (so-called) in the sciences, divinity and 
medicine occupy in our day. Investigators from classca who 
have devoted years to studies conducted on a backivard track 
from truth, and acquired imperfect, not to say false notions 
of what relates to the spiritual side of man, scorn to surren- 
der the scholastte theories they have imbibed at so great cost 
of time, money and labor to the dictation of unlettei'ed me- 
diums, whether iuspired by devil or angel. Jesu<i showed his 
great wisdom in wasting no time on such as these, for the 
simple reason that he knew it would be of no avail. ' Who- 
soever (said he) shall not receive the kingdom of God as a 
little child shall in no wise enter therein.' " 

That there are frauds and self-delusions in Spiritualism 
every careful investigator knows ; but that there is a residuum 
of proved facts of the most wonderful kind, explicable by no 
theory of deception and deserving the attention of all earnest 
thinkers, is equally true. These facts can no longer be evaded 
or slighted by those who dare to face the truth however it 
may reverse their opinions. 

^d by Google 

OBJECTIONS CONSIDEEED. 231 

Tlio Springfield (Mass.) Republican, of Oct. 30th, 1874, 
publislies a long account of the Ediiy phenomena, and cliar- 
actetizea ttem as " the most mysterious facts that have been 
thus far recorded in the history of Spiritualism." Butmhile 
thus accepting the phenomena as proven, it concludes as fol- 

" The information the apparitions vouchsafe Is as valueless 
as all such Information lias been. One of tliem leeturfs 
vaeuely, one improvises sonRS, one dances and weaves spirit- 
ual cloth for other ■ spirits ' not so capable as herself, one 
merely nods and smiles. None of them have told usyet about 
thenewlife; weare nowiserthan ot old. The manifesta- 
tions In the Eddy homestead, tiius far, remarkable as they 
are, have simpiv added a deeper mystery to the stranRC thlnst 
called Spiritualism. We know it is not all imposture, we 
know it is not all illusion ; where and what the truth is, we 
yet wait to see." 

To a]l which the sufB.cient reply is simple enough : In the 
nature <>f things leMt fact could any spirit pouiUy coiwauni- 
eate to be compared in masjiitade wUh llie Proof PAirAULE 
of it) own exisliTiee ? 

The wonderful fact of a future life is, at the present time, 
either practically Ignored, or but faintly entertained, or else 
ridiculed and rejected by more than three-fourtlis of tho 
people of Christendom ; an atheistic Sclt nee hits its voice and 
proclaims annihilation as the only consistent ereed for a »a- 
vant; the prayer even ot believers is, "Help thou my unbe- 
lief !" and now, when spirits come and reveal themselves pal- 
jiably to our senses, and claim recognition, and get It, and de- 
clare to us that death has not destroyed them, or clianged 
their affections, the stupendous demonstraim.";, instead of 
being welcomed with exultation, is met with the complaint, 
" None of them have told us yet about the new life ; we are 
CO wiser than of old 1" 

"No wiser?" Does the faet itself leave us actually no 
wiser? Can any one who laments the loved one gone before, 
and longs foi a reiinion, say that the information which tha 
apparitions vouchsafe is " valueless "7 Valueless ? And the 
information they vouchsafe is, that the departed still live? 
Hear the testimony of one who has seen and heard and 

^d by Google 

232 DESCRIPTIONS OP SPIEIT-LIFE. 

touched. I have nlready (page 121) related my own inter- 
view with the Rev. Mr, Pope, wlio went with his wife to see 
the manifestations at Moravia, M".Y. He writes to Dr. Crow- 
ell, Feb. 2eth, 1873 : " We went there almost totally unbeliev- 
ing as to the possibility of seeinB o\i.r spiril>frien<Js, but our 
doubts and unbelief were soon swept away. We went there 
oppressed with o great sorrow ; we saw those we mourned, 
as alive from the dead ; we looked into their faces as In other 
days ; we received messages from their spirit lips ; we felt 
thetr celestial hands touching us, and we went away sorrow- 
less, our hearts singing for joy. All things now seem 
changed ; the world wears a brighter aspect ; and I tell people 
I am one of the happiest men on earth. I always believed 
and preached that the departed are alive, and near us, but 6*- 
lUving and seeing are widel]/ different thmgi, and I thank God 
for the ocular demonstration, and for the joy tt gives." 

It is not quite correct to say that spirits tell us nothing 
" about the new life." Their accounts of it are as various as 
their characters. As the objective environments of a spirit 
arc supposed to correspoud with his moral and mental state, 
it is quite consistent that the descriptions of their " new life " 
by these revenants should differ greatly. 

It is a question, moreover, whether it would not require the 
development of a new sense In ourselves before wo could fully 
comprehend the descriptions we might get of life In the spirit- 
world. Eve 'f we got something new— some truthful and 
extraordina y t f th w life"— what would it 

amount to u I w h d tl f Ity f accepting the truth 
When it was ff d 1 pp eel tl g t accordingly? 

We are t Id th t th gh Sp itu 1 m " we are no wiser 
than of old. T Ij th t d p d A mere fact adds noth- 
ing to our vii d m tl th f t cepted tor what it is 
worth. All tl f t whl 1 the highest archangel 
could impart i g d t th w life" would profit us 
nothing unl th w th p p nditions of mind and 
heart, or the opening of a latent sense, for its reception. 
Spirits and seers, ancient and modern, liave given full and 

^d by Google 

OBJECTIONS ANSWERED. 233 

various descriptiona oC tlie "new life'*; descriptions wliich 
may 1)0 true, false, or mixed ; but obviously tliey are iiotliing 
to OS until we have the data and the faculties for t^stinglheii 
accuracy. Mrs. A, A. Andrews says she lias seen autograph 
letters, enough to fill a volume, written by spirits, under 
strictest test conditions, upon paper untouched hy the me- 
dium, and containing descriptions of daily lite in tlie otlier 
world, which gaye as vivid a conception of existence there as 
It seems possible for those still in the flesh to form. 

To attempt to throw discredit on tlie significance of spirit 
matevialhatlons simply because sometlilng neie, beyond the 
amazing fact Itself, is not added, is obviously unwise. I:: 
ourselves, and not in the fact, must the requisite condition he 
presented before anything new in regard to the future life 
can enter our minds. A mere asserUon takes no root in an 
nnreceptive understanding. 

Suppose that a true account of the occupations In spitit-llfe 
of Plato, Shakspeare or Columbus were written out and pub- 
lished : what impression would it make unless we had been 
prepared, by thought, sympathy and prescience, to recognize 
the verisimilitude of the description ? 

The objection, therefore, that spirits " tell us nothing about 
the new life," does not hold ; tliey tell us a good deal, but 
what they tell us is valueless indeed so long as we ai-e unqual- 
ified to form an opinion of its truth. The prophecies of Cas- 
sandra were none tlio less true because they were not be- 
lieved. 

As for the objection, so often raised, "Why do not spirits 
forewarn us of many accidents, public or private, which 
their premonitions might avert?" the Spiritualist is not 
bound to give any other reply than this: " I do not know." 
Any person who will take the trouble to investigate may 
learn that. In many Individual cases, premonitions are given, 
and calamities are averted by spirit interposition. Why this 
is not done ottener, or in a manner to impress tlie public at 
large more forcibly, is a matter on which we may speculate 
but cannot speak with confidence. 

^d by Google 

234 THE PEOOF PALPABLE. 

Objections may be miiltipll<-d, but the> cannot invalidate 
tlie one great fact wlucb mu'-t bufln-t Fruofs palpable, giv- 
en ill tlie reappearance, in tempuratily niati^rialized forms, 
ot deceased person'!, are now oo numerous and so fully at- 
tested, that no incredulity or oppositiuii can impair tbeii 
force. The pbenoraena are admitted by all mho have quali- 
fied IbemselvtB by patient and unprejudiced investigation to 
pronounce an opinion 

Since the pbeiiomi,iia of Modtm Spintualiini cannot be ex- 
plained by known natural laws, and teem frequently to occur 
in violation of those laws, " there remain only for their ex- 
planation either the magic forces of the mediums, or of for- 
eign spirits." Such, as I learn from Dr. Bloede, Is the con- 
clusion of Dr. Maximilian Perty, Professor of Natural Science 
at the University at Berne, Switzerland, autlior of " The Mys- 
tical Phenomena of Iluman Nature;" who further admits 
that there are many undeniable facts which can hardly or 
not at all be explained by the forces of a medium or his sur- 
roundings, and must be attributed to spiritual beings. 

Thus to the spiritual theory all persevering investigators 
are brought at last, sooner or later, according to the extent 
and thoroughness of their experiences and studies. To the 
proofs mental and supersensual we liave now added the proof 
palpable of Immortality; and the result of our examination 
la that no theory, other than the spiritual, is ample enough 
to include all the facts, and to offer for them a rational solu- 

^d by Google 

ALPHABETICAL INDEX. 

AndrowB, Mrs, A. A.,*),45, 118, !» 
AndreiifB, Mra. Mnrj-, S3-W. 
Anlmnli', ImmortullCr of, 143, 03 
ApnlionluB, iriS, __ 

Appanlit"". >\22. St,m,73,J3li 
Aiiiyll, DntQ of. UW. 
AriVtotlp, la, IM. 

AtKSfliD.M, I6!l, '167,108, 176,184 
Atomixm, SU, 100. 
Aucrbneli, in. 
Au'-mtlne, St., 74, 7B, 1«. 
AuRbiwo, C«vb of, 27. 

Itnoon, jDha, 13^ 

BnniD, Lord, 148, 140, 150, 180 

Bala, Alox., 72,83. 

Barnnnl, ll.,4U 

Bnmi'B, Albert, 29. 

.r" 

8(1 13l),306. 

S5 ei, 92,119. 

Bible Spirit 
Hi(-elow, L. 
Billot. 213. 

Hi(-elow, L. A., 3a. 
Blllot.2l." 
IlHCktinri 

„._.jtBk7,Mra.,2', 
tloertc, Ur.,V10,lJ3 
llyton, T., Si, 

lnino,ti.,r'U 150.180. 

tiiclmnmi,.!. R., 0»- 
Baelmor. Dr., 27. ail, 157,174, "8 
Bueklo, a'UoE.,2n. 

Bu?nonF, 1(10, 105. 
BuriiB, Jns., 4R. 
BunIB, HrB. Jas., 43. 

CnbBnlB.ia;, tso. 

^d by Google 

Id b, Google
