Planchette; or, The Despair of Science (Epes Sargent, 1869)
===========================================================
Epes Sargent — The classic American defense against scientific materialism — 'Planchette; or, The Despair of Science'. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (planchetteordes00sargoog) — 1869 first edition.

Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 

PlANCHETTE; 

THE DESPAIR OF SCIENCE. 

FULL ACCOUNT OF MODERN SPIRITUALISSC, ITS PHENOMENA, 
AND THE VARIOUS THEORIES REGARDING IT, 

SURVEY OF FRENCH SPIRITTSM. 

^ Ja^et^^ 

BOSTON: 

ROBERTS BROTHERS 

1869. 

Hosted by Google 

Hosted by Google 

A PREFACE IN A LETTER. 

"\TY DEAR Friend, — More than twenty years 
ago, we ventured to cross the border of what 
Ennemoser calls "the great ill-famed land of the 
marvellous." Certain manifestations arrested our 
notice. Repelled and, for a long time, baffled by 
what seemed merely grotesque or trivial, we did not 
abandon inquiry. Our interest in the proscribed 
phenomena has not yet abated. We have lived to 
see the smile of derision with which the spiritual 
hypothesis that accompanied them was at first 
saluted, grow fainter and fainter, until it now rarely 
appears on the lips of well-informed persons ; and 
the question is put seriously, even by doctors of 
divinity and veterans of science, "What do these 
things mean?" 

I cannot presume to answer dogmatically ; but 
having kept trace of the so-called spiritual move- 
ment that began at Hydesviile in 1847, and having, 
long before that period, investigated the kindred 
phemomena of somnambulism, independent and 
mesmeric, I have hoped to offer such a survey of 

Hosted by Google 

the facts and theories as would be acceptable to 
earnest and uncommitted seekers after truth, always 
excepting those who, like Mr. Herbert Spencer, 
decline, "on d friori grounds," to look into the sub- 
ject. Recently, attention has been directed to it 
anew by the wooden trifle known as the Planchette ; 
and I have chosen the name of this mysterious toy 
as the title of my book, rather as a convenient sign- 
post, pointing to one little phase of the complex 
whole, than as indicating fully the character of the 
facts here collected ; for these are, I am persuaded, 
of supreme importance, embracing, as they do, in 
their relations, most of the authentic marvels in the 
pneumatology of ancient and modern times. 

Without undervaluing the tributary services of 
Planchette in certain rare cases, 1 cannot doubt that 
its eccentricities are often explicable by unconscious 
nervous movement or by wanton deception. But, 
after making allowance for all that is unprofitable, 
trifling, and tedious in the experiments, — for all that 
ought to be deducted as giving no conclusive evi- 
dence of supersensual knowledge or power, — there 
is a remainder of well-attested results, which cannot 
be explained by any theory of imposture, halluci- 
nation, or unexplored nervous action ; and these re- 
sults belong to the class here considered. 

I regret that the circumstances under which the 
present work was written did not permit me to shape 

Hosted by Google 

it in nearer accordance with my own notions of com- 
pleteness and of the far-reaching signiiicance of the 
developments ; but this earth-life is so brief and un- 
certain, that to have deferred my task, in order to 
accomplish more, might have been to accomplish 
nothing ; and when one has something to say, he 
may leave it for ever unspoken if he is over-nice in 
his choice of modes of presentation. May I not tell 
the public that to your pen, my friend, they may 
look for something more in keeping with the ampli- 
tude of the theme ; something of which I may ven- 
ture to announce, — 

" 'Tis not the hasty product of a day, 
But the well-ripened fruit of sage delay?" 
In treating of the anti- sup ernatu rail sm of the 
age, you remark, — 

"Every now and then comes forth soihe one who says aloud, 
after this manner : ' I know it, and also every man living knowe, 
by his own eyes and ears, that there has nothing ever been 
known of the spiritual world, not a word from it even, not a 
miracle. . . . That anybody knows, or ever has known, more 
about it than anybody else, is nonsense. I am myself the stand- 
ard by which you may measure Abraham, the patriarch; and as 
to his visions, they were merely dreams, su<;h as I have myself. 
I am the measure of the man Paul, And, you may believe me, 
as to voice or light from heaven ever having come to him at the 
time of his conversion, that it was not so. Simply, at that time, 
he had an attack of vertigo, such as we all know something 
about. Oh, this glorious clearing of the mind, by which now, 
in my view, there ie nothing higher anywhere than the level of 
my own experience 1 Oh, what a curafort it is to have miracles 

Hosted by Google 

shrink into common earthly things, and to know that nobody has 
ever seen them, any more than I have ! ' This would seem to be 
odd comfort; but there are persons whose needs it would seem 
to meet." 

You anticipate that the child born this year will 
see in his generation our men of science become 
reverent believers in the supernatural of the Scrip- 
tures. In the facts I here present, you wiil lind 
some reasons for this opinion ; but you will also 
learn that there are persons who admit the phe- 
nomena, but denounce Spiritualism as a " nervous 
epidemic, based on a gigantic assumption, and 
propping an ancient superstition," namely, that of 
individual spirits ! So, you see, there will be work 
still for the Spiritualists, even when the facts are 
generally accepted, as they are likely to be within 
the next quarter of a century. 

For portions of this volume, I can claim no 
other merit than that of a compilation. Some of it, 
however, is compiled from past publications of my 
own. For what I have adopted from others I have 
endeavored to give credit, except where the purely 
narrative form of the matter seemed not to require it, 
or its source could not be traced. 

Of late years, our public journalists have gener- 
ally been not only tolerant, but liberal, toward in- 
vestigators into the modern phenomena. In some 
instances, however, holders of the spiritual hypo- 
thesis have been met in a way which would be in- 

Hostea by Google 

suiting, if it were possible for a pedantic arrogance 
to insult. To some of their speculations a learned 
critic, whose audience is rather select than large, 
replies with impertinent personal detraction, — his 
ready relief when confronted by a non-ego that will 
not fit into his pigeon-holes. Then, in all dissen- 
tients, he sees at once a base congenital defect ; by 
the easy and polite imputation of which, without the 
foreign aid of argument, he would explain the au- 
dacious phenomenon of a way of thinking, different 
from his own. 

Less amusing, but equally supercilious, is the re- 
gard which a somewhat higher authority bestows on 
the spiritual theory. 

At this time, when the extreme materialism that 
denies a soul and a future life lifts its head with so 
assured an air, and assumes the tone of scientific 
certainty, claiming the latest discoveries of physiol- 
ogy and biology in its support, it is not for one who 
accepts substantially the leading facts of this volume, 
to be deterred by the ignorant misconceptions and 
the de-kaut-en-bas affectations of any would-be 
dictators in the world of letters and philosophy, 
from handing on to the next willing hand the torch 
which may help to illumine the occult places of 
truth. These enterprising critics aspire to put a 
stop to the great phenomena of Spirituaham by 
means of powerful leading articles and ingenious 

Hosted by Google 

PREFACE, 

feats of irony. A sneer at gravitation would have 
about as much effect as their clever writing has had 
in arresting progress. 

Thanks to that Providence who ever proportions 
our natural supply to our needs, physical and spirit- 
ual, the means of opposing to the hypothesis of the 
extreme materialist an array of positive facts are 
now widely famihar; so much so indeed, that the 
time for sarcasms and condescensions towards them 
is past, except among the loiterei's in the present 
quick march of mind. An accumulation of facts, 
supported by the most respectable contemporaneous 
testimony, is presented in this book, such as no free, 
sincere intelligence can dismiss with contumely or 
flippant unconcern. To neutralize their force, or to 
induce any person, who does his own thinking, to 
be blind to their importance, it will require some- 
thing more than a sprightly critique or even a crush- 
ing "editorial," — disgraceful as such insensibility 
may seem to the able editor himself. 

What are we to do with these facts? Criticism 
has done its worst, and they are still irrepressible. 
May we not hope that what is now the despair 
of Science may one day be its key to much that is 
obscure in the duplex nature of man; its clew 
to a complete rational assurance of his immortal 
destiny ? 

E. s. 

Boston, January, 1869, 

Hosted by Google 

TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER I. 

Wha-T Science Says of It 1-28 

PUuichelle, 01 Ihe little plank — Its cipriees — lia geneali^y — Related to 
the tipiang table; — Science puiiled — Phjaical disiiirhances — The phe- 
nomena impre^ble — Resistance to the fects— Cambridge and the me- 
lUoins— The Professors nonplussed— Their solemn admonition— Heibert 
Spencer — Faraday's lest — Science on the high hoise — Tj-ndall and 
Home — Sir Da.id Brewster — Professor Hate — Scientific redaction — 
Dr. Eltiolson — Mr. Wilkinson ^ Piofessor De Moigan — Testimony of 
eleclncians — A Bupett^ious philosopher — Humility of true science — 
History repeatb^ itself 

CHAPTER II. 

Thb Phekomena of 1847 29-54 

Rappingsat Hydeaville — The Foi family— Glanvd and Wesley — Melanc- 
thon-Lulher-MeetingatRocheBter— Letter of WiUiamMountfcird — 
Multiplication of mediums — Koon's rooms ^ Davenport Brothers 
Br. Gray's letter— Dark circles — Loomis's lestiraony — Professor Mapes 
— Captain Barton- The Davenports in Europe — French jugglers- 
Messrs. Coleman andCooper-TheStrMford phenomena- H.Greeley 
on Spiritualism- SenatorSinimons — Dr. Campbell — Cui bono ? 

CHAPTER III. 

Manifestations through Miss Fox 5S"79 

Dr. Gray on the phenomena- Mr. Uvermore's remarkable eiperiences— 
Kate Foi— Apparitions of Estelle and Dr. FranWin- Spirit flowers, cos- 
tume, &c. — What the seers say — Identity of spirits— Spirit-writing— 

body- 

CHAPTER IV. 

Manifestations through Mr. Home So-iw 

Mediumship of Home — Mrs. Lyon — Lawsuit — Home's affidavit — Per- 
sonal eiperiences — Thoi^t-reading -Thackeray a Spiritualist — Robert 

Hosted by Google 

! OF CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER V. 
The Salbm Phenomena, &c 104-1 

CHAPTER VI. 
Various Mediums and Manifestations .... 123- 

Colchesler— Mrs. Cushman— Miss Jennie Lord— Second leller of W. M, 

played on — Laura V. Ellis— Her imilatoH— Mr. Danakin-s narrative — 
The iron ling— Manifestationa through Charles H. Read — Mr. Richard- 
son's afBdavit— Spiiil-voices— Spiril-photogtaphs— Mr. Mumler — Mr. 

CHAPTER VII. 
The Seeress of Prevorst — Kerner — Stilling . 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Somnambulism, Mesmerism, &c 

Terience — Enlarged h< 

Hosted by Google 

TABLE OF CONTEN-I 

rs. 

Various 

n.=3nierisls - Arago - Prtdkiioos fulfilled - ■ 

l^he Stul. 

eard 

ptophec: 

,- Brill 

an-Zscl.. 

on the Mul- Shelley - Dl, Bushndl- CapQb. Y. 

;ient 

AlkiotDi 

1 — Hat Diuch of a shower — Dr. Elliolson again 

-The mo 

phenomi 

=oa known to Billot and Defeuzo- Clairv, 

Bd Spiriiu! 

ilism 

.-raoek- 

- Tyndall ■ 

-}■ 

Martina 

CHAPTER IX. 

iWheatt 

Toft-Wynyard 

-John 

Palmer, the aclor-HannlinKS-Tte Co 

ghost— Beau- 

wing 

phcnom 

eoa — Slrange doings — Naivative ^f B 

ir, Aschaner- Bal 

™50n - Shoter- T. Starr Kins ™ Spir 

lltmllsn, 

— Cariyle. 

Theories 
Eariylheo 

CHAPTER X. 

2l8 

lies— Dr. E. C. Rogers — Mahan, Bvay, 

Freride 

8-273 

, Bray, Frerideot Samson ^ ' 
— Theory of hallna 
A. Leighton — Remarks of " London Spiritual M^aiine " — Spiritual 
hypothecs — Value of scientific opinions — The iron collar — Double-goets 

— Mr. Owen's narrslive — B. Coleman — Apparitions of liying persons — 
Low character of communications — Fallible spints— Daumets theory 

— Rciohenhach on Spirilualiim — I'heory of Hooeslas— Of Dr. Ash- 
burner — Mr. Guppy-S " Mary Jane " theory — Odic theories reviewed by 

relation of Forces— Wake's psychology — Darwin's hypothecs — Re- 
marks of "London Star"- Character of voudiers— Various solutions— 
The first question, 

CHAPTER XI. 

Common Objectioks — Teachings 279-3^5 

The change wrought hj death — Johaid on the vulgar notion— Tendency of 
fegta—Causes of opposition- Natural repugnance — Higher manifesti- 
lioiiB— Spiritualism defined— Ahsence of dogmatic teaching— Wollaalon 
—Jamieson— Judge Carter— Report of Cleveland Cominitte*- Dark 
drcles- Dr. Wilkinson— Mr. Sliorter ~ Frivolous objecrions- Answer 
10 '■ New York Narion " — Pjihonism — Antiquity of SpirituaUsm — Con- 
liadicliDns- Dr. W. B. Potter— Mr. A. E. Newton's reply— LordLjlloo 
— What is mailer- Honesias- Plutarch— Julian the Apostate- Gei«ral 
agreement — Punlehmenl remedial - Statement from " Pall Mall Gaiette " 

Hosted by Google 

— 'ipirmialESm leaderless — Rochester resolulions — Discipline of evil — 
Discourse of a tnediimi — S, J. Finney — Shorter — Whal is religion 
-ksrdeo-A J. Davis-Bianca Mgjon-The Calhoiic Church- 
Hecker— " Dublin Review " — Diabolical agency — Swedenborgians and 
SpintuaLsts — Wm. While — Claims to in&llibility — Delachainbrc — 
Leasing— Object of earthly disdpiine. 

CHAPTER XII. 
Spiritism, Pre-existence, &c 326-373 

No recognition of leaders —Lalour on the phenomena — Allan Kardec — 
Spinbsni — It. doctrines— Re-incamation — Rev. Edward Beecher's 
"ConSicl of Ages" — Ori^nof evil — J. S. MiU on the Calvinisl doc- 
trine— Whitiier— A prevalent idea — Kardec on the siBtit-body — Heniy 

tations ftoni Herder, Lessing, &c. — Tiansmigralimi — Herodotus — 
Plato's Mmceplion — Origen's — Hume — Rolhery — Cudwoith — Scho- 
penhauer— I renins— J. W. Jackson — SwedenboiB— A. J. Davis- 
Cabinet — E. fitechot. — Reynaud's " Terre et Ciel "—The Theological 
heU - Pierre LeroiiK on memory - Chaseray - Advocates of IransmiKia- 
lion— Instinctive aspirations — Charles Bonnet — Matter and spirit— 

CHAPTER Xlir. 

PSYCHOMETRY 374-339 

Modem sdence in harmony with Spuimalism — Schroeder van der Kollt — 
Memory imperishable — Marvels of memory— Coleridge— Sir William 
Haraihon — Dupotet — Sensitives- Experiences of Zschokke — Of Des- 
champs- Of Goethe and Lavater— Of Forceylhe WiUson— Reichen- 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Cognate Facts akd Phenomena 390-400 

Spritualism of the Bible- Angustiaeon miracles- Testimony of Evodius, 
s bishop of the eariy church —The scholastic ages — Catholic miracles — 
Testimony of St. Theresa-Reply to Renan by Mounlford - Guardian 
angels- Speaking in unknown tongues- Oriental phenomena — Plan- 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTE. 

CHAPTER I. 

" Have any of the rulers or of llie Pharisees believed on Hiiu?"-i-l. ?d4«. 

THE future historian of the marvellous cannot well avoid 
some mention of the plaiichette or " little plank." For his 
benefit, we will remark that the year i368 witnessed the appear- 
ance of the pianchette, in great numbers, in the booksellers' 
ehops of the United States. 

Why so sudden a demand for it should have sprung up, no- 
body could explain. Pianchette was nothing new. For twelve 
or fifteen years it had been common in France, where it received 
its name. It was simply an improvement on some ruder instru- 
ment that had been in use among the original American inves- 
tigators, of the year 1848, into the rapping and table-tipping 
phenomena. 

The pianchette is a little heart-shaped table with three legs, 
one of which is a pointed lead-pencil, that can be slipped in and 
out of a socket, and by means of which marks can be made oii 
paper. The other two legs have casters attached, which can be 
easily moved in any direction. The size of this table is usually 
about seven inches long and five wide. At the apex of the heart 
is the socket, lined with rubber, through which the pencil is 
thrust. 

Not improbably, some future antiquarian will discover that 
this mystic toy was in use long before the days of Pythagoras. 

Hosted by Google 

The phenomenon of the tipping tables was known twenty cen- 
turies ago. 

The form of the planchette is of little consequence, and may 
be regulated by the caprice of the manufacturer. The instru- 
ment is made light, so that the slightest application of force will 
move it. As for the insulated casters and other " patent" con- 
trivances, they are of no account, except to give novelty to an 
advertisement. 

When the modern rapping phenomena began to be investi- 
gated, communications ftere received by the tedious process of 
calling over the alphabet, and noting down the letters at which 
the rap was given. Then, when the movements of tables took 
place, it was suggested that by arranging a pencil at the foot of 
a light table, and placing a sheet of paper under it, the intelli- 
gent force that was operating might produce written sentences. 

The device was tried, and found successful. The table, once 
set in motion by the passivfe influence of a medium, began 
to trace characters, then words and sentences. This method 
was finally simplified by substituting little tables, the size of a 
hand ; then small baskets, pasteboard boxes, and finally the flat 
piece of wood, running on little wheels, and called Planchette. 

Here we have the genealogy of the planchette. It is. vou 
see, the direct offspring of the tipping table. The pher 
in which it is made instrumental are, for the n 

„ And now, what will Planchette do? 

Place it on the smooth wood of a table, and let one person, or 
two or more, of a particular organization, rest the fingers on it 
lightly, and it will soon begin to move; and this without any 
conscious intent or action on the part of any individual present, 
as there is reason to believe. 

Then, by placing a sheet of white paper under the pencil, it 
will be found that intelligible sentences will be written out by 

There would be nothing curious in all this, were it not for the 
character of these sentences in many instances. Expressions 

Hosted by Google 

wholly foreign to the mental habits of the operators will be found 
on the paper. Thus, the pioue will he made to write profanely-; 
and the profane will be suddenly made instrumental in the pro- 
duction of messages which might do credit to Madame Guyon 
or to Vincent de Paul. But the results are as various as the 
idiosyncrasies of individuals. 

Frequently, answers to mental questions will be given with a 
directness that leaves no doubt as to the intelligence of the oper- 
ating force. 

For example : the other day an affectionate father put a men- 
tal inquiry, to which the instantaneous reply, under the hands 
ofachiId,was "Ahusband." The question had been, "What 
does Miss Susan wantf" The inquirer then asked what sum 
he had paid for repairing a certain garment and the answer was 
correctly given, "Three dollars and seventy five cents 

What wonder that the planchette should be gett ng to be a 
puzzle and a study to thousands of intellig nt nqu rer , for 
whom the great problems of psychology and pi ys o]o«iv have a 
not irrational interest? 

It must not be supposed that the " little planlt w II be equally 
communicative under the fingers of all. In the majority of cases 
it obstinately refuses to move. The failures are very numerous. 
Probably not more than ten out of a hundred persons in a mixed 
assemblage would be found, through whom the phenomena 
would take place; and in these hundred there might possifily be 
one who would prove a good medium. Such a one will soon 
discard the planchette as of no use, in the production of phe- 
nomena far more extraordinary than any got by its aid. 

The editor of the " Boston Journal of Chemistry," Dr. James 
R. Nichols, with a candor somewhat rare among men of science, 
remarks (September, 1868), of the phenomena of Planchette and 
the tipping tables: "The position assumed by a majority of 
scientific men towards this class of phenomena is that of entire 
disbelief. They do not separate the physical disturbances, the 
outward show of force by unseen agencies, from the spiritual 
interpretation mixed up with, or inseparably connected, as they 

Hosted by Google 

tion. 

ir t 

conclusio Th d 

first clea w alh bbhvihwhch ubd 

The great question le, W&ether these alleged fkystcal disturbances 
actually occur or not, independent of direct and palpable kummi 
agency. Is it mischief, or is it not? Is it delusion, or is it not? 
These questions they have settled in their own minds ; and the 
conclusion is, that Ihs pkeaomeiia are undeniably real. 

" Not a step further will they go ; beyond this all is misty and 
dark. Many occupy this position mho hesitate to admit it, as 
there is in scientific circles a peculiar sensitiveness ufon the subject; 
and odium and disgrace are liable to rest on any one, no matter 
how high his position may be, who cherishes a belief even in 
the reality of the physical disturbances. We incline to think 
the popularity of Planchette may serve to break a link in the 
chain of prejudice that binds fast honest convictions, and permit 
a little more freedom in thought and investigation." 

If the " little plank " shall accomplish as much as this, it will 
not have been wholly unproductive of good; but science must put 
off its dictatorial attitude, and take facts as they present them- 
selves, before it can hope to make any progress in the path of 
interpretation and induction. The writer adds ; — 

"We are asked Xa explain Planchette. To do this would be 
to explain a most remarkable and extensive class of physical 
phenomena, beginning with the antics of the little heart-shaped 
table, and running up through parlor tahle-tippings, rappings, 
writing, &c., to the more astounding physical disturbances, 
noises, and hub-bub, witnessed in so many dwellings in this 
country and in Europe. There are probably a dozen or more 
families disturbed in this mysterious manner in the United States 
at the present moment; but every effort is made at concealment, 
as but few people of respectability feel that they can bear up 
under the public odium attached to such proceedings. 

Hosted by Google 

"We once, for several hours, listened to the recital of what 
occurred in the dwelling of Rev. Dr. Phelps, of Stratford, Conn., 
from the lips of the venerable man himself. We were reduced 
to the alternative, from listening to his statement, of regarding 
him, his family, and a wide circle of intelligent friends, as the 
most egregiously duped, deluded, cheated circle of men and 
women, the greatest liars and impostors, that ever lived, or of 
believing in the reality of phenomena, which human reason and 
human science were incompetent to explain. We felt compelled 
to adopt the latter alternative. 

" Thousands, from the strange and unusual character of the 
phenomena, have been driven to a belief in their supernatural 
origin, and the unfortunate delusion has spread throughout the 
civilized world. We incline to think exaggerated views are 
entertained respecting the competency of scientific men to shed 
light upon the subject. The key to the mystery must be found 
before any reliable solution is reached. We will not weary the 
reader with details of what the writer has seen. Suffice it to say, 
that enough has been observed to lead to the conclusion, that 
tliere is one ^oxver, impulse, or farce, in nature, regarding the 
character of-whick, mankind are totally in the dark. 

" It has proved, so far as our experiments extend, a most 
difficult and baffling subject to investigate. The nature of this 
difficulty is illustrated in Planchette. Why cannot one person 
cause it to move as well as another? Why does it sometimes 
utterly and ignominiously fail when those are present who have 
the strongest desire to witness its movements, and when those 
who are supposed to influence its moieraents, ihare m this desire > 
The attempt, or design, to carefulli and methodically invest! 
gate and study the phenomenon appears to arrest it In some 
families, a lady, or a child eien stands m such relations to the 
instrument as to cause it to move by passing it at a consider 
able distance. It seems full of inip-itience to work when such 
persons are in the house , and it « ill write, leap, and run about 
as if impelled by an irre'.i-tible impulse It hai occurred when 
Euch a family has invited one or more ladies oi gentlemen to an 

Hosted by Google 

6 PLANCiiinTH. 

investigation of its performances, and thej have come, that the 
results have been frivoloue and unsatisfactory. A calm, philo- 
sophical, careful man is not likely to become convinced of the 
reality of this class of phenomena from such exhibitions. 

"Several years ago we invited a friend — a highly distin- 
guished professor in one of our largest Universities — to visit a 
house where certain estraordinary physical disturbances were 
alleged to be taking place, apparently in connection with a girl 
about twelve years of age belonging to the family. In this in- 
stance, the power was uncommonly demonstrative, the force 
being brought to bear upon several articles of furniture, but 
more particularly upon a parlor-table, which danced and tumbled 
about the room, entirely regardless of tlie professor's cool in- 
vestigations and ingenious tests to 'discover the trick.' This 
he entirely failed to accomplish. There were no conducting 
wires, springs, pulleys, or levers to be found; and the little girl 
and family were manifestly as ignorant of what produced the 
phenomena as ourselves. A large number of theories were pro- 
pounded and discussed, not one of which was in the least satis- 
factory; and the whole aifair remains a mystery. 

"In explanation, we hear it olten stated that it is due to 
animal magnetism. Of course, such declarations must come 
from the unlearned or unscientific, as science recognizes no 
such force or principle in nature as animal magnetism. Some 
kinds of fishes possess electrical power, and can impart shocks; 
but then they carry about with them a little arrangement of 
cells or batteries, which is the source of the electrical force. 
Human beings are not supposed to possess any such endow- 
ment. It is very convenient to have a term to apply in explana- 
tion of the phenomena among the crowd, although it may be 
entirely unmeaning and empirical. Electricity offers no expla- 
nation; neither does magnetism, as at present understood. 
Chemical laws and principles are appealed to in vain for a 
solution; and as regards ' odic force,' we have not the slightest 
knowledge of what that is. 

" In conclusion, we venture the opinion, that if the phenomena 

Hosted by Google 

HE HEH MEN RRB 

willu 
Su 
these phenomena which have been attrac g g 

of public attention for the last twenty ye S 

" put down " and " exploded," as we have 
they are now excorting from men of scien S 

tion, after years of bitter hostility and 
part, to which, however, there have bee 
tions. 

Perhaps Dr. Nichols is a little bastj S 

spiritual hypothesis "an unfortunate de 
the least, is as yet an open question. But g g 

to have the phenomena admitted. We m ff 

to their cause. Having agreed upon the / 
theory as to the origin may be, whether 
some unknown force not spiritual, or c w 

better term, that the force is spiritual,— g^ 

those who differ from us on this point, as 

The " Scientific American," the prlndp 
the United States, has had its attention attracted by Planche te 
to these despised phenomena; and, m one of its issues, ot July, 
,868, manfully makes the admission, that "a peculiar class of 
nhenomena have manifested themselves within the last quarter 
of a century, which seem to indicate that the human body may 
become the medium for the transmission of force to inert and 
dead matter, either in obedience to the will of others, or by the 
action of the nervous power upon the muscular system, in such 
a way that those through whom or from whom it emanates are 
totally unconscious of any euercise of volition, or of any mus- 
cular movement, as acta of their own wills." 
The only expression here that we would modify, is in the 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTE. 

remark 
in " the 
full of t 

ing the 

phenom 
merism, i 
The san 
men ha 

their rea 
would b 

tigate, escept upon their own conditions ; and ridicule not only 
of the phenomena themselves, but of those who believe in them -1 
have marked the course of scientiiic men ever since these mani- 
festations have laid claim to public credence. Such a spirit 
savors of bigotry. The phenomena of table-tipping, spirit- 
rapping so called, and the various manifestations which many 
have claimed to be the effect of other wills acting upon and 
through the medium of their persons, are exerting an immense 
influence, good or bad, throughout the civilized world They 
should, therefore, be candidly examined ; and if they are purely- 
physical phenomena, as has been claimed, they should be re- 
ferred to their true cause." 

Dr. J. Ray, well known in the United States for his works on 
Medical Jurisprudence, contributes to the - American Journal of 
Insanity," of October, 1867, a paper, ,n which he admits that many 
of the facts of Spiritualism "ire susceptible of proof, and are 
attested by evidence that places them bevond a reasonable 
doubt." ' They indicate,' he says, "the existence of agenc.e, 
certainly, that have not let been admitted mto the plulosophy 
of the schools It is to be regretted, that the present tendeni.y 
is to ignore them entirel>, rather than to make them a subject 
of scientific investigation It is '.urprising that pliisicians 
especially, with su>.h well recognized aflections betore them as 

Hosted by Google 

RESISTANCE TO THE KAC 

catalepsy, somnambulism, ecstasies, and double c 

should jump to the conclusion that all the facts of Spiritualism 

and animal magnetism are utterly anomalous and impossible." 

The first elaborate attempt to give a bad name to these phe- 
nomena was the " knee-joint theory " of Dre. Lee and Flint, in 
1849. It was declared that the raps were made by a slipping of 
the knee-joint, and a pamphlet was published to prove it. In- 
numerable were the denunciations from scientific quarters, that 
then followed the contemned phenomena. The testimony of 
thousands of competent witnesses was set aside as worthless. 
They did not know " how to observe." They had not had the 
advantage of a " thorough scientific training; " and they could 
not use their eyes and ears and other senses in a manner to 
afford any guaranty whatever that they were not under an hallu- 

Such was the language of the late Professor Felton, of Har- 
vard College ; and in England, of the celebrated Faraday and of 
Sir David Brewster. 

Every now and then paragraphs would appear in the news- 
papers, headed " The humbug exploded at last," " Spiritualism 
exposed," &c. And then we would be told that some "medium" 
had turned State's evidence, and had revealed how the "tricks" 
were accomplifihed. There have been many such mediums, 
wlio, having failed to attract attention by genuine phenomena, 
have hoped to reach the public ear and the public purse by 
undertaking to disclose how the manifestations were brought 
about. But, like Balaam, they could not curse whom God would 

All such attempts on the part of deserters have resulted in lit- 
tle that was satisfactory; although they have had a good effect in 
making investigators more wary, by showing that some of the 
phenomena of the dark circles, especially the rope-tying experi- 
ments, may be adroitly simulated. 

In the year 1857, a reward having been offered by the publish- 
ers of the " Boston Courier" for the production of certain phe- 
nomena, a well-known investigator. Dr. II. F. Gardner, of 

Hosted by Google 

Boston, undertook to exhibit them before a committee of pro- 
fessors of Harvard University, composed of Benjamin Peirce, 
Louis Agassiz, B. A. Gould, and E. N. Horsford, all of them 
gentlemen of the highest scientific distinction. 

The result of the rash experiment may be read in the follow- 
ing report, inade by this committee, and dated Cambridge, 
Mass., June 29, 1857:- 

"The Committee award that Dr. Gardner having failed to 

word imparted to the spirits In an adjoining room,' ' who read 
a word in English written inside a book or folded sheet of 
paper,' * who answered any question ' which the superior intel- 
ligence must be able to answer,' who ' tilted a piano without 
touching it, or caused a chair to move a foot,' and having failed 
to exhibit to the committee any phenomenon which, under the 
widest latitudeof interpretation, could be regarded as equivalent 
to either of these proposed tests, or any phenomenon which 
required for its production, or in any manner indicated a force 
which could technically he denominated spiritual, or which was 
hitherto unknown to science, or a phenomenon of which the 
cause was not palpable to the committee, is, therefore, not enti- 
tled to claim from the ' Boston Courier ' the proposed premium 
of five hundred dollars. 

" It is the opinion of the committee, derived from observa- 
tion, that any connection with spiritualistic circles, so called, 
corrupts the morals and degrades the intellect. They therefore 
deem it their solemn duty to warn the community against this 
contaminating influence, which surely tends to lessen the truth 
of man and the purity of woman. 

be Mtn fivjni the "Edinburgh Review" (July, 1868), where Ihal highly conservative 

Hosted by Google 

UTTERS HER PROTEST. II 

"The committee will publish a report of their proceedings, 
together with the results of additional investigations and other 
evidence, independent of the special case submitted to them, but 
bearing upon the subject of this stupendous delusion." 

The promised report has not yet (1868) seen the light. 

The solemn admonitions of the Cambridge professors against 
the " stupendous delusion" seem to have been of little sSect in 
repressing inquiry or checking belief in the manifestations ; inas- 
much as Spiritualists who could then be reckoned by thousands 
must now be estimated at millions. 

Dr. Gardner, on his side, reported that the four learned gen- 
tlemen insisted upon prescribing conditions that were fatal to the 
production of the subtle and evasive phenomena, obtained, inde- 
pendently of the will, from various mediums. 

On this occasion, the mediums were Miss Kate Fox, Mrs. Brown 
(of the Fox family), Mr. J. V. Mansfield, Mr. Kendrick, the 
Davenport Brothers, and Dr. G. A. Redman, since deceased. 

Raps were produced, but the committee were not satisfied that 
this now common manifestation, which no intelligent person 
questions, was not some mechanical trick. 

At the first sitting, Mr. Agassiz and others refused to sit at the 
table. The committee had agreed to make the conditions har- 
monious, as far as they could. Here, at the outset, was a devia- 
tion which discomposed the mediums. Mr. Redman, in his 
"Mystic Hours," states, that, on being importuned to join the 
circle, Mr. Agassiz averred that he had sworn never to sit in a 
circle, and meant to adhere to hie oath. 

Redman significantly asks, "Forwhatwas he present? Re- 
ceiving no manifestations of any consequence, Dr. Gardner and 
myself retired to an ante-room to inquire of the operating 
intelligence what next should be done? Scarcely were we 
seated at the table, when it moved violently; and a communica- 
tion was written, from right to left, to the purport, that unless 
all present were willing to receive, and shaped their actions 
accordingly, nothing could be done. We announced the sub- 
stance of the message to the party. Mr. Agaisiz desired to see 

Hosted by Google 

sa it, and ' that it was sheer 
humbug.' ... 

"I now politely invited Mr. Agassiz to join me in the ante- 
room, and we would try alone ; that no doubt he would be more 
Bucceasful. ' Sit with you ? ' said Mr. A., 'No! ■! have resolved 
to sit with no one. I made up my mind before coming here, 
that nothing would come of it; and I am only the more con- 
vinced it is all deception.' I could say no more." 

The experiments with the Brothers Davenport were reserved 
for the last. The following is the account given by Dr. T. L. 
Nichols, their Enghsh biographer (1865) : — 

"At the beginning, they were submitted to a cross-examina- 
tion. The professors exercised their ingenuity in proposing 
tests. ' Would they submit to be handcuffed ? '— ' Yes.'— ' Would 
they allow men to hold them?' — ' Yes.' A dozen propositions 
were made, accepted, and then rejected by those who made them. 
If any test was accepted by the brothers, that was reason enough 
for not trying it. They were supposed to be prepared for that, 
so some otiier must be found. It was of no use to put them to 
any test to which they were ready and apparently eager to 

"At last the Ingenious professors fell back upon rope,— -their 
own rope and plenty of it. They brought five hundred feet of 
new rope, selected for the purpose. They bored the cabinet, set 
up in one of their own rooms, and to which they had free 
actese, full of holes. They tied the two boys in the most 
thorough and the most brutal manner. They have, as any one 
may see, or feel, small wrists, and hands large in proportion, — 
good, solid hands, which cannot be slipped through a ligature 
which fits even loosely on the wrists. When they were tied 
hand and foot, arms, legs, and in every way, and with every kind 
of complicated knotting, the ropes were drawn through the holes 
bored in the cabinet, and firmly knotted outside so as to make a 
network over the boys. After all, the knots were tied with hnen 
thread. 

Hosted by Google 

THE PROFliSSORS NONPLUSSED. 13 

" Professor Peirce then took his place in the cabinet between 
the two brothers, who could scarcely breathe, so tightly were 
they secured. As he entered, Professor Agassie was seen to put 
something in his hand. The side doors were closed and fastened. 
The centre door was no sooner shut than the bolt was shot on 
them inside, and Professor Peirce stretched out both hands to 
see which of the two firmly bound boys had done it. The phan- 
tom hand was shown, the instruments were rattled : the profes- 
sor felt them about his head and face, and at every movement 
kept pawing on each side with his hands, to iind the boys both 
bound as firm as ever. Then the mysterious present of Pro- 
fessor Agassiz became apparent. The professor ignited some 
phosphorus by rubbing it between hie hands, and half-suffocated 
himself and the boys with its fumes in trying to see the trick or 
the confederate. 

"At laf^t, both boys were untied from al\ the complicated 
fastenings without and within the cabinet; and the ropes,were 
found twisted around the neck of the watchful Professor Peirce ! 
Well, and what came of it all? Did the professors of Harvard 
tell what they had seen? Not in the least. To this day they 
have made no report whatever of the result of their investiga- 
tion, and are probably, to this day, denouncing it all as humbug, 
imposture, delusion, Sic. What can a man of science do with a 
fact he cannot account for, except deny it? It is the simplest 
way of overcoming a difficulty, and avoiding the confession that 
there is something in the world which he does not understand. 
Of all men in the world, men of science, and especially scien- 
tific professors, are the last to acknowledge that ' there are more 
Ihings in heaven and earth, than are dreamt of in their phi- 
losophy.' " 

Thus ended the famous investigation into the phenomena by 
the Cambridge professors. As appropriate to the subject, we 
quote the following remarks from a letter by the late Dr. William 
Gregory, of Edinburgh, a well-known writer and physician : ^- 

"The rational inquirer will soon find that there are innumera- 
ble causes of failure, —such as the state of health of the sub. 

Hosted by Google 

ject; the state of the weather; the state of body or mind of the 
experimenter; and last, not least, the influence of the bystatid- 
erE, above all if they be skeptical, prejudLced, or excited by con- 
troversy. Whether in magnetism, in clairvoyance, or spiritual 
manifestations, we who have experimented know these things; 
but the scientific committees never do, and hence they most 
unreasonably expect, and indeed some observers as unreasona- 
bly promise, uniform success, as the test of truth. 

" For many years past I have never accepted any such chal- 
lenge or test ; nor have I made any attempt to convince, in this 
way, men who are capable of expressing decided opinions pre- 
vious to their having examined the subject. All that I ever 
consent to do is to make the trial, on the express understanding 
that failure proves nothing as to the disputed truth. And even 
then I reject all dictation as to conditions, as I will only experi- 
ment under the conditions presented by Nature, to whom the 
skeptics have no right to dictate Our dutv is to study Nature as 

hp dkh wfidra 

th d w p b n gh 

hbpdcedd h d 

d h d d gm m d n 

e 

Egh hbqte bh 

American biethrtn. Mr. Herbert Spencer settles the question 
on a fir/ari grounds, as glibly as if Bacon had not long since 
shown the absurdity of a priori objections to attested facts. 
Professor W. D. Gunning, of Boston, who lately (i86S) had an 
interview with Mr. Spencer, writes: "In the course of the con- 
versation, he referred to a great naturaUst. 'Mr. Spencer,' said 

I, 'do you know that Mr. has become a Spiritualist?' 

'Yes,' he said, 'and I am greatly surprised.' 'Did you ever 
look at the phenomena?' -No,' he said, 'I never did. I have 
settled this question in my own mind on i priori grounds'! 
Now, Herbert Spencer, for whose power as a thinker no one has a 
higher respect than myself, is writing a great work on psy- 
chology; and he settles these questions of odyle, trance, and of 

Hosted by Google 

FARADAY S TEST. 15 

obsession — involving the very nature of the soul and its pow- 
ers — on it priori grounds. The savans had settled the impossi- 
bility of meteoric stones a priori. But things settled in that 
way won't stay settled." 

Everybody has heard of the philosopher who refused to look 
through a microscope, on being told it would unsettle a favorite 
theory. 

In England, the late Professor Faraday committed himself, at 
an early period, against the possibility of the " spiritual " phe- 
nomena. His declaration that, " before we proceed to consider 
any question involving physical principles, we should set out 
with clear ideas of the naturally possible and impossible," was 
severely handled by Professor A. De Morgan, the distinguished 
mathematician. 

The whole assumption on which Faraday based his objection 
to facts of supposed spiritual agency was a misconception. 
Neither in table-moving nor any other of these phepomena is 
the creation of force implied, as he imagined, but simply the 
employment of existing forces by invisible intelligences; a view 
which, whether it be true Or false, is at least not manifestly im- 
possible. 

The only practical suggestion on this subject by Faraday was 
the employment of an instrument to test whether the alleged 
table-movements were, or were not, caused bj- the muscular 
pressure of the sitters around it; but, apart from other consid- 
erations, this suggestion was at once disposed of by the fact 
that these movements frequently occurred without the slightest 
contact with the table. 

In 1865, Faraday wrote, " They who say they see these things 
are not competent witnesses of facts." 

The facts which Faraday had so unhesitatingly pronounced to 
proceed from involuntary muscular action, and from no other 
cause, had become so unruly, that, after some fruitless attempts 
to right himself, he gave up the subject in disgust. 

At length, however, the numerous and circumstantial descrip- 
tions given by men of high note, and dinned into his ears, had 

Hosted by Google 

1 f> PLANCHETTE. 

their effect; and he signified his desire to see for himself. A 
meeting was accordingly arranged for him by Sir Emerson 
Tennant, at which Mr. Home, the medium, was to be present. 
But, lo ! the day before the sitting was to have been held, Fara- 
day demanded a programme of -what was to take place ! 

In a letter dated June 14, i86i, he says, "It would be a coa- 
descemioa on my part to pay any more attention to them [the 
occult phenomena] now." He asks, " Does Mr. Home wish me 
to go? Is he willing to investigate as a philosopher, and, as 
such, to have no concealments, no darkness? . . . Does he make 
himself responsible for the effects, and identify himself more or 
less with their cause? Would he be glad if their delusive charac- 
ter were established and exposed ; and would he gladly help to 
expose it, or would he be annoyed and personally offended? 
Does he consider the effects natural or supernatural? If natural, 
what are the laws which govern them? or does he think they 
are not subject to laws? If supernatural, does he suppose them 
to be miracles or the work of spirits.' If the work of spirits, 
would an insult te the spirits be considered as an insult to him- 
self f If the effects are miracles, or the work of spirits, does he 
admit the utterly contemptible character, both of them and their 
results, up to the present time, in respect either of yielding 
mformation or instruction, or supplying any force or action of 
the least value to mankind?" 

Such was the spirit in which the great scientist approached 
the subject. And Mr. John Tyndall, the eulogist of Faraday, 
and hardly his inferior as a man of science, makes the follow- 
ing announcement, under date of May 8, i863: " I hold myself in 
readiness to witness and investigate, in the spirit of the forego- 
ing letter, such phenomena as Mr. Home may wish to reveal to 
me during the month of June." 

Mr. Tyndall, echoing Faraday, calls upon Mr. Home, as pre- 
liminary to the "condescension" of an investigation by Mr. 
Tyndall, to " admit the utterly contemptible character of the 
manifestations and their results"! 

In his reply to Mr. Tyndall, Mr. Home writes, ■' I would ask 

Hosted by Google 

THB HIGH HOKSB. 1 7 

if this is the tone of a humble student and inquirer, prepared to 
analyze and ascertain facts, or whether it be not the sign of a. 
mind far gone in prejudging the question at issue? . . . When 
these matters first engaged public attention. Professor Faraday 
had, unfortunately, publicly decided they were due to involun- 
tary muscular action | and, as time went on, every development 
of them which proved the incorrectness of his explanation was 
received almost as a personal affront by him. . . . Mr. Tyndall 
says he is ready to witness and investigate in the spirit of-Mr. 
Faraday's letter. From the attitude he takes up, I fully believe 
it; and as such spirit is not that of logic, nor according to the 
true scientific method, I will wait until he can approach the sub- 
ject in a more humble frame of mind." 

Mr. Tyndall having introduced into his correspondence the 
nameofMr. W.M.Wilkinson, that gentleman addressed a letter 
to the " Pall Mai! Gazette," of London, in which, referring to 
Mr. Tyndall's proposition to retain Faraday's preliminary tests, 
he says, if conditions are to be the order of the day, he would 
like answers from Mr. Tyndall on certain preliminaries : — 

" If he insist on having an answer to Che question whether 
what he is about to investigate ' can be of any use or value to 
mankind,' 1 shall require him to answer whether the cuiiono has 
been introduced into science as a bar to inquiry, and, if so, vjicn T 
The history of science is full of instances in which centuries have 
elapsed between the observation of phenomena and their appli- 
cation to useful purposes. More than a thousand years the 
world had to wait before the known qualities of conic sections 
were applied in carpentry; and it was many years before the first 
experiments in electricity ended in the electric telegraph." 

When the Davenport Brothers visited England in 1864, yet 
another opportunity was offered Professor Faraday to set him- 
self right on the great question. Twenty-four gentlemen met at 
the house of Mr. Dion Boucicault, and, after a most searching 
and thorough investigation of the manifestations, unanimously 
agreed, that they "could arrive at no other conclusion than that 
there was no trace of trickery in any form, and certainly there 

Hosted by Google 

iO PI.ANCHKTTE. 

■were neither confederates nor machinery; and thai, so far as 
their investigations enabled them to form an opinion, the phe- 
nomena which had taken place in their presence were not tlie 
product of legerdemain." 

Professor Faraday was one of those invited ; and, on this oc- 
casion, he might have had, what on the former occasion he had 
thought so necessary, a programme; inasmuch as with the 
Davenports the same general order of phenomena, and in the 
same sequence, usually take place. This time, however, the de- 
mand was not repeated ; but, while acknowledging the courteous 
invitation of the Brothers, he expressed himself " disappginted " 
with the "manifestations," and therefore left them "in the 
hands of the professors of legerdemain." 

"If," he wrote, "spirit communications, not utterly worth- 
less, should happen. to start into activity, I will trust the spirits 
to find out for themselves hoiu they can move my attention. I am 
tired of tkem." 

It is barely possible that the spirits did not regard it as a mat- 
ter of supreme importance to find out how they might move Mr. 
Faraday's attention. 

Among the gentlemen present at the meeting which Faraday 
declined to attend, and all of whom testified to the good faith 
with which the cKperiments were conducted, were Lord Bury; 
Sir Charles Nicholson ; Sir John Gardiner; Rev. E. H. Newen- 
ham ; Charles Reade, author of " Foul Play," &c. ; Rev. W. Ellis ; 
Captain Inglefield, the Arctic explorer ; Robert Bell, the author; 
Robert Chambers, publisher and author; Dr. E. Tyler Smith; 
and other well-known persons. 

The late Sir David Brewster was almost as unfortunate as 
Faraday in his relations to this perplexing subject. In the early 
part of 185s, on the invitation of Mr. William Cox, of Jermyn 
Street, London, Brewster was at a siance, where Mr. Home was 
the medium. The late Lord Brougham, the late Mrs. TroUope, 
her son Mr. Thomas Trollope, and Mr. Benjamin Coleman, were 
also present. Seated in a private room, in the open light of day, 
the party saw, among other extraordinary things, a heavy table 

Hosted by Google 

SIR DAVID LOSES HIS TEMPER. ig 

rise from the floor; a phenomenon which Faraday had asserted 
the " undeviating truth" of Newton's law would not permit, and 
which, to believe in, was proof of " deficiency of judgment." 

In a letter to Mr. Coleman (Oct. g, 1855), Brewster writes, 
" It is true that, at Mr. Cos's house, Mr. Home, Mr. Cox, Lord 
Brougham, and myself sat down to a small table, Mr. Home 
having previously requested us to examine if there was any ma- 
chinery about his person; an examination, however, which we 
declined to make. When all our hands were upon the table, 
noises were heard, rappings in abundance; and finally, when 
we rose up, the table actually rose, as appeared to me, from the 
ground. This result I do not attempt to explain." 

In a conversation afterwards with Mr. Coleman, as the latter 
testifies. Sir David Brewster scouted the idea of there having 
been trick or delusion in the matter ; but said, " SJiirit is the last 
thing I -01111 give in to." 

At first stunned and surprised. Sir David seems to have subse- 
quently been laughed out of his profound impressions, and to have 
joined the scoffers. He wrote a letter to the " Morning Adver- 
tiser," in which he affected to cast ridicule on the subject. Mr. 
Cox, Mr. TroUope, and Mr. Coleman, each wrote to refute Sir 
David, and placed him in a position before the public not the 
most honorable to his consistency and courage. 

Goaded by these confutations, he afterwards, in a published 
address, dismissed the stupendous amount of testimony con- 
firming the phenomena of Spiritualism, with the following 
words : " All such beliefs are the result of an imperfect education, 
of the want of general knowledge. They are the observations 
of ill-trained faculties, the cravings of morbid and mystic tem- 

B that have been suckled on the husks and garbage 

literature," &c. 

And yet his own letter is in existence, in which he says, " 
result [the rising of the table] I do not attempt to explaio' 

He sees a table under his nose rise from the ground; doe 
attempt to explain it; will, on reflection, rather distrus 
senses than admit that the fact was other than an appear. 

Hosted by Google 

and contents himself with referring the belief of others, seejng 
a similar thing, and beiievEng that they see it, to "ill-trained 
faculties " I 

If such is to be the last word of science on the subject, is it to 
be wondered that science his been told not to block the way? 

It 16 pleasant to turn from these instances of arrogance and 
illiberality on the part of men of science to others of a very dif- 
ferent character, from men who are their peers. The late Pro- 
fessor Hare (born, in Philadelphia, 1781, died 1858) was eminent 
both as a chemist and electrician. For twentj-nine years he was 
professor of chemistry in the medical school of the university 
of Pennsylvania. After first maintaining, in a published letter, 
dated July 27, 1853, the mechanical view of the phenomena taken 
by Faraday, Dr. Hare instituted a series of scientific tests and 
experiments, the result of which was, that he became convinced 
there was a new order of facts which could not be explained on 
Faraday's theory. Though be may be charged with credulity in 
accepting much that came by supposed spiritual communi- 
cations, no one can deny that he investigated the physical phe- 
nomena with a rare amount of patience and skill. He was 
thoroughl ■ d f the genuineness of the manifesta- 

^'"- ^ d unbeliever in deity and in the immor- 

•^^'''y ° ly before his death, he avowed himself 

"°' "" S but " a believer in revelation, and in a 

revelati J of Nazareth." 

^°^^ he experience of Dr. Hare was that of 

Dr. John Elhoteon, F.R.S., president of the Royal Medical and 
Chirurgicai Society of London, and who died July, 1868, at the 
age of eighty. He had been a fearless investigator of the phe- 
nomena of mesmerism, but had rejected some of the higher 
marvels of somnambulism and clairvoyance. A materialist in 
hisbeljef, he had written an elaborate treatise denying the ex- 
istence of an immortal soul. He denounced all mediums as 
ielusions the facts claimed by 

Hosted by Google 

SClENTIFiC RE-ACTION. Zl 

In the year 1863, being at Dieppe, he was introduced to Mr. 
D. D. Home, and spent some time in investigating, with the aid 
of the sons of his friend, Dr. Symes, the phenomena attributed 
to Spirituaiism. The result Was, in the language of the "London 
Morning Post," of Aug. 3, 1868, " that he espressed his convic- 
tion of the truth of the phenomena, and became a sincere Chris- 
tian, whose handbook henceforth was the Bible. Some time 
after this, he said he had been living all his life in darkness, and 
had thought there was nothing in existence but the material." 

Professor A. De Morgan, of London, as contemporary' en cj'clo- 
piedias will show, is of the first eminence as a mathematician. 
In 1863, a volume of some four hundred pages, from the pen of 
his wife, appeared, bearing the title, " From Matter to Spirit : 
the Result of Ten Years' Experience in Spirit Manifestations." 
The preface is by the professor himself; and in it he plainly ad- 
mits his belief in the reality of the phenomena, although incred- 
ulous as to their spiritual origin. 

"I have no acquaintance," he says, "either with P. or Q;,; 
but I feel sure that the decided conviction of all who can see 
both sides of the shield must be, that it is more likely that P. 
has seen a ghost than that Q^ kneivs he cannot have seen one." 

"I am perfectly convinced," he says, "that I have both seen 
and heard, in a manner which should make unbelief impossible, 
things called spiritual, which cannot be taken by a rational being 
to be capable of explanation by imposture, coincidence, or mis- 
take. So far I feel the ground firm under me. But when it 
comes to what is the cause of these phenomena, I find I cannot 
adopt any explanation which has yet been suggested. . . . 
Spirit or no spirit, there is at least a reading of one mind by 
something out of that mind. . . . 

"The Spiritualists, beyond a doubt, are in the track that has 
led to all advancement in physical science; their opponents are 
the representatives of those who have striven against prog- 

" There is a higher class of obstructives who, without jest or 
sarcasm, bring up principles, possibilities, and the nature of 

Hosted by Google 

22 

'l.ANCHHTTE. 

IfciiiBS. The.e mo.t worthy ind re.ptct.ble opponeM, ,„ if 
wropg to b. reckoned the U„eal de.c.nd.ott „f tho.e who 
proved the e.rlh co-Id not he round, bec.o.e the people on the 
other side would then tumble off. .. . 

"I have said that the deluded spirit-rappers are on the riitht 
track, the, have the spirit and the method of the grIndS 
When ,h„,e p.th, ,ere cut through the uncleared fori in which 
It IS now the daily routine to walk. What was that spirit? It 
wa. the .p,ri, of universal examination, wholly unchecked b, 
fear of hemg detected in the examination of uon.en.e 

c P "i" e to 

the spi rf „ 

, P gi p of 

unkno p w d .„h .. _ „ 

J .. '■ o n o h ho 

' P '' P *■ P wn 

. ''!f.' " h »h h 

mtehig ce hgw „nh hd con- 

ception D lYi t. 

Soelet, ' " ' " •■ 

, """ ■ f ' h w wh „d 

low?° 1 ' !■ mp wh p ". 

r°*'* " h . wh h q t y mfers imposture 

. d ,n T ™P<"slWlity of the pheuomeua asserted, 

and then alleges imposture agamst the examination of the evi- 

J'" ',' v"' '-"^'^ *""'" " ""*'° '"" •'-" »= n«ttr 
Mgau to be everywhere talked about; during which time there 
nave been many announcements of the total extinction of the 
.pint mania. But In several ease., a. 1. Tom Moore's f.b.e, 
the extinguishers have caught fire." 

The late Daniel Davl., of Boston, well known a, an eleclrical 
ms rumeut-maker, was so thoroughly persuaded of the genuine- 
ness of the phenomena, as manifested in raps, movements of 
tables, &e., that, after exhausting all hi. practical knowledge 

Hosted b, Google 

MR. VARLEYS TESTIMONY. 23 

in testing them, he offered a reward of a thousand dollars to an/ 
one who would produce them independentlj of any medium. 
It is needless to say that his offer was never accepted. 

Another electrician, Mr. C. F. Varley, at the trial of the cele- 
brated case of Lyon Tiersus Home, in London, April, 1S68, made 
oath as follows ; "il have been a student of electricity, chemistry, 
and natural philosophy, for twenty-six years, and a telegraphic 
engineer by profession, for twenty-one years ; and I am the con- 
sulting electrician of the Atlantic Telegraph Company, and of 
the Electric and International Company 

" About nine or en ea s ago ha n^ had n a en on 
directed to the sub e t of bp u s n by pon ane u and 

unexpected developmen n my own fam ly n he fo of 
clairvoyant visions and on n un cations I de e n ned to test 
the truth of the alleged phys a phenomena to t e be t of my 
ability, and to ascert^ n poss ble tl e natu e of he fo ce h ch 
produced them. 

"Accordingly, about eight years ago, I called oa Mr. Home, 
and stated that I had not yet witnessed any of the physical 
phenomena, but that I was a scientific man, and wished to in- 
vestigate them carefully. 

" He immediately gave me every facility for the purpose, and 
desired me to satisfy myself in every possible way; and I have 
been with him on divers occasions when the phenomena have 
occurred. I have examined and tested them with him and with 
others, under conditions of my own choice, under a bright light, 
and have made the most jealous and searching scrutiny. I have 
been since then, for seven months, in America, where the sub- 
ject attracts great attention and study, and where it is cultivated 
by some of the ablest men; and having experimented with, and 
compared the forces with electricity and magnetism, and after 
having applied mechanical and mental tests, I entertained no 
doubt whatever that the manifestations which I have myself 
examined were not due to the operation of any of the recognized 
physical laws of nature, and that there has been present on the 
e intelligence other than that of 
the n- "■ 

Hosted by Google 

^4 FI^NCHETTE, 

Mr. J. H. Simpson, another English electrician, the inventor 
of electrical apparatus, including one for printing at a distance 
by the telegraph, writes (iS68) to " Human Nature," a monthly 
magazine, published in London, as follows : " That the physical 
effects are, ,n Mr. Home's case, produced without aid from elec- 
tricitj-, ferro-magnetiem, or apparatus of any kind, I am well 
satisfied. Thej are &o»4 fide. Of that no one who witnesses 
them can have a doubt." He adds, however, "I believe that 
nine-tentbs of the phenomena produced through Mr. Home will 
some day be shown to have nothing to do with aid lent by die- 
embodied spirits." 

With regard to the one-tenth remaining, Mr. Simpson sug- 
gests no theory as to their origin. 

. One ofthe earliest and most accomplished inq " " t th 
P'^ W 11 m M rti W Ik 4+, L i 

I FldLod Sit H bth fhd 

t gu 1 d J G h W Ik I h ftd t ( 86&1 th 

H ca 1 dj f d h - 

&hphmhb 11 b db 1 

fthmtpwri-1 g fE pe dbyp 

"1 1 -^ g P f d 1 d 

<^ dbyptlm fb d dt 

^ y tl g 1 k f d t mp bi 

^ •" h b gg t d by J f pi t 

d w th tl b t t p bl m b 1 gy d 

Phy My w h bj p b bh 

Prttt' hgd t dgt 

d h bj ct f Spiritualism is bo misunderstood by the pub 
he, I have the right to tay that having had my attention drawn 
to certain remarkable occurrences about eighteen years ago in 
the house of a relative and which continued for ncdily twehe 
years, I have since that time occupied a portion of m> leisure in 
inquiring into the sub,ea and in arranging the vinous phe 
nomena, and compinng them with histor cal statement;, of 
similar occurrences 
"I have very seldom been at anv 4!n « and that not for 

Hosted by Google 

A SUFERCILIOtrS PHILOSOPHER. 35 

many years, having entirely Eatisfied myself years ago of the 
truth of most of the phenomena, — that is, of their actual happen- 
ing; and I have at the same time and for many years formed 
and constantly expressed the opinion that itwaswrong to be- 
lieve in, or act upon, what might appear to be communications 
from the unseen, on their own evidence merely. I have in- 
variably inculcated that no such communication should be re- 
ceived as of so much value as if it were told by a friend in this 
world, inasmuch as you know something of your friend here, 
and cannot know the identity or origin of the communicant. 

" 1 have frequently referred to the passage in the Old Testa- 
ment, in which it is said that God sent a lying spirit, and to the 
directions given us in the New Testament, to try or test the 
spirits. I have pursued the inquiry under great misrepresenta- 
tions and obloquy, and I intend to continue it as long as I can; 
and I believe that the subjects of spiritual visions, trances, 
ecstasies, prophecies, angelic protection, and diabolic possession, 
anciently recorded, have already had light thrown upon them, 
and will have much more. I submit that I iiave a right to 
pursue an inquiry into psychological laws, without being sub- 
jected to ridicule or abuse, and that the proof of supernatural 
occurrences is valuable in both a scientific and religious point 
of view. The mere physical phenomena which the public 
erroneously fancies to be the whole of Spiritualism, and which, 
of course, afford room for spurious imitation and fraud, are in 
my belief the most unimportant part of the subject, and have not 
for years engaged my attention." 

Mr. G, H. Lewes, author of a " History of Philosophy," took 
part in the Tyndall-Home controversy, in a long letter, (May, 
1868), the burden of which was, that men of science were quite 
right to refuse to waste their valuable time in investigating the 
pretensions of mediums, and that "had the tone of Faraday's 
letter been ten times more offensive, it would have been no 
excuse for Mr. Home's declining his investigation." 

Upon which the London " Spiritual Magazine " remarks, "Let 
the matter as to examination be put on its right ground ; namely, 

Hosted by Google 

26 PLANCHETTE. 

that scientific and literarj' 
examination of the quest 
opportunities are so open 
lions of people have alrea 
many of them men of the 
Jt would be stepping out 
man in. We protest aga 
profoundly ignorant men 
covered in a corner, becau! 
formed of it. Spiritualis 

mere day of testing and proving as even the law of gravitation. 
When as many men and women have accepted !t as would peo- 
ple ScoUand several times over, it is surely ridiculous for such 
as Professor Tyndall and Mr. Lewes io asi for some scientific 
nob to seiiU the point for them. Jf he -wishes, let tie nob do it 
on his own account, or stand out of the ■a/ay." 

We have said enough to sliow the attitude of science, past 
and present, with some honorable exceptions, towards the great 
facts re-asserted by modem Spiritualism. 

The reality of the alleged facte, supposed to be spiritual, must 
be tried by the same tests as any other class of alleged facts; 
that is, by testimony and experiment. It is believed that they 
have been so tried. Whether they are caused by spiritual agency 
is another and separate question ; and whether scientific men are 
the best qualified to decide this point may well admit of doubt. 
They hare no instruments to lay hold of spirits; no chemical 
tests by which to detect their presence. Retorts and galvanic 
batteries are here of no avail. A simple woman, like Joan of 
Arc or the Seeress of Prevorst, may be the true experts here. 

The complaint is often made that science has outran religious 
belief; that as men have acquired more knowledge, they have 
become more and more unsettled in their opinions as to their 
inner iife, and in the existence even of the spiritual world. The 
facts of modern Spiritualism present themselves no sooner than 
they are needed to meet the want which this tendency has 

Hosted by Google 

HUMILITY OF TRUE SCIENCE. 2'] 

There has long g n ti n h h d veries of 

the age have so far g d m h h er quali- 

fied to form accura p g ce cult phe- 

nomena than were h gr of three 

centuries since, h p n q omething 

not to be question h P, b - Socrates, 

Plato, Plutarch, Origen, Augustine, Luther, Baxter, and Mather, 
were mere children, compared with the college professors of our 
own day, in their ability to judge of the genuineness of these 
phenomena. Because science has invented a few chemical tricks, 
and has made great discoveries in electricity and magnetism, 
it is assumed that the ancients must have been more easily im- 
posed on than we, in regard to psychological marvels. _ There 
is no evidence whatever that such was the fact. 

The phenomena on which the ancients based their belief, in 
gods or spirits, and the Blackstones and Glanvils their belief in 
witchcraft, were, with unimportant exceptions, experiences anal- 
ogous to those to which thousands of persons are now bearing 
testimony. Science has not made us one jot better able to dis- 
pute the genuineness of these phenomena than were the men of 

"We refuse," says a recent writer, "to believe assertions 
without evidence: we decline to reject testimony merely be- 
cause it vouches what is new or strange. It is cot in the least 
impossible, it is not even improbable, it is probable, rea- 
soning from the past it is even certain, that real phenomena 
should reveal themselves totally inexplicable by any known law, 
apparently a violation of physical laws, perhaps new prin- 
ciples, pregnant with marvels to which the tictions of the past 
are prosaic. What Paul ever thought of making the sun paint? 
What Joseph or Elisha could ever converse with a friend three 
thousand miles across the ocean? Talk of prophecy! Why, 
Halley predicted the very day and minute of the appearance of 
a comet which was myriads of miles away at the time he diedl 
There is no event better authenticated in history than Sweden- 
borg's vision of the great fire of Stockholm. The perfectly 

Hosted by Google 

i3 

ascertained facts of mesmerism, clairvoyance, and electricity, 
prepare ub to wait with reverence and candor upon the unfold- 
ing of such phenomena as are attested by Bell, Gully, and Col- 
lier; and we «hall never be ashimed to own that as truth m all 
ages has owed ^ery much more to credulity than to conceited 
skepticism and self sufhc ent prejudice so there o no pbenom 
cnon, however marvellous tl at we should a priori reject is 
impossible in the face of cognate facts and accumulated m 
telligent, and unexcept onable testimony 

It is the duty of Science to wait upon Nature to reverentlv 
listen to what she chooses to teli and in the wav it pleases her 
to utter it and deal with the Jacts that a e maniiested without 
ignoring them because others are t ot man lested We n u t be 
glad to learn her lesson on the conditions she choo?es to p e 
scribe, thankful to accept such insight into her arcana as che 
vouchsafes to grant 

We can readily underatind why ti n d sectana is should de 
nounce the investigation of these phenomena as dangerous; but 
how, in this nineteenth century, a committee of intelligent 
gentlemen, renowned for their attainments in their respective 
departments of science, and whose province it was to consider 
the subject from a purely scientific stand-point, should think to 
frighten grown men and women from pursuing an inquiry into 
certain remarkable facts of nature, by raising the cry of " im- 
morality," and talking of their " solemn duty to warn the com- 
munity," &c., would indeed be astounding, did we not remember 
that history repeats itself, and that there were "professors" 
before the year of grace 1857 ; even among those wise ones who 
denounced the researches and revelations of Copernicus and 
Galileo as immoral, pernicious, diabolical, tending " to lessen 
the truth of man and the purity of woman." 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER II. 

THE PHENOMENA OF .847- 

" there b in oalure Aothiog mterpolaud or without coQ:i«ctionT 9s in a bad 
tragedy." — AristQile- 

TN the little village of Hydesville, Wayne County, New York, 
■'- there stood, in 1847, a small house, which had been occupied 
by Mr. Michael Weekman. He had been troubled by certain rap- 
pings, of which he could give no esplanation. But they at- 
tracted little attention, and may have had no connection with 
subsequent developments. It was reserved for the family of Mr. 
John D. FoK, of Rochester, a respectable farmer, to ha.ve their 
names inseparably associated with the first development of the 
modern spiritual movement, based on the phenomena now chal- 
lenging the regards of all thoughtful persons. 

Mr. FoK moved into the house the nth of December, 184.7.- 
His family consisted of himself, his wife, and six children % but 
only the two youngest were staying with them at the time of the 
manifestations, — Margaret, twelve years old, and Kate, nine 
years old. The former of these sisters subsequently became the 
wife of the celebrated Captain Kane, the Arctic explorer. 

From the first, the family were disturbed by noises in the 
house; but these they attributed for a time to rats and mice. 
In January, 1848, however, the sounds became loud and start- 
ling. Knocks, BO violent as to^produce a tremulous motion in 
the furniture and floor, were heard. Occasionally there would 
be a patter of footsteps. The bed-clothes would be pulled off; 
and Kate would feel a cold hand passed over her face. 

Hosted by Google 

3° PLANCHETTE. 

Throughout February, and to the middle of March, the dis- 
turbances increased. Chairs and the dining-table were moved 
from their places. Mr. and Mrs. Fox, night after night, with a 
lighted candle, explored the house, but in vafn. While thej' 
stood close to the door, raps would be made on it; and on their 
opening it no one would be found. 

On the night of March 31st, having been broken of their rest 
for several nights previous, they retired to bed earlier than usual, 
hoping to sleep without disturbance. The sounds, however, were 
resumed. They occurred near the bed occupied by Kate and 
Margaret. Kate attempted to imitate the sounds by the snap- 
ping of her fingers. There was the same number of raps in re- 
sponse. She then said, " Now do as I do ; count one, two, three 
four, five, six," at the same time striking her hands together. 
The same number of raps responded, at similar intervals. The 
mother of the girls then said, " Count ten ! " and ten distinct 
raps were heard. " Count fifteen ! " and that number of sounds 
followed. She then said, "Tell lis the age of Katie" (the 
youngest daughter), " by rapping one for each year; " and the 
number of years was rapped correctly. "How many children 
havel.?" There were seven raps in reply. "Ah!" she thought, 
" it can blunder sometimes." " Try again." StitI the number 
of raps was seven. Mrs. Fox was surprised. " Are they all 
alivef" she asked. No answer. " How many are dead?" There 
was a single rap. She had lost one child. 

" Do as I do," said Kate Fok. Such was the commencement. 
" Who can tell," asks Owen, " where the end will be ? " 

" A Yankee girl, but nine years old, following up, more in 
sport than earnest, a chance observation, became the instigator 
of a movement, which, whatever its true character, has. had its 
influence throughout the civilized world. The spark had been 
several times ignited, — once, at least, two centuries ago; but it 
had died out each time without effect. It kindled no flame till 
the middle of the nineteenth century." 

The instances here referred to are the answers by knocks 
elicited by Mr. Mompeeson in 1661, and by Glanvil and the 
Wesley family. 

Hosted by Google 

D WESLEY. 3! 

The Rev. Joseph Glanvil, chaplain in ordinary to Charles II., 
was a writer of great erudition and ahility. In his "Sadducis- 
mus Triumphatus," written tp show that the phenomena of 
witchcraft were genuine oecnrrciices, he gives an account of Mr. 
Mompesson's haunted house at Tedworth, where it was observed 
that, on beating or calling for any tune, it would be exactly 
answered by drumming. When asked by some one to give three 
knocks, if it were a certain spirit, it gave three knocks, and no 
more. Other questions were put, and answered by knocks 
exactly. Glanvil himself says, that, being told it would imitate 
noises, he scratched, on the sheet of the bed, five, then seven, 
then ten times; and it returned exactly the same number of 
scratches each time. 

Melancthon relates that at Oppenheim, in Germany, in 1620, 
the same experiment of rapping, and having the raps exactly 
answered by the spirit which haunted a house, was successfully 
tried ; and he tells us that Luther was visited by a spirit who 
announced hie coming by " a rapping at his door." 

In the famous Wesley case, the haunting of the house of John 
Wesley's father, the Parsonage at Epworth, Lincolnshire, in 
1716, for a period of two months, the supposed spirit used 
to imitate Mr. Wesley's knock at the gate. It responded to the 
Amen at prayers. Emily, one of the daughters, knocked ; and it 
answered her. Mr. Wesley knocked a stick on the joists of the 
kitchen ; and it knocked again, in number of strokes and in loud- 
ness exactly replying. When Mrs. Wesley stamped, it knocked 
in reply. 

It is not surprising that John Wesley was a Spirnualist. 
"With my latest breath," he writes, "will 1 bear my testimony 
against giving up to infidels one great proof of the invisible 
world ; I mean that of witchcraft, confirmed by the testimony of 

A writer in the " Encyclopaidia Metropolitans " (London, 
1861), referring to these and similar phenomena, observes: 
"It is, to say the least, a remarkable fact, that such occurrences 
are to be found in the histories of all ages, and, if inquiries are 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTE. 

but sincerely made, in the traditrons of nearly all living fami- 

lies. Til 

ral monitions of this kind 

portending death; and the authentic records of such thin 
■would make a volume." 

In the '■ Life of Frederica HaufK, the Seeress of Prevorst, by 
Dr.Justinus Kerner, chief physician atWeinsberg ■• (who died 
in 1859), almost every phase of the recent spiritual phenomena 
is described as pertaining to her experience. To these more 
than twenty credible witnesses teetify. They consisted in re- 
peated knockings, noises in the air, a tramping up and down 
stairs by day and night, the moving of ponderable articles, &c. 
But we must return to the experiences of the Fox family. 
Startled and somewhat alarmed by the manifestations of intelli- 
gence, Mrs. Fox asked if it was a human being that was making 
the noise, and, if it was, to manifest it by making the same noise. 
There was no sound. She then said, " If you are a spirit, make 
two distinct sounds." Two raps were accordingly heard. 

The members of the family by this time had all left their beds, 
and the house was again thoroughly searched, as it had been 
before, but without discovering any thing that could explain the 
mystery; and, after a few more questions-and responses by raps, 
the neighbors were called in to assist in tracing the phenomenon 
to its cause. But the neighbors were no more successful than 
the family had been, and confessed themselves thoroughly con- 
founded. 

For several subsequent days, the village was in a turmoil of 
exciteijent ; and multitudes visited the house, heard the raps, 
and interrogated the apparent intelligence which controlled 
them, but without obtaining any clew to the discovery of the 
agent, further than its own persistent declaration that it was a 

About three weeks after these occurrences, David, a son of 
Mr. and Mrs. Fox, went alone into the cellar, where the raps 
were then being heard, and said, ''If you are the spirit of a 
human being who once lived on the earth, can you rap to the 
letters that will spell your name? and if so, now rap three 

Hosted by Google 

THE ROCHESTER KNdCKINGS. 33 

times." Three raps were promptly given, and David proceeded 
to call the alphabet, writing down the letters as thej were indi- 
cated ; and the result was the name, " Charles B. Rosma," a 
name quite unknown to the faniilj', and which thej were after- 
ward unable to trate. The statement was in like manner 
obtained from the invisible intelligence, that he was the spirit of 
a peddler, who had been murdered in that house some years pre- 
According to Mr. David Fox, the floor was subsequently 

dug up, to the depth 

of r 

nore 

than 

L five feet. 

when the remains 

of a human i.«h„,™^ 

c r J 

Soon aft 

d Roches- 

ter, at whi. 

p d them; 

and here i 

pp e 

s of the 

alphabet ii 

b d h 

dff n spirits 

were appa 

n; and 

that, in shi 

m 

h p ence of 

the two gi. 

m p rported 

to be the ! 

d th 

1 being 

accorapanii 

d h 

rr g as to the 

spirits' ide 

a also observed in the frequent moving 
of tables and other ponderable bodies, without appreciable 
agency, in the presence of these two girls. These manifesta- 
tions, growing more and more remarkable, attracted numerous 
visitors, some from long distances ; and the phenomenon began, 
as it were, to propagate itself, and to be witnessed in other fami- 
lies in Rochester and vicinity; while, as coincident therewith, 
susceptible persons would sometimes fall into apparent trances, 
and become clairvoyant, and re-affirm these raps and phj-sical 
movements to be the production of spirits. 

In November, a public meeting was called; and a committee 
appointed to examine into the phenomena. They reported that 
they were unable to trace the phenomena to any known mun- 
dane agency. Of course, the large majc^ity of persons pro- 
nounced the whole thing an imposture; and the public press 
was against it. almost without an exception. There were stories 

Hosted by Google 

34 

that the Fox girls produced the sounds by their knees and toe- 
joints; and one of their relations, a Mrs. Culver, declared that 
Kate Fox had told her how it was done. If the joung and mis- 
chief-loving Kate had ever told her so, it must have been in 
sport; for Mrs. Culver's explanation was soon rejected as not 
covering the phenomena. 

The girls were subjected to the examination of a committee of 
ladies, who had them divested of their ciothes, laid on pillows, 
and watched ; still the sounds took place on walls, doors, tables, 
ceilings, and at quite a distance from the mediums. 

We have before us a letter, received by us, dated Rochester, 
N.Y,, Feb. 16, 1850. It is from the pen of a friend, an English 
gentleman of high culture, who, at our request, availed himself 
of a brief stay in Rochester to look into the subject of the mys- 
terious knockings. He made two calls on the Misses Fox, to 
hear the rappings, and wrote us as follows in regard to them : — ' 

" My opinion of the rappings is that they are human, very 
human, sinfully human, made to get money by. If really there 
is a ghost in the matter, then quite certainly he is very tickle, 
something of a liar, very clumsy, very trifling, and altogether 
wanting in good taste. It would indeed be painful to me, ex- 
ceedingly, if I thought that any man on this earth, on dying, 
had ever turned into such a paltry, contemptible ghost. 

"Yet at a distance from this place, as I understand, there are 
men affecting philosophy, and even a skeptical philosophy, who 
are ready to believe, and who do believe, that these Rochester 
knockings are a spirit. A very ridiculous spirit I An untrue 
ghost, a very pretending ghost I a ghost of no reverence or awe 
whatever! Indeed, a ghost that is no ghost at all I 

" Here, now, I have written what will satisfy your curiosity 
about this absurd business. My esperience in It will be 'useful 
to me, in regard to superstition as a disease of the human mind. 
I have learned something from the errand I have been on. But 
to me the knockings themselves are not nearly so wonderful as the 
echoes they make in Rie city of New York." 

The gentleman who wrote this letter subiequently made a very 

Hosted by Google 

MULTll'l. I CATION OF MEDIUMS. 35 

careful investigation of the phenomena, as manifested through 
the mediumship of the late G. A. Redman, and became fullv 
convinced of their genuineness. He accepted the spiritual hy- 
pothesis as to their origin, and is now (1868) — after years of 
esamination and reflection, both in this country and in Europe — 
an unwavering believer,* and one who can give solid reasons for 
his belief; thus justifying that remark of Novalis, who says, 
"To become properly acquainted with a truth, we must first 
have disbelieved it, and disputed against it." 

It was soon found that the marvellous phenomena could be 
produced through numerous persons of either sex. Mediums 
for the manifestations began to spring up on all sides; and, as a 
matter of course, spurious phenomena began to be mixed with 
the genuine. 

The raps were soon superseded by more astonishing and in- 
explicable experiences. Tables, chairs, and other furniture 
would be moved about, raised from the floor, and, in some cases, 
so powerfully, that six full-grown men have been known to be 
carried about a room on a table, the feet of which did not 
touch the floor, and which no other person touched. Hand- 
bells would be rung, guitars floated about the room and played 
on, tambourines played on, and moved about with marvellous 
force; and at last spirit-hands would be both seen and felt. 
Although these phenomena would be generally produced in the 
dark, there were enough of thera produced in the light to satisfy 
inquirers that the effects were not imaginary or spurious. 

Mediums were developed with various powers. There rapidly 
sprang into notice musical, writing, speaking, drawing, and 
healing mediums. The press and the pulpit sneered and ful- 
minated; but the work went on with amazing celerity, until 
millions were not ashamed to admit their belief in the phe- 

At the rooms of J. Koon, Athens County, Ohio, in February, 

Hosted by Google 

2,6 PLANCH tTTE. 

1854, musical instruments were played on with astonishing force. 
Five witnesses, whose names are published,* testify to seeing 
spirit-hands on these occasions. Thej Bay, " They [the spirits] 
beat a march on the drum, and carried tlie tambourine all around 
over our heads, playing on it the while. They then dropped it 
on the table, took the triangle from the wall, and carried it all 
around, as they did the other instruments, for some time. We 
could only hear the dull sound of the steel ; then would peal 
forth the full ring of the instrument. They let this fall on the 
table also. After this, they spoke through the trumpet to all, 
stating that they were glad to see them. Then they went to a 
gentleman who was playing on the violin, and took it out of his 
hand up into the air, all around, thrumming the strings, and 
playing as well as mortals can do. They played on the trumpet, 
then took the harp, and played on both instruments ; and, at the 
same time, sang with four voices, sounding like female voices, 
which made the room swell with melody. 

"After this, they made their hands visible again,- took paper, 
brought it out on the other table, and commenced writing slowly, 
when one of the visitors asked them if they couid not write 
faster : the hand then moved so fast we could hardly see it go ; 
but all could hear the pencil move over the paper for some five 
minutes or so. When done, the spirit took up the trumpet and 
spoke, saying the communication was for friend Pierce; and, at 
the same time, the hand came up to him, and gave the paper 
into his hand. Now, said the spirit, if friend Pierce would put 
his hand on the table, they would shake hands with him for a 
testimony to the world, as he could do much good with such a 
fact while on his spiritual mission. He then put his hand on 
the table by their request; the hand came up to him, took his 
fingers, and shook them. Then it went away, but soon came 
back, patted his hand some minutes, then left again. Now it 
came back the third time ; and, taking his whole hand for some 

* D. Hasldcr, PiHsbutg; A, P. Pierce, Philadelphia: H. F. Partridge, Wheeling, 

Hosted by Google 

five minutes, he examined it all over, and found it as natural as 
a human hand, even to the nails on the fingers. He traced the 
hand up as far as the wrist, and found nothing any further than 
that point." 

Having, on some forty occasions, witnessed phenomena analo- 
gous to these, and quite as remarkable, we cannot doubt that 
this account is scrupulously true, so far as the fuels are con- 

We have already had something to say of the Davenport 
Brothers. In 1346, their family in Buffalo were disturbed by 
what the}- described as " raps, thumps, loud noises, snaps, 
cracking noises in the dead of night." In 1850, having read in 
the newspapers of the Rochester knockings, they sat round a 
table with their hands upon it, and waited further developments. 
These began by knockings and other noises, and table -tlppings. 
Soon, the alphabet was called into use ; then, through the hand 
of Ira, the elder boy, messages were written by an invisible 
scribe ; and Ira was " floated in the air over the heads of all the 
people, and from one end of the room to the other, at a height 
of nine feet from the floor, every person in the room having the 
opportunity of seeing him as he floated in the air above them." 
To add to the wonder, William and Elizabeth (a sister) were 
also upborne ; and other marvels took place. 

On the fifth evening of their proceedings (according to Dr. 
Nichols), "in compliance with a direction rapped out on the 
table by the now familiar method of calling over the alphabet, a 
pistol was procured, and capped, but not loaded- One of the 
boys was then directed to go to a vacant corner of the room and 
fire it. At the instant that he fired, the pistol was taken from 
his hand ; and, by its flash, it was plainly seen, by every person 
in the room, held by a human figure, looking smilingly at the 
company. The light and the form vanished together, as when 
we see a landscape in a flash of lightning; and the pistol fell 
upon the floor." 

Under the directions of supposed spirits, the brothers were 
tied with all sorts of complicated knots, and then released in an 

Hosted by Google 

3$ PLANCHETTE. 

inexplicably brief space of time. The news of what was taking 
place soon spread ; and many eager inquirers came to the house. 
Such was the curiosity, that public exhibitions were given. The 
fact that the phenomena were produced for the most part in the 
dark, naturally gave rise to suspicion and dispute. 

In the year 1868, at the Cleveland Convention of Spiritualists, 
a report was adopted, reprobating what were called " the dart 
circle impostors, who pretend to do physical impossibilities, 
claiming that spirits do them, while they give no proof of what 
they assert." " After a diligent and careful investigation of the 
subject,"' says the report, " we are irresistibly forced to the con- 
clusion that darkness is not a necessary condition for physical- 
manifestations ; but that it is a condition assumed and insisted 
upon by tricksters, having no other use than to afford oppor- 
tunities for deception." 

These remarks are likely to mislead. They appear to be aimed 
principally at the class of manifestations for which the Daven- 
ports are celebrated. That the most remarkable of the manifes- 
tations produced in the dark have been produced in the light, 
will not be disputed ; but it does not follow from this that dark- 
ness may not sometimes be more favorable to their production. 
Darkness, It is true, may offer more opportunity for fraud ; but 
a little more trouble taken will soon satisfy the patient inves- 
tigator. We do not doubt that genuine mediums are often 
tempted to "help on" the phenomena. But careful observers 
do not find it difficult to separate the true from the simulated. 
We must not expect to find all mediums persons of scrupulous 
integrity. 

The Davenports were mere boys when they commenced their 
exhibitions; and it would not be surprising, if sometimes, impa- 
tient of the capriciousness or slowness of " the spirits," they tried 
to make them " hurry up," by some boyish acts that may prop- 
erty be denounced as tricks. Indeed, Dr. John F. Gray, of New 
York, well known to American Spiritualists as identified from 
the first with the cause, and a thoroughly impartial, independent 
investigator, wrote us, under date of New York, June 7, 1864, as 
follows ; — 

Hosted by Google 

DB. LOOMIS S TESTIMONY. 39 

" I have not seen the Davenports this time here ; but I enter- 
tain no doubt of the genuineness of the manifestations made in 
their presence. When thej were here some years ago, thej 
were detected in making spurious manifestations when the 
genuine failed." 

Surely the testimony of careful, scientific investigators, lilse Dr. 
Gray, thoroughly prepared against fraud, and anticipating it, is 
worth something in a case like this. 

Dr. Loomis, professor of chemistry in the Medical College, 
Georgetown, has given a minute account of his investigations 
into the phenomena produced through the Davenports. His 
testimony will carry the more weight with the skeptic, when it is 
known that he does not admit the spiritual hypothesis, but at- 
tributes the thauraaturgic occurrences to some new, unknown 
force. From Dr. Loomis's report, we extract enough to indicate 
the thoroughness of his investigation, and the character of hie 

" At one end of Willard's Hall is a large platform about fifteen 
feet square, and three feet from the floor, carpeted. At the back 
side of this platform, resting on three horses, about eighteen 
inches high, with four legs, each one inch in diameter, was a 
box or cabinet, in which the phenomena occurred. 

" I find the box seems to be made for two purposes only, ist, 
to exclude the light; and 2d, to be easily taken apart and packed 
in a small space for transportation. It is made of black walnut 
boards, from one-fourth to one-half of an inch in tljickness. 
The boards are mostly united by hooks and hinges, so as to be 
taken apart and folded up. The box is about seven feet high, 
B!K feet wide, and two feet deep ; and the back was one inch in 
front of the brick wall of the building. It has three doors, each 
two feet wide and as high as the box ; so that when the doors are 
open the entire interior of the box is exposed to the audience. 

"Across each end and along the back are boards about ten 
inches wide, arranged for seats, firmly attached to the box. 
These are one-half inch walnut boards. At themiddle and near 
the back edge of each of these seals are two half-inch holea. 

Hosted by Google 

4° Pl^ANCHETTK. 

through which ropes maj- be passed for the purpose of tying the 
boys tirmlj to their seats. The entire structure is soJight and 
frail as to utterly preclude the idea that any thing whatever could 
be concealed within or about its several parts, by which any aid 
could be given in producing the phenomena witnessed. The 
top and bottom of the box are of the same thin material, and not 
tongued and grooved; so that the joints were all open. The 
floor was carpeted with a loose piece of carpet, which was taken 
out. The entire inside of the box was literaliy covered with 
bruises and dents, from mere scratches to those of an eighth of 
an inch deep. I examined the bos thoroughly in all its parts, 
and am satisfied that there was nothing concealed in it ; nor was 
there any way by which any thing could he introduced into it to 
aid in producing the phenomena. The phenomena exhibited 
may be divided into several classes. 

"a. Before the performance commenced, the audience chose a 
committee of three, of which I was one. The other two were 
strangers to each other and to myself. I never saw them before 
that evening, have never seen them since, and do not know their 
names. One of the committee — a stout, muscular man, over 
six feet in height, professionally a sea-captain, and who re- 
marked to me as he was performing the operation, that he had 
pinioned many prisoners — tied one of the boys in the following 
manner : viz., a strong hemp rope was passed three times round 
l' * "■ d w h p round the 

*■ ddg bbhdthe back. 

Thpw pdtw d bdnd tied in 

S p b B h w pleted, the 

"" "* <^w hhflhb tween the 

^ whh rfhhd putted with 

"^ <> d q T ti m ompletely 

stopped in the wrists. 

" The boy complained of pain, and said, ' Tie the rope as you 
wish ; but I cannot stand it. I am in your power; but you must 
loosen the rope.' I remarked to the captain that it was cruel to 
let the rope remain so tight as it was, that security could be 

Hosted by Google 

gained without being iinneceisarlly cruel. We examined his 
wrists again; and the captain decided not to loosen tlie rope. 
The whole work of tying the boy was closelj watched by me 
during the entire progress, and thoroughly examined when 
done; and I must say that very little feeling was exhibited for 
the boy. No human being could be bound so tightly without 
suffering escrueiating pain. His hands were released in about 
fifteen minutes. I then examined his wrists carefully. Everv 
fibre of the rope had made its imprint on the wrists. I examined 
them a second time, one hour and thirty minutes after; and the 
marks of the rope were plainly visible. He was pinioned as 
tighUy around the body. After being thus tied by his hands, 
he was seated at one end of the box; and a second rope being 
passed around his wrists, was drawn both ends through the 
holes in the seat, and firmly tied underneath. His legs were 
Ued in a similar manner, so that movement of his body was al- 
most impossible. All the knots were a peculiar kind of sailor 
knots, and entirely beyond reach of the boy's hands or mouth. 

■'The other Davenport boy was tied in a similar way by an- 
other member of the committee. After being tied, I carefully 
examined evel-y knot, and particularly noticed the method !n 
which he was bound. The knots were all beyond the reach of 
his hands or mouth. He was as securely bound as the other, 
the only difference being that the ropes were not as tight around 
the wrists. This one, as the other, was tied to his seat; the 
ropes being passed through the holes, and tied underneath to 
the ropes attached to his legs. Thus fastened, one at one end 
of the box and one at the other, they were beyond each other's 

" Thus far I was perfectly satisfied of three things, isl. There 
was in the box no person except the boys, bound as above de- 
scribed ; 3d, It was physically impossible for the boys to liberate 
themselves; 3d, There was introduced into the box nothing 
whatever besides the boys, and the ropes with which they were 
bound. 

" These being the conditions, the right-hand door was closed ; 

Hosted by Google 

42 PI.ANCHETTE. 

then the left-hand door; and finally the middle door was 
closed. At the same time the gas-lights were lowered, so that 
it was twilight in the room. Within ten seconds, two hands 
were seen by the committee and by the audience, at an opening 
near the top of the middle door; and, one minute after, the 
doors opened of their own accord, and the boy bound so tightly 
walked out unbound, the ropes lying on the floor, every knot 
being untied. The other boy had not been released ; and a care- 
showed every knot and every rope to be in the 

were then drawn through the holes in the seat, and tied under- 
neath, drawing the bands firmly down on the seat. A second 
rope was passed several times around both legs and firmly tied, 
binding the legs together. A third rope was tied to the legs and 
then fastened to the middle of the back side of the box. A 
fourth rope was also attached to the legs and drawn backward, 
and tied to the ropes underneath the seat, which bound the 
hands. This last rope was so tightened as to take the slack out 
of the others. Every rope was tight; and no movement of the 

Hosted by Google 

TFSTIMONy, 

ddh wg wpp T 

h b b T w 

in the box with the boja except the ropes; 3d, It was physi- 
cally impossible for the boys to ha e t ed themselves, every one 
of the knots being bejond the reach of their hands or mouths, 
and the boys being four feet apart, 4th, The time elapsing from 
the closing of the doors to their opening — less than two minutes 
by the watch — was altogether too short for any known physical 
power to have tied the ropes as they were tied. 

"c. The boys being tied in this manner, one of the committee 
was requested to shut the doors. He stepped forward, closed 
the right-hand door, also the left-hand door, and was about 
closing the middle door, when two hands came out of the box, 
one of which hit him a severe blow on the right shoulder. The 
committee-man was partly in the box and felt the blow, but did 
not know what struck him. lie immediately threw open the 
doors ; but nothing could be found but the boys, tied as before. 
I carefully re-examined the positions of the ropes, and found 
them as I had left them. The hands were seen by the audience 
distinctly. The lights had not been turned down ; and the hands 
were seen in the plain gas-light, and remained in sight several 
seconds. Having satisfied myself of the reality of the hands, 
having seen the blow given by one of them, which was sufficient 
to turn the committee-man partly round, I examined them with 
reference to their position in relation to the boys anatomically 
considered. The middle door had not been closed, and the 
committee-man had not left the box; both boys were firmly tied 
to their seats, and the gas was fully lighted. The hand that 
appeared to the left of the committee-man might have been, so 

Hosted by Google 

44 Vl-ANCHKTTE. 

far as position and Hiiatomical relation were concerned, the right 
hand of the boy at the left side of the box ; but the hand that 
struck the man could not have belonged to either boy. It was 
more than four feet from either one, and at least two feet high; 
and, had either boy been sufficiently near, it must have been a 
right hand on a left arm. 

" d. The box was then carefully examined again; and noth- 
ing could be found except the boys, bound as described before. 
There were then placed on the floor, between the boys, a hell, 
a violin, a guitar, a tambourine, and a trumpet. This being 
done, the left door was closed, then the right door; and, as the 
committee-man was closing the middle door, the brass trumpet, 
weighing about two pounds, jumped up from the floor, struck 
the top of the box with great force, and fell out on the floor. 
This took place while the committee-man stood facing the box. 
The door was wide open; and the committee-man stood partly 
in the box. The boys were again carefully examined, and found 
to be tied as at first. I examined the ropes that I had carefully 
and privately arranged, as before described, and found them as 
I had lefl them. 

"e. The trumpet was placed back, and all the doors closed. 
Within ten seconds the violin was tuned and began to play; at 
the same time the guitar, tambourine, and hell began to play, 
all joining in the same tune. Part of the time the bell was 
thrust out oi the window in the upper part of the middle door, 
by an arm, and played in sight of the audience. While the 
music was being made, there were a multitude of raps, both light 
and heavy, on all parts of the box. The first tune was played 
and repeated; and a few seconds of comparative quiet followed, 
broken only by the instruments jumping about the box, and a 
few raps. Soon a second tune was begun, in which all the in- 
struments joined as before. In the midst of this tune, the doors 
suddenly opened themselves ; and the instruments tumbled about, 
some one vray, some another ; and part fell out on the floor. The 
time between the stopping of the music and the opening of the 
door was not a single second. I went at once to the box and 

Hosted by Google 

PROFESSOR MAPES S EXPERIENCES. 45 

found both boys bound, hand and foot, as I had left them. I 
examined the ropes particularly about the wrists, and found 
them in the precise position in which I had left them, measuring 
from the processes of the radial, ulnar, and metacarpal bones. 
I also found the ends of the ropes under the seats, which I had, 
as previously described, privately arranged in a peculiar man- 
ner, in precisely the same position as I had left them." 

The late Professor Mapes, well known for his scientific attain- 
ments, described an exhibition witnessed by him through the 
Davenport Boys. These boys permitted themselves to be bound 
by cords, hand and foot, in any way the operator pleased; and 
in an instant they were liberated by the supposed spirits. The 
spirit of one John King claimed to be the chief actor of their 
band. With this spirit Professor Mapes said ke conversed /or 
half an koar. The voice was loud and distinct. Spoken through 
a trumpet. He shook hands with him, the spirit giving a most 
powerful grasp ■ then takin" his hand again, it was increased in 
f\ze and caT!e d-w A Thp dw m 

panied only byh dmnwhm D nd 

Dr. Wilson. Th d u g n wh h 

King entered ha d n pydha 

which they wre ppddwhh d 

them. Their handpw d hkd h 

heads, and replaced m an mstant. lurnmg on the lights, they 
found each hat and cap was turned inside out; and it took many 
minutes to replace them. Dr. Warren's gloves, which were in 
his hat, were also turned completely inside out. This eshlbi- 
tion took place in a large club-room at Buffalo, selected by the 
professor and his party, having but one place of entrance and 
exit. The boys sat on an elevated platform at a large table; 
and this table, in an instant of time, was carried over the heads 
of the auditors, and deposited at the most distant part of this 

It is unnecessary to multiply descriptions of the phenomena. 
After giving exhibitions in the principal cities of the United 
States, in the latter part of 1864, the Davenport Brothers wrnt 

Hosted by Google 

46 

PLANCUKTTE. 

to England. Here their reception was of rather a mixed char- 
acter. By some they were denounced or mobbed ; by others they 
were treated with the attention which was due to the extraor- 
dinary manifestations produced in their presence. They were 
accompanied by Mr. William Fay, himself the medium for some 
mexplicable specimens of modern thaumaturgy. 

Captain Richard F. Burton, the African traveller, in a letter 
dated Nov. lo, 1864, gives a detailed description of a'sitting with 
the brothers at his own lodgings. He says, " Mr. Fay's coat 
was removed whilst he was securely fastened, hand and foot- 
and a lucifer match was struck at the same insti 
the two gentlemen fast bound, and the coat in th 
to the other side of the room. Under precisely 
stances, the coat of another gentleman present was placed upon 

"I have spent a great part of my life in Oriental lands, and 
have seen there many magicians. Lately, I have been permitted 
to see and be present at the performances of Messrs. Anderson 
and Tolmaque. The latter showed, as they profess, clever con- 
juring; but they do not even attempt what the Messrs, Daven- 
port and Fay succeed in doing, - for instance, the beautiful man- 
agement of the musical instruments. Finally, I have read and 
listened to every explanation of the Davenport ' tricks ' hitherto 
placed before the English public; and, believe me, if any thing 
would make me take that tremendous jump 'from matter to 
spint,' it is the utter and complete unreason of the reasons by 
which the manifestations are explained." 

In France the Davenports were well received by the emperor; 
but a great clamor was raised against them by the press, and the 
unbelievers generally. Two experts, however, in the art of 
legerdemain, in Paris, - namely, M. Hamilton, a professor of the 
art and M. Rhys, a manufacturer of conjuring implements,— 
lully exonerated, in published letters, the brothers from all sus- 
picion of trick. M. Rhys is the maker of all the articles used by 
the well-known Robert Houdin, who is himself the inventor and 
originator of almost the whole of the tricks performed by the 

Hosted by Google 

THE DAVENPORTS IN FRANCE. 4^ 

less accomplished jugglers, and who declared some time since 
that nothing in the magic art could account for the so-called 
spiritual phenomena which he had witnessed. The letters al- 
luded to were published in the " Gazette des Strangers " in Paris, 
on the 31th of September, 1S65, and are as follows : — 

" Messrs. Davenport, — Yesterday I had the pleasure of being 
present at the stance you gave; and I came away from it con- 
vinced that jealousy alone was the cause of the outcry raised 
against you. The phenomena produced surpassed my especta- 
Icon- 
th m cable, 

selves 

on of 
at the 
d that 
11 add 
ced any 

Hosted by Google 

4'' PLANCHETTK. 

tioi., hands, life-like in form and texture, were frequently' seen 
before the doors were closed; and from the aperture two long, 
naked, femininely formed arms, and also a group of not less than 
five hands of various sizes, were protruded at the same instant." 

Mr. Benjamin Coleman, of London, a gentleman personally 
known to us, and who has been an indefatigable investigator of 
the phenomena for many years, writes, under date of May, 1868, 
of the MeBsrs. Davenport and Mr. William Fay, " I desire to 
convey to those of my friends in America, who introduced them 
to me, the assurance of my conviction that the Brothers' mission 
to Europe has been of great service to Spiritualism. ... I have 
had no reason whatever to change my opinion of the genuine 
and marvellous character of their mediumship, which is entirely 
free from the imputation of trickery and bad faith of any kind." 

Mr. Robert Cooper, of London, a sincere and disinterested 
Investigator, and who accompanied the Davenports to Ireland, 
Scotland, Belgium, and Germany, solely in the pursuit of truth, 
writes as follows: "I have been intimately associated with the 
Davenports for seven months. I have witnessed the manifesta- 
tions under a variety of circumstances, — in the dark and in the 
light, in public and in private, — and I have never seen any in- 
dication whatever of the slightest approach to trickery. On the 
contrary, I have seen much to convince me of the absence of 
any thing of the kind. For instance, I have seen lights struck, 
contrary to regulations, when the instruments were sounding 
and floating in the air; but no one was discovered out of his 
place, the only result being the falling of the guitars to the 
ground. 

"At Brut elo at i sdaiice before the hrst hterarj soc etj of the 
town, blue paint was placed on the instruments unitnown to 
any of us but though the n truments were all played on no 
trace of the pamt was found on the hands of the Irothers At 
Antwerp at the conclusion of the cabinet s4aace a gentleman 
exhibited his hand coiered with some black compo ition of a 
greasy nature He said he had ciught hold of, the hin Is that 
appeared at the cabinet « ndow and fulU evpected v,\ en tht. 

Hosted by Google 

THE STRATFOHD PHENOMENA. 49 

Davenports came from the cabinet, to find their hands blackened, 
but, to his great surprise, such was not the case. I have also 
known black composition placed on the hands of the brothers 
during the dark siance, with the idea that the instruments would 
show traces of the pigment; but snch was not the case. None 
of our party knew of these experiments being made till the ter- 
mination of the stances." 

Mr. Cooper has heard the " spirits " speak in an audible voice, 
and has held long conversations with them, He says, " It is 
obviously impossible for any one to he with the Davenports, as 
I have been, and not discover fraud, if any existed. I could 
multiply proofs in favor of the genuineness of these manifesta- 
tions. If they are not a reality, then all creation is a myth, and 
our senses are nothing worth." 

The occurrences in the family of the Rev. Dr. Phelps, of Strat- 
ford, Conn., which took place not long after the manifestations 
through the Fox family (1848-9), are of a character strictly 
analogous to those that were established as true, so far as 
human testimony can establish any thing, in the days of witch- 
craft. 

For seven months, the phenomena were of the niost unac- 
countable character. We took the pains to write to Dr. Phelps 
at the time, and have from him a letter confirming the facts in 
every particular. On returning one day from church, the family 
found the doors of rooms, which had been carefully locked, all 
thrown open; and the furniture tossed about in the utmost con- 
fusion. In one room were from eight to ten figures formed with 
articles of clothing, and arranged with singular skill. They 
were all kneeling, and each with an open Bible before it, as if in 
mockeryof their own church-going. Nothing was missing. The 
family locked the door of this room, but only to find, on open- 
ing It again, the number of figures increased, and that with 
articles of dress which three minutes before they had seen in 
other parts of the house. Heavy tables were lifted up and let 
down again, strange noises were heard; and a boy of eleven 
years of age was lifted up and carried acroB= the room. His 

Hosted by Google 

50 PLANCH ETTE, 

clothes were carried away, and only discovered after a long and 
patient search. He was sent from home to a distant school, 
but had to be recalled, as his clothes there were cut to pieces 
repeatedly in a most estraordinarj manner. The panes in the 
windows used to fly to pieces as Dr. Phelps and others stood 
looking at them. 

In his letter, Dr. Phelps writes, "I have seen things in motion 
above a thousand times! and, in most cases, where no visible 
power existed by which the motion could be produced. There 
have been broken from my windows more than seventy-one 
panes of glass, more than thirty of which I have seen broken 
before my own eyes." 

About the year 1850, the Hon. James F. Simmons, of Rhode 
Island, a well-known member of the United-States Senate, was 
the witness of some remarkable phenomena. In the autumn of 
1852, Mr. Horace Greeley,* editor of the "New-York Tribune," 
received a letter which he published in his paper, with the fol- 
lowing introduction; "The writer has received the following 
letter from Mrs. Sarah H. Whitman, in reply to one of inquiry 
from him as to her own experience in ' Spiritualism,' and espe- 
cially with regard to a remarkable ' experience^ currently re- 
ported as having occurred to Hon. James F. Simmons, late 
United-States Senator from Rhode Island, and widely known as 
one of the keenest and clearest observers, most unlikely to be 

wititessed," and that ^'ccrfaiQ devclopmems stton^ry indicale that they do proceed 
frofD depaited spiiila." But he complaios lha( nothing of any value is oblatned by 
the inviitieatian ; that the spirits " did Dot help to fish up the Atlantic cable dot 
find Sir John rranfclin;" Ihal Spiritualism haa not made the body of believers "het- 
ter meo and women." Muoh the same kind of objeotioa miglit be broi^t agaiost 
the Copernican theory of die univerae. Mr. Greeley admits that the pheaomeoa may 

I an old CAble, hut btill »>nielhiDg> We kai 

Hosted by Google 

SENATOR SIMMONS'S EXPEDIENCES. CI 

the dupe of rajstery or the slave of hallucination. Mrs. Whit- 
man's social and intellectual eminence are not so widely known ; 
bat there are very many who know that her statement needs n^ 
confirmation whatever." Here is her letter : — 

"Dear Sir, -I have had no conversation with Mr. Simmons 
on the subject of your note until to-day. I took an early oppor- 
tunity of acquainting him with its contents; and this morning 
he called on me to say that he was perfectly willing to impart to 

pencil, which had been given her by the deceased. Weeks 
passed ; and, although frequent inquiries were made, no writing 
was found on the paper. 

"Mrs. Simmons happening to call at the house one day, ac- 
companied by her husband, made the usual inquiry and received 
the usual answer. The drawer had been opened not two hours 
before, and nothing was seen in it but the pencil lying on the 
blank paper. At the suggestion of Mrs. Simmons, however, 
another investigation was made; and on the paper were found a 
few pencil lines, resembling the handwriting of the deceased, 
but not so closely as to satisfy the mother's doubts. Mrs. Sim- 
mons handed the paper to her husband : he thought there was a 
slight resemblance, but would probably not have remarked it 

Hosted by Google 

52 PLANCIIETTI!. 

had the writing been casualty presented to him. Had tlie sigiia- 
lure been given him, he should at once have decided on the 
resemblance. He proposed, if the spirit of his son were indeed 
present, as alphabetical communications received through the 
sounds affirmed him to be, that he should, t&eii and t/iere, affix 
his signature to the auspicious document. 

"In order to facilitate the operation, Mrs. Simmons placed 
the closed points of a pair of scissors in the hand of the medium 
and dropped her pencil through one of the rings or bows, the 
paper being placed beneath. The hand presently began to trem- 
ble ; and it was with difficulty it could retain its hold of the scis- 
sors. Mr. Simmons then took the scissors into his own hand, 
and dropped the pencil through the ring. It could not readily 
be sustained in this position. After a few moments, however, it 
stood as if firmly poised and perfectly still. // Iken begaa slowly 
to move. Mr. Simmans sa-Bi the Uiifrs traced beneath kis eyes. 
The words, yatnes D. Simmons, were distinctly and deliberately 
written ; and the band-writing -was a fac-simile of kis son's sig- 

" But what Mr. Simmons regards as the moat astonishing part 
of thia seeming miracle is yet to be told. Bending down to 
scrutinize the writing more closely, he observed, just as the last 
word was finished, that the top of the pencil leaned to the right. 
He thought it was about to slide through the ring; but, to his 
infinite surprisp, he saw the point slide slowly back along the 
word ' Simmons,' till it rested over the letter i, wkea it imprinted 
a dot. This was a punctilio utterly unthought of by him. He 
had not noticed the omission, and was therefore entirely unpre- 
pared for the amendment. He suggested the experiment, and 
he thinks il had kept pace only with his will or desire. But how 
will those who deny the agency of disembodied spirits in these 
marvels, ascribing all to the unassisted powers of the human 
will, or to the blind action of electricity, — how will they dispose 
of this last significant and curious factP 

"The only peculiarity observable in the writing was that the 
lines seemed sometimes slightly broken, as if the pencil had 
been lilted, then Fet down again. 

Hosted by Google 

CUl BONO.' 

" One other circumstance I am permitted to note, which is not 
readily to be accounted for on any other than spiritual agency. 
M S'm h " d his son's death 

heen resorted 

ried. Improba- 

were, atter an 

rue hy a gentle- 

m who was with 

th Intending soon 

S m ons to learn his 

this: V 

' " the permission 

of S mm 

In h B h Standard," of Aug. 14, 1863, Dr. Campbell 
" nilar phenomena, "The conclusion of 
believe in the existence of angels 
d d n he existence of the spirits of men both good 

and b d w b e that all are capable of acting in their 
d mb d d n the minds of men still in the flesh; we 

b n h p bility of intercourse between man and these 

d mb d d gences, whether good or bad; we believe, on 

th tl S pture, that spirits are capable of entering 

hum n b d caking through them and acting in them; 

a d h w b e in the possibility of spirits operating on 

m n w rapping out the letters of the alphabet, or 

n V, -VI " with the pencil. We see nothing in Scrip- 

ture or in the nature of the case that militates against these 
conclusions. All that we require is proof, indubitable, sensible 
proof, from our own eyes and ears. On that condition, we at 
once give full credence." 

To the question often put by the inconsiderate, in regard to 
the phenomena. "What good have thev all done? —What's the 

Hosted by Google 

54 PI.ANC1£ETTE. 

use of them all?" Dr. Campbell replies, "We are sometimes 
met with the question cui bono F We deny our obligation, as a 
condition of rational faith, to prove the cm bono. It may exist 
where we see it not, and have important ends to accomplish 
with which we are unacquainted." 

Dr. Campbell relates some singular occurrences in his own 
experience, and concludes, " Explanation of such phenomena 
we have none to offer; but we stand by the facts as here stated." 

It IS astonishing how often this cui bono interrogatory is put 
by persons who ought to see how a little reflection would silence 
them. Once when Dr. Franklin was asked in regard to some 
discovery, " Whafs the use of it?" he retorted by saying, 
"What's the use of a new-born baby?" And as for that matter, 
it might be asked, "What's the use of any thing?" 

"I do not see that people have been made better men and 
women by these things," says a popular editor, in reference to 
the spiritual phenomena, the genuineness of which he admits. 
And by a superficial thinker, the remark will be taken as sound 
common sense, and as settling the whole question of their im- 
portance. 

But you will observe that precisely the same objection might 
be brought against the discoveries of Copernicus, of Newton, 
and even of Morse and Fulton. Have people been made better 
men and women by the theory of gravitation, by the steamboat, 
the railroad, and the electric telegraph? Indeed have the print- 
ing-press and the photographic art been exclusively servants in 
the cause of morality ? Such questions, if not always put in the 
spirit of "the loud laugh that speaks the vacant mind," certair.ly 
indicate rather a narrow view of the great facts of e: 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER III. 

MANIFESTATIONS THROUGH MISE 

' * that thej will probably excite many an exclamation of 
incredulity, although the authority on which they rest is above 

We have already had occasion to quote the testimony of Dr. 
John F. Gray, of New York. He was one of the earliest and 
most persevering investigators of the Hydesville phenomena. 
To us he has been personally known for more than a quarter of 
a century; and he is well known to a large circle of intelligent 
patients in the great city where he has had a lucrative profes- 
sional practice until, a few years ago, he retired from active 

Dr. Gray accepts the spiritual hypothesis as the only one 
covering all the phenomena he has witnessed. His reasons for 
believing that spirits communicate with men in the body are 
thus stated in a succinct summary of the results that have come 
to his knowledge during the last twenty years : — 

" I. Fhenomena of a fhysical nature not referable to the laws 
of physical relation; such as the moving of ponderable bodies, 
independent of earthly mechanics ; the production of a great 
variety of sounds, also independent of any known or conceiv- 

Hostea by Google 

56 

able mechanical apparatus ; the production of lights of various 
colors, sizes, shapes, degrees of brilliancy, and duration of in- 
candescence, in every case without the presence of any chemical 
agents or apparatus known to or usable by man; and, lastly, the 
refroduction of living material bodies, through 'which extemfo- 
raneoas, but real and tangible physical organiiatioiis, the spirits 
have re-appeared to their friends on cfl/-/:*, expressing their pecu- 
liarities of physical form and movement, and likewise their 
peculiar and distinctive modes of apprehension, feeling, and 
intellection. Through these temporarily organized effigies of 
their former earth-bodies, they have (as I know from several 
instances of recent date) spoken to and sung with their relatives 
here, and have given many other equally palpable proofs of their 
ability to reconstruct and inhabit a physical form. 

"II. Phenomena of a mental nature not referable to earthly 
volition and intelligence; such as the contrivance and produc- 
tion of the physical phenomena above cited ; the product 

writings in various ancient and modern 1 

nguages, wholly u 

n to those in whose presence they have been executed; the 
utterance of prophecy; the narration of events, and the recital 
of mental facts that are transpiring in distant places, often 
across broad oceans ; the improvisation and incredibly rapid 
production of symbolic drawings and elaborate pictures by per- 
sons not versed in the pictorial art, and unable to explain the 
symbols they have executed and combmed m such a way as to 
convey a good lesson of l.le, or renew a long-buried personal 
reminiscence; lastly, the felicitous and atcurate impersonation 
of persons long departed this life, ind «ho were wholly un 
known to and unheard of by the pei senators 

"The philosophy of spirit intercourse shedi a mellow light 
over human history and humin science It founds a positne 
psychology, and teaches where to look tor wellsprings of mven- 
tion and progress ; and it reconules us to the hard rainistrj of 
sin and sorrow, of ignorance and suftenng " 

In i860, Mr. C. F. Livermore, an opulent and weil-known 
banker of New York (formerly of the firm of Livermore & 

Hosted by Google 

MR. LIVERMORES NARRATIVE, 5^ 

Ciewes, but now retired from business), lost his wife, to whom 
he hud been much attached, and who had been attended during 
her last illness by Dr. John F. Gray, an old friend of the hus- 
band. Mr. Livermore, an inveterate skeptic, was now induced 
by Dr. G- to call on Miss Kate Fox, the young woman through 
whose quick-witted nes 6 these rapping phenomena were origin- 
ally interrogated and developed at llydesville. 

In February, 1861, Mr. L, accordingly had a sitting with Miss 
Fok; and the result was an entire change in his views concer..'^ 
ing life and death. 

At a small gathering of inquirers at which our friend, Mr. 
Benjamin Coleman, of London, was present, in 1861, Dr. Gray 
read the following extraordinary account by Mr. Livermore of 
the manifestations which Mr. L. obtained through Miss Fox. 
After describing the precautions he took to prevent the possibil- 
ity of deception, Mr. L. proceeds as follows : — 

"The lights being extinguished, footsteps were heard as of 
persons walking in their stocking- feet, accompanied by the 
rustling sound of a silk dress. It was then rapped out by the 
alphabet, ' My dear, I am here in form ; do not speak." A glob- 
ular light rose up from the floor behind me ; and, as it became 
brighter, a face, surmounted by a crown, was distinctly seen by 
the medium and myself. Next, the head appeared, as if covered 
with a white veil : this was withdrawn after the figure had risen 
some feet higher; and I recognised unmistakably the fall head 
and face of my ■taife, surrounded by a ^emi-circle of light about 
eighteen mches in diameter. The recognition was complete, 
derived alike from the features and her natural expression. The 
globe of light was then raised, and a female hand held before it 
was distinctly visible. Each of these manifestations was re- 
peated se* eral times, as if to leave no doubt in our minds. Now 
the hgure, coming lower down and turning its head, displayed, 
falling over the globe of light, longflosiing hair, which, even ia 
its shade of color, appeared like the natural tresses of my wife, 
and like hers was unusually luxuriant. This whole mass of hair 
was whisked in our faces many times, conveying the same sensa- 

Hostea by Google 

5^ PI.ANCUETTE. 

tions as if it had been actually human natural kalr. This also 
was frequently repeated, and the hair shown to us in a variety of 
ways. The light and the rustling sound then passed round the 
table and approached me, and what seemed to the touch a skirt 
of muslin was thrown over my head, and a hand was felt as if 
holding it there. A whisper was now heard; and the words, 
' Sing, sing,' were audibly prononnced. I hummed: an air, and 
asked, 'Do you like that? ' 'Yes, yes,' was plainly spoken in a 
whisper; and in both cases I recognized distinctly the voice of 
my wife, to which I had become sensitively familiarized during 
her last illness, when she had become too weak to talk aloud." 

At another sitting, a few days after, the same precautions and 
conditions being observed, the following phenomena were wit- 
nessed : — 

"The table was lifted from the floor, the door violently shaken, 
the window-sash raised and shut several times; and, in fact, 
every thing movable in the room seemed in motion. 

" Questions were replied to by loud knocks on the door, on the 
window, ceiling, table, everywhere ; all being the work of several 
powerful spirits, who were present, and whose presence was 
necessary, as it was afterwards explained, to support or induce 
the manifestations of a more beautiful and interesting cbar- 

" An illuminated substance, like gauze, rose from the floor be- 
hind us, accompaniedby a rustling sound, like that of a silk dress. 
The previously described electrical rattle became very loud and 
vigorous. The figure of a female passed round the table, and, 
approaching us, touched me. The gauzy substance was shaped 
as though covering a human head, and seemed as if drawn down 
fight at the neck. Upon close eiamination, as if approached 
near me a second time, it changed its form, and now seemed in 
folds over a melon-shaped oblong, concave on one side; and in 
this cavity there appeared an intensified brilliant light. By rape, 
I was requested to look beyond the light. I looked as directed, 
and saw the appearance of a human eye. Again receding with 
the rattle, the light became still brighter ; and then, re-approach- 

Hostea by Google 

.'111. >.ini,nHtJKii, !, NARRATIVE. en 

ing, the gaaze, ,yhich had changed in form, was grasped by a 
naturally-forraed female hand; and unfolding, revealed to me 
with a thrill of indescribable happiness, tie upper half of t&e face 
of my Toife, the eyes, forehead, and expression in perfection. 
The moment the emotion of recognition had passed into mv 
mmd, It was acknowledged by a succession of quick raps. 

The figure disappeared and re-appeared several times the 
recognition becoming each time more nearly perfect, with an ex- 
pression of calm and beautiful serenity. I asked her to kiss me 
If she could; and, to my great astonishment and delight, an arm 
was placed around ray neck, and a real palpable kiss was im- 
planted on my lips, through something like fine muslin. A head 
W.S laid upon mine, the hair falling lujiuriantly down my face. 
The kiss was frequently repeated, and was audible in every part 
of the room. The light then moved to a point about midway 
between us and the wall, which was distant about ten feet. The 
ratthng increased m vigor ; and the light, gradually illuminating 
that side of the room, brought out in perfection an entire female 
figure facmg the wall, and holding the light in her outstretched 
hand, shakmg it at intervals, as the light grew dim. My name 
and her name were repeated in a loud whisper; and among 
other things which occurred during this remarkable sitting, 
the figure at the close stood before «e mirror, and -was reffecUd 
therein." •" 

The incidents of another evening were thus described : " The 
lights and electrical rattle were as strong as on the previoui oc- 
casions. Hands were placed upon my forehead a head placed 
upon mine, J:he hair a before fallmg down my face into my 
hand. I grasped .t and found it posit .ely and unmistakably 
human hair. It was afterwards i^hisked pUifully at me creat- 
mgasmuch«md as an ordinary fan The spiritual robe was 
then dropped o\er m\ head and lace as real and material in 
substance as cotton or miicl,r. ^r - ..=_.. c . . 

Luuion or muslin ot a. very fi le teiture. At one 

time, the globe ot light extended to about two feet in diameter 
At last, it was shaken with another -hirp rattle and, shining 
brightly, revealed again the full head and face of my wife, every 

Hosted by Google 

6o 

feature in perfection, but spiritualized in shadowy beautj such 
as no imagination can conceive, or pen describe. In her hair, 
just above the left temple, was a single white rose, the hair being 
arranged with great care. The next appearance, after a brief 
interval, revealed the same face, with a pink rose instead of a 
white one. The whole head and face were shown to us, at least 
twenty times during the sitting, and each time was recognized 
by me, the perfection of the recognition being in proportion to 
the brilliancy of the light. During the whole of these manifes- 
tations, cards of a large size, provided by myself, were placed on 
the floor, with a pencil; and long messages were found to have 
been written upon them," &c. 

Dr. Gray, in conclusion, said, " These manifestations could 
not have been produced by human means; and if you admit the 
competency of the witness, of which, from ray knowledge of him, 
I have no doubt, they are, in my opinion, conclusive evidence of 
spirit identity." 

Several persons in the assembly rose to ask questions of Dr-. 
Gray, respecting this very startling narrative; and one gentle- 
man said, he really could not, though a believer in Spiritualism, 
receive such statements without great misgivings of delusion 
being mixed up witli them. " Now," he said, " I put it to you, 
Dr. Gray, Do yoii believe that such things can and did occurf " 
Dr. Gray replied very calmly, "Yes, my friend; I believe as 
implicitly every word of those narratives as I do in my own 

Previous to leaving New York, Mr. Coleman made a special 
visit to Miss Kate Fox, the medium for these wonders ; and she 
fully corroborated all that Mr. Livermore had told him. 

Of Miss Kate Fox, Dr. Gray writes : " She has been intimately 
knojvn to my wife and me from the time she was a very young 
girl ; that is to say, from 1850 to this date [1861]. At that early 
day in the hisjory of the manifestations, she was frequently a 
visitor in my family; and then, through that child alone, with- 
out the possibility of trick from collusion with others, or, I may 
truly .idd, of imposture of any kind, all the various phenomena 

Hosted by Google 

DR, GRAYS TESTIMONY. 01 

recorded by friend L., except the reproduction of visible human 
forms, were witnessed by Mrs. Gray and myself, and many other 
relatives and friends of our family. Among these I may men- 
tion, as frequent, attentive, and yery able observers, the late Dr. 
Gerald Hull,* my brother-in-law; and Dr. Warner, my son-in- 
law. Miss Fox is a young lady of good education, and of an 
entirely blameless life and character." 

Of Mr. Livermore, Dr. Gray says, "Besides his general char- 
acter for veracity and probity, Mr. L. is a competent witness to 
the important facts he narrates, because he is not in any degree 
subject to the illusions and hallucinations which may be sup- 
posed to attach to the trance or ecstatic condition. I have 
known him from his very early manhood, and am his medical 
adviser. He is less liable to be misled by errors of his organs 
of sense than almost any man of my large circle of patients and 

Mr. Livermore is of opinion that the electrical conditions, 
botli of the atmosphere and of tlie persons receiving manifes- 
tations, are even more important and subtle than mental con- 
ditions. He says of himself, " My condition has always been 
highly electrical. I find no difficulty in lighting gas by applying 
the end of ray finger to the burner, after having excited the elec- 
tricity of my system, by friction of my feet on the carpet. This, 
however, is not an uncommon occurrence here; though I have 
repeatedly tried it in England without success." 

"You ask if I believe all the manifestations are from one 
spirit. Most certainly not ; for it has been repeatedly explained, 
and I think proved, that the spirit made itself visible to me 
through the powerful aid of other spirits." 

Cards were written on, in a very neat small hand, exactly like 
the natural handwriting of " Estelle," the wife, when in the 
flesh. Facsimiles of two of these cards, the one purporting to 

which Dr. G. i~i! wjiiims. 

Hosted by Google 

62 

PLANCHETTH. 

be wntten by the spirit of Mr. L.'s wife, and the other by the 
"spirit of Benjamin Franklin," are published in the "London 
Spiritual Magazine," of November, i86i. 

A spirit, assuming to be Franltlin, was afterwards repeatedly 
visible. In a letter, dated Nov. 23, i86], Mr. Livermore writes : 
" I now aver, that no doubt of the identity* of the spirit longer 
remains upon my mind. His appearance [the same on several 
occasions] corresponds with the original portrait of the philoso- 
pher; the difference being simply that which one would expect 
to find between a painting and a face replete with life and ex- 
pression. His presence was a wonderful and startling reality, 
seated in the chair opposite me at the table, vividly visible, and 
even to each article of dress. There could be no mistake." 

This eidolaa of Franklin, as well as that of Estelle, was after- 
wards seen by the brother-in-law of Mr. Livermore, and by Dr. 
Gray. The following are extracts, taken somewhat at random 
from Mr. Livermore's spiritual diary, of 186J-1863 : — 

"Aug. iS, 1S61, S P.M. — Present, the medium and myself. 
Atmosphere heavy and warm. , Carefully examined the room, 
locked the door, took the key, and made all secure. Sat in quiet 
half an hour, when a spherical oblong light, enveloped in folds, 
rose from the floor to our foreheads, and rested upon the table in 
front. By raps, 'Notice how noiselessly we come.' Hereto- 
fore the light had generally appeared after a succession of 
starthng sounds and movements of movable objects; but in 
the present instance all was quiet. From this time, 8.30, till 
11.30, the light was constantly visible, but in different forms. 
It remained upon the table a full half-hour, the size and shape 

• If spirils hive the power, atlribulcd to them bj many sears, of assuming anj ap- 
pearance al win, it is obvious Uiat some high spirimal seuse mast be developed in lu 
before w« can reasonably be sure of Ibe idcntil^ of any spirit, eveo Ihough it come 
bearing Ihe exact resemblance of the person il ma; claim to be. We think, thera&re, 
that the fact that the spirit, described by Mr. L., bore the aspect of Fraoklin, and called 
itself Kranklin, is no suBicienl reason for dismis^ng aU doubts as to its identity. It 
may be, tint we most be in a spiritual ,iate before «e ea„ really be wisely confident of 

Hosted by Google 

AN EXTKAOHDINARV AI'I'Aii ITION. 61 

of a large melon. As during this time it was passive, I asked if 
it could rise, whereupon it immediately brightened, flashed out, 
and rising, seemed a living, breathing substance. By raps, 
'This is our most important meeting; for it brings to our circle 
two powerful spirits great and good.' The light became gradu- 
ally more powerful, and so brilliant upon the side opposite us as 
to illuminate that part of the room. It now rose from the table, 
resting upon my head and shoulder; the drapery in the mean 
time touching and falling upon our faces, with a peculiar scent 
of violets. After resting upon, and pressing my head and shoul- 
der wiiA Ihe vjoigkt of a living Aead, it descended to the floor. 
I was now satisfied that the purpose of this meeting was some 
other than tlie appearance of the spirit of my wife. The light 
now rose with increased brilliancy, showing a head upon which 
was a white cap surrounded by a frill. Seeing no face, I asked 
what this meant. The reply was by raps, 'As wAen Iwas ill.' 
This was correct; for it was to all appearances the peculiar cap 
worn by my wife during her last illness. This having passed 
away, the light appeared again very brilliantly, showing a crown 
composed apparently of oak-leaves and flowers, a very, very 
beautiful manifestation. I had brought with me on this occa- 
sion some new cards of a larger size, different from any before 
used, and had placed upon two of them private marks. These 1 
put upon a book on the table. In a few minutes they were taken 
from the book, and one of them appeared near the floor, sus- 
pended three or four inches from the carpet, — I could not judge 
accurately; but the light brightly showed the centre card and 
radiated from each side to a distance of some three or four 
inches ; or, in other words, the card was the centre of a circle 
of spirit- light of a foot in diameter; while an imperfectly- shaped 
hand, holding my small silver pencil, was placed upon the card 
and moved quietly across from left to right, as though writing, 
and when finishing a line, it moved quickly back to recommence 
another. We were not permitted to look at this very long at a 
lime, as our steady gaze disturbed the operating forces ; but it 
remained more or less visIWe for nearly an hour. The full 

Hosted by Google 

64 PLANCHETTH. 

formed hand was seen only a portion of the time ; but, during all 
this titne, a dark substance, rather smaller than the natural 
hand, held the pencil, and continued to write. One side of the 
card being finished, we saw it reversed and the other page com- 
menced. This is satisfactory evidence of the reality of spirit- 
writing, if any eviderice can be satisfactory. There could have 
been no possible deception here. I held the medium's hand : 
the door was locked, and every precaution was taken by me as in 
previous instances. The identical cards were returned subse- 
quently, covered witli the finest writing. . . . 

"■Sept. afi, 1861.— , . . After five or six appearances of my 
wife, the light rested upon the floor some ten feet distant from 
me; then, rising, it suddenly darted across the room backwards 
and forwards, until, having gained sufficient power, it flashed 
brightly upon the wall, and brought into relief the entire figure 
of a large, heavy man, who stood before us. He was rather 
below the medium height; but broad-shouldered, heavy, and 
dressed in black, his back towards us, and his face not visible. 
He appeared thus three times very perfectly, remaining in view 
each time for about a minute. The moment his entire form was 
discerned by us, rappinga commenced simultaneously in all 
parts of the room, which continued during the time he was in 
sight, as if to express delight at the achievement of a new suc- 
cess. On asking if the spirit we saw was that of Dr. Franklin, 
we were answered in the affirmative by three heavy dull knocks 
upon the floor, as though made by a heavy foot, which were 
several times repeated. During this sitting, the spirit of my wife 
approached, tapping me upon the shoulder, smoothing my hair, 
and caressing me ; viliile her long tresses, as natural as in life, 
dropped over my face, -aiilh the peculiar scent of delicate, freshly 
gathered violets. A new and very curious manifestation now 
took place, showing us how the echoes were produced ; and there 
was spelled out, ' Darling, have you not been reiuardedf The 
light in producing these echoes or explosions assumed a lily 

;o brilliant as to light 

■e of the room, so that 

Hosted by Google 

Miss Fox and I could see each other distinctly, as well as various 
objects in the room. Then bounding up and down from the 
surface of the table some twelve or eighteen inches, it struck the 
table, and, descending on ray arm, produced the raps or echoes. 
"Friday Evening, Oct. 4, iS6i.~A bouquet of flowers 
■was placed upon the mantel in a vase with water. As soon as 
the gas was turned down, a movement was heard; and we were 
requested to ' get a light.' Upon doing so, we found the flowers, 
with the vase and other articles, had been removed from the 
mantel to the table, which stood in the centre of the room. We 
again extinguished the light, when immediately the heavy cur- 
tains of the window were drawn aside, and raised and lowered 
repeatedly, admitting the light from the street. Rustlings were 
heard after an interval of quiet, with sounds as of persons walk- 
ing in stocking-feet. A peculiar sound was produced by striking 
against the wall, as though with a bag of keys or broken earthen- 
ware. This same bag of keys, or whatever it might have been, 
also seemed to be dropped from a height of several feet, and to 
fall heavily upon the floor, whiie we were told to listen. Tre- 
mendous concussions were then made upon the floor, jarring the 
whole house. The spirits of my wife and Dr. Franklin came to 
me in form at the same time, — he slapping me heavily upon the 
back, while she gently patted me upon the head and shoulder. 
The electrical rattle was now heard; and the light increasing in 
brilliancy disclosed to our view the full figure of a heavy man. 
At my request, the figure ' walked ' across the floor, and appeared 
many times in difterent positions with entire distinctness. My 
wife now appeared in great vividness and beauty. Her figure 
floated gracefully through the room, her white robes falling 
back as she glided through the air, brushing a-aiay pencils, cards, 
i£c., as she passed over and s-aieft across the table. This spirit- 
robe was shown us in a variety of ways ; and the manifestation of 
texture was exquisitely beautiful. We saw her plainly withdraw 
her face behind it, pushing the robe forward while it swung in 
the air. It was brought over the table, the light being placed 
behind, so that it became transparent and gossamer like, as 

Hosted by Google 

66 PLANCHETTE. 

though a breath of air would dissolve it. This was frequently 
repeated, and the robe drawn across mj head, as palpably as 
though of material substance. Whenever it approached closely, 
we discovered a peculiar scent of purity, like a very delicate per- 
fume of newly gathered grass or violets. 

" Oci. 20, 1861. — This manifestation was a powerful one, 
showing the whole figure of my wife, but not her face. She 
stood before us enveloped in gossamer, her arm and hand as 
perfect as in life, the arm bare from the shoulder, with the excep- 
tion of the gossamer, which was so transparent that it was more 
beautiful for being thus dressed. I asked to be touched; when 
she advanced, laid her arm across my forehead, and permitted 
me to kiss it. I found it as large and as real in weight as a liv- 
ing arm. At first It felt cold, then grew gradually warm. She 
held up the little finger, and moved it characteristically; and 
while we were looking at that, she let her hair fall loosely down 
her back. The manifestation was concluded by her writing a 
card, resting it upon my shoulder, caressing roe upon the head 
and temple, and kissing me for good-night. 

"Nov. 3, i86t. — This evening, according to promise, my 
wife came in full form, placing her arms completely around 
my neck; but the most remarkable and novel manifestation was 
the production of perfume from spirit- tlowers. Something, re- 
sembling a veil in its contact, was thrown over my head; and, 
while it was resting there, spirit-flowers were placed at my nose, 
eshaling the most exquisite perfume I have ever smelt. I asked 
what this was ; and was told ' My wreath of spirit- flowers.' At 
my request the same was brought to the medium, who experi- 
enced similar sensations. This was repeated probably a dozen 
times, the perfume being as strong as that of tuberose, but en- 
tirely different and far more exquisite. 

'^ Sanday Evening, Nov. lO, 1861. — Immediately upon sitting 
down, there was communicated by raps, 'JVo/aiVBce.'. . . My wife 
tapped upon my shoulder, informing me that she should give all 
her aid to Dr. Franklin, who now became visible, his face for the 
first time being seen. The light was apparently held by another 

Hosted by Google 

MR. LIVERMOKK's NARKATIVE. 6? 

figure enveloped in dark covering, from behind which the light 
approached, shining full upon the face of Dr. Franklin, about 
whose identity there can he no longer any doubt or mistake. I 
should have recognized it anywhere as Dr. Franklin's face, as I 
have learned to know it from the original paintings I have seen of 
him ; hut the strong points of his character were manifest as no 
painting could exhibit them. He was apparently dressed in a 
white cravat, and a brown coat of the olden style ; his head was 
very large, with gray hair behind his ears ; his face was radiant 
with benignity, intelligence, and spirituality ; while my wife's 
was an angel face of shining beauty, spiritualized in its ex- 
pression of serenity and happiness. His appearance was that 
of a man full of years, of dignity, and of fatherly kindness. In 
whom one could find counsel, affection, and wisdom. He came, 
perhaps, a dozen times, and once or twice so near that kis eyei 
■aiere seen full and clear. My wife appeared three times in white 
robes and enveloped in flowers. 

'^Monday B-oening, Noz: 12, 1861. - Electric rattlings were 
heard; and the light becoming very vivid discovered to us Dr. 
Frantlin sealed, his whole Ji^re and dress complete. Indeed, so 
vivid was the light, and so real was the man sitting there, that 
his shadow was thrown upon the wall as perfectly as though a 
living human being were there, in his earth-form. His position 
was one of ease and dignity, leaning back in the chair, with one 
arm upon the tahle, occasionally bending forward in recognition 
of us, his gray locks swinging in correspondence with the move- 
ment. We closed our eyes by request. Upon opening them, he 
was standing on the chair, his form towering above us like a 
statue. Again he resumed his seat, the act being accompanied 
by loud rustlings, which attend each movement of the spirit. A 
message from my wife informed me that a card would be visibly 
handed to Dr. Franklin. During all. these appearances, there 
seemed to be two other forms or spirits assisting, one of whom 
held the light. One of these enveloped figures approached Dr. 
Franklin, and, extending an arm, held a card directly before his 
face, so that the card was distinctly visible, and then placed it 

Hosted by Google 

on his knee, and afterwards handed it to me. The power was 
great, remaining vigorous during the evening ; and Dr. Franklin, 
my silent companion, sat in his chair, my -vis'ii-vis, for an hour 
and a quarter. 

" Wednesday Evening, Nov. 2i,i^i. — . . . Something like a 
handkerchief of transparent gossamer was brought; and we were 
told to look at the hand whieli now appeared under the gossamer, 
as perfect a female hand as was ever created. 1 advanced mj 
own hand, when the spirit-hand was placed in it, grasping mine ; 
and we again grasped hands with all the fervor of iong-parted 
friends, mj wife in the spirit-land and myself here. The ex- 
pression of love and tenderness thus given cannot be described; 
for it was a reality which lasted through nearly half an hour. I 
examined carefully that spirit-hand, squeezed it, felt the knuckles, 
joints, and nails, and kissed it, while it was constantly visible 
to my sight. I took each finger separately in my hand, and 
could discern no difference between it and a human hand, except 
in temperature ; the spirit-hand being cold at first, and growing 
warm. I wore a glove, however, and could not perhaps judge 
accurately in all respects. At last ' good-night ' was spelled out, 
by the spirit-hand tapping upon mine, and then for a parting 
benediction, giving it a hearty shake. Nothing in all these 
manifestations has been more real to me, or given me greater 
pleasure, than thus receiving the kindly grasp of a hand dearer 
to me than life, but which, according to the world's theory, has 
long since with all its tenderness and life mouldered into the 
dust of the earth. 

" Friday Evening, Nov. 2g, 1861. — My brother and I and the 
medium present. Conditions unfavorable. Heavy rain-storm. 
Darkened the room, and immediately a spirit-light rose from 
the floor. I put on my glove, and my brother did the same. 
The light soon came in my hand, when I felt that it contained a 
female hand. It was frequently placed in mine, and by me 
grasped tightly, so that I felt every part of it, boti the medium'' 
hands being at the time held by we. The spirit of my brother's 
deceased child also placed his hand in mine ; and a large man's 

Hosted by Google 

hand, purporting to be that of Dr. Franklin, w 
seiz' g d h k" g • "I 

s placed in mine, 
ok my whole 
each of these 
different- sized 
of ours, and 
ndj second, a 

folding- doors 

V. e opened our eyes : tie room was illujaiaaied by the burning 
match; and Dr. Franklin luas before as, kneeling, the top of his 
head about a foot above the table. We looked at him aa long as 
tlie match burned; and he became invisible as it expired. . . . 
Soon after the male figure first appeared, the following was 
communicated by raps: 'Now, dear son, can the world ever 

doubt? This is what we have so long labored to accomplish. 

B. F.' Also, 'My dear, now I am satisfied. — Estelle.' Upon 
cards there was subsequently written by the spirit, as follows : 
'This meeting is the most important we have ever had. Long 
hare we tried to accomplish this manifestation, and success has 
crowned our efforts. You saw that I had only to light the match 
to show you that I was as naturally in form as you are. I have 
long tried to come in an earthly light, and have at last suc- 
ceeded.' 

Hosted by Google 

»0 PLANCHETTE. 

"Dec. IS, 1861.— The figure of Dr. Franklin appeared per- 
fectly delineated, seated in the window, and permitted me to 
examine his hair with my hand. The hair was to sight and 
touch as real as human hair. 

'^Saiarday Evemug, Bee. 28, 1S61. — In my own house and 
room, which was carefully examined, and door locked by myself. 
Soon after extinguishing the gaslight, the spirit-light rose, and 
requested us, by raps, to follow it across the room to the win- 
dow, which was heavily curtained, to exclude the light from 
the street. By raps, the following was communicated : 'Icoine; 
I come in a cloud: Immediately the light became very viyid : 
the 'cloud' appeared against the curtain, a portion of it over- 
hanging from the top ; while the face and figure of my wife, from 
the waist was projected upon it with stereoscopic effect. White 
gossamer, intertwined with violets and roses, encircled her 
head; while she held in her hand a natural flower, which was 
placed at my noee, and subsequently fownd upon the bureau, 
having been carried by the spirit from a basket of flowers on the 
table, standing in the centre of the room. We were told to 
notice her dress, which seemed tight-fitting, of a substance 
like delicate white flannel. She was leaning upon her right 
hand; the cuff of her sleeve was plain and neatly turned back. 
In answer to my inquiry, whether this appearance was not like a 
bas-relief, I was answered, ' No; but you see Ihe fine spirit-form, 
rou votice I come in health, a«d not an One year ago to-nigkt.' 
This appearance is new, and quite different from those originally 
seen, and is efi-ected without noise or demonstrations of any 
kind. 

^^Thursday Evening, Jan. 33- — My wife made her appear- 
ance standing against the door. She was exquisitely robed 
in white, and enveloped in blue gossamer. A white ribbon, 
tied or knotted in the centre, passed across her waist; and a 
large and perfect bovl-knot of white silk ribbon was attached to 
her breast diagonally. In her hand, near her face, she held 
a small oval mirror, about two inches in diameter. We had 
seen the mirror before, but at a distance. On this occasion I 

Hosted by Google 

MR. UVHRMORES NARRATIVE. 71 

determined to exnmine it cioselj, and approached to within six 
or eight inches. The mirror was apparently glsES, and reflected 
objects perfectlj, — not only the light itself, but I saw my own 
face in it. The spirit-finger held opposite was reflected with all 
its motions. We asked for certain movementa of the finger, 
which were made as requested, and simultaneously reflected in 
the mysterious glass. The flowers in her hair and on her person 
were real in appearance. Over her forehead was a crown of 
flowers. In the centre was a button or flower of black and gold 
upon a background of white. A card taken from me, and upon 
which I had written a private question, was held by the spirit in 
front of her face, and behind the oval mirror, which thus hung 
suspended and swinging against the white card, rendering it a 
real, palpable object. The light shone vividly upon her face and 
figure; and while we stood looking intently, she instantly, as 
quick as thought, disappeared, with a rushing sound. Then, 
by raps, was communicated, 'The electricity is very strong; 
and we did this to show you how quickly we can disappear.' 
Very soon she returned, as real as before. The light was subse- 
quently placed upon the floor, near the door ; while we receded to 
the middle of the room, remaining thus, at a distance of some 
ten feet from the medium, for twenty minutes. We were then 
requested to open the window to admit air, to enable them to 
dissipate the electricity. Immediately upon the fresh air being 
admitted, the light grew dim and disappeared. 

" yan. 24. — A stormy night with hail and sleet, ending in a 
severe gale. Conditions favorable. My wife appeared dressed 
precisely as last night, except having white gossamer around 
the top of her head. The 'bow,' which was in the same place 
upon her breast, was the same as then ; and on this occasion was 
taken in our fingers for examination, being to sight and touch as 
real as silk. A low, murmuring sound was heard, something 
like the buzzing of a bee. I listened carefully, and noticed that 
it came from the lips of the spirit. This was an unsuccessful 
attempt to speak, or rather the preparatory process, eventually 
to result, doubtless, in success. The light approached her face. 

Hosted by Google 

7^ PLANCHBTTE. 

We were told to look in her mouth. Upon doing so, we dis- 
covered what seemed a piece of dried grass projecting from her 
lips about three inches. This was then placed in my hand and in 
my mouth. I dosed my teeth upon it, finding it a real substance. 
By raps, I was told it was a spiritual substance, when it was 
withdrawn, and disappeared. A large musical box was standing 
upon the table, which required considerable force to start it or 
to stop it by means of springs. At my request, the spirit-light 
rose, resting upon the keys, and started the music, then stopped 
it, changing or repeating the tunes, and finally zuound it uf. 

">i. 30, 1S62.-A manifestation of great power and 'sohd 
form.- A veiled figure robed in white stood by us ; and, opening 
the drapery which enveloped the head, we distinctly saw the 
eyes, forehead, and hair of Estelle, life-like, ' likejlesh and Mood • 
The lower part of the face was covered with the gossamer. This 
figure walked and floated through the room; kissed me, rested 
its arm, while fully visible, upon my head and shoulders, 'repeat- 
ing the same to tKe medium. The arm was round, full, and 
flesh-hke. I examined it both with my eyes and hands. 

•'ya«. 31, 1862. — Estelle and Dr. Franklin appeared alter- 
nately. Dr. Franklin's shirt-bosom and collar were as real to 
appearance as though made of linen. We handled them, and 
examined in the same manner his tunic, which was black and 
felt like cloth : his face and features were perfect and distinctly 
visible. This manifestation differs from that of last night this 
having been spoken of by them as ' the fine spiritual form,' which 
seems like the projection of form, color, and expression with 
stereoscopic elTect. We now see that the rustling is produced by 
movements of the envelope or robe, and is doubtless electrical. 

" 5«»rfay Evening, Feb. 9, 1862. - My wife appeared leaning 
upon the bureau, with white lace hanging in front of and around 
her head. This lace or open work (like embroidery) was so real, 
that the figures were plainly discernible, and could have been 
sketched. As she stood in front of the bureau, the top of the 
mirror was plainly visible over her head, reflecting her form and 
surroundings. There were flowers in her hair; and in other 

Hosted by Google 

St°lKIT-WRITIN<iS. y, 

respects her appearance was similar to those previously de- 
scribed. The body of her dress or robe was of spotted white 
gossamer, while the lace-work was in diamonds and flowers. 

"Wednesday E-aemng, Feb. 12, 1862. -I found the power 
string; and soon after entering the room messages were rapped 
out upon the door across the entire width of the room, tifteen 
feet distant from the medium and myself. About fifteen minutes 
after extinguishing the light, my wife came to us in exquisite 
beauty; if possible, more vividly than ever, and directly over the 
table. In her bosom was a white rose, green leaves and other 
smaller flowers. A card which she had written upon was visibly 
given to me, handed back, and returned to me repeatedly by her, 
while she was in full view. Her hand, real in form and color, 
was affectionately extended to me, and caressed me with a touch 
BO Tuli of tenderness and love that I could not restrain my tears • 
for to me it was really her hand, her native gentleness was ex' 
pressed through it. The card was as follows; 'Dear C, - 
Beautiful spring is approaching; flowery spring. Over you 
lightly fall its shadows; and may no sorrow, no clouds, touch 
the brightness of your future. Have you not noticed, dear C, 
that all your life you have been prospered, guided, and directed 
by the guardians of your happiness? You have always been 
followed by an invisible protecting power, which will ever be 
near when danger threatens, to step between you and difficulty, 
to lead you into paths of happiness and peace. We are now 
more closely linked, from our constant intercourse. There is 
not a day closes without a lasting blessing from us. As life is 
short, live well and live purely. . . . Fear not the world : there 
will be a day when this great truth will be seen in its true light 
and prized as it should be. . . . Be happy: all is well. Good- 
night. — ESTEHE.' 

"Saturday E-ve«ing, Peh. 15- — Atmosphere unfavorable and 

damp. This meeting was held especially for Mr. G , my 

brother-in-law. There were present, the medium, Mr. G 

and myself. I asked for a manifestation of power; and we at 
once received the following message : ' LhUn. and k^«^ I, .„«.. 

Hosted by Google 

74 PI.ANCHETTE. 

ikrough the air; hands off the table.' Immediatelj' a terrific 
metallic shock was produced, as though a heavy chain in a bag 
swung bj a strong man had been struck with his whole power 
upon the table, yarri«^ the whole house. This -was repeated three 
times, with decreasing force, A heavy marble-topped table 
moved across the room ; and a large box did the same, no person 
touching or being near either of them. An umbrella which had 
been lying upon the table floated through the room, touching 

each of us upon the head, and was finally placed in G 's 

hand. These physical manifestations were given doubtless to 
convince an additional witness of the reality of spirit or invisi- 
blepower. If such was the object, the purpose was well served; 
for every possible precaution had been taken by him, even to the 
sealing of the doors and ivindows. 

"Sunday Evening; Feb. 16, 1862. — Appearance of m3- Aife 
and of natural flowers. I had been promised a new manifesta- 
tion, ^something natural as life.' We sat longer than usual in 
quiet, and received the infallible message, ' No failure.' The 
spirit announced her presence by gentle taps upon my shoulder, 
accompanied by rustlings, kissed me, and asked for a card and a 
pin, then another pin; all of which I handed over my shoulder, 
together with a small strand of my hair, which latter was par- 
ticularly requested. The taking of each of these articles was 
accompanied by rustlings ; and, as the spirit-hand was extended 
over my shoulder visibly, the drapery fe!l upon my hand and 
arm. Some ten minutes were now occupied by the spirit in 
arranging the card, pins, &c., when the following message was 
received : ' I will give you a spirit-_flower.' Immediately after- 
wards an apparently //-ss^i/y gathered flower was placed at my 
nose, and that of the medium. My wife now appeared in white, 
holding the card in one hand, and the spirit-light in the other; 
while we discovered, fastened to the card, a leaf and flower. I 
asked if I could have the flower, and was answered in the affirma- 
tive. My hand was then taken by the spirit, opened, and the 
card placed thereon; while I was particularly and repeatedly 
enjoined to ' be very careful,' and ' do not not drop or disturb it.' 

Hosted by Google 

SPIRIT-FLOWERS. 75 

With the other hand I now lighted the gas, and found, to my 
surprise and astonishment, a leaf of laurel, about two and a half 
Inches in length, pinned upon the card, and a pale pink flower 
pinned to the centre of the leaf, with the strand of hair passed 
through and tied in the leaf. We examined it carefully, Emelled 
it, touched it, and found it fragrant and fresh. The card had not 
been during all this time within reach of the medium, who sat 
on my right, while the spirit stood at my left, and the doors were 
as usual carefully and securely locked. After a careful examina- 
tion of five or ten minutes, we were requested to darken the room. 
Before doing so, wishing to preserve the leaf and flower, I placed 
them and the card upon a book in a remote part of the room, and 
returning to the medium, turned out the gas. The following 
message was then communicated : ' I gave you the sacred priv- 
ilege of seeing this flower from our spirit-home: it has van- 
ished.' I immediately relighted the gas, and directed my steps 
across the room, when I found the card and the pins precisely 
as I had left them ; but the leaf and flower were gone. By raps, 
'Next time you shall see the flowers dissolve in the light.' The 
following was also written upon another card by the spirit of 
Benjamin Franklin ; ' My son, we are achieving a great victory 
atthismoment. — B. F.'» 

"Saturday Etiening, Feb. 22, i863, —Appearance of flowers. 
Cloudy. Atmosphere damp. Conditions unfavorable. At the 
expiration of half an hour, a bright light rose to the surface of 
the table, of the usual cylindrical form, covered with gossamer. 
Held directly over this was a sprig of roses, about six inches in 
length, containing two half-blown white roses, and a bud with 
leaves. The flowers, leaves, and stem were perfect. They were 
placed at my nose, and smelled as though freshly gathered; but 
the perfume in this instance was weak and delicate. We took 
them in our fingers, and I carefully examined the stem and 
flowers. The request was made as before to ' be very careful.' 

• Fort Draielson on Ihe Tennessee Riv(r, was laken 00 this dij by the Federal 

Hosted by Google 

7" J^LANCHETTK. 

I notice .„ .dh..l,e, ,,.„„. fteM.g which ,„ „p,.|„ed „ 
b.,.g the „,„„ of. d.„p, i„p.„ .,„„pi„.. „,„ j„^„ 
ivere held near .nd over the light, which .oemed to feed mi .i,e 
them ,„b,t.„ce in the ..,ne .,,„„„ .. the h.nd. 1 h„e no- 
tod .h.t .1, th=.e .plritnal creation, .re nonri.h.d .nd fed or 
■nateoahzed by means of the electrical reservoir or cylinder and 
that when the, begin to diminish or p.,s off, toe?.".,!!' 
..crease ..ices place the monten, thej arc height in eontacl 
Til . '.", P"»"»nj 1". the electrical light. Bj r.,., we were 
told to JK,/,„ „i ,„ a,„ dml„e.' The sprig was placed 
over the light, the Sowers drooped, and, in less than one minntt 
melted as though made of wart, their substance seeming to 
spread as ihej disappeared. B, r.ps, ■ S., ,&. „„, ™,-,.. 
A tamt Irne .mniedlately shot aero., the cjlinder, grew into « 
.tern I and ,n about the same time required for its dis.olution. 
the .ten,, bud, .nd roses had grown into created perfection! 
ifl]. was several times repeated, and was truly wonderful. We 
wen promised the phenomenon of their probable disappearance 
in the gaslight when the atmosphere became pure and clear 

"S.W.y Bvms; M. ,3, ,86,. - Flowers. Atmosphere 
ver, d.inp. Condition, unf.vor.ble. The Hower, were ™ro 
dnced in the same manner as last evening. 1 felt them carefull, ■ 
and a rose was placed in my mouth, so that I took its leaves 
between my lips. They were delicate as natural rose-leaves 
and cold; and there was a peculiar freshness about them, bui 
very httle fragrance. The following moss.ge was written ™on 
a card, . My dear C—,- Again we h.ve^ c.ntrn"^i,hr 
atmcphere; but how much we have been able to do owinir to 
the many powerful .id. who have been .0 kind to u.l Do you 
...hae the great blessing. ,. .re giving youP Do you re.L 
what a great proof you h.ve received in being permitted to see 
the flowers which decor.te our s.cred w.lk.? . . The time is 
coming, has come, when this .object will be honored. Good- 

night. — ESTELLE." 

" Tuesday Evening, Feb. 25, i862.-Appearance in nresen™. 
of a third witness, Mr. G— , the n..diZ, and nyX Th" 

Hosted by Google 

MR. I.IVEKMOKES NARRATIVE. J^ 

room in ivliich we sat was conn ted w th tl m II m 

by siiding-doors; but the door d w d I d g t h 
two were carefully sealed. Aft tt g b t h If h 
we were directed to open these 1 d g d wh 1 th m d m 

and myself proceeded toawidwg hhw h 

dark curtain to exclude the 1 ght [ M wh 1 M 

G remained by the table. Lp h g h d 

vivid light rose from the floor d t h f m f 

male spirit standing against th wh w U dj g h 

dow. At first his face was not ble, or lather was concealed 
by the unusual quantity of dark drapery by which he was envel- 
oped ; but after two or three efforts the face of Dr. Franklin was 

recognized. During this time Mr.G was not permitted to 

leave the Wble. At last the conditions having become stronger, 
or rather the effect of his presence having been partially over- 
come, the following message was received: ' Dear friend, ap- 

frcach: Mr, G now came to us, when the spirit of Dr. 

Franklin immediately became visible to him. He saw the hair 
was real ; for while we stood before him it was frequently placed 
over and on the light to show its substantiality. He did not, 
however, see the spirit in the same degree of perfection that we 
do, but sufficiently well to recognize the face of Dr. Franklin as 
represented in his portraits. The eyes, hair, features, and 
expression, together with a portion of the drapery, were all 
visibly perfect ; but the power of the electrical light was consider- 
ably weakened from the effects of Mr. G— 's presence. These 

eflectG were very curious. With Mr. G in the other room, 

the light was bright and vivid, decreasing as he approached in 
proportion to the distance ; again brightening as he receded, and 
vice-vers/i, sliowing that the sphere of a person in the earth-form 
has a direct influence upon these creations of the invisible 
world ; and that this influence may be a disturbing one, from no 
other cause except surprise, fear, or any violent emotion result- 
ing from inexperience in the phenomena." 

In a letter to Mr. Coleman, dated June loth, 1862, Mr. Liver- 
more writes. "I have the pleasure of announcing to you the 

Hosted by Google 

78 PLANCniiTTE. 

initiation of Dr. Gray as a witness of tiie visible presence of Dr. 
Franklin on Friday niglit last. He saw the spirit less distinctly 
than has generally been ray experience, but sufficiently well to 
recognize him. This being, however, the first time of seeing 
him, he may expect to attain by progressive steps the same vivid- 
ness that has been manifested to us, after the first epiotions of 
surprise have been overcome by familiarity with the phenom- 
enon. The doctor actually saw and took the gray liair of 
Franklin's spirit, as well as a portion of the clothing in his hand, 
and examined them. To me this is now a very common occur- 
rence ; but the additional corroborative testimony of Dr. Gray is 
very important." 

Dr. Gray, on his part, fully confirms all this. He writes (Jan- 
uary, 1867), "I can only reply to your latest request, that I would 
write out my testimony in this case for publication, that Mr, 
Livermore's statements are each, one and all of them, fully reli- 
able. His recitals of the stances in which I participated are 
faithfully and most accurately stated, leaving not a shade of 
doubt in my mind as to the truth and accuracy of his accounts 
of those at which I was not a witness. I saw with him the 
philosopher Franklin, in a living, tangible, physical form, 
several times and on as many different occasions. I also wit- 
nessed the production of lights, odors, and sounds ; and also the 
formation of flowers, cloth -textures, &c., and their disintegration 

"These phenomena, including the apparition of Dr. Frank- 
lin and also many other phenomena of like significance, have 
all been shown to me when Mr. Livermore was not present and 

" Mr. L. is a good observer of spirit phenomena ; brave, clear 
and quick sighted, void of what is called superstition, in good 
health of body and mind, and remarkably unsusceptible to 
human magnetism. Moreover, he knows that all forms of spirit 
communication are subject to interpolation from earth-minds, 
and are of no other or greater weight than the truths they con- 
tain confer upon them. 

Hosted by Google 

COSTUME OF SPIBITS. 79 

"Miss Fox, the medium, deported herself with patient integ- 
rity of conduct, evidently doing all in her power, at all times, to 
promote a fair trial and just decision of each phenomenon as it 
occurred. —John F. Gray." 

The narrative of Mr. Livermore includes nearly all the most 
important phenomenawhich have been experienced in connec- 
tion with these modern manifestations. His observations in 
respect to the costume of the supposed spirits appear to have 
been careful and minute. This question of the dress of spirits 
has been often discussed. When Joan of Arc was in mockery 
asked by her judges about the clothing of the spirits who visited 
her, she replied, "Is it possible to conceive that a God who is 
served by ministering spirits cannot also clothe themP" 

Swedenborg affirms that in the spirit-world all clothing is 
representative, and is outwrought from the afiections and states 
of its several inhabitants. 

Some seers have asserted that the spiritual body is composed 
of a subtle ether, and that spirits make themselves visible by 
means of its vibration, and can give what forms they please, by 
a mere effort of the will, to their coverings; that the human 
body itself, and the garments we wear, are composed of the same 
ultimate particles of matter; and that the spiritual fabric is 
nothing but those ultimate particles in their most attenuated 
state. Of the power of spirits to use the elements of our own 
atmosphere, in giving concretion, visibility, and tangibility, 
odor and color, to forms, the experiences of Mr. Livermore and 
others offer strong testimony. The subject is one which a mose 
advanced science may some day be able to explore.. 

Hosted by Google 

nily."- 

CHAPTER IV. 

MANIFESTATIONS THROUGH MR. HOME, 
rs at once mortal and immorlal ; Lnhabitjnts of time and dwellera in 

■r\ANIEL DUNGLASS HOME was bom new Edinburgh, 

-«-' March, 1833- When about a year old, he was adopted by 
an aunt. Some eight years afterwards he accompanied her and 
her husband to America. At the age of seventeen, he was resid- 
mg at Norwich, Conn. Soon after the developments at Hydes- 
ville, through the Fox family, he began to manifest extraordinary 
powers as a medium, and in 1851 had acquired considerable 
reputation among those interested in the phenomena in the 
United Stales. 

He went to Europe early in the spring of 1855 ; and his career 
there, in the exercise of his wonderful gifts, has been of a charac- 
ter to bring him repeatedly before the public. 

Not long since he was a party to a lawsuit, at the trial of 
which he was the subject of a good deal of abuse and misrep- 
resentation by the English press. It was the celebrated case of 
Lyon versus Home. The plaintiff, Mrs. Lyon, was a widow 
lady, seventy years old or more, possessed of a considerable for- 
tune, and without any child or near relative. Having read Mr. 
Home's "Incidents of My Life," she called on him, introduced 
herself (Oct. 30, 1866), and asked him to visit her. He did so ; 

and, after two or three intervie 

i, she proposed to make Y. 

her adopted son. In November, she executed a will in his favor- 
and the next month he took the name of Lyon, advertising the 
fact. She executed a deed, confirming a gift of £.4-000. and 
«ddmg £6,000; and, linally. in January, ,867, she conveyed 

Hosted by Google 

MR. HOME AND MRS. LYON. 8l 

to him, after the reservation of a life-interest, a further snm of 
£30,000. All this waa done in legal form, and after deliberation 
and consultation. 

Whether it was the part of good taste and manly independence 
in Mr. Home to accept these large sums, we dechne to discuss; 
hut we will venture the remark, that, among the self-righteous 
ones who have made him the subject of their denunciations, there 
is probably not an individual who, under similar circumstances, 
would not have consented to be enriched in the same way. 

From the facts in Mr. Home's affidavit, we are led to infer that 
it was not till after he had been thus formally adopted by the 
old lady as a son, that he discovered she had been calculating on 
his marrying her. "Do you know," said she, "that nothing 
would be greater fun than that I should marry you.' How the 
world would talk!" Mr. Home does not appear to have been 
agreeably impressed by the intimation. 

In her bill of complaint, Mrs. Lyon asserted that she was 
made to believe by Home, " that the spirit of her deceased hus- 
band required her to adopt the said defendant." It very soon 
appeared on the trial, by her own displays of wilfulness and 
headstrong unveraclty, that the old lady was one whom neither 
spirits out of the flesh nor in the flesh would be likely to influ- 
ence to do what was contrary to her own caprice. She contra- 
dicted her own testimony so grossly, that even the presiding 
Vice-Chancellor — bitterly prejudiced as he was against Mr. 
Home and against Spiritualism —could not avoid speaking of 
her testimony as " clearly untrustworthy, and such as no man 
ought to have his case decided upon against him." 

And yet there was no evidence whatever, except her own 
assertion, that Mr. Home had tried to get her to adopt him, bj 
representing that her departed husband recommended it. Mrs. 
Lyon seems to have been dazzled by the social position which 
she fancied that Home occupied, by his presents from kings 
and emperors, and to have aspired to miit in the aristocratic 
world, and to assume in her old age a rank from which she had 
been all her life excluded. 

Hosted by Google 

82 

She 60on found she had miscalculated in regard to Mr. Home. 
Instead of taking her matrimonial hints, he was so unaccommo- 
dating as to fall ill, and threaten to die. He had a little boy for 
whom Mrs. Ljfon conceived a deadlj dislike; and she now saw 
before her the prospect of the large sums she had parted with 
going to enrich this youth. One fine day, as Mr. Home was 
about starting for Paris, he was arrested and thrown into prison 
under a writ of «e exeat regno. 

The trial came on in the spring of 1868, before Vice- Chancellor 
Giffard, who decided the case adversely to Mr. Home, ordering 
him to restore all the money lie had received from Mrs. Lyon. 
From this decision Mr. Home appealed; but lately there has 
been a compromise between the parties, which ends the affair. 

The fable of the wolf and the lamb is recalled by Mrs. Lyon's 
attempt to show that she was under the " undue influence, as- 
cendency, and power" of Mr. Home. Hers appears to have 
been the stronger will in the case ; and she had every thing her 

The iffidaMt of Mr. Home sets forth, that from his childhood 
he has been subject to the occasional happening of singular 
ph3'.ical phenomena in his presence, which are most certainly 
not produced by him or by any other person in connection with 
him I have," he affirms, "no control over them whatever: 
they occur irregularly, and even when I am asleep. Sometimes 
I am many months, and once I have been a year, without them. 
I cannot account for them further than by supposing them to be 
eiFected by intelligent beings or spirits. Similar phenomena 
occur to many other persons. . . , These phenomena, occurring 
in my presence, have been witnessed by thousands of intelligent 
and respectable persons, including men of business, science, and 
literature, under circumstances which would have rendered, 
even if I had desired it, all trickery impossible." 

Mr. Home proceeds to affirm that they have also been wit- 
nessed in their own private apartments, when any contrivance 
of his must have been detected, by the emperor and empress of 
the French, the emperor of Russia and his family, the king of 

Hosted by Google 

MR. HOMES AFFIDAVIT. 83 

Prussia, and other royal personages, who have had ample oppor- 
tunities, which they have used, of investigating the phenomena 
and inquiring into the character of the medium. 

"I have resided," continues Mr Home, "in America, Eng- 
land, France, Italy, Germany, and Russia; and in every country 
I have been received ao a gueot ind friend by persons in the 
highest position, who were quite competent to discover and 
expose, as they ought to haie done, any thing like contrivance 
on my part to produce the-.e phenomena. I do not seek, and 
never have sought, the aiquamtance of any of these exalted 
personages. They hai e sought me , and I have thus had a cer- 
tain notoriety thrust upon me. I do not take money, and never 
have taken it; although it has been repeatedly offered me for or 
in respect of these phenomena. . . . Some of the phenomena in 
question are noble and elevated, others appear to be grotesque 
and undignified. For this I am not reponsible, any more than I 
ani for the many grotesque and undignified things which are 
undoubtedly permitted to exist in the material world. I sol- 
emnly swear that I do not produce the phenomena aforesaid, 
or, in any way whatever, aid in producing them." 

I th f th examination, Mr. Home said, "I 

h rsed with them orally. They have 

le to my ear; and I have talked to 

eard, like a rapping. It does not 

Ve take it for granted, the same as 

6^ wire, that there is an intelligence 

language used by the spirits is 

g vated. 

aced in violation of the ordinary 
rotest against its being supposed 
whom this has occurred.) Chairs 
in the same way. I have found a 
in convincing those who did not 
m ity of the soul." 
H very delicate constitution and ex- 

He is tall, slender, and fair-haired, 

Hosted by Google 

34 Pl.ANCHHTTB. 

and does not convey the idea of robustness, physical or mental. 
His acquaintances generally appear to have mingled in their 
regard for him a sort of tenderness, as if he were one to be 
shielded from the rougher experiences of life. Those who liave 
known him best, testify to his character as " a man of honor 
and proper moral feeling." 

Our first call on Mr, Home was made without signifying our 
intention to any one. We had never seen him or corresponded 
with him, and did not suppose that he even knew us by name. 
But as we rang the bell, he, without having seen us, said to 

Mrs, R., at whose house he was stopping, "That is Mr. 

who rings. He has come to call on me." 

Dr. Winslow Lewis, long known as one of the most eminent 
surgeons of Boston, informed us, in Home's presence (Feb. 21, 
1865), that he (Dr. L.) took up the "Boston Directory" the 
day before to loolt for a name which he had not mentioned to 
any human being. "Here, I'l! find it for you," said Home, 
taking the book out of his hand, and instantly pointing to the 

Dr. Lewis also told us that he handed to Home a photograph- 
album, full of likenesses, the originals of which were unknown 
to hira; and Home pointed to those persons who had deceased, 
and in every instance he was right. 

" Second sight," said Home, joining in the conversation, " is 
my strong point," (His mother had been a seeress. From her 
he had probably derived his gift.) " Being at a party once in 
London, I heard one man say to another, ' Do you know that 
fellow?' — 'Oh, yes! that's that humbug. Home.' At once I 
turned to the last speaker, and said, 'Excuse me, sir; but I am 
at this moment vividly impressed with the particulars of an 
afFair in which you were an actor* — let me see — when you were 
twenty-two years of age. But I cannot help wondering why 
you took the course you did, when you might have' — here 

• iDStaausofautnilufaculiy inlhelivesorZsthokke, thelalcFoiceylheWillHin, 

Hosted by Google 

1 whispered the rest in his ear. The man looked aghast, and, 
drawing me aside, said, 'There should be no human being but 
m If 1 k w= T word of that affair Siy no more You 

whhkp g hn m 

wh h h h p 

From the numerous published accounts, amounting now to 
several hundred, bj msny different witnesses, of the phenomena 
produced through the mediumship of Home, we select the 
account, which we slightly abridge, hy the late Robert Bell, con- 
tributed to the " Cornhill Magazine " (London, August, i860), 
when the late Mr. Thackeray — so justly celebrated for his writ- 
ings^was the editor. 

In introducing the account, Mr. Thackeray saye, " I can vouch 
for the good faith and honorable character of our corrcGpondent, 
a friend of twenty-five years' standing." 

Of Mr. Thackeray's own convictions on the subject we have 
the following record, which we extract from Weld's " Last Win- 
ter in Rome" (1865): — 

" I remember well meeting the late Mr. Thackeray, at a large 
dinner-party, shortly after the publication in the 'Cornhill 
Magazine.' then edited by him, of the paper entitled 'Stranger 
than Fiction.' In this paper, as will be remembered by many 
readers, a detailed account was given of a spiritual sJaace, at 
which Mr. Home petformed, or caused to be performed, many 
surprising things, the most astounding being his floating in 
the air above the heads of persons in the room. There were 
several scientific men at the dinner-party, all of whom availed 
themselves of the earliest opportunity to reproach Mr. Thacke- 
ray with having permitted the paper in question to appear in a 
periodical of which he was editor, holding, as he did, the high- 
est rank in the world of letters. Mr. Thackeray, with that 
imperturbable calmness which he could so well assume, heard 

Hosted by Google 

S6 

all that was said against him, and the paper in question, and 
thus replied : ' It is all very well for you, who have probably 
never seen spiritual manifestations, to talk as jou do; hut, had 
you seen what I have witnessed, you would hold a different 
opinion.' He then proceeded to inform us that, when in New 
York, at a dinner-party, he saw the large and heavy dinner- table, 
covered with decanters, glasses, dishes, plates — in short, every 
thing appertaining to dessert — rise fully two feet from the 
ground, the modas oferandihcing, as he alleged, spiritual force. 
No possible jugglery, he declared, was or could have been em- 
ployed on the occasion ; and he felt so convinced that the motive 
force was supernatural, that he then and there gave in his adhe- 
sion to the truth of Spiritualism, and consequently accepted the 
article on Mr. Home's siance. Whether Mr. Thackeray thought 
differently before be died, I cannot say; but this I know, that 
every possible argument was used by those present to endeavor 
to shake his faith in Mr. Home's spiritual manifestations, which 
were, as they declared, after all but sorry performances com- 
pared with the surprising tricks of Houdin or Frikell." 

We will not longer detain the reader from that part of Mr. 
Bell's paper relating to Mr. Home: — 

'"I have seen what I would not have believed on your testi- 
mony, and what I cannot, therefore, expect you to believe upon 
mine,' was the reply of Dr. Treviranus to inquiries put to him 
by Coleridge as to the reality of certain magnetic phenomena, 
which that distinguished savaat was reported to have witnessed. 
It appears to me that I cannot do better than adopt this answer 
as an introduction to the narrative of facts I am about to relate. 
It represents very clearly the condition of the mind before and 
after it has passed through experiences of things that are irrec- 
oncilable with known laws. I refuse to believe such things upon 
the evidence of other people's eyes ; and I may possibly go so 
far as to protest that I would not believe them even on the evi- 
dence of my own. When I have seen them, however, I am 
compelled to regard the subject from an entirely different point 
of view. It is no longer a question of mere credence or author- 

Hosted by Google 

TRUTH STRANGER THAN FICTION. 87 

tj, but . qu»lion of &«• Wh.te.er conclu.lon., If .»J, I "W 

h.ve bren projected inlo . better po.Mon for Judgmg of it thin 

I occupied before; and that wliat then appeared an impoBition, 

a delusion now assumes a shape which demands inTCstiga- 

"°°But I cannot eipeel persons who h.ve not witnessed these 
things, to taltc my word for them i because, under s,m Jar circum- 
stances I certainly should not have taken theirs. What I do 
expect is, that thej will admit a. reasonable, and as being in 
strict accordance with the phliosophic.i method of procedure 
the mental progress I ha,, indicated, from the total rejcet.on of 
"nraordinarj phenomena upon the evidence of other., to the 
recognition of such phenomena as matter of fact, upon our own 
direJt observation. This recognition point, the way to inquiry, 
which is precisely what I desire to promote. . - . 

..Our party of eight or nine ...cmbled in the evemug, .nd the 
.<„„ commenced about nine o'clock, in a spacious dr.wmr- 
nDcm, of which it is necessary to give some account, in or er 
render perfectly inteliieible what is to follow. In different part, 
of the room were .otas and ottomans, and in the centre a round 
°;hie!.t which it was arranged that the „■..„ should be heid^ 
Between thl. table and three windows, which filled up one side 
of the room, there ,a. a large .ofa. The window, were draped 
with thick curtain., and protected by spring-bhnd.. The space 
in front of the centre-window wa. unoccupied ; but the window, 
on the right and left were filled by geranium-stands. 

"The company at the table consisted partly of ladie. and 
partly of gentlemen, and amongst the gentlemen ... the cele- 
brated Mr Home. ... He look, like a man whose life has been 
passed in a mental conlllet. The eitpre,.ion of his face m repose 
fsTat of physical .nlertogi but it quickly light, up when you 
address him, and his natural cheerfulness color, hi. whole man- 
ner There is more kindliness and gentleness than vigor in the 
■character of hi. feature.; and the same e.syn.tured di.po.ition 
may be traced in hi. unre.tr.ined intereourse. He is yet .0 

Hosted bi Google 

Pi-ANCHBTTK. 

joung, that the plajfultiess of boyhood has not passed away 
and he never seems so thoroughly at ease with himself ano 
others as when he is enjoying some light and temperate amuse- 

"The stance commenced In the centre of the room, I pass 
over the preliminary vibrations to come at once to the more 
remarkable features of the evening. From unmistaliable indi- 
cations, conveyed in diiferent forms, the table was finally re- 
moved to the centre-window, displacing the sofa, which was 
wheeled away. The deep space between the table and the win- 
dow was unoccupied, but the rest of the circle was closely packed. 
Some sheets of white paper, and two or three lead-pencils, an 
accordion, a small hand-bell, and a few flowers were placed on 
the table. Sundry communications now took place, which I 
will not stop to describe; and at length an intimation was 
received, through the usual channel of correspondence, that the 
lights must be extinguished. As this direction is understood to 
be given only when unusual manifestations are about to be made 
It was followed by an interval of anxious suspense. There were 
lights on the walls, mantel-piece, and console-table ; and the 
process of putting them out seemed tedious. When the last was 
CEtrnguished, a dead silence ensued, in which the tick of a watch 
could be heard. 

■' We must now have been in utter darkness, but for the pale 
light that came in through the window, and the flickering glare 
thrown fitfully over a distant part of the room by a lire which 
was rapidly sinking in the grate. We could" see, but could 
scarcely distinguish, our hands upon the table. A festoon of 
dull gleaming forms round the circle represented what we knew 
to be our hands. An occasional ray from the window now and 
then revealed the hazy surface of the white sheets, and the misty 
bulk of the accordion. We knew where these were placed ; and 
could discover them with the slightest assistance from the gray, 
cold light of a watery sky. The stillness of expectation that 
ensued during the first few minutes of that visible darkness was 
so profound that, for all the sounds of life that were heard, it 
might have been an empty chamber. 

Hosted by Google 

ROBERT bell's narrative. S9 

"The table and the window, and the space between the table 
and the window, engrossed all eyes. It was in that direction 
everybody instinctively looked for a revelation. Presently, the 
tassel of the cord of the spring-blind began to tremble. We 
could see it plainly against the sky ; and, attention being drawn 
to the circumstance, every eye was upon the tassel. Slowly, 
and apparently with caution, or difficulty, the blind began to 
descend: the cord was evidently being drawn; but the force 
applied to pull down the blind seemed feeble and uncertain. It 
succeeded, however, at last; and the room was thrown into 
deeper darkness than before. But our vision was becoming 
accustomed to it ; and masses of things were growing palpable to 
ns, although we could see nothing distinctly. Several times, at 
intervals, the blind was raised and pulled down ; but, capricious 
as the movement appeared, the ultimate object seemed to be to 
diminish the light. 

"A whisper passed round the table about hands having been 
seen or felt. Unable to answer for what happened to others, I 
■will speak only of what I observed myself The table-cover was 
drawn over my knees, as it was with the others. I felt distinctly 
a twitch, several times repeated, at my knee. It was the sensa- 
tion of a boy's hand, partly scratching, partly striking, and 
pulling me in play. It went away. Others described the same 
sensation ; and the celerity with which it frolicked, like Puck, 
under the table, now at one side and now at another, was sur- 
prising. Soon after, what seemed to be a large hand came 
under the table-cover, and with the fingers clustered to a point, 
raised it between me and the table. Somewhat too eager to 
satisfy my curiosity, I seized it, felt it very sensibly ; but it went 
out, like air, in my grasp. I know of no analogy in connection 
with the sense of touch by which I could make the nature of that 
feeling intelligible. It was as palpable as any soft substance, 
velvet, or pulp ; and at the touch it seemed as solid ; but press- 
ure reduced it to air. 

" It was now suggested that one of the party should hold the 
hand-bell under the table ; which was no sooner done than it 

Hosted by Google 

90 PLANCHETTE. 

was taken away, and after being rung ; 
fin ally returned, still under the table, inl 
person. 

"Whiie this was going forward, the white sheets were seen 
moving, and gradually disappeared over the edge of the table. 
Long afterwards we heard them creasing and crumpling on the 
floor, and saw them returned again to the table; but there was 
no writing upon them. In the same way, the flowers which lay 
near the edge were removed. The semblance of what seemed a 
hand, with white, long, and delicate fingers, rose up slowly in 
the darkness, and, bending over a flower, suddenly vanished with 
it. This occurred two or three times; and although each 
appearance was not equally palpable to every person, there was 
no person who did not see some of them. The flowers were 
distributed in the manner in which they had been removed; a 
hand, of which the lambent gleam was visible, slowlj ascending 
from beneath the cover, and placing the flower in the hand for 
which it was intended. In the flower-stands in the adjoining 
window, we could hear geranium-blossoms snapped off, which 
were afterwards thrown to different persons. 

" Still more extraordinary was that which followed, or rather 
which took place, while we were watching this transfer of the 
flowers. Those who had keen eyes, and who were in the best 
position for catching the light upon the instrument, declared 
that they saw the accordion in motion. I could not. It was as 
black as pitch to me. But, concentrating my attention on the 
spot where I supposed it to be, I soon perceived a dark mass rise 
awkwardly above the edge of the table, and then go down, the 
instrument emitting a single sound, produced by its being struck 
against the table as it went over. It descended to the floor in 
silence; and a quarter of an hour afterwards, when we were 
engaged in observing some fresh phenomena, we heard the 
accordion beginning to play where it lay on the ground. 

" Apart from the wonderful consideration of its being played 
without hands, no less wonderful was the fact of its being 
played in a narrow space, which would not admit of its being 

Hosted by Google 

SPIRIT-MUSIC. 91 

rawn out with the requisite freedom to its full extent. We 
istened with suspended breath. The air was wild, and full of 
strange transitions, with a wail of the most pathetic sweetness 
running through it. The esecution was no less remarkable for 
its delicacy than its power. When the notes swelled in some of 
the bold passages, the sound rolled through the room with an 
astounding reverberation; then, gently subsiding, sank into a 
strain of divine tenderness. But it was the close that touched 
the hearts, and drew the tears of the listeners. Milton dreamt of 
this wondrous termination when he wrote of ' linked sweetness 
long drawn out." By what art the accordion was made to yield 
that dying note, let practical musicians determine. Our ears, 
that heard it, had never before been visited by ' a sound so fine.' 
It continued diminishing and diminishing, and stretching far 
away into distance and darkness, until the attenuated thread of 
sound became so exquisite that it was impossible at last to fix 
the moment when it ceased. 

"That an instrument should be played without hands, is a 
proposition which nobody can be expected to accept. TJie whole 
story will be referred to one of the two categories under which 
the whole of these phenomena are consigned by ' common sense.' 
It will be discarded as a delusion or a fraud. Either we ima- 
gined we heard it, and really did not hear it ; or there was some 
one under the table, or some mechanism was set in motion to 
produce the result. Having made the statement, I feel that I am 
bound, as far as I can, to answer these objections, which I admit 
to be perfectly reasonable. Upon the likelihood of delusion, my 
testimony is obviously worth nothing. With respect to fraud, I 
may speak more confidently. It is scarcely necessary to say, that 
in so small a circle, occupied by so many persons, who were 
inconveniently packed together, there was not room for a child 
of the size of a doll, or for the smallest piece of machinery, to 
operate. But we need not speculate on what might be done by 
skilful contrivances in confines so narrow, since the question is 
removed out of the region of conjecture by the fact, that, upon 
holding up the instrument myself in one hand, in the open room. 

Hosted by Google 

9^ PLANCH ETTE. 

with the fuli light iipon it, similar strains were emitted, th 
regular action of the accordion going on without any visibk 
agency. And I should add that, during the loud and vehement 
passages, it became so difficult to hold, in consequence of the ex- 
traordinary power with which it was played from below, that I was 
obliged to grasp the top with both hands. This esperience 
was not a solitary one. I witnessed the same result on different 
occasions, when the instrument was held by others. 

■' It is not my purpose to chronicle all the phenomena of the 
evening, but merely to touch upon some of the most prominentT 
and that which follows, and which brought us to the conclusion 
of the stance, is distinguished from the rest by this peculiarity, 
— that it takes us entirely out of that domain of the marvellous 
in which the media are inanimate objects. 

" Mr. Home was seated next to the window. Through the 
semi-darkness his head was dimly visible against the curtains 
and hie hands might be seen in a faint white heap before him! 
Presently, he said, in a quiet voice, ' My chair is moving ; I am 
Off the ground: don't notice me; talk of something else,' or 
words to that effect. It was very difficult to restrain the curios- 
ity, not unmixed with a more serious feeling, which these few 
words awakened; but we talked, incoherently enough, upon 
some indifferent topic. I was sitting nearly opposite to Mr. 
Home; and I saw his hands disappear from the table, and his 
head vanish into the deep shadow beyond. In a moment or two 
more he spoke again. This time his voice was in the air above 
our heads. He had risen from his chair to a height of four or 
five feet from the ground. As he ascended higher, he described his 
position, which at first was perpendicular, and afterwards became 
horizontal. He said he felt as if he had been turned in the gen- 
tlest manner, as a child is turned in the arms of a nurse. In a 
moment or two more, he told us that he was going to pass across 
the window, against the gray, silvery Kght of which he would be 
visible. We wafched in profound stillness, and saw his figure 
pass from one side of the window to the other, feet foremost 
lying horizontally in the air. He spoke to us as he passed, and 

Hosted by Google 

MANIFESTATIONS THROUGH MR. HOME. 93 

'old us that he would turn the reverse way, and recross the 
window; which he did. His own tranquil confidence in the 
safety of what seemed from below a situation of the most novel 
peril, gave confidence to everybody else ; but, with the strongest 
nerves, it was impossible not to be conscious of a certain sensa- 
tion of fear or awe. He hovered round the circle for several 
minutes, and passed, this time perpendicularly, over our heads. 
I heard his voice behind me in the air, and felt something lightly 
brush my chair. It was his foot, wliich he gave me leave to 
touch. Turning to the spot where it was on the top of the chair, 
I placed my hand gently upon it, when he uttered a cry of pain ; 
and the foot was withdrawn quickly, with a palpable shudder. 
It was evidently not resting on the chair, but floating; and it 
sprang from the touch as a bird would He now passed over to 
the farthest ex m d d d b 

voice of the d nd d h d d H h d 

reached the ng p n wh h d gh m k d 

Eoon aflerwa dd ddd mdhp h 

An incident wh h d d nng h p g nd 

imparted a St ng m w tl h d wh K 

we supposed to be on the ground under the window, 
played a strain of wild pathos in the air from the most distant 
corner of tbe room. 

" I give the driest and most literal account of these scenes, 
rather than run the risk of being carried away Into descriptions 
which, however true, might look like exaggerations. But the 
reader can understand, without much assistance in the way of 
suggestion, that at such moments, when the room is in deep 
twilight, and strange things are taking place, the imagination is 
ready to surrender itself to the belief that the surrounding space 
is inhabited by supernatural presences. Then is heard the tread 
of spirits, with velvet steps, across the floor ; then theear catches 
the plaintive murmur of the departed child, whispering a tender 
cry of ' Mother ! ' through the darkness ; and then it is that forms 
of dusky vapor are seen in motion, and colored atmospheres rise 
round the figures that form that circle of listeners and watchers. 

Hosted by Google 

94 

I exclude all such sights and sounds because they do not admi' 
of direct and satisfactory evidence, and because no sufScieni 
answer can be made to the objection, that they may be the 
unconscious work of the imagination. 

" Palpable facts, witnessed by many people, stand on a widely 
dilTerent ground. If the proofs of their occurrence be perfectly 
le^timate, the nature of the facts themselves cannot be admitted 
as a valid reason for refusing to accept them as facts. Evidence, 
if it be otherwise trustworthy, is not invalidated by the unlikeli- 
hood of that which it attests. What is wanted here, then, is to 
treat facts as facts, and not to decide the question over the head 
of the evidence. 

"To say that certain phenomena are incredible, is merely to 
say that they are inconsistent with the present state of our 
knowledge; but, knowing how imperfect our knowledge is, we 
are not, therefore, justified in asserting that they are impossible. 
The ' failures ' which have occurred at siaaces are urged as 
proofs that the whole thing is a cheat. If such an argument be 
worth noticing, it is sufficient to say that ten thousand failures 
do not disprove a single fact. But it must be evident that, as we 
do not know the conditions of ' success,' we cannot draw any 
argument from ' failures.' We often hear people say that they 
might believe such a thing, if such another thing were to hap- 
pen ; making assent to a particular fact, by an odd sort of logic, 
depend upon the occurrence of something else. ' I will believe," 
for example, says a philosopher of this stamp, ' that a table has 
risen from the ground, when I see the lamp-posts dancing qua- 
drilles. Then, tables ? Why do these things happen to tables f ' 
Why, that is one of the very matters which it is desirable to 
investigate, but which we shall never know any thing about so 
long as we ignore inquiry. 

"And, above all, of what use are these wonderful manifesta- 
tions ? What do they prove i> What benefit have they conferred 
on the world? Sir John Herschel has answered these questions 
with a weight of authority which is final. ' The question. Cut 
bono t — to what practical end and advantage do your researches 

Hosted by Google 

CONFIBMATION OF MK. BELL's NARRATIVE. 95 

tend f — is one which the speculative philosopher, who loves 
knowledge for its own sake, and enjojs, as a rational being 
should enjoy, the mere contemplation of harmonious and mutu- 
ally dependent truths, can seldom hear without a sense of 
humiliation. Me feels that there is a lofty and disinterested 
pleasure in his speculations, which ought to exempt them from 
such questioning. But," adds Sir John, ' if he can bring himself 
to descend from this high but fair ground, and justify himself, 
his pursuits, and his pleasures, in tbe eyes of those around him, 
he has only to point to the history of all science, where specula- 
tions, apparently the most unprofitable, have almost invariably 
been those from which the greatest practicable applications have 
emanated.' 

"The first thing to be done is to collect and verify facts. But 
this can never be done if we insist upon refusing to receive any 
facts, except such as shall appear to us likely to be true, according 
to the measure of our intelligence and knowledge. My object is 
to apply this truism to the case of the phenomena of which we 
have been speaking; an object which I hope will not be over- 
looked by any persons who may do me the honor to quote this 

" W this account. Dr. J. M. Gully (known to many American 
as well as English patients), who was present at the seance, and 
the neighbor of Mr. Bell, says, " I can state with the greatest 
positiveness^hat the record is, in every particular, correct ; and 
that no trick, machinery, sleight-of-hand, or other artistic con- 
trivance, produced what we heard and beheld. ... I may add 
that the writer omits to mention several curious phenomena. A 
distinguished liitdroi^ur, who was present, asked the supposed 
spirit of his father whether he would play his favorite ballad for 
us. Almost immediately the flute-notes of the accordion (which 
was on the floor) played through, ' Ye banks and braes of Bonnie 
Doon,' which the gentleman assured us was his father's favorite 
air whilst the flute was his father's favorite instrument. He then 
asked for another favorite air, not Scotch, of his father's, and 
' The Last Rose of Summer' was played in the same note. ^This, 
the gentleman told us, wa; 

o which he had alluded." 

Hosted by Google 

96 PLANCHETTK. 

Mr. C. F, Varlej, the electrician, in a letter dated May 7th, 
1868, gives an account of a sitting at his own house, with Mr. 
Home; when a large ottoman, capable of seating eight persons, 
was moved all over the room, and a side-table was driven up to 
him by invisible means; Mr. V. having hold of both Mr. Home's 
hands and legs at the time. " Imposture," says Mr. V., "was 
impossible." 

In the third chapter of the Book of Daniel, we read that King 
Nebuchadnezzar caused three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, to be bound and cast into a burning, fiery furnace. 
But a fourth form, like unto "the Son of God," was seen walk- 
ing with the three, loose from their bonds, in the fire. "And the 
princes, governors, and captains, and the king's counsellors, 
being gathered together, saw these men upon whose bodies the 
fire had no power, nor was a hair of their head singed, neither 
were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on 
them." 

Investigators into modern spiritual phenomena will not ques- 
tion the literal truth of this narrative. The facts have been 
paralleled repeatedly during the last twenty years. 

The ordeal by fire is of great antiquity. It was known to the 
Greeks. In one of the plays of Sophocles, a suspected person 
declares himself ready " to handle hot iron, and to walk over 
fire " in proof of his innocence. 

Blackstone, the great legal authority, writes, "Fire-ordeal 
was performed either by taking up in the hand, unhurt, a piece 
of red-hot iron, of one, two, or three pounds' weight ; or else by 
walking, barefoot and blindfold, over nine red-hot ploughshares, 
laid lengthwise at unequal distances ; and if the party escaped 
being hurt, he was adjudged innocent; but if it happened other- 
wise, he was then condemned as guilty. By this method. Queen 
Emma, the mother of Edward the Confessor, is mentioned to 
have cleared her character when suspected of familiarity with 
Alwyn, Bishop of Winchester." 

The ordeal was accompanied with religious service, within con- 
secrated walls ; and the solemnity with which the Church super- 

Hosted by Google 

THE ORDEAL BY FIRK. 97 

intended the appeal to Heaven invested it with a sacred char- 
acter. A form of ritual viras appointed by ecclesiastical author- 
ity. It will be familiar to many readers, from its being given 
by Sir Walter Scott in the historical Notes to his " Fair Maid of 
Perth." 

The theory that the exemption, in these cases, from harm by 
lire was the result of trick, or fraud, or the contrivance ol 
priestcraft; that chemical agencies were applied to protect the 
body from the natural effects of fire ; that some liniment was used 
to anoint the soles of the feet; that asbestos was mixed with a 
composition to cover the skin; that the hands were protected by 
asbestos gloves, so made as to imitate the skin, — is all pure 
supposition. There Is no evidence to support it: it is simple 
conjecture as to how it is supposed these things might have been 
done, not evidence as to how they really -were done. To prevent 
the defendant from preparing his hands by art, and in order to 
ascertain the result of the ordeal, his hands were covered- up 
and sealed during the three days which preceded and followed 
the fiery application; and it is an entirely gratuitous conjecture 
that those in whose care the accused was placed made use of 
these opportunities to apply preventives to those whom they 
wished to acquit, and to bring back the hands to their natural 
condition. " Even were the clergy, generally, base enough, and 
impious enough," says Mr. Shorter, "to resort to these juggling 
tricks, and blasphemously appeal to Heaven with a lie in their 
mouths, and with the consciousness of so moristrous a fraud, 
this could scarcely have been done without the connivance of 
magistrates and civil rulers, who were not always well disposed 
to the Church, but not un frequently looked upon the ecclesiasti- 
cal authorities with a jealous eye." 

The instances are quite numerous in which American mediums 
have thrust their hands into Uie flames of hot fire, and held 
them there for a minute or more. 

At a Uance in London, in i860, in the presence of several pei- 
Bons (whose names are at the service of the curious), Mr. Home, 
being entranced, did, in the presence of all, lay his head on the 

Hosted by Google 

TE. 

burning coals, where it remained several moments, he 

• injury : 

a hair of his head n 

1 whose intelligence and veracity Mr. Shorter * 
bears teEtimony, has witnessed this fire-test several times ; and, 
to bring up our chain of evidence to this year of grace 1868, we 
quote from his letter, pf March of that year, to Mr. S. : — 

"'The evening on which the phenomena I am about to relate 
occurred, had been full of interest, several very remarkable 
manifestations having taken place ; such as the absorption of 
water by an unseen agency, and the retention of water in an 
open-necked bottle, thougll the same was is-aerted and violently 
moved and swung about. Mr. Home, who was all the time in a 
deep trance, now poured several drops of water upon his finger- 
points; and I noticed a slight jet of steam rise, hissingly, from 
the ends of his lingers, and accompanied by flames of electric 
light, or odic, of a violet, bluish coler, half an inch to an inch 
in length, much resembling the drawings given ^i Reichen- 
bach's works. Still continuing in a trance, Mr. Home now 
approached the fire, and, kneeling down before the hearth, pro- 
ceeded to explain how greatithe power of spiritual beings was 
over matter, not because they worked miracles, but from their 
superior chemical knowledge; adding, 'We gladly have shown 
you our power over fluids : our power over solids is as great. 
Now see how I handle burning coal;' then laying hold of the 
burning back of coal in the hearth with his hands, he deliber- 
ately broke it asunder; and, taking a large lump of incandesceat 
coat into tie palm of his hand {the s,\2.e of an orange), Mr. Home 

arose and walked up to Mrs. , whose alarm at what she 

was witnessing had quite unbalanced her. I examined his hand 
andivrlst; the heat was so intense that it struck through the 
back of his hand, all but scorching his wristband; and Mr. 
Home then, addressing Mrs. , said, 'That is a burning 

■ Under Ihe Latinited name of Thomas lireviot, Mr. Thomas Sho.ttr, of London, 

Hosted by Google 

MB. HOMK's FIKK-TEST. Sfl 

coal, A ; it is a burning coal; feel the heat of his h1h<'i""ft 

burning coal will not hurt Daniel 1 — have faith!' / closely 
examined iis hand, and by the light of the gloming coal I could 
trace every line in the falm of the hand. The skin was not, as 
will be surmised, covered b^ a glove, or steeped in a solution 
of alum : it was as clean as soap and water could make it. Mr. 
Home now explained that spiritual beings had the power of 
abstracting heat as a distinctive element; and to prove this he 
said, now mark: — 

" ' We will cool it now, — draw out the heat.' My doubts were 
by this time thoroughly aroused : I closely watched the process. 
On laying hold of the coal, which had become black, I found it 
to be comparatively cooled; and, taking it from his hand, I ex- 
amined it carefully ; so also the skin of his hand. At his request, 
I returned the coal into the palm of his hand; almost instanta- 
neously, the heat returned; not to incandescence, only the 
caloric. On applying my hand t h 1 lb tm It ml 

I t yl 

tt d th h d 

took conviction at the cost ol 

Ight 

doubted any more. The scr 

y I h 

of Mr. Home to precluded th 

b t d 

tain of tlie fact of an unprot 

d f 

medium being ' fire-proof,' I t 

k M t^ 

J f 

enough, no smell of smoke, o 

h b 

ble. Mr. Home, who was still 

t 

edly at my persevering efforts t 

d 

" On another evening, Mr. Hi 

)me, afte 

le, after he had shown us some 
remarkable phenomena, all whilst in a trance, knelt down 
before the hearth: deliberately arranging the bed of burning 
coal with his hands, he commenced fanning away the flames ; 
then, to our horror and artiazement, placed his face and head in 
the fiames, which appeared to form a bed, upon ^vhich his face 
rested. I narrowly watched the phenomenon, and could see the 
flames touch his hair. On withdrawing his face from the flames, 
/ at once examined his hair ; not a fibre burnt or scorched, — un- 
scathed he came out from the fire-test, a true medium. 

Hosted by Google 

lOO PLANCHETTE. 

" I am aware that great incredulity will reward my n 
I give wliat I have seen, as a fact, refraining from explanation. 

"That the fire-test has played its part in the records of every 
race of people, the veriest tyro in history knows. Fire-test was 
the crucial test of religious fanatics, whose unreasoning ortho- 
doxy sought strength by imitating the wondrous phenomenon I 
have just been recording." 

Thus, then, the credibility of the narratives from the Hebrew 
Scriptures is confirmed by, and they in turn confirm, the similar 
narratives which we find in various countries and centuries, even 
to our own. Their range is too extensive, many of thera are too 
circumstantial and well attested, the testimony to the facts Is 
too clear, too independent and concurrent, to permit us to assign 
them wholly to imposture. Make what large and liberal abate- 
ment you will for fraud on the one hand, and credulity on the 
other, you cannot altogether dispose of the question in that 
only be fitly characterized 
ty of mankind, 
of which Mr. Home has 
nd shortening of his body. 

I. Jamblichus, who flour- 
rist, writes, "The signs of 
nn. Sometimes there are 
., the body is seen to be 
irne aloft through the air; 
take place about It." 
Mr. H. D. Jencken, of Norwood, England, communicates, 
under date of December, 1867, his experiences at four stances, at 
which the body of Mr. D. D. Home was elongated and short- 
ened ; and on all these occasions Mr. J. used his utmost en- 
deavor to make certain of the fact. On two of them, he had the 
amplest opportunity of examining Mr. Home, and measuring 
Ihe actual elongation and shortening. At one, the extension 
appeared to take place from the waist ; and the clothing separated 
eight to ten inches. Mr. J., who is six feet, hardly reached up 

Hosted by Google 

to Mr. Home's shoulder. Walking to and fro, Mr. Home es- 
pecially called attention to the fact of his feet being firmly- 
planted on the ground. 

" He then," says Mr. J., " grew shorter and shorter, until he 
only reached my shoulder, his waistcoat overlapping to his hip. 

the nrst instance, seeing the marvellous manifestations that 
arise from Mr. Home's mediumship." And she adds, " Medium- 
ship is a mystery we cannot fathom, nor understand why the 
power should be delegated to one more than to another." 

But it is equally perplexing why other gifts should be dele- 
gated to one person and not to another; why Mozart should be 
ft consummate musician at five years of age, and another person 
should not, at fifty, be able to tell one tune from another; why 
an idiot boy should possess an astonishing power of computa- 
tion, and another person, well-endowed in most respects, should 
not be able to do in a week what the other will do in a few 

A certam "secularist" denies all authority to iHi/i'nc/ in sup- 
plying hopes of a future life, inasmuch as he does not happen to 
be conscious of the existence in himself of that instinct which 
others undoubtedly have in a strong degree. But it is just as 
irrational for a man to deny immortality to others, because he 

Hosted by Google 

I02 PLANCH KTTK. 

himself maj be th 

which are develo mm m 

deny, because of 1 m 

Newton and Beet 

"Why has not P m g 

things universal a m 

words, Why has G m 

himaelff Why do rm T 

advocate of the theory ol pre existence baji we bring our tatul- 
ties from our anterior states ; so that what we make our own 

It is inscrutable, and seems unjust, that Providence should 
give my neighbor a faculty, and deny it to jhb; especially when 
I greatly desire and covet it. We cannot explain why Provi- 
dence should be so partial ; but iel ns not, on that accounl, deny 
l&e fact. Because Swedenborg, or the Seeress of Prevorst, or 
Andrew Jackson Davis, or Daniel Home, or Emma Hardinge 
may see a spirit, and we may not, let us not jump to the conclu- 
sion that they are either dupes or iiars ; especially when they 
prove to us,- as they do, that they possess powers of prevision, or 
clairvoyance, which we do not possess (at least in our normal 
state), and which are such as we asci-ibe only to spirits. 

There may be a faculty for apprehending spiritual truths, and 
for communicating with spiritual beings, just as there is for 
grasping the fundamental principles of mathematical or musical 
science. Where the faculty is deficient, let us beware how we 
deny the rightfulness of its existence in others, — ■ pronouncing 
it a mere excrescence upon the human soul, to be removed by 
the surgery of those "secular" doctors, who think to cure the 
great heart of humanity of the hope of rejoining the loved ones 
gone before. 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER V. 

THE SALEM PHENOMENA OF 1691 . 

A N elaborate work on Salem Witchcraft, from the pen of the 
-^~*- Rev. Charles W. Upham, an esteemed Unitarian clergy- 
man, was published in Boston, U.S., in 1S67. Of it the " Edin- 
burgh Review" (July, 1868) remarks, " No more accurate piece 
of history has ever been written." 

Accurate in its facts it may be, and yet of questionable accuracy 
in the construction it puts on them. 

If there is any thing in human history that is established by 
human testimony, it is the occurrence, in all the ages of which 
we have any authentic record, of phenomena, still familiar to 
multitudes, but which are now denied by a large class of minds ; 
not because the phenomena are not vouched for by abundant 
testimony, but because they do not happen to accord with indi- 
vidual notions of the possible or the actual. 

SirWilliamBlackstonedid not depart from this world till four 
years after the declaration of American Independence. He was 
the contemporary of our immediate ancestors. His "Commen- 
taries on Law and Testimony " are still so highly esteemed, that 
they have not to this day been superseded as the first work 
proper to be placed in the hands of the law student. Few men 
better qualified to weigh and scrutinize testimony, at once in a 
practical and philosophical spirit, have ever lived; and, on the 
•ubject of Witchcraft, Blacketone remarks, in the fourth book of 

Hosted by Google 

*04 M-ANpHETTK. 

his Commentaries, " To deny the possibility, nay, actual exist- 
ence of witchcraft and sorcery, is at once flatly to contradict the 
revealed Word of God in various passages of hoth the Old and 
New Testament; and the thing itself is a truth to which everj 
nation in the world hath borne testimony, eil/ier by examples 
seemingly -well attested, or by prohibitory laws, which, at least, 
suppose the possibility of commerce with evil spirits." 

Mr. Lecky, in his "History of Rationalism" (1864), shows 
that the testimony establishing the facts of witchcraft is of the 
most irresistible character. The accumulations of evidence are 
such as to amaze the skeptical student. "The wisest men in 
Europe shared in the belief of these facts ; the ablest defended it ; 
the best were zealous foes of all who assailed it. For hundreds 
of years no man of any account rejected it. Lord Bacon could 
not divest himself of it. Shakespeare accepted it, as did the 
most enlightened of hie contemporaries. Sir Thomas Browne 
declared that those who denied the existence of witchcraft were 
not only infidels, but also, by implication, atheists." 
^ The phenomena of witchcraft were real enough for the author- 
ities in England and Scotland to burn the supposed witches by 
thousands; for Geneva (151,5) to burn five hundred in three 
months ; for the diocese of Como in Italy to slaughter one thou- 
sand ; for a single diocese in France to destroy more than could 
be reckoned; for the little town of Salem in Massachusetts to 
put to death some of its best men and women. 

All at once a re-action in public opinion took place, and the 
belief in witchcraft declined. From one extreme men went to 
the other. The re-action was at first not so much against the 
facte as against the fanatical construction put upon them; but 
the general discredit soon involved both. An unfavorable public 
opinion undoubtedly checked the development of mediums for 
the phenomena. Grief and indignation succeeded the wild cre- 
dulity that had made innocent parties responsible for acts, the 
interpretation of which was to be found in a purely scientific 
study of the matter, free from all religious prepossession. 
The marvels of witchcraft, as they were developed in Salem, 

Hosted by Google 

PHENOMENA OF WITCHCRAFT. 105 

and are recorded by Upham, were of the same class with those 
jihenomena which the present writer and thousands of other 
persons have witnessed, during the last thirty years, in cases of 
somnambulism, whether induced by mesmerism or independent 
of that influence, and, in the more recent manifestations, through 
persons called mediums. In the Salem phenomena there were 
violent convulsions of the bodies of those afflicted, especially 
when the supposed witch was near. There were surprising and 
apparently superhuman exhibitions of muscular strength. Vio- 
lent motions in objects around, as if attracted and impelled by 
some mysterious force, were witnessed. A statF, an iron hook, 
shoes, keys, and even a chest, were seen to move, as if tossed by 
an invisible hand. A bed, on which a sufferer lay, shook most 
violently, even when several persons were seated on it. Stones 
were hurled against houses and persons : articles of iron, pewter, 
and brass were tossed about, a candlestick being thrown down, 
a spit flying up chimney, and a pressing-iron, a stirrup, and 
even a small anchor, being moved ; of which facts many persons 
were eye-witnesses. 

Mysterious raffings were also heard. Audible scratchings 
on the bedstead of a person affected were made. A drumming 
on the boards was heard; and a voice seemed to say, "We 
knock no more ! we knock no more ! " A frying-pan rang so 
loud that the people at a hundred yards' distance heard it. 
Sounds as of steps on the chamber-fioor were heard. Divers 
noises BE of the clattering of chairs and stools were heard in an 
adjoining room. Very varied are these instances. 

Wonderful fowtrs of thought and grace of expression were 
exhibited by the most ignorant and uneducated, and by persons 
of ordinary, and even of small, mental capacity. Of one person 
It IS recorded, " He had a speech incessant and voluble, and, as 
was judged, in various languages." Of a little girl It is men- 
tioned, " She argued concerning death, with paraphrases on the 
thirty-first Psalm, in strains that quite amazed us." 

Cases of mysterious tnnuledgt, like those now called clairvoy- 
ance, are reported, even by the coolest witnesses. Brattle men- 

Hostea by Google 

106 PLANCHKTTE, 

tions that " several persons were accused by the afflicted whom 
the afflicted never had known." Little girls thus affected de- 
scribed, as their tormentors, persons they had never seen ; and hy 
these descriptions the parents or friends of the girls sought out 
the accused, even in remote places. 

Perhaps the most consistent explanation of this implication of 
innocent persons, by the children, and others who were the 
mediums on the occasion, is, that they were under the control of 
mischievous and malignant spirits, who found their pleasure in 
fixing suspicion on the wrong parties. 

If we may believe Swedenborg, spirits are very human in their 
weaknesses. In his spiritual diary, he says, '*^Vhen spirits 
begin to speak with man, he must beware, lest he believe thera 
in any thing; for they say almost any thing. Things are fabri- 
cated by them, and they lie. ... If man then listens and be- 
lieves, they press on, and deceive and seduce in divers ways." 

Of one of the little daughters of John Goodwin, of Boston, 
Mather says, "Perceiving that her troubiers understood Latin, 
some trials were thereupon made whether they understood 
Greek and Hebrew, which, it seems, they also did; but the 
Indian languages they did not seem so well to understand." 

We have repeatedly known a medium to be lifted in her chair 
from the floor on to a table, where there was no means of its 
being done by any known human agency, or mechanical con- 
trivance. How like is this to the testimony of respectable citi- 
zens of Boston in 1693, In the case of Margaret Rule! " I do 
testify," says Samuel Aves, " that I have seen Margaret Rule 
liilsd up from her bed, wholly by an invisible force, a great 
way tovrards the top of the room where she lay." "We can 
also testify to the substance of what is above written," say Robert 
Earle, John Wilkins, and Daniel Williams. " We do testify" — 
to a precisely similar occurrence, say Thomas Thornton and 
William Hudson.* 

"We have in history," says Calmet, "several instances of 
persons full of religion and piety, who, in the fervor of their 

Hosted by Google 

LKVITATION. 'O7 

lEons, have been taken up into the air, and have remained 
lere for some time. We have known a good monk, who rises 
oraetimes from the ground, and remains suspended, without 
wishing it. I know a nun to whom it has happened, in spite of 
herself, to be thus raised up-" , 

He mentions the same thing as occurring to St. Phihp of Nen, 
St, Catherine Colembina, and to Loyola, who was " raised up 
from the ground to the height of two feet, while his body shone 
like light." ^ ,., 

Savonarola, before his tragical death at the stake, and wh.le 
absorbed in devotion, was seen to remain suspended at a con- 
siderable height from the floor of his dungeon. " The historical 
evidence of this fact," says Elibu Rich, in the "Encyclopedia 
Metropolitana," " is admitted by his recent biographer." 

Indeed, the authentic instances of this phenomenon are far too 

ain children supposed to be bewitched, Mr. Upham 
writes, "The convulsions and paroxysms of these girls; their 
eyes remaining fi-ted, bereft of all light and expression; their 
screams, the sounds of the motions and voices of the invisible 
beings they heard; their becoming pallid before apparitions, of 
course seen only by themselves, &c., -were the result of trickery, 
was nothing but acting, but such perfect acting as to male all 
who witnessed their doings to believe it to be real. They would 
address and hold colloquy with spectres and ghosts ; and the 
responses of the unseen beings would be audible to the fancy of 
the bewildered crowd. ... But none could discover any 
imposture in the girl who h-.d by long practice become 

wonderful adepts in tl a u j, y and probably of ventr.l- 

°^AMording to Mr. Up am he w hcraft which manifested 
itself in Salem, .in .69 was a bu ab e " to childish sporhve- 
ness 1 to the mischievo s p o eed n^ f the children in the Rev. 
Mr. Parris's family"! jj , r _ 

There is an increduhty which it requires a good deal 01 cre- 
dulitv to arrive at in the face of notorious facts. Even the 

Hosted by Google 

loS 

PLANCHETTE. 

"Edinburgh Review" — eulogistic as it is, and, for the most pa. 
justly, of Mr. Upham — rebukes him for confining his vie- 
almost exclusively, to the theory of fraud and falsehood, a, 
affording the true key in dealing with these phenomena. 

"Mr. Upliam,"sajs the reviewer, " is evidently very far iadeed 
from understanding or suspecting how much light is thrown on 
the darkest part of his subject, by physiological researches car- 
ried on to the hour when he laid down his pen. ... In another 
generation, the science of the human frame may have advanced 
far enough to elucidate some of the Salem mysteries, together 
with some obscure facts in all countries, which cannot be denied, 
while as yet they cannot be understood." 

So far so good. But the reviewer, while reluctantly admitting 
facts that Spiritualism has forced upon the attention of the 
world, cannot avoid going out of his way to speak an ill word 
of those who have adopted the spiritual hypothesis, and to 
bring against them the charge of malting several thousand luna- 
tics for our asylums; a charge which the statistics of those asy 
lums have repeatedly disproved, and which, if it were true, 
would be no argument against the prosecution of truth, any 
more than the fact that many thousands become insine from 
religious excitement would be an argument against religion 

Dr. Maudsley. a writer quoted with approval by the reviewer, 
shows the absurdity of thus charging a morbid tendency ot the 
brain, ending in insanity, upon the mere tof^ic, toward which 
the mind may have directed itself at a certain time. This 
" topic " may be denounced by shallow observers as the exciting 
cause; but a deeper diagnosis will prove that the true cause lay 
in the cerebral cells. 

The reviewer calls the Spiritualists " a company of fanatics, 
. . . who can form no conception of the modesty and patience 
requisite for the sincere search for truth, , . . who wander in a 
fool's paradise," . . . and who are "partly answerable for the 
backwardness" of conservative men of science. 

" Who excuses accuses," says the proverb ; and the reviewer's 
apology for the men of science will be accepted only by simple- 

Hosted by Google 

frigt!Ti:ni!D bv an hypothesis. 109 

,5. Here for hveiitj years have the Spiritualists been pro- 
iming certain facts and phenomena, which they have called 
jon the sat'aas to investigate. The hypothesis as to the origin 
jf these facts, whether mundane or ultra-mundane, had nothing 
to do with the facts themselves. A man who sees Mr. Home 
lifted to the ceiling may believe it was done by a spirit, or'by 
a latent foree in the individual himself, or in the surroundmg 
spectators. All that Spiritualists have said has been, ■■ Come 
and see the fact, and explain it then as you please. But do not 
denounce us as dupes and fanatics for believing the testimony 
of our senses. Do not expect us to be laughed out of the ver- 
dict of our own faculties, as poor Sir David Brewster was, after 
seeing the table move." 

This, it is well known, has been the position of all intelligent 
Spiritualists; there being many, so-called, who believe simply 
in the facts, without attempting to explain them. And now the 
"Edinburgh Review," seeing that the time is coming when it 
must prepare for a cAange of 6ase in regard to these facts (as it 
has done in regard to mesmerism), charges it upon the so-called 
Spiritualists, that by their hyfothesis they have frightened off 
investigation ! Bold investigators they must be who can be ter- 
rified by an hypothesis. ,:, ^ , , 
The late Dr. William T. G. Morton, when he was told that sul- 
phuric ether would produce insensibility to pain, went on fear- 
lessly and tested the fact, and became a great discoverer. As 
the "Edinburgh Review" would have said of him, " He could 
form no conception of the modesty and patience requisite for the 
sincere sssrch for truth." 

When Kate Fox heard the raps, she said, " Do as I do," and 
found that they were regulated by intelligence. She, too, could 
form no conception of this vaunted "modesty and patience. 
She imagined an hypothesis: she tried it; and the result was 
the production of the phenomenon. 

Subsequent investigators into the phenomena have followed 
her example. They have interrogated the invisible power, what- 
ever it may be, producing the manifesUtions 1 and, by adoptmg 

Hosted by Google 

the hypothesis that it was intelligent, and could answer que 
tions, they have found that it could do so ; and they have arriv 
at great results, just as other discoverers have, by simply leanin, 
on an hypothesis. 

And so when this learned reviewer charges Spiritualism with 
"deluding and disporting itself with a false hypothesis about 
certain mysteries of the human mind," he merely utters words 
of resentment that have no philosophical significance. He 
might as well abuse Columbus for finding America through 
the false hypothesis of its being the eastern end of Asia. If an 
hypothesis is adequate to the desired result, what absurdity to 
denounce a man for using it as a temporary scaffolding on which 
to mount ! 

" Hypotheses," says Novalis, "are nets: only he who throws 
them out will catch any thing." 

But for the earnestness of investigators, a large class of facts, 
discovered, or, rather, rediscovered, by Spiritualism, would 
have been relegated to the oblivion where they have lain for 
ages. To this day, it has been a constant warfare on the part 
of Spiritualists, to establish these facts. Men of science and of 
learning, with here and there an exception, have done all they 
could to discredit and crush them out. 

And now, when the facts number their believers by millions, 
and it begins to he impossible to ignore them longer, the, 
"Edinburgh Review" — while it timidly admits some of the 
least remarkable of them — would blacken with its harmless 
ink the fair fame of the men through whose intrepidity, fidelity 
to truth, and impenetrability to precisely such sneMs as the 
reviewer's, those pregnant facts have become the property of 

And he stigmatizes these men as " fanatics " 1 Is he aware in 
what company the fanatics now find themselves f Not to mention 
those eminent men of the last generation, — such as Lavater, the 
physiognomist; Schubert, the philosopher; Goethe, Zschokke,* 
G6rres, Oberlin, Von Meyer, Ennemoser, Kerner, and many 
others, who were Spiritualists before the phenomena of 1848. — 

Hosted by Google 

CilARLKS H. FOSTER. Ill 

■we need but refer to the late ArchbUhop Whatelj', the late I-ord 
Lyndhurst, the late Mr. Senior, the late Mr. Thackeray, the late 
Mrs. Browning, and other distinguished persons, by whom these 
phenomena were accepted as spiritual. Cardinal Wiseman ad- 
mits them. So do Professor De Morgan, Mr. Robert Chambers ; 
Bishop Clark, of Rhode Island ; Mr, Varley, the electrician ; the 
eloquent Jules Favre, a member of the French Academy ; Gari- 
baldi, Mazzini, and hundreds of eminent men, towards whom for 
this reviewer to affect contempt, would be simply ridiculous. 

But it is only a short distance in the admission of facts that 
he has as yet gone. When, by and by, he is compelled to go 
further, and to accept the most surprising of the phenomena 
recorded in this volume, and to abandon his complacent theory 
that the marvels which Spiritualists proclaim are merely the 
chimera of " an objective world of their own subjective esperi- 
ence," he.will, we hope, be a little more cautious in his sneers at 
men who, if they had heeded such ridicule as his, would long 
since have been checked in the investigation of facts, so repug- 
nant to the preconceived notions of quarterly reviewers. 

We refer to Mr. Upham's book, simply to call attention to the 
fact, that in hig own town of Salem, at the very time he was 
writing a history of witchcraft, in which he sets down as delu- 
sions and tricks certain phenomena that were established as 
true in the minds of judges, juries, clergymen, and magistrates, 
by the overwhelming amount of evidence that was adduced, 
there lived (1865-68), hardly a stone's throw from his own 
house, a young man of the name of Charles H. Foster, bom 
in Salem, 1838, through whom similar phenomena, quite as 
remarkable as any in the annals of witchcraft, might have been 
witnessed and fairly tested. Mr. Upham must have known of 
him by reputation ; for Mr. Foster was and is widely celebrated, 
both in America and England, for his marvellous displays of a 
knowledge such as we call spiritual, inasmuch as it far tran- 
scends all that we can conceive of in our normal state of con- 
When Justinus Kerner was investigating (1826), through 

Hosted by Google 

Madame HaufF^ (the Seeress of Prevorst), phenomena belong- 
ing to the same group with those of modern Spiritualism, the 
critics and reviewers, he tells us, instead of coming to see the 
faots for themselves, as they were invited, all rushed home, 
mounted their high stools, and began to write against the phe- 
nomena and everybody connected with them. 

So has it been with Spiritualism ; and now it looks as if the 
reviewers could never forgive the despised "fanatics" for get- 
ting hold offsets in advance of them, and making them commit 
themselves againt^t them. 

Of our own experiences with Mr. Foster, we will record only 
one class ; but with this we have repeatedly been made familia-. 
both at his rooms and our own house. We have reason to 
believe that there are several thousand persons at this time, in 
America and England, who could confirm our experience by 
their own with the same medium. 

Some time in i86i, seeing Mr. Foster's advertisement in the 
newspapers, we called on him at his temporary boarding- pi ace, 
near the United-States Hotel in Boston. We had intimated our 
purpose to no one, either at the moment or previously. We had 
been asked by no one to attend. We had never seen Mr. Foster, 
He had never seen ua, as he said and as we believe. We sought 
him simply in his capacity of a professional medium to test his 

He was alone in a small room, and we two remained alone 
during the sitting. The room was about 15 by 15, with two 
windows looking on the area back of the house. The curtains 
were up. It was noonday. There was no possibility of decep- 

At his request, we wrote twelve names of departed friends on 
twelve scraps of paper, and rolled the scraps into pellets. We 
were at liberty to use our own paper, or to tear from what was 
lying on the table. Mr. Foster walked away from us while we 
wrote; and we were careful that he should not see even the 
motion of our hand. 

The paper we used was fine as tissue paper. We folded, and then 

Hosted by Google 

PROOFS OF CLAIRVOYANCE . 113 

rolled up each piece separately, and pressed it till it was hardly 
larger than a common grape-stone. We placed the pellets on 
the uncovered mahogany of the table, and mised them up. Mr. 
Foster ran his fingers rapidly over them, without taking up any 
one of them. Then, almost instantly, he pushed one after the 
other towards us, and, as he did bo, gave us, without pause or 
hesitation, name after name, until he came to one which was 
a name so unusual, that we know of but two persons alive 
at this moment who bear it. "The name of this person will 
appear on my arm," said Mr. Foster; and, rolling up his sleeve, 
he showed us the name Arria, in conspicuous red letters, on the 
sltin of his left arm. 

He had given the names on eight of the pellets correctly in 

Having had enough to astonish us for one sitting, we did not 
ask him to do more that day. On many subsequent occasions, 
similar tests of power were given to us by Mr. Foster. 

In this experiment it was impossible that he could get his 
knowledge from our mind. This is a favorite theory of the 
scoffers ; but it will not apply here. We knew, it is true, the 
names that were on the pellets ; but the pellets were so mixed up 
that we could not have told which was which, had our life de- 
pended on it. We might have guessed right once ; but to do it 
eight times in succession was hardly in the range of possibil- 
ity. 

Wiere did Mr. Foster get the faculty of telling ns -Jihat vjat 
written on each of those felleis f 

In a pellet on which we had written the name of George Busk, 
we had added, as a further test of Mr. Foster's clairvoyance, 
these words: '-Are these things truly from human spirits ?" 
Seizing a pencil, Mr. F., with a nervous rapidity, wrote off the 
following reply before the pellet had been opened, and before we 
knew the name that was on it: "These communications are 
truly from the spirit-world. And is it not a glorious thought 
thus to be able to communicate with the beloved ones who have 
gone to the far-off spirit-landf " This, though not an exact 

Hosted by Google 

114 PLANCHETTH. 

reply to the inquiry, was near enough to eitcite astonishment. 
To Rofus Dawes, we wrote, "Old friend, what ehall I think 
of it?" The reply was, ■' Thinic it is all right now. It is a 
boon given to man to prove to him the immortality of the soul. 
[Signed] Rufus." 

The replies do not afford any satisfactory evidence of spirit 
identity, nor were the questions framed with that view; but 
what explanation can we give of the faculty that could read in 
every particular pellet, rolled into illegibility as it was, the 
name and the question? 

The venerable John Ashburner, of London, editor of Reich- 
enbach's " Dynamics of Magnetism," and long one of the most 
successful practising physicians in England, has given a narra- 
tive of his experiences in the presence of Mr. Foster. As many 
of these accord with our own, we give them in preference to 

"I have myself," says Dr. Ashburner, "so often witnessed 
spiritual manifestations that I could not, if I were inclined, put 
aside the evidences which have come before me. When Mr. 
Charles Foster was in London, in 1863, he was often in my 
house; and numerous friends had opportunities of witnessing 
the phenomena which occurred in his presence. . . . The second 
morning that he called on me was about two weeks after his 
arrival in England. Accidentally, at the same time arrived at 
my door Lady C. H. and her aunt, wife of the Rev. A. E. I 
urged them to come in, and placed them on chairs at the sides 
of my dining-table. Their names had not been mentioned ; Mr. 
Foster having retired to the further extremity of the room, so as 
not to be able to see what the ladies wrote. I induced them each 
to write, upon separate slips of paper, six names of friends who 
had departed this world. These they folded into pellets, which 
were placed together. 

" Mr. Foster, coming back to the table, immediately picked up 
a pellet, and addressing himself to Mrs. A. E,, 'Alice,' he said, 
which made the lady start, and ask how he knew her name. 
He replied, 'Your cousin, John Whitney, whose name you wrote 

Hosted by Google 

'S TESTIMONY. 115 

on that little piece of paper, stands by jour side, and desires me 
to say, that he often watches over you, and reads your thoughts, 
which are always pure and good. He is delighted at the tender- 
ness and care which you exhibit in the education of your chil- 
dren.' Then he turned towards rae, and said, 'Alice's uncle is 
smiling benignantly, as he is looking towards you. He says, 
you and he were very intimate friends.' I said, ' I should like 
to know the name of my friend;' and Mr. Foster instantly re- 
plied 'Gaven. His Christian name will appear on my right 

" The arm was bared ; and there appeared, in red letters, fully 
one inch and a quarter long, the name William raised on the 
skin of his arm. Certainly, William Gaven was my dear old 
friend, and the uncle of the lady whose name is Alice. How, 
without yielding to the truth of the assertion of Mr. Foster, that 
he was a discerner of spirits, the fact could be known to a com- 
plete stranger, who had all his life resided in America, and could 
know nothing, even of the names of the ladies whom I had 
brought into my dining-room from the street-door, where I 
had accosted them, their names not having been known to mjr 
servants, is a phenomenon well calculated to puzzle the intellect 
of any one not having faith in Spiritualism. Mr. Foster's arm 
retained, on the surface of his skin, the raised, red letters for fully 
five minutes. I applied a powerful magnifying lens over them, 
and my two young friends and I watched them until they sub- 
sided and disappeared. It has been said that the skin was 
scratched by a pointed lead-pencil, and I knew some- persons 
who wrote on their arms, and succeeded in raising red letters; 
but the letters did not so quickly subside, and in some instances 
left sore scratehes, marks or tokens of the want of common 

"Mr. Foster ne>:t addressed himself to Lady C, whom he had 
never seen before in his life, until he met her in my dining-room. 

'Your mother,' said he, 'the Marchioness of , stands by 

your side, and desires to give you her fond blessing and very 
affectionate love.' He added, ' Lady C. you wrote on a piece 

Hosted by Google 

no PLANCHETTH. 

of paper I hold here the name of Miss Stuart. She stands by 
the side of your mother, and is beaming with delight at the 
sight of her pupil. She was your governess, and was much 
attached to you.' He added, 'That charming person, the 
Marchioness, was a great friend of the doctor's. She is so 
pleased to find you all here! Her Christian name is to appear 
on my arm,' Mr. Foster drew up his sleeve, and there appeared 
in raised, red letters, on the skin, the name Barbara, which 
subsided and disappeared gradually, as the former name William 
had done. Here were cases in which it was quite impossible 
that the medium could have known any single fact relating to 
the families oi- to the intimacies of any of the persons present. 
I had myself formed his acquaintance only two days, and the 
ladies had arrived from a part of the country with which he 
could not possibly be acquainted. It may be inquired veryfairly, 
how it is proposed to connect such a narrative with any philo- 
sophical view of our mental functions? One need be at no 
loss for a reply but it is more advisible at present to multiply 
our facts 

Mj father was in h s youth addicted to the pur-uit of 
knowledj,e and besides physics and chemistry althoi gh he 
never proposed to be ome a prolessional physiciin he studied 
anatomy at the Borough Hospitals and hid the late Mr Chne 
for his teacher, and Sii Astley Cooper for his fellow- student. 
Mr. Foster had passed his life of twenty-four years in America. 
The son of a captain in a merchant ship, sailing from and to the 
port of Salem, In Massachusetts, he had never heard of Sir 
Astley Cooper. One evening, in my drawing-room, a hand, as 
palpable as niy own hand, appeared a little above the table, and 
soon rested gently upon the thumb and four fingers on the sur- 
face of it. Several persons were seated round the table. Mr. 
Foster, addressing me. said, 'The person to whom that hand 
belongs is a fiiend of yours. He is a handsome man, with a 
portly presence, *nd is very much gratified to see you, and to 
renew his acquaintance with you. Before he mentions his name, 
he would like to kni>w if lou remember his calhng your father 

Hosted by Google 

DR. ashbuknkr's 

his old friend, and yourself his young friend.' I had forgotten 
it; but I remembered it the moment the name was mentioned. 
'He calls himself Sir Aetlej Cooper' said Mr Foster, 'and 
wishes me to tel! jou th'it certa n p r ts ha e the power, by the 
force of w 11 ol creat g fron e en ents of organ c matter in 
the atmosphere fa b n les of the hands tl ej possessed on 
earth.' SI ortly the hand me ted n T M F 

said, 'Two fr ends of jours des e t mm 

They accompanj S r Ast ey Cooper w 

geon, and went to Canada. He was Eg w 

student. He calls himself Bransby p Th w 

jour intimate friend, George Young w h d 

with you once before, since he left you p 

" It would not be difficult to mul 
spiritual manifestations of this very tr m 

My friend. Sir William Topham, we w g 

have investigated mesmeric phenora 
induced on Wombwell, at the Wellow H 
unconscious sleep, which enabled Mr. S V m 

a most excruciatingly painful limb, ab w th h 

patient's knowledge, asked me to giv 

inquiring minutely into the phenom pe w h 

friend EUiotson* and I were so comp d d d p n 

Sir William, with the concurrence of Foster, fined an early day 
for dinner. Tliere were only the three of us at the dinner-table. 
The servant placed the soup-tureen on tlie table. No sooner 
had I helped my friends to soup, than Sir William, who had 
preferred the seat with his back to the fire, requested permission 
to alter his mind, as the fire was too much for him. He went to 
the opposite side of the table, forgetting to take his napkin with 
him. Immediately, a hand, apparently as real as the hand of 
anyone of us, appeared, and lifted the napkin into the air gently 
and gracefully, and then dropped it carefully on the table. 

Hosted by Google 

Almost siraultaneouslj, while we were still engaged over our 
soup, one side of the dining-table was lifted up, as our philo- 
sophic friend Mr. Faraday would conclude, by unseen and 
unconscious muscular energy; and the moderator lamp did not 
fall from its place on the centre of the table. The decanters, 
Ealtcellars, wineglasses, knives and forks, water-carafes, tum- 
blers, all remained as they were in their places: no soup was 
spilled ; and Faraday's unconscious muscular force, or som,: 
correlative or conserved agency, prevented the slightest change 
among the correlative ratios of the table furniture, although the 
top sloped to very nearly an angle of forty-five degrees. There 
was a wonderful conservation of my glass, china, and lamp. 
The servant who was waiting upon us stared, lifting up both 
arms, exclaimed, 'Law! well, I never I ' and the next minute he 
cried out, ' Do, do look at the pictures 1 ' which, with their ten 
heavy frames, had appeared to strive how far they could quit the 
wall, and endeavor to reach the dinner-table. 

" The appearance of hands was by no means an unusual phe- 
nomenon. One evening, I witnessed the presence of nine hands 
floating over the dining-table. 

■' On one occasion, the Hon. Mrs. W. C. and her sister-in-law 
desired to try some experiments in my danker kamer, a room 
the Baron von Reichenbach had taught me how to darken 
properly for experiments on the od force and the odic light 
emanating from living organized bodies. This room afforded 
opportunities for marvellous manifestations. When the light 
was excluded, the two ladies were seated on one side of a heavy 
rosewood occasional table with drawers, weighing at least seventy 
or eighty pounds; Mr. Foster and I were on chairs opposite to 
them. Suddenly a great alarm seized Mr. Foster; he grasped 
my right hand, and beseeched me not to quit my hold of him ; 
for he said there was no knowing where the spirits might convey 
him. I held his hand, and he was floated in the air towards the 
ceiling. At one time, Mrs. W. C. felt a substance at her head, 
and, putting up her hands, discovered a pair of boots above her 
head. At last Mr. Foster's aerial voyage ceased, and a new 

Hosted by Google 

MR. c. H, Foster's mediumship. 119 

phenomenon presented itself. Some busts, as large as life, rest- 
ing upon book cupboards seven feet high, were taken from their 
places. One was suddenly put upon Mrs. W. C.'s lap ; others, 
on lay obtaining a light, were found on the table. I removed 
these to a corner of the room, and put out the light. Then the 
table was lifted into the air, and there remained for some seconds. 
Thenit gexitlj descended into the place it had before occupied, with 
the difference that the top was turned downwards, and rested on 
the carpet. The ladies were the first to perceive that the br.iss 
casters were upwards. 

"One of these ladies had missed, on another occasion, her 
pocket-handkerchief. Mr. Foster told her she would find it in the 
conservatory behind the back drawing-room. It was behind a 
flower-pot. Mrs. W. C. went up-stairs, and found the handker- 
chief in the spot indicated. A similar event happened a second 
time. The question was, How the pocket-handkerchief could 
travel from the dining-room, all doors being shut, to the floor 
above, where it was deposited on a shelf in the conservatory. 
Mr. Faraday would aver that mr facts were corroborative of his 
conservation of force. 

" In that back drawing-room stands a heavy Broadwood's 
semi-grand pianoforte. Mr. Foster, who is possessed of a fine 
voice, was accompanying himself while he sang. Both feetvrere 
on the pedals, when the pianoforte rose into the air, and was 
gracefully swung in the air from side to side, for at least five or 
six minutes. During this time, the casters were about at the 
height of a foot from the carpet." 

Mr. Foster's first indications of mediumship took place when 
he was about fourteen years old, at the Phillips school in Salem, 
where his attention was arrested by raps near him on his desk 
during school-hours. The next change was to violent noises 
near his bed at night, which at once awakened him, and brought 
his parents into his room, where the furniture was found tossed 
about in all directions. At first this happened only in the dark ; 
but soon it came in the light, and furniture would be heard 
moving about in rooms where no person in the flesh was 
present. 

Hosted by Google 

'20 PLANCHKTTK. 

Al his manifestations on one occasion, when letters were 
coming on his skin, two men seized him rudelj' by the arm to 
discover the trick, as they called it. " We know," said they, 
" that no letters will come on the arm while we hold it." "What 
will you have?" asked Foster. " Something that will be a test," 
cried they; "something that will fit our case." Immediately, 
while they were holding the arm, as in a vice, and glaring upon 
it with all their eyes, appeared in large round characters the 
words, tviojools! 

Of this phenomenon of s/i^fHia/d on the flesh, the instances are 
numerous and thoroughly authenticated. Ennemoser, Passa- 
vent, Schubert, and other eminent German physiologists, admit 
the fact as not only established as regards many of the so-called 
saints of the Catholic Church, but in undoubted modern in- 
stances, as in the case of the ecsiaticas of the Tyrol, Catherine 
Emmerich, Maria Dorl, and Domenica LaxKari, all of whom 
enhibited the stigmata. The signatures of the fostus are anal- 
ogous facts; and if the mind of the mother can act on an- 
other organism, why, it is asked, should not the minds of 
mediums act on their own ? The fact of the phenomenon 
has been placed by testimony beyond the dispute of any but 
the ignorant. We have witnessed repeatedly under circum- 
stances where to doubt would have been to reject all rational 
proof as worthless. 

We have spoken of the Salem phenomena of 1692, as analo- 
gous with those of 1868. While we write, additional proof of 
this is offered. Indeed, the candid chronicler will find himself 
embarrassed by the number of confirmatory narratives, old and 

In July, 1868, occurrences of an inexplicable character took 
place in the house of a Mr. Travis at Thorney, a small hamlet 
near Muchelney, and about two miles from the town of Laog- 
port, in England. The following account is from the " Bristol 
[Eng.] Daily Post," of August, 1868 : " It is said that even the 
walls shake at times; while the doors and windows are opened 
and closed again very frequently in a most forcible manner. 

Hosted by Google 

THE MUCHELNEY 

Pillows and boleters are taken from beneath the occupants of 
Lieds. Noises, ranging from the reports of manj' muskets to the 
distant boom of a field-piece, are heard in different parts of 
the house. Scores of persons attest the accuracy of these state- 
ments. Most of them avow that no human agency could do 
what they have seen done and escape detection. If there is 
any thing true in the doctrines which the Spiritualists preach, 
they may make converts by the hundred in this neighbor- 
hood." 

Another English journal, the " Western Gazette," of July 31, 
1868, describing these occurrences, remarks, "Of course, a great 
philosopher cannot be expected to investigate a ' trumpery ghost 
story,' or a ■ silly tale of a haunted house.' He inas/s that it is 
impossible for a table to move without hands; and it would, 
therefore, be only a waste of his valuable time to inquire whether 
a table has ever done so or not. This, we fear, is the view 
which too many of Our all-knowing savatis will take of the 
Muchelney business. But is such a view truly philosophical f Do 
we know every thing yet? Are there no natural laws or forces 
yet to be discovered? — no exceptions, or apparent exceptions, to 
the operation of known laws to he determined? 

" We may safely assert that it is impossible that one and one 
can ever make three, or that the three angles of a triangle can 
ever make more or less than two right angles ; but, once clear of 
mathematics, we can never be safe in using the word ' impossi- 
ble.' 

"A generation that sees two men on opposite sides of the 
globe, conversing with each other by means of an ubiquitous 
agent, that is known only by its effects, can surely believe in 
almost any thing, except the incorrectness of the multiplication- 
tahle. 

"We have no well-defined theory on the subject of these 
phenomena; but we are convinced that there is no trickery in 
til's case; that the phenomena are due to causes of which science 
has, as yet, taught us nothing; and that we should act in an un- 
philosophical spirit if we rejected the evidence of our own and 

Hosted by Google 

others' senses because of its apparent inconsistency witli tlie littl 
which we happen to know of nature's laws." 

How much longer will a false conservatism think to put out of 
existence verified facts, like these, by uttering its shrill negative 
cry, shutting its eyes, and burying its ostrich head in the 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER VI. 

VARIOUS MEDIUMS AND MANIB'EETATIONS. 
" Now th«. are di«rsiti== of gift=, bm iHb ame »pmt^ . ^^ Hav« aH .he ^fts of 

THE number of persons in the United States through whom 
phenomena similar to those in the case of Mr. Home and 
of Mr. Foster have taken place, is now so large, that to mention 
them all would almost require a volume. Charles Colchester, 
young and of a fine personal appearance, but wayward and infirm 
of purpose, like many similar se«sitiT/es, gave us several sittings, 
at which he manifested remarkable powers, not unlike those of 
Mr. Foster. 

We know not how true" it is, but Mr. Colchester told us, that 
on his meeting Hermann, the celebrated prestidigitaUur, the 
latter said to him, " If you can give me the name of my father, 
1 will believe that your intelligence is preternatural i for no per- 
son in America, I am convinced, knows that name." Colchester 
at once wrote out the name, Samuel Hermann Radesky ; and 
Hermann said it was right. 

Mr William Ambisy Colby relates (July 6, 1861) that he 
called on Colchester in New York. "I first asked him," says 
Mr, Colby, " if he could tell me what I had lost. He told me I 
had lost a pocket-book with papers in it of no value ; that it was 
picked from my pocket in a Broadway stage. I then told him 
that he was mistaken ; for there was a paper amongst them 
of value. 'Oh, no! 'said Colchester, 'lam not mistaken; but it 
is WH who are mistaken. The paper you have reference to .s a 
check for $315. which, instead of putting In your wallet, you put 

Hosted by Google 

in your hal, inside the lining.' I immediately looked in my 1 
and, sure enough, the check was there, just where Colchester t< 

Here, surely, was information, on the medium's part, quite 
independent of any co^iscous knowledge in the mind of the 
inquirer. Yet how often we are told, that the medium's knowl- 
edge is always got from the mind of the inquirer! 

In a letter to our friend, Mr. Coleman, of London, Professor 
W. D. Gunning writes (1868) from Boston, as follows in regard 
to Mrs. Cushraan, a medium who resides in Charlestown, 
Mass.t "I visited her house in company with a Boston clergy- 
man. A guitar was laid on my knees, and after a few minutes 
lifted up, held in the air, and played upon by unseen hands. 
This was m full daylight The con t 1 t d h It aa 

Utterl3 mp bl f th 1 d t t h th t g N m t I 
unde th m t id h d tl m Of th 

wew bthtfidWdd tddhtlbt ly 
after th 1 II t t g t N w th t th t pi d th 

S"'t« it t t d d f Uy 1 k h m b g 

^^ ■■ ^ 'd p t 1 t t w pi y d th th 

that w iplyd d f b Hwldw 

resist th t th t h by p t I 

•'^■"S m kwigtl thtwkw 

i*^""-' S d d g th ht d bl d 

;^°"<1 t >" t d t d t m m t 1 th ? 

We rap d b t w th 1 d f w t \l d 

to ret t tl ly 1 th th f th f th f d f Ch 

tianit th f th 1 11 f, t p t f 11 g Th 
steep dmtnl bt thb M y 

ing o t f tl k Id f Ete 1 L f \\ th tl 1 q t 
Bishop f Rh d I 1 d I h 1 tl 11 f m th p t Id 

as a gift of the Father, sent in his own good time to his children, 
to wean them from doubt, to confirm them in faith, to take away 
the Btmg of death by the knowledge that immortahty means no 
giiuzy abstraction, but rea^iKB ■" " 

r of 1860-61 we tested, < 

Hosted by Google 

THROUGH MISS LORD. 1 25 

: mediumsh[p of Miss Jennie Lord (now Mrs. Webb), through 
.10m physical manifestations, of quite a startling character, 
ere produced. These to8k place several times at our own house, 
ivhere the possibility of trick or collusion was carefully excluded. 
In two or three instances a friend (the same who wrote the 
inciedulous letter from Rochester in Chapter II. of this volume) 
was present, at our invitation ; and once we were present at his, 
when the phenomena took place in his own house in Boston. 
While the occurrences of the evening were fresh in our minds, 
we each wrote an account of them ; and his narrative was afier- 
wards put in the form of a letter and sent to our mutual friend, 
William M. Wilkinson, in England. We subjoin it: — 

" Dear Sir, — I wish to send you an account of some spirit- 
ual manifestations which I have lately witnessed; and which, 
indeed, have been the only experiences of the kind, which I 
have had since I saw you in London last June. As you know, 
I have been long absent from this city, sojourning in France and 
Italy for four years. 

"On my return here, I found that, among my immediate 
friends, Spiritualism was regarded as a something dead. But 
the only reason which my informants could give for their belief, 
was that they had not heard the subject mentioned for a year or 
two. However, I asked them, and they smiled when I did so, 
whether the northern lights would become incredible by not 
being talked about. 

"Through a friend, whose name and judgment are a sufficient 
guarantee for whatever he may choose to vouch, I heard lately 
of a medium whom I had hever known before. That medium 
is a young fragile woman. Last Tuesday evening she came to 
my house. I had some friends to meet her. Altogether for the 
seaace, we were eight in number. It was explained to us, that 
the medium would pass into a state of trance, and that the room 
would have to be darkened. ' Oh ! ' says some skeptic, ' a dark 
room! That is enough for me.' Perhaps so; and perhaps also 
it would be enough for him. equuUy, if it were insisted that 

Hosted by Google 

IZ6 Pl.ANCHETTH. 

mediumship was impossible in the dark, and possible only ir 
room all ablaze with light. But, before we advance furthe 
I will ask this skeptic, why is it that an^ron b jl! will retain hea 
in the dark longer than m the light? And perhaps in ascer- 
timing that he may learn something which may help in the 
mquirj, why spiritual mediumohip i« sometimes stronger or 
more eflectiie when the light i'; excluded? 

"There were ranged on a table, about two feet behind the 
inedmm the articles wh ch it was understood would be in requi- 
sition during the eiening. About the placing of the articles, 
there was no mystery made, nor was anj jugglerv possible in 
connection with the manner in which thei were disposed We 
sat round a table; and, after a llttie '. n^ing the med urn passed 
into a state, apparently, of trance The e-vpreasion of her face 
was much changed, was much refined tnd beaut hed The last 
light -was extinguished. All round the table »e held one 
another's hands, except the medium and she instead of hold 
ing my Hand, laid her hand upon n ine drawing her hand along 
it, as though for some mesmeric purpose Her other hand was 
placed similarly on the hand of one of my friendo who sat on 
the other side of her. 

"For persons hard of belief, I would remark thit if darkness 
be unfavorable, in some respects for detecting imposture it is 
also very unfavorable, in a strange place for the operations of 
one who would cheat. I wish it too to be fuih ui derstood 
that, throughout all the wonders wh cl happened we had full 
knowledge of each other's hands e\erv moment Several times 
when the phenomena were most remirkable I said to mj friends 
'Now are we all sure, that we, eiery one have charge of the 
hands which we ought to be holding? And the answer was 
'Yes: we are all satisfied.' 

" A bell was carried round the roo n r g ng was rung over 
our heads, and was placed against m* cheek A guitir waa 
played upon, as it was carried about the room It wi'i laid on 
our heads and played upon. It was whirled ovtr our heads 
BO rapidly, that we felt the wind ol t as it went round and 

Hosted by Google 

MANIFESTATIONS THROUGH MISS LORD. 13/ 

round. It was rapped on the heads of five or six persons; it 
■was rattled among the glasses of the chandelier; it was struck 
on the floor, and thrown on to the tabie, — and all this, as it 
seemed, in a moment. The quick, versatile movement of the 
instrument I can liken to nothing bo much as to the darting of 
a fly to and fro. 

"A giass of water was placed to my lips, in the neatest manner 
possible ; and I drank from it. And it was carried round to the 
iips of other persons at the table. A tambourine was beaten as 
it was borne about the room. It was strtict on our heads ; and 
it was shalten above ua with great force. A horn was blown, 
and made a noise almost terrific. With several of us a sheet of 
paper was spread over the face and through it we felt distinctly' 
the pressure oi a hand A hand without any thing interven- 
ing waB placed on mj hetd It vfia a large hand; and it 
grasped mj head tirmU and shook it It took hold of a lock 
of hair over mv lorehead and pull d it That these things were 
not done bj persons ol flesl and blood, I know thoroughly 
well 

"I I aie an acquaintance who wa wont to be a very fierce 
and b tter opponent of Spiritual sm He used to account medi- 
umship as an imposture a transparent and a gross impos- 
ture a most cunning imposture and also a most simple kind 
of imposture JSow lately he said to me, 'Blowing a. horn, 
piaiing a gu tar' What is the ^ood of that?" 

' I answered him Mv friend I did not say there was any 
good m it I merely said there was a fact in it, and that fact, 
the oper<»tion of a spirit. And if you think that to be nothing, 
wh> then tou must think very differently now from what you 
did, when ,the mtre supposition that a spirit might rap on the 
table used to make you foam with excitement, as you re- 
member.' 

" ' Ah, well ! ' he said, ' but what now do you think is the use 
of itf And why cannot it be done anywhere by anybody? 
And if spirits can do such things as you say, why can they 
not tell us something useful, whether there is going to be a 

Hosted by Google 

I 28 

" ' And perhaps you would add,' I replied, ' how to square the 
circle, how to be infallible as to latitude and longitude at sea, 
and how to find the philosopher's stone. But, my friend, it may 
be that many a spirit is less intelligent thau you yourself are. 
For, when you think of it, what a way to wisdom that would 
be, for a spirit to become omniscient with merely slipping off his 
overcoat of flesh 1 ' 

"'But — but — but why do they not teach us something — 
some of them? And is it not true, that they often tell lies? 
And, in fact, somehow I can make nothing out of it.' 

" To this I answered, ' That is very probable ! and no great 
wonder. And by the way of mediumship, as to spirits tell- 
ing falsehoods, as you suppose they do sometimes, why that 
would show at least that there are lying spirits. And that thing 
made certain to you as a fact, would be a matter of more impor- 
tance, infinitely, than the discovery of twenty new comets. And 
now as to a spirit blowing a horn or beating a tambourine, 
you think it is nothing. But, for myself, I think that it implies 
a spirit present who is the actor ; that it proves that, under cer- 
tain circumstances, spirits have power over matter ; and that it 
suggests many subjects for the most serious consideration of the 
theologian, the moralist, and the man of science. 

On several occasions we have known Miss Lord to be lifted 
bodily with her chair, while she was seated in it, from the floor 
on to the table, by some unknown force. In a like mysterious 
manner, at our own house, a large bass-viol was played on 
vigorously and with fair skill, while the medium's hands were 
held by us, and deception was impossible. " Coronation" and 
other sacred tunes were thus played. The fo-vjer, whatever it 
was, wouldi before playing, spend a minute or two in tuning the 
instrument, and would then indicate its readiness by tapping 
the heads of certain persons in the audience with the bow. A 
large, flexible hand, full of life and guided by intelligence, and 
which was nearly twice the size of Miss Lord's hand, touched us 

Hosted by Google 

PHENOMENA IN PRESENCE OF MISS ELLIS. izg 

and others repeatedly on the head, pulled our hair, took down 
the hair of our sister, and then put it up as before, placed a 
tumbler filled with water at our lips, and this at the right angle, 
and with the nicest adjustment, so that not a drop was spih. 
These manifestations, though in utter darkness, were of such a 
character, and produced under such conditions, as to render 
imposture impracticable. 

A writer in " Once a Week," a London journal, recently under- 
took to account for the phenofiienon of the " spirit-hand " by the 
theory that the effect was accomplished by the aid of an instru- 
ment he calls the lazy-tongs. It is perhaps superfluous to saj 
that his explanation is now obsolete, like the toe-joint theory to 
explain the rappings : it does not begin to cover the facts. 

Another medium, through whom we have witnessed some 
astonishing phenomena, though we have not had opportunities 
of testing them as thoroughly as those through Miss Lord, is 
Miss Laura V. Ellis, of Springfield, Mass. This young lady 
was only fourteen at the time we first saw her in the summer of 
1866. She entered a small movable cabinet or closet, and while 
she was tied there in the most thorough manner, the door was 
dosed, whereupon, in an incredibly short space of time, various 
manifestations requiring the free use of hands or feet took place. 
The following account by Mr. L. J. Fuller of a sitting at WilH- 
mantic, Conn., February, 1867, corresponds with our own experi- 

" After Miss Ellis was tied in the usual way with strips of cloth, 
the knots were sewed through and through, and then the ends of 
the cloth sewed strongly to the sleeves of her dress; after which 
she was firmly secured in the cabinet, when the following mani- 
festations were given : A string was tied around her neck in a 
square knot in six seconds ; this was repeated twice, with the 
same results. A string was tied around the waist in four seconds ; 
repeated twice, once in four seconds, and once in three ; tied 
around the hack of her neck in eight seconds; front of her neck, 
fifteen seconds; repeated in fourteen seconds; untied from her 
neck in fifteen seconds; untied from front of neck in three 

Hosted by Google 

130 PLANCHETTE. 

seconds; bell rung in two seconds; repeated in four seconds; 
loud raps with stick in two seconds; repeated in one second; 
stick thrust through the aperture of the cabinet fourteen ioches, 
and afterward thrown ten feet from the cabinet; plajing on the 
tambourine in one second; playing on the trombone in one sec- 
ond; also singing, and keeping time with the trombone; 
drumming, whistling, and keeping time with the jews-harp, and 
other instruments; besides many other and varied manifesta- 
tions. Her hands were then untiaB and extended horizontally, 
and tied to staples, so that by turning the hands toward the bead, 
which was fastened back to the cabinet, the nearest they could 
come to tlie ends of the knot was twelve inches from thera. The 
knot was untied the first time in thirty seconds, and the second 
time in twenty seconds. 

" The whole was done under the closest Ecrutiny of a commit- 
tee of three, no one of whom could detect the slightest evidence 
of collusion during the whole entertainment. The medium's 
hands were repeatedly examined during the whole time of the 
entertainment, and found in the same condition as when first 
tied. No show of any effort on her part could by the closest 
scrutiny be detected ; and all unprejudiced minds were satisfied 
that the manifestations were produced by some power outside of 
Miss Ellis." 

On another occasion, at Keene, N.H., according to the report 
of Mr. Henry Woods, "a trombone, harmonicon, tambourine, 
and drum were played, and other feats performed ; all these 
feats being done while Miss Ellis's wrists were securely tied at 
her back, and to the cabinet, her ankles tied, and neck also fas- 
tened to the cabinet. Last, hut not least, a knife with the blade 
shut, having been laid in her lap, was taken and used to cut her 
loose from the cabinet, and to disengage her wrists, the knife 
being then left half-way open in her lap. Let none say that 
these things are accomplished by trickery, until they have been 
personal witnesses of the wonderful phenomena presented."- 

Various attempts have been made to prove that these pheno- 
mena are mere tricks ; and several imitators, some perhaps with 

Hosted by Google 

THE IRON RING PHENOMENON. 131 

the partial aid of forces similar to those operfltitig through Miss 
Ellis, have undertaken to show that the manifestationB could all 
be accotnplished by manual dexterity; but, thus far, no one has 
succeeded in indicating this to the satisfaction of candid com- 
mittees. It is not uncommon for partially gifted mediums to try 
to excite attention by denouncing the manifestations through 
their more successful brethren or sisters as fraudulent ; but, when 
it comes to the proof, they always fail of proving in iJie light, that 
ali the phenomena can be produced by triclt or skill. 

Under date of Nov. 24, 1867, Mr. W. A. Danskin, of Balti- 
more, Md., gives an account of a youth, about nineteen years 
old, and whose head measured twenty-two inches round, from 
whose neck a solid iron ring weighing fourteen ounces, and 
measuring but fifteen inches on its inner circle, was taken and 
replaced. The ring was submitted to the closest inspection, both 
before the experiment and while on the neck. 

On one occasion another ring, precisely similar in appearance 
to the one ordinarily used at the exhibition, was made, marked 
by four indentations while the metal was soft, and brought to the 
hail, at one of the public exhibitions, without the knowledge of 
the medium or his friends. The parties having it in charge 
watched their opportunity, and substituted the marked ring for 
the original. The manifestation was successfully given, though 
the time of it was somewhat extended, and the medium was 
much exhausted. 

"Once," says Mr. Danskin, "when only three persons were 
present, — the medium, a friend, and myself, — we sat together in 
a dark room. I held the left hand of the medium, my friend held 
his right hand, our other hands being joined; and, while 
thus sitting, the ring, which I had thrown some distance from 
us on the floor, suddenly came around my arm. I had never 
loosened my hold upon the medium, yet that solid iron ring, by 
an invisible power, was made to clasp my arm, thus demonstrat- 
ing the power of our unseen friends to separate and re-unite, as 
well as to expand, the particles of which the ring was com- 

Hosted by Google 

The following tim g d b h g 

of Baltimore, wh n myb dpbhd h 

" Banner of Ligh o J 868 

"We, the und g d b w h d d 

the social meetin d d h d g 

inches le&a-in s han h S ^ h d 

and unraistakftb pad dh kT h 

advertisement c P ti d d cep 

because the ring m d m n h 

audience, both b d w h k h ou 

This eictraord dmdd p hug 

July 2, i863. S h d h > Da k n w Th ng 

manifestation was entirely free from deception or fraud; and, 
under the conditions established, fraud was absolutely impossi- 
ble." He is confident that in no single instance did this medium 
attempt to impose on any one. 

Some surprising manifestations, through Mr, Charles H. 
Read, of Buffalo, have been witnessed during the summer and 
autumn of 1868. The "Daily Times," of Brooklyn, N.Y., in its 
issue of April 3, 186S, has a clear and accurate account of these 
phenomena, of which ours is an abridgment. 

Precautions were taken against the possible intrusion of any 
confederate. Mr. Read was securely tied. Tlie wrists were 
made fast until the cord settled well into the flesh ; it was then 
drawn between the knees, the ends being carried down with two 
well-jammed turns on the front rung of the chair, and then back 
to the rear rung, where the end was made fast with several half- 
hitches. The arms were secured and tied to the back of the 
chair, and the legs fastened at the ankles to the rear legs of 
the same. Being seated in position, and at a distance from the 
table, the gas was turned off; and in a^oui one-kalfof a minute, 
on being re-lighted, one of the rings encircled his arm. 

The fastenings were instantly examined, and found undl; 
turbed. During the dark interval, some singing was indulged 
in. Supposing a confederate to have beei able to pass the twine 

Hosted by Google 

H, READ. J33 

barrier without ringing the bell, he could not, in half a minute, 
have untied the ropes eo as to slip the ring on the arm, and re- 
tie them again ; for it required more than five minutes to adjust 
them in the first instance, and the same knots could not have 
been even Binmiated. The ring still remaining on the right 
arm, the gas was again extinguished ; and in less than a minute 
the light reiealed ike stool on his arm ; or, in other words, the 
ring was on the floor, where it had been heard to fall, and 
the stool had taken its place. There was no movable ringwhich 
could have been removed so as to slip the stpol-leg down between 
the arm of the medium and his body. The ropes and knots were 
still intact. 

Once more was darkness; and the next revelation was the 
medium's cotti off and on the fioor, against the wall, at some dis- 
tance from his position. The fastenings were again examined: 
not the least slackening wa.'! found. A further test was made, 
and the stool appeared on the other arm. 

At the request of the demonstrator, the writer placed his own 
coat on the table; and, in less time than this sentence may be 
written, he beheld one of Mr. Read's arms in the sleeve of the 
garment, which could not be removed without cutting or untying 
the ropes. A moment or two of darkness, however, sufficed to 
find it thrown to one sideof the apartment. During these demon- 
strations the medium seemed to become gradually weak and 
exhausted, as if he had been rudely handled. Finally, there was 
more darkness ; and in a little more than a minute, counted by a 
healthy and regular pulse, there came a sound as of something 
thrown aside, which the gas revealed as the ropes on the ckande- 

The man was entirely free, and before him dangled the fasten- 
ings. His wrists showed deep indentations; and his hands were 
swollen, from partial euspension of the circulation of the blood. 
The reader may be assured that in all this there was not, and 
could not be, the slightest collusion. Mr. Read could not untie 
himself, nor could he be approached by a confederate. 

Similar phenomena through Mr. Read, accompanied with 

Hosted by Google 

134 PLANCHKTTE. 

touches from spirit- hands,* on the persons of several among the 
audience, were witnessed on the evening of Sept. 8, 1868, at 
the residence of Mr. Z, A. Willard, of Boston. 

Vocal manifestations have been not unfrequent in the 
history of supposed spiritual disturbances. Some very singular 
occurrences took place in the family of John Richardson, in 
Hartford, Trumbull County, Ohio, the latter part of the year 
r8,54. The affidavits of himself, his wife, and Mr. James H. 
More, bearing date Jan. 8, 1855, were duly made before Mr. 
William J. Bright, a justice of the peace, who, in communicating 
them to the public, says, "The facts are of public notoriety 
here, and can no doubt be sustained by any amount of evi- 
dence." 

The wildest doings of the days of witchcraft are paralleled in 
the following narrative, which we quote for its explicit testimony 
in regard to the vocal manifestations ; — ■ 

" About five weeks ago," deposes Mr. Richardson, " mj atten- 
tion was arrested by a very sharp and loud whistle, seemingly in 
a small closet in one corner of ray house. This was followed by 
loud and distinct raps, as loud as a person could conveniently 
rap with the knuckles. The closet-door is secured or fastened 
by a wood button that turns over the edge of the door. This 
button would frequently turn, and the door open, without any 
visible agency. This was followed by a loud and distinct 
(apparently) human voice, which could be heard, perhaps, fifty 

"After repeating a very loud and shrill scream several times, 
the voice fell to a lower key, and, in a tone about as loud as 
ordinary conversation, commenced speaking in a plain and 
distinct manner, assuring the family that we would not be 
burned, and requesting us to have no fear of any injury, as we 
were in no danger. Those manifestations being altogether 

■ Prof. Demon, the accoinplished geologist, author of a tetnaifcable work, entitled 
"TheSc.LiiotThLngi,"aaj!, "I have seen spirit-hands over and over ^n, — have 
taken impressions of them in BOUT and putty and clay." We have a letter from Dr. J. 

Hosted by Google 

VOCAL MANIFESTATIONS. 135 

unaccountable to myself and family, we searched the entire 
house, to find, if possible, the cause of this new and startling 
ph m p m but the 

ne J R H loore, 

was detailed at length. ^\ e could readily discover a difference 
in the voice professing to come from the two spirits. 

" About the third day after these manifesEations commenced, 
my wife brought a ham of meat into the house, and laid it on 
the table, and stepped to the other side of the room, when the 
ham was carried by some invisible agency from four to six feet 
from the table, and thrown upon the floor. At another time, a 
bucket of water was, without human hands, taken from the table, 
carried some sin feet, and poured upon the floor. This was 
followed by a large dining-table turning round frorf its position 
at the side of the room, and being carried forward to the atove, 
a distance of more than six feet. This was done while there was no 
person near it. The same table has, since that time, been thrown 
on its side without human agency, and often been made to dance 
about while the family were eating around it. At one time, 
dishes, knives, and forks were thrown from the table to the 
opposite side of the room, breaking the dishes to pieces. 

" On another occasion, the voice requested Mrs. Richardson 
to remove the dishes from the table, which was done immedi- 
ately, when the table commenced rocking violently back and 
forward, and continued the motion, so that the dishes couli^ not 
be washed upon it, but were placed in a vessel and set upon the 
floor, from whfch a number of them flew from the tub to the 
chamber-floor overhead, and were thus broken to pieces. What 

Hosted by Google 

.36 

crockery remained we attempted to secure by placing it in a 
cupboard, and shut the doors, which were violently thrown open ; 
and the dishes flew, like lightning, one after another, against 
the opposite side, and broke to pieces. At another time, a drawer 
in the table was, while there was no person near it, drawn out; 
and a plate that had been placed there carried across the room 
and broken against the opposite wall. And this kind of demon- 
stration has continued until nearly all the crockery about the 
house has been broken and destroyed. 

" At different times, the drawers of a stand in a bedroom have 
been taken out, and at one time carefully placed on a bed. A 
large stove-boiler has been, while on the stove, filled with water, 
tipped up, and caused to stand on one end, and the water was 
turned out upon the floor, and at this time taken off from the 
stove, and carried some six feet, and set down upon the floor, 
and this while untouched by any perEon. A teakettle has often 
been taken from the stove in the same manner, and thrown upon 
the floor. At one time, a spider, containing some coffee for the 
purpose of browning, was taken from the stove, carried near the 
chamber-floor, and then thrown upon the floor. And frequently, 
while Mrs. Richardson has been baking buckwheat cakes on the 
stove, the griddle has, in the same unaccountable manner', been 
taken from the stove, and thrown across the house; and often 
cakes have been taken from the griddle while baking, and have 
disappeared entirely. 

"At one time, the voice, speaking to my wife, said it (the 
spirit) could bake cakes for George, a boy eating at the table. 
Mrs. Richardson stepped %way from the stove, when the batter 
(already prepared for baking cakes) was by some unseen agency 
taken from a crock sitting near the stove, and placed upon the 
griddle, and turned at the proper time, and when done taken 
from the griddle, and placed upon the boy's plate at the table. 
The voice then proposed to bake a cake for Jane, my daughter, 
who was at work about the house. The cake was accordingly 
baked in the same manner as before stated, and carried across 
the room and placed in the girl's hand. 

Hosted by Google 

SriRIT PHOTOGKAPHS. !37 

" During all these occurrences, the talking from the two voices 
and others has continued, and still continues daily, together with 
such manifestations as I have detailed, with many others not 
named. The conversation, as well as the other demonstrations, 
have been witnessed almost daily bj myself and family, as well 
as by scores of prersotis, who have visited my house to witness 
these strange phenomena. 

"I wiil only add, that the spirit (the voice) gave as a reason 
for breaking crockery and destroyiijg property, that it is done to 
convince the world of the existence of spirit presence." 

Several instances are related in which photographs of supposed 
spirit-foi-ras have been taken. In the autumn of i36l, the " spirit 
photographs," said to be got through Mr. Mumler, a Boston 
photographer, were a subject of much controversy. Of course, 
the many believed Mr. Mumler an impostor; but no evidence 
whatever of this was ever adduced, and now, after a lapse of 
years, we cannot learn that any one who knows him personally 
can harbor a doubt of his honesty. On the contrary, the testi- 
mony from friends and acquaintances, familiar with his character 
and social position, is strongly in his favor. What gave rise to 
distrust was the fact that many persons who sat for photographs 
of some spirit-friend, to accompany their own, would find, in- 
stead of a likeness they could recognize, a figure that would be a 
puzzle to them and all their acquaintances. Of course, the 
immediate cry, in these cases, would be "Humbug!" But 
the failure was no evidence whatever that the questionable figure 
was not photographed on the plate in some way wholly inexph- 
cable to the operator. 

Mr. William Guay, an experienced photographer from New 
Orleans, and who, though a stranger, was admitted to scrutinize 
the whole process, reported favorably to Mr. Mumler's entire 
sincerity in the matter, and satisfied himself that a second form 
did appear on t/ic negative without a visible object to produce it. 
Mr. Mumler allowed him to superintend all the operations. 
" He desired me," says Mr. Guay, " to select my glass out of a 
large number that stood on the table, or work-bench. I picked 

Hosted by Google 

igS PLANCHETTE, 

up one from the lot, examined it, rubbed it, threw my breath on 
it, and found it to be nothing more than a piece of ordinary 
glass, to all appearance new. 

" He insisted on m_v going through the operntion of coating, 
silvering. Sic, which I did, as follows : Having the glass in my 
hand, I coated it with the collodion and placed it in the bath, 
previously examining the inside, or at least looking into the 
bath by the light of the lamp. While the plate was in the hath, 
I examined the plate-holder, which stood beside the bath. When 
the plate was done, I took it out, placed it in the plate-holder, 
and carried it to the camera- stand, under the skylight. Keeping 
my eye constantly on it while it was at my feet, resting on the 
camera-stand, I examined the tube and camera-box. Finding 
every thing all right, I took my seat in such a position as to 
see every thing going on. Being seated profile, I could, by 
turning jgy eyes around, see pretty well the background and also 
the camera-box, Mr. Mumler by it, and the young man (his 
assistant) off in the corner, I having previously made sure that 
there was nobody else about beside us three." 

The focus was adjusted, the cloth removed ; and Mr. Guay sat, 
hoping that the picture of his departed wife " might come on the 
negative, standing in front and by him." The sitting over, he 
immediatelj- passed to the camera-box, took out the plate-holder, 
and went to the dark room, followed by Mr. Mumler. Having 
thrown on the developing solution, Mr. Guay closely watched 
what was coming; and, to his astonishment, he saw t-JJO ficlufes 
come out, one of which was a faint picture of his wife. The 
negative having dried, he varnished it and placed it on the 
shelf. 

On B. subsequent day, he went through the same process, with 
similar precautions, and this time silently wished that the 
"spirit likeness" might be one of his father. His wish was 
answered. "It is impossible," says Mr. Guay, " for Mr. Mumler 
to have procured any pictures of my wife and father. The 
likeness of my father is clear and perfect; that of my wife is 
not." Mr. Guay says he had much conversation with Mr. 

Hosted by Google 

SPIRIT PHOTOGRAPHS. 139 

Mumler, and could not detect a eingle syllable suggestive of 

Professor W. D. Gunning (1867) relates an instance in which 
a spirit-hand appeared on the photograph of a joung girl. He 
says, " While sitting before the camera, she was smitten with 
partial blindness. She described it to me as 'a kind of blur 
coming suddenly over her eyes.' She spoke of it to the artist, 
who told her ' to wink and sit still.' In developing the plate, he 
noticed an imperfection, but did not observe it closely. He sat 
the girl again, and took a sheet of eight tintypes. She felt no 
blur over her eyes, and there was no blur on the pictures. The 
artist noTU examined the first sheet, and found hands oh lie face 
and neck of every tintype, eight ia all I I have examined four of 
these, and find the hands in precisely the same position on each 
picture. Now the artist affirms that no human being but himself 
and the girl was in the room when these pictures were taken. 
He has no theory : he only knows that these hands came on the 
picture through no agency of his. What, then, shall we say?" 

Professor Gunning shows that the theory that the plate was an 
old one, and the hands had been photographed there before, is 
absurd. " As weil talk of making an Iliad by throwing down a 
ton of types at random ! " Other explanations he rejects as 
equally unsatisfactory, and says, " The best part of my life has 
been spent in the study and interpretation of science ; and, in all 
humility, I should be competent to weigh and interpret facts so 
simple as these. And, to my mind, Ibis picture is a fact quite as 
important to science as an Amazonian fish. I will not cross an 
ocean for a new bug, and cry ' Humbug ! ' to a fact like this at 
my very door. . . . 

" In paintings of the creation, done in the Middle Ages, you 
will see the hand of Deity moving over chaos; only the hand, 
for clouds and darkness veil His form. Belief in the Infinite 
Being and the life eternal was nourished and sustained in our 
fathers, by art. And now art comes to us even more divine ; for 
she is Nature's own, painting with sunbeams. And our loved 
ones now and then lift the veil, and reach forth a hand from out 

Hosted by Google 

140 PLANCHETTE. 

that world of light and beauty, — from thatworld a hand clothed 
upon with elements from this ; and art, in her new era, minis- 
ters again to our hope of immortality." 

Of the numerous spealting mediums, the writing, the drawing, 
the musical (such as Blind Tom, the colored boy), the healing, 
the letter-reading, &c., we have left ourselves little room to 
speak in this place. Many of the phenomena through these 
various mediums are quite as wonderful and significant as those 
we have described; but as they are more open to partial explana- 
tion by causes not outside of the individual, we shall not do 
more than to refer to them at present. 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER VII. 

THE SEERESS OF PREVORST. — KERNER. — STILLING. 

THE most remarkable of the phenomena we have recorded 
had their counterpart in those known in the httle village 
of Prevorst, amid the mountains of Northern Wurtemberg, 
twenty-two years before -the Fox family first heard the rappings 
at Hydeaville. 

Frederica Hauffe, the seeress, was born in Prevorst, in the year 
1801. She died in 1829. " She lived," writes the late Margaret 
Fuller, " but nine -and -twenty years ; yet in that time had trav- 
ersed a larger portion of the iield of thought than all her race 
before in their many and long lives." 

The biography of the seeress, published in 1839, was from the 
pen of Justinus Kerner, chief physician at Weinsberg, a man of 
unquestionable ability and stainless integrity. His proclama- 
tion of the phenomena, and the spiritual facts developed in the 
life of his subject, brought upon him a storm of ridicule and 
denunciation, from which there are few men who would not have 
shrunk. He met it bravely, and maintained his ground with a 
steadiness which no sneers from the savaiis and wits among his 
contemporaries could impair; and at last his veracity as a 
biographer, his philosophical sagacity, and his skill as a cool 

Hosted by Google 

142 PLANCH ETTK, 

observer of facts have been completely' vindicated by the events 
of the last twenty years. 

After her marriage, in her 19th year, to Herr Hauffi, a worthy 
man, the seeresa, who was of a remarkably delicate organizalion, 
became subject to spasmodic attacks, and would often pass into a 
somnambulic state. She at last became so sensitive to magnetic 
influences that even the nails in the walls had to be removed. 
Articles, the near neighborhood of which to her person was 
found injurious, would be taken away by an unseen hand. Such 
objects, as a silver spoon would be perceptibly convej-ed from her 
hand to a more convenient distance, and laid on a piate; not 
thrown, for the things would pass slowly through the air as if 
borne by invisible agency. 

In 1826, Dr. Kerner took charge of Mrs. Hauffe. He soon 
found that drugs had no effect upon her. Even the homcco- 
pathic pharmatopieia was discarded. The seeress, in her clair- 
voyant state, prescribed for herself better than any physician 
could have done. 

The rapping phenomena were common in her presence. Ker- 
ner says, " As I had been told by her parents, a year before her 
father's death, that, at the period of her early magnetic state, 
she was able to make herself heard by her friends, as they lay 
in bed at night, in the same village, but in other houses, by a 
knocking, — as is said of the dead, — I asked her, in her som- 
nambulic state, whether she was able to do so now, and at 
what distance? She answered, that she would sometime do it; 
that to the spirit space was nothing. Sometime after this, as we 
were going to bed, — my children and servants being already 
asleep, —we heard a knocking, as if in the air, over our heads. 
There were sin knocks, at intervals of half a minufc. It was a 
hollow, yet clear sound, soft, but distinct. We were certain 
there was no one near us, nor over us, from whom it could pro- 
ceed; and our house stands by itself. On the following evening, 
when she was asleep, when we had mentioned the knocking to 
nobody whatever, she asked me whether she should soon 
knock to us again; which, as she said it was hurtful to her, 1 
declined." 

Hosted by Google 

THK BAPPINGS AT PREVORST. 143 

And again he tells us, " In ray own house, I can bear witness 
.ot only to the sounds of throwing, knocking, &c. ; but a small 
table was flung into a room without any visible means ; the 
pewter plates in the kitchen were hurled about, in the hearing of 
the whole house, — circumstances laughable to others, and which 
would be so to rae, had I not witnessed them in my sound mind ; 
but which become doubly significant, when I compare them to 
many accounts I have heard of the like nature, where there was 
no somnambule in question." 

Here we have phenomena precisely like those with which the 
records of witchcraft, and tlie accounts of haunted houses, are 
filled. 

Speaking of a spirit who frequently came to her, Kerner 
says, "His appearance was always preceded by knockings; 
however suddenly a person flew to the place to try and detect 
whence the noise proceeded, they could see nothing. If they 
went outside, the knocking was immediately heard inside, and 
■vice-Tiersd. However securely they closed the kitchen-door, nay, 
if they tied it with cords, it was found open in the morning ; and 
though they frequently rushed to the spot on hearing it open or 
shut, they never could find anybody. Sounds as of breaking 
wood, of pewter plates being knocked together, and the crack- 
ling of a fire in the oven, were also commonly heard; but the 
cause of them could not be discovered. A sound resembling 
that of a triangle was also frequently heard ; and not only Mrs. 
Hauir^, but others of her family, often saw a spectral female 
form. The noises in the house became at length so remarkable, 
that her father declared he could stay in it no longer; and they 
were not only audible to everybody in it, but to the passengers 
in the street, who stopped to listen to them, as they passed." 

The Rev. Mr. Hermann wrote several questions for a spirit 
who visited Mrs. Hauff^ to answer. From the time these were 
shown to the spirit, Mr. Hermann "found himself awakened at a 
particular hour every night, and felt immediately an earnest dis- 
position to prayer. There was always, a' "" ■■— - 

ocking ii 

n the floor, and s 

Hosted by Google 

144 PLANCHETTB. 

on the walls, which his wife heard as well as himself; but thej 

Several experiments were made to test the reality of the seer- 
ess's spirit- vis ion. Kerner relates that "An acquaintance of 
Mrs. HauffS's who sometimes visited her, one day informed us 
that a friend of hers was dead. This person had promised her 
that he would appear to her after death, and we consequently 
hourly expected to lenrn that she had seen his ghost; but days, 
weeks and months passed without any such event happening. 
Tiien the acquaintance owned, that, not believing in the reality of 
these apparitions, he had said it for an experiment; the person 
was not dead. Another experiment was made as follows ; Mrs. 
Hauffd was frequently visited by the spectre of a deceased person, 
of whom she had never seen or heard any thing whatever. A 
friend bade her Icarn of this ghost the period of his birth, which 
neither she nor I knew. This was done ; but when our friend 
made inquiry of his relations whether the time mentioned was 
correct, they said, 'No.' This our friend wrote to us; and I 
read the letter to Mrs. Haufl"^, advancing it as a strong argument 
against the reality of the apparitions. She answered," unmoved, 
that she would inquire again. She did so, and tlie answer was 
the same. I wrote again to my friend, saying so, and begging 
him to ascertain more particularly the period of the birth in 
question; and, on doing this, he found that the relations had 
been in error; the time had been correctly named." 

He adds, " I could relate many other equally remarkable facts, 
but that I should be encroaching too much on the privacy of the 
parties concerned." He details twenty-two facts that occurred at 
Weinsberg in evidence of the presence and operations of spirits. 
Concerning these he says, " Of the greatest number, I was my- 
self a witness; and what I took upon the credit of others, I most 
curiously investigated, and anxiously sought, if by any possi- 
bility a natural explanation of them could be found; but in 
vain." These facts are further corroborated by councillors, pro- 
fessors, and other oP'cial persons. 

Mrs. HauffS's statement concerning the spirits who appeared 

Hosted by Google 

THE SEERESS'S DESCRIPTION OF SPIRITS. I45 

^o her is interesting. Her worde are, " 1 see many with whom 
i come into no approximation, and others who come to me, with 
whom I converse, and who remain near me for months : I see 
them at various times by day and night, whether 1 am alone or 
in company. I ara perfectly awake at the time, and am not sen- 
sible of any ciicumstance or sensation that calls thera up. I see 
them alike whether I nm strong or weak, plethoric or m a state 
of inanition, glad Or sorrowful, amused or otherwise ; and I can- 
not dismiss them. Not that tliey are always with roe ; bat they 
come at their own pleasure, like mortal visitors, and equally 
whether I am in a spiritual or corporeal state at the time. When 
I am in my calmest and most healthy sleep, they awaken me : 
I know not how; but I feel that I am awakened by them, and 
that I should have slept on had they not come to my bedside. 
I observe frequently that, when a ghost visits me by night, those 
who sleep in the same room with me are, by their dreams, made 
aware of its presence : they speak afterwards of the apparition 
they saw in their dream, although I have not breathed a syllable 
on the subject to them. Whilst the ghosts are with me, I see 
and hear every thing around me as usual, and can think of other 
subjects; and though I can avert my eyes from them, it is 
difficult for me to do it i I feel in a sort of magnetic rapfort 
with them. • They appear to me like a thin cloud, that one could 
see through; which, however, 1 cannot do. I never observed 
that they threw any shadow. I see them more clearly by sun or 
moonlight than in the dark; but whether I could see them in 
absolute darkness, I do not know. If any object comes between 
me and them, they are hidden from me. I cannot see them with 
closed eyes, nor when I turn my face from them." 

" Here 'then," says Mr. Shorter, in his review of these occur- 
rences, " nearly forty years ago, in the life of this poor, untaught 
peasant woman, we have brought together those modes of sp.nt 
manifestation which call forth so much denial when the.r 
occurrence at the present day is affirmed; manifestations m 
dream, vision, voice, touch, writing, drawing, presentiment, pre- 
diction, apparitions, second-sight, clairvoyance, crystal- seeii^. 

Hosted by Google 

1^6 PLANCHETTE. 

tnovements of objects, rappings, trance- speaking, thought-read- 
ing, and the epirit-ianguage," 

According to Kerner, Eschenmajer, Schubert, Gorres, and 
others, who observed Madame Hauffe long and carefully, she 
seemed to be more in the spiritual world than in the physical. 
" She was," says Kerner, '-more than half a spirit, and belonged 
to a world of spirits : she belonged to a world after death, and 
was more than half dead. In her sleep Only was she truly awake. 
Nay, so loose was the connection between soul and body that, 
like Swedenborg, she often went out of the body, and could 
contemplate it separately." 

Like many other clairvoyants she could, in her somnambulic 
state, read any thing laid on the pit of her stomach, and inclosed 
between other sheets of blank paper. Her perception of differ- 
ent sensations from plants, precious stones, and other minerals, 
was repeatedly tried by placing them in her hands, when she 
would always ascribe the same property to the same thing. She 
was at times lifted into the air, as has been the case with Mr. 
Home, Miss Lord, and other modern mediums, as well as with 
many saints and devotees of all countries and times. 

Science in its progress is daily supplying, in connection with 
these and kindred facts, many new analogies. " However in- 
comprehensible," says Friedrich von Meyer, " a woijd of spirits 
may be to the natural reason, the progress of our knowledge of 
the physical world and of the extraordinary nature of man is 
every day rendering it more comprehensible." 

Kerner, who died in 1859, full of years and honors, was a 
writer of no ordinary force and culture. In the spirit with 
which he handles his assailants, he often reminds us of that 
matchless master of controversial weapons, Lessing. 

In his " Leaves from Prevorst," published subsequently to the 
eeeress's death, Kerner, after relating some striking cases of 
spirit-agency, of recent occurrence, through others than the 
seeresa, says that any person wishing to convince himself of one 
of them " has only to make the little journey from Stuttgart to 
Oberstenfeld." 

Hosted by Google 

A PICTUKE FOR ALL TIME. I47 

" But," adds Kerncr, with fl fine irony, " it is much more coiv- 
enient to sit at your writing-table by the fireside, and decide on 
such things without seeing them." 

His picture of the class of critics who pronounce judgment on 
facts in this way is one fijr all time. Some of these philosophers, 
indeed not a few may be found in our own country, mounted 
on reviewers' stools, and sending forth their oracular criticisms, 
weekly or monthly, on matters they know nothing about, in any 
practical or experimental sense. 

■' None of those gentlemen," writes Kerner, "who call them- 
selves the friends of truth, set so much value upon it, as to 
move a single foot over the Resenbach : no one takes the least 
trouble to prove these things at the time, and on the spot. For 
many years the extraordinary manifestations of the Seeress of 
Prevorst were made public; but none of the gentlemen who 
now, all at once, pretend that they would have liked so very 
much to have seen her, and who sit and write whole blue-books 
about her, ever took a moment's trouble, whilst she lived, to see, 
to hear, and to test her. 

" At their writing-tables they continued sitting, but professed 
to have seen, heard, and proved every thing, — much more than 
the quiet, earnest, and deeply thinking psychologist, Eschen- 
meyer, who did take the trouble to examine and prove every 
thing at the time and on the spot, for the truth's sake, shunning 
no journey, when necessary, in the severest cold of winter. 
Only by such a method can such things be probed to the truth: 
the learned way of knowing and speculating by the pounce-box 
proves nothing. 

"These gentlemen luho construct their ieaven and their hell 
according to their Oiiin ivishcs, and push the iove and grace of 
God before them in any direction that is convenient to them, 
rather than give themselves up to believe what, from their pride 
and sensual indulgences, is most unpleasant and repugnant to 
them, labor hard, by all the arts of intellectual acuteness and 
of dialectics, to persuade themselves, though it be but for the 
brief moment of this life, that the future inevitably awaiting 

Hosted by Google 

148 PLANCHETTH. 

them, will correspond with the wishes and feelings which exis' 
in this bodjf. 

" Probahly it iB very difficult for the pride of man to believe 
that he shall, one day, come into a condition where the noth- 
ingness of his inner being shall issue to the light; when the 
mask shall fall, under which he has endeavored here to conceal 
himself, and to parade himself complacently in the public eye. 
It is diiiicult, too, for the so-called intellectual* to believe in 
spirits liai do not s/imv t/iemselves spiritual. According to them, 
every man after his death should at once arrive at the intel- 
lectual knowledge and eminence of a Hegel. But now come 
spirits, trifling and foolish, and spirits like those who came to 
the Seeress of Prevorst; who longed after Scripture texts and 
hymns ; at the name of Jesus became clearer, and asserted that 
only in the name of Jesua can rest and joy be found. In such 
spirits it is impossible for the learned and intellectual to believe ; 
and such apparitions are to them only the product of a sick 

" And spirits now come, who are much poorer and more desti- 
tute than spirits in this life ever showed themselves, so that to 
our critics Buch a spirit-world must appear unworthy of God; 
and if they could convince themselves that such a spirit-world did 
exist, they would doubt the wisdom of the Creator : since spir- 
its, they think, should either not show themselves at all, or in a 
manner to do honor to their Maker.. This signifies nothing, 
however ; for God and Nature will have the mastery ! \ 

" Let us suppose, for a moment, that those creatures 01 

• Wiuieas the silly remarks of Ihe "London Saturday Review" of Dec. i 
wUch saya, " If (his is the spirit-world, and if this isspirLlual inteHigence. and tfaUlhat 

and play 'f '>•'". SiKct Hsmt; s,i lln aaor<li<m.a«d kiss /Oti !« ai Ja.i, am 
^ist iafy picinrrt, andiBrile sucA sailimaiUl aamby pamby ai Mr, Culraaai cupir 
'nd/rsmthib-di<^alioH,UU^ackhlila-lotiartspcilaMtfigandaccitl<aaiikail 
Urn, thantoiemnediuiihaichiaiimmertalUy at mis." Kemer anticlpaies an. 
answer! the sneers of wlHings like Ihia. 

Hosted by Google 

kkrskr's reply to the critics. 149 

earth, which constitute a transition class, and find themselves, as 
it were, in an intermediate state, as seals, bats, megathenans, 
were so formed that they could only be seen by men of a pecul- 
iar condition of nerves, and by others not at all, the latter 
would protest that no such creatures existed, or could possibly 
exist They would exclaim excitedly, 'A creature half-mouse, 
half-bird, a creature half-calf, half-fish, would be unworthy of 
the Creator, who never brings forth helpless, crippled, half- 
existences. Such things, they would say, are the mere births of 
a sick fancy ; and, were they really existent, which, however, it 
would be the height of folly to believe, would make one doubt 
the wisdom of the Creator.' That is precisely what the critics 
say of what they call low and undignified spirits. 

"But these creatures, now mentioned, do exist at this very 
time, my beloved 1 spite of thy belief and thy critical judgment; 
and thou Shalt not, therefore, doubt the wisdom of their Creator, 
but Shalt fall down, and, with all humility, shah worship and 
say, 'What I here in the dust, with the eye of a mole, regard 
as so great a disharmony, will hereafter, when the scales fall 
from my mole's-eye, appear as harmony.' 

"And so is it also with those wretched spirits 1 Beloved 1 
they are there! However thou mayest, in thy notions of the 
Creator, consider them so unworthy ; however, in thy intellectual 
wealth, mayest struggle against them in thy spirit, - there they 
are, contrary to all the systems of such learned, acute, and mtel- 
lectual men 1 There they are in truth, as real as the helpless 
caterpillars, out of which slowly the butterfiies shall unfold 
themselves.' There they are, and you cannot hinder them; 
cannot do otherwise than disbelieve in them, and, disbelieving, 
fight against them with all your dialectic arts, ready- writings, 
wit, and acuteneas, b«t ■vhich, in fact, does not at all annihilate 
this spirit-vjortd; but it goes on its way, troubling itself not in 
the least about all your intellectual skirmishing. 

"On this point an able writer has said already, 'Suppose a 
critic to write an article that turned out and was decided by the 

public to be a pooi 

affair, are we to consider it unworthy of 

Hosted by Google 

ISO PLANCHKTTI!. 

the Creator to have made auch a "wretched Stick"? And suppose 
this critic to have suddenly departed into the other world, with- 
out having got any more sense, are we to doubt the wisdom of 
the Creator, if the man should manifest himself here as a verv 
paltry ghost indeed?' It may, however, be answered, by some 
wise one, that every thing should in this world either not exist, 
or exist as a credit to its Maker. This, indeed, would be very 
praiseworthy and agreeable ; but the courteous reader knows 
very well that the image of God in this world often reduces him- 
self to a most hideous and foolish caricature of a man ; but does 
any body on that account doubt of the wisdom of the Creator? 
Yes : let us look into the mirror, and lam afraid -we shall Jlnd our- 
selves -aery much unlike the original image of God." 

Kerner then gives a series of well-attested cases of the appari- 
tions of such distorted and degraded spirits, and adds, " It is an 
incontestable truth which Jacob Bohme ably demonstrates, and 
which the Seeress of Prevorst confirms ; namely, that ■ The 
body being now broken up and dying, the soul retains her like- 
ness as the spirit of her will. Now is it away from the body; 
for in dying there is a. separation. Now the likeness appears in 
and amid the things which the soul had here imbibed, which 
she had infected herself with, which she allowed to build them- 
selves up in her, since she has the same well-spring in her. 
That which she loved here, which was her treasure, and into 
which the spirit of her will entered, is now expressed in her, 
and becomes her spiritual image, not as a reminiscence, but as 
an actual condition.'" 

Let us hope that the day is near when a more reverent atten- 
tion will be lent to facts which are the key to much that con- 
founds our scrutiny in our studies of human nature. 

Johann Jung- Stilling, born in Westphaha, in Germany, 1740, 
was, like Kerner, a devoted Spiritualist. His "Theory of Pneu- 
matology," translated into English by Samuel Jackson,_was re- 
published in New York, in 1851, with an introduction from the 
pen of our revered friend, the late George Bush, whom it was our 
fortune to introduce to some of the phenomena of somnambu- 

Hostea by Google 

STILLING. 151 

lism, which wc were investigating at the time. Stilling appears 
to have been well versed in the facts which the manifestations 
of 1848 brought so prominently before public attention. The 
phenomena of rapping and knocking he frequently notices, as 
modes of spirits announcing themselves. He was convinced of 
the existence of the spiritual body. "There is a natural body, 
and there is a spiritual body," says St. Paul ; is mow, not is 

Stilling was unconsciously a "medium." He announced, 
more than ten weeks before the occurrence, the tragic fate of 
Lavater, who was shot by a soldier in Zurich, in 1799. Stilling 
wrote seasonably to Hess, and begged him to communicate the 
prediction to Lavater. The warning seems to have been un- 
heeded. Stilling's presentiments of evil were sometimes very 
strong, and as unerring as they were strong. In his " Pneuma- 
tology," he has collected a great number of authentic narratives 
of apparitions and other phenomena indicative of spiritual 
powers. The "many-sided" Goethe was Stilling's fellow- 
Btudent at Strasburg, and became strongly attached to him. 
"I urged him," says Goethe, "to write his life; and he promised 
to do so." The promise was fulfilled. 

Stilling was well acquainted with the phenomena of animal 
magnetism. His experiments convinced him, as our own long 
since convinced us, that the soul does not require the outward 
organs of sense in order to be able to see, hear, smell, taste, and 
feel, in a much more perfect state.* "Animal magnetism," he 
says, " proves that we have an inward man, a soul, which is 
constituted of the divine spark, the immortal spirit, possessing 
reason and will, and of a luminous body, which is inseparable 

* "The vision that (an sec through bi'ick walls," says Professor WiUiam Denlon 
(1E6B), ^'and cUstinguish objects tniks away, does not belimg to tha body: it mail 

aaeH, hear, and see, and ha9 powels of locomotion. As tlie fin in the unhatched fidi 

Hosted by Google 

153 

from It L ght ekctric magnetic ^ihanic matter and ether 
appear to be Ul one -ind the same substance under diSerent 
modifications The light or ether i the element wh ch con 
s soul and bod} and the sp ritual and material world t 

gether 

The Ideas we form o 

E the creation ar 

id ili the sc ence and 

knowledge resulting Iro 

m thera 

depen 

d entreh ipon our 

organization God new 

eiery th 

IgIS 

t IS in It (^If For t 

he viewed things in epace and at 

no sp 

ace (.an be conLei ed 

as really eiistmg unless 

limited. 

the \16 

HS wheh God takes 

would therefore also be 

limited, ■ 

whch 

5 impossible; conse- 

quently no space exists o 

ut of us i 

n natu 

re but our ideas of it 

arise solelj irom our or 

^anization 

11 God wewed objects in 

he would 

exist in 

L time, and thus again 

be limited Now, as thi» 

is Impos 

sible, ti 

me is therefore also a 

mode of thinking pecuhai 
true or real." 

■ to finite < 

:apaciti 

es, and not anj thing 

From these principles, 

Stilling 

arrives 

at the opinion that, 

and space are only modes of thinking suited U 
present state, it is impossible that rational inferences, though 
mathematically just, can serve to guide us into the truths of tlie 
invisible world, when their premises are founded on modes of 
thinking adapted to the visible world, but excluding operations 
from the invisible. 

Perhaps this theory may explain why natural science makes 
such blunders in its attempts to deal with the recent phe- 

Hostea by Google 

CHAPTER VIII. 

SOMNAMBULISM, CLAIRVOYANCE, ANIMAL 

ouwHl see." — ?«<**«(. 

imputt the ongin of thsst I 

hi„g. to n,=n's mis 

iis^tions, they do he 

LmenUl principle of their ow 

Ti pliiloaophy. that : 

nd the criterion of aU truth," 

— Carfnwrt*. 

IN the face of the opposing protestations of a negative mate- 
rialism, there is one great fact established by the positive 
testimony of the past and of our own age ; this, namely, that 
there are and have been such individuals as seers, somnambu- 
lists, mediums, exhibiting powers which wholly transcend those 
of our mortal senses, and who must derive such powers either 
from spiritual faculties of their own, superseding the physical 
and normal, or from communication with spirittial forces and 
intelligences external to themselves. The manifestations upon 
which our convictions of this fact are based are of daily occur- 
rence, and such as may be tested by all who will take a little 
trouble and esercise a little patience. 

More than thirty years ago, by a series of experiments which 
extended over a period of two years, we satisfied ourselves of 
the facts of animal magnetism, or mesmerism, including the 
higher phenomena of lucid somnambulism. Our opportunities 
of investigation were of daily occurrence, and such as to make 
imposture impracticable. We made many observations of high 
psychological significance, as we believe, confirming most of the 
accounts of similar experiences by Puysegur, De Leuze, Dupotet, 
Chnuncy Hare Townshend, and others. 

Hosted by Google 

The interest of these observations has been, to a great extent, 
merged in the more comprehensive generalizations of modern 
Spiritualism, including the phenomena of animal magnetism, as 
well as of witchcraft and sorcery, and thus showing them all to 
be expressions of one great spiritual or psychical fact. 

Moreover, many of the moat surprising phenomena of animal 
magnetism, though ridiculed and denied for a long time by the 
scientific world, are now admitted by the leading physiologists 
of the day. Science is Just beginning to change its attitude of 
angry contempt for the less unbecoming position of inquiry and 
attention. One has only to read the medical and phyBiological 
writings of Dr. Carpenter, hisadmissions on the subject of som- 
nambulism, of brain action without consciousness, and other 
unexplained mysteries, to be satisfied on this point; for Dr. Car- 
penter now represents the most advanced school of England in 
his department of physiology, and few equally high contempo- 
rary authorities can be named. 

It is true that some of the more surprising facts of clairvoy- 
ance are still kept at a distance, on probation, even by Dr. Car- 
penter; but they are no longer treated with that disdainful 
vituperation or easy indifference which the magnates of science 
observed towards them up to the year 1856. 

The phenomena of lucid somnambulism are a constant offence 
and stumbling-block to the modern materialistic school, of 
which Moleschott, Vogt, Feuerbach, and Buchner are active 
representatives. With the asperity of partisanship, these able 
writers deny all evidences of a psychical nature in man, and 
seem to take it as a personal affront if we credit them with 
immortal souls. 

"It may appear singular," says Dr. Buchner, "that at all 
times those individuals were the most zealous for a personal 
contmuance after death, whose souls were scarcely worthy of 
such a careful preservation." 

This modest philosopher would 
Augustines, Origens, Pascals, Johnso 
man race as small speciraens, compared with Dr. Buchner 1 

Hosted by Google 

THE BELIKF IN- IMMORTALITY. 155 

Ludwig Feuerbach (born 1804) has the following remark: 
'■ No one who has eyes to see can fail to remark, that the behef 
in the immortality of the soul has long been effaced from ordi- 
nary life, and that it only exists in the subjective imagination of 
individuals, still very numerous." 

That the belief In immortality has been largely effaced from 
the ordinary life of many educated persons, is, we fear, but too 
true ; but this is owing, in a great degree, to the circumstance, 
that 'the class of facts which modern Spiritualism has re-verilied 
has been excluded, by false theories and au imperious ignorance, 
from scientific consideration. Belief in immortality was more 
general in ancient times than now, if we except the rapidly 
increasing body of Spiritualists. Even SO good a Catholic as 
Frederick Schlegel admits this. "Among those nations of 
primitive antiquity," he says, " the doctrine of the immortality 
of the soul was not a mere probable hypothesis : it was a lively 
certainty, like the feeling of one's own being." 

One has to go back only to the time of Richard Baxter, to see 
how largely the convictions of immortality, in his day, were 
baaed on n knowledge of spiritual phenomena. 

But in what mole's labyrinth can the learned Feuerbach have 
been burrowing, that he does not know that some of the most 
eminentanthropologistsofthepresenttime-menwhobuildtheir 
belief on a patient induction of objective facts — have admitted 
the phenomena and the hypothesis of Spiritualism? 

He has no doubt heard of the Darwinian theory; for it is a 
favorite one with the materialists, while at the same time it does 
not in the least disturb the Spiritualists. Among the Spiritual- 
ists of England is Mr. Alfred R. Wallace, a distinguished natu- 
ralist, who made explorations on the Amazon; and of this 
gentleman, Dr. Hooker, the president of the British Scientifac 
Association, spoke as follows, in his address at the meeting at 
Norwich, in August, 1868 : — 

" Many of the metaphysicians' objections have been c— ">- 

verted by that champio 
knight, Alfred R. Wallace, i' 

ural selection, Mr. Darwin's 

Hosted by Google 

^S^ PI.ANCHETTK. 

'Westminster Review," and 'Creation by Law,' in the 'Journal 
of Science,' October, 1867, &c., in wlilch tiie doctrines of 
'Continual Interference,' the 'Theory of Beauty,' and kindred 
subjects, are discussed with admirable sagacity, knowledge, and 
skill; but of Mr. Wallace, and his many contributions to philo- 
sophical biology, it is not easy to speak without enthusiasm; 
for, putting aside their great merits, he, throughout his writings, 
with a modesty as rare as I beiieve it to be in him unconscious, 
forgets his own unquestionable claims to the honor of having 
originated, independently of Mr. Darwin, the theories which he 
so ably defends." 

Mr. Wallace's testimony to the facts of Spiritualism is there- 
fore that of a competent scientific man of the highest reputation ; 
and for such a man to be complacently set down, by a metaphy- 
sician in his closet, as the victim of his " subjective imagination," 
is a reversal of the order of things. 

Mr. Karl Vogt (born 1817) is very intolerant of any facts of a 
spiritual tendency. He says, "Physiology" (my physiology?) 
" decides definitely and categorically against individual immor- 
tality, as against any special existence of the soul. The soul • 

does not enter thefcetus, like the ei 

IS possessed, 

but isaproduct ofthe developmentof thebrai , ^ ___ 

lar activity is a product of muscular development, and secretion 
a product of glandular development. . . . The fcetus manifests 
no mental activity: this changes with the periods of life, and 
ceases altogether at death." 

Here is mere dogmatic assertion, without any proof or apology 
for proof. How does Mr. Vogt kno-a, that " the ftetus manifests 
no mental activity"? From the time of that Elizabeth, men- 

5 "Onlolpgy" of Di 

■. DoherlyCTrttbiH 

rr & Co.. 

. LoDdon) 

, some. 

i Spirit, 

writer, "fgimstht 

: body in 

»to^,byco]licdD 

pimick!ofii.ait«frc 

m Ihc blood of Hi 

to forme 

irgam;: 

Hosted by Google 

DOGMATISM OF MATERIALISTS. 

157 

'oned by St. Luke, down to our own day, there are mothers bj 
-he million who will tell Mr. Vogt that his declaration is erro- 

Mr. Vogt labor, through an entertaining volume, in which 
the language of science Is diversified with that of sarcasm, to 
prove that we need not pass over many links of our genealogy 
to find apes for our ancestors. We have no special repugnance 
to the ape-theory. Many Spiritualists are inclined to it. The 
Darwinian hypothesis might become a certainty to-morrow, and 
It would not clash with the convictions of aman who knows 
that the phenomena proclaimed in this volume are eubstantiallj- 
ti-uej and Spiritualism, while it encourages us to aspire to the 
attainments of the loftiest seraph, would, if rightly meditated, 
teach us a humility that would not shrink from sympathy with 
the creature that Is lowest in the scale of being. 

But so far as Mr. Vogfs system rests on his ignorance of 
spiritual facts, it needs reconstruction, if he would have it 
conform with the science of the future. 

Dr. Moleschott (born 1822), who has acquired high distinction 
as an anthropologist, imagines, with the sanguine temperament 
of youth, that he has uttered the last word of science in regard 
to a certain class of facts, when he says, "Unprejudiced philos- 
ophy is compelled to reject the idea of an individual immortality 
and of a personal continuance after death." 

So the philosophy which differs from that of Dr. Moleschott, 
and which refuses to accept his cheerful doctrine of the soul's 
annihilation, is aphiloEophyof "prejudice"! Newton, Leibnitz, 
and the rest, were men of prejudice ! 

With equal positiveness, the late Dr. Elliotson (who knew a 
good deal that Dr. Moleschott has yet to master) taught, for 
many years, in the "Zoist," a materialism quite as dense and 
narrow as his. But, after hi had lived threescore years and ten, 
he stumbled on one little fact, demonstrated to him by his senses 
and his reason, which shivered the " unprejudiced philosophy" 
of a lifetime as hy a Hghtning-flash, and convinced him that the 
Spiritualists, with their vulgar intuitions and their stubborn 

Hosted by Google 

'J.ANCHETTE. 

were, after all, m the right 

T. Vr V"" i.^.,=,-..«. tonrinuance after death." 

Dr. Mole«ehotfs phUo.ophj 1, foredoomed to the same end 
lor ,t real, on . repudiation of (he po.ltlve te.ttaonj of a l.rtre 
po,l,on of the hnoan race up t„ the pre.ent time. Onle.. Ilk. 
Ute man who ,.fu.ed to look through a micro.eope. heeau.e it 
would .ubverl h„ pet Iheorj, he atubhorulj. per.i.t, in ignoring 
the great f.el, „f Spirltnali.a, he m«,t .o4 day do „ e'iIoI.™ 

-CL'rpil'ttT.tf!! "" "'"■ ■"" "■""'•"^ '"■'• 

AdJ bound all Nalun, by Ilis rulH ; 
So ftres lie in Ihal dreadful hour 
When injured Truth eiens her power 
Some «™/A,„™™,„ ,„ ™^, 

f?. Tt T ^°^^'^' ^°^^''^ ^^'^^^y '" "'^ ""^^^ recent writings 
of Dr. Molaschott, that he i. reconsidering his barren doctrine of 
the " all-mightiness of the transmutations of matter " in which 
he seems merely to have revamped some of the notions of 
Herachtus. 

The detri.l „f He e„„tin.„u. life „f man, after the dl..olntlo„ 
of the rjatenal bodj. „ a negation that ue.er ari... from h.rf. 
ihf ■ r ° ««P"i«'>" <•' "ny po.ltl,e knowledge, but 

the mere dogmatic .„ertion that bejond the line of .uch knowU 
o^h, r "•• "°""»S ■""=■ Thl. i. wh, w. regard a. unphil- 
o.oph,eal and tnatmnal the po.ttion of Uto.e „iu Lei 
d^g.n,„al,y I,., „, f,,.„„„, „^j ^„„ ,_ ,^_ ^^^ ' 

nnph.l«»Ph.e.l and nn.cle.tISc ., it la arwga.t „d prl.ump- 

The utmost that the materialist can rationallv «av f» 
'u«*^lhe factor. f....,..„r,,. .c. ationanj say, is, 

do«f>i ihe fact of a future life." To 

lo futui^ life," 

Hosted b, Google 

CLAIRVOYANT SOMNAMBULISM. I59 

le ought to be the Epirit whose existence he repudiates. If it 
requires spirit to reveal the fact of spirit, surely nothing less 
than spiritual authority is requisite to teach the fact of no-spirit. 
Thus the dogmatist against a future life is involved in a contra- 
diction. To teach the matter confidently, he ought to have an 
illumination, the possibility of which his theory utterly denies. 
No one but a seer has a right to say, "There is no life for man 
beyond the grave; " and the seer's own seership would give the 
lie' to his assertion. The Pyrrlionist may he a philosopher; but 
the teacher of annihilation is simply a charlatan. 

Tlie Spiritualist, on the contrary, having a knowledge of 
phenomena, meiital and physical, proving to his satisfaction the 
existence of spiritual powers, would be false to his own legiti- 
mate convictions if he did not teach the great fact of immortal- 
ity as a certainty, in view of which our mortal life ought to be 
shaped, and our thoughts and affections constantly refreshed by 
the sublime consciousness that death is a mere incident, which 
leaves the essential part of our being untouched; and that we 
shall survive to study the infinite works of the Creator in other 
worlds, and to commune with the loved ones gone before, and 
the great and good of all ages, in progressive stages of being, 
with which this rudimental state, and our disciphne here, shall 
be found hereafter to have been in perfect accord. 

Dr. Bilchner has an easy way of disposing of certain mcon- 
venient facts. He says, " Some of these phenomena, clairvoy- 
ance especially, have been laid hold of to prove the existence of 
the supernatural and supersensual. ... All these things are 
now, by science and an interrogation of the facts, considered as 
idle fancies. . . . What the belief in sorcery, witchcraft, de- 
moniac possession, &c.. was in former centuries, re-appears now 
under the agreeable forms of table-moving, spirit-rapping, psy- 
chography, somnambulism, &c. . . . There can be no doubt 
that all pretended cases of clairvoyance rest upon fraud or illu- 
sion. Clairvoyance, that is, perception of external objects with- 
out the aid of the senses, is an impossibility. It is a law of 
nature, which cannot be gainsaid, that we require our eyes to 

Hosted by Google 

l6o PLANCHETTK. 

see, our ears to hear, and that the senses are limited in theii 
action b;' space." 
It would thus seem that Dr. Biichner, like his master, Mole- 

schott, bases his whole strncture of atheii 

his ignorance of certain facts, known to be true at this day bj- 
several millions of intelligent persons, and publicly proclaimed 
as true by several thousands. If he will open his eyes, he will 
find that he is behind the age. Even Dr. Carpenter and the 
"Edinburgh Review" admit the power of somnambulists to see 
through opaque substances, and to read witliout the normal use 
of their physical organs of sight. 

Dr. Maudsley, in his recent work on the "Physiology and 
Pathology of the Mind," has presented the materialistic view of 
his subject with eKhaustive ability; but in doing this he has to 
ignore almost entirely the great, facts of somnambulism. His 
reference to the subject is of the most meagre and casual kind. 
"Perhaps," he says (page 267}, " no more fitting opportunity 
than the present will present itself for referring to the singular 
state of somnambulism." And then, after attributing the phe- 
nomena to the " independent action of the sensorial and corre- 
sponding motor centres," he winds up with "a striking instance" 
that recently came under his observation. It is a story of a 
young sempstress who got up in the night and finished, in a 
state of somnambulism, the work on which she was engaged. 

And here is the moral he draws from the incident : " Soon the 
long day's task will be over with her, and she will sleep well 
where no troubles more can reach her, and no dream of work or 
sorrow disturb her slumbers." All which is simply a repetition 
of Chaumette's epigraph in the days of the French revolution: 
"Death is an eternal sleep." An hypothesis which all the facts 
of somnambulism confute I And yet to this momentous subject 
Dr. Maudsley gives less than two pages out of the four hundred 
and forty-two to which his volume extends. 

M. Georget, a much esteemed physiologist of the Paris school, 
appears to have arrived ultimately at a very different conclusion 
from that where Dr. Maudsley leaves us. Georget was the au- 

Hostea by Google 

iTlMONY < 

idl 

thor of a much esteemed work on the " Physiology of the Ner- 
vous System (1821)." In it he profeseed opinions, charged with 
materialism, very similar to those of Dr, Maudsley; but, after 
numerous experiences in magnetic somnambulism, Georget 
completely changed his views, and had the courage and good 
faith to avow it, and fo give the avowal an added sanctity by 
incorporating it in his last will and testament, as follows : — 

"I must not conclude without an important declaration. In 
1821, in my work on the ' Physiology of the Nervous System,' 
I boldly professed materialism. . . , This work had scarcely 
appeared, when renewed meditations on a very extraordinary 
phenomenon, somnambulism, no longer permitted me to enter- 
tain doubts of the existence within us, and external to us, of 
an intelligent principle, altogether different from material ex- 
istences ; in a word, of the soul and God. With respect to this 
I have a profound conviction, founded upon facts which I 
believe to be incontestable. This declaration will not see the 
light till a period when its sincerity will not be doubted, nor my 
intentions suspected. As I cannot publish it myself, I request 
those persons who may read it, on opening this will, that is to 
say, after my death, to give it all possible publicity." 

Anton Mesmer (1734-1815) bears much the same relation to 
animal magnetism that Miss Kate Fojt does to modern Spiritu- 
alism. The fact of the influence of one human being by 
another, under certain conditions, through passes of the hand, 
or by the simple exercise of the will, was known and practised 
long before Mesmer introduced the subject anew to public atten- 
tion. Recent discoveries at Pompeii show that it was a mode 
of relief known there centuries ago. Plautus, in "Amphitryo," 
makes one of his characters ask, " How if I stroke him slowly 
with the hand, so that he sleeps?" These magnetic means of 
cure were not only practised, but directions for them were 
inscribed on sacred tables and pillars, and illustrated by pic- 
tures on the temple walls, so as to be intelligible to all. Apu- 
leiua furnishes similar evidences of the ordinary practice by the 
Romans of magnetic manipulations, to induce somnambuHsm 

Hosted by Google 

l62 PLANCH ETTK. 

and clairvojance. In Livy alone, there are more than fifli 
instances in which he refers to the literal fulfilment of dreams, 
oracles, prognostics by seers, &c. 

It was Mesmer's theory, that the universe is submerged ia an 
eminently subtle fluid, which he thought should be named ani- 
mal-magnetic fluid, because it can be compared to the fluid of 
the magnet; that this fluid impregnates all bodies, and trans- 
mits to them the impression of motion ; that it insinuates itself 
into, and circulates through, all the fibres of the nervous system ; 
and that it may be accumulated, when the magnetizer wills it, 
in buckets, tubs, &c., and especially in the organs of the magnet- 
izer who transmits it to the magnetized. This hypothetical 
fluid will remind the classical reader of the "chain uniting all 
beings "of Hesiod, and the "soul of the world" of Plato. 

With Mesmer's operations began the modern interest in ani- 
mal magnetism, whatever its antiquity may be. In 1778, he 
arrived in Paris, and for five or six years made a great noise by 
his experiments. The king appointed a commission, consisting 
of five members of the Royal Academy, and four members of 
the Faculty of Medicine, to report upon Mesmer's eshibilion. 
Franklin was a member of the commission; but he was at the 
time unwell, and unable to attend its sittings. 

The commission, in their elaborate Report, allow that in what 
they witnessed, there was something that seemed the working 
of a mysterious agent. They reduced Mesmer's exhibitions to 
four classes ; first, those which could be explained on physio- 
logical grounds ; second, those which were contrary to the laws 
of magnetism; third, those where the imagination of the mes- 
merized person was the source of the phenomena; and fourth, 
facts which led them to admit a special agent. One member of 
the commission, the eminent Laurent de Jussieu, became a con- 
vert to Mesmer's views, and testified to " several well-verified 
facts, independent of the imagination." 

In the year 1826, the French Academy of Medicine appointed 
a second commission. They labored diligently for five years, 
and presented a report (June, 1831) through Dr. Husson, It is 

Hosted by Google 

MESMERISM. 163 

igned by nine members of the commisEion, two onlj, Messrs. 
Jouble and Magendie, having declined to assist at theinFCfiti- 
gations. The commission admit nearly all the important facts 
of animal magnetisiu. 
"It is demonstrated to us," they declare, "that magnetic 

leep has been produced in circumstances where the magnetized 
persons have not been able to see or gain any knowledge of the 
means employed to determine it." The magnetizer being in a 
separate apartment, and the subject wholly unaware of his inten- 
tion, the sleep was induced through the mere operation of the 
magnetizer's will. We have ourselves repeatedly tested this 
phenomenon here admitted by the commission. 

The Report speaks of a terrible operation (the removal of the 
right breast) which was performed by M. Cloquet upon Madame 
Plantin. During the twelve minutes that the operation lasted, 
the invalid, previously magnetized, "continued to converse 
calmly with the operator, giving not the slightest evidence of 

The late Dr. Valentine Mott, of New York, who was present 
at this operation, added his personal testimony in our presence 
to the truth of the foregoing statement. 

In regard to clairvoyance, the commission report several 
facts. Among others, they speak of a law student, M. Villa- 
grand, whose evelids were kept clostd bj the different members 
of the commisaion but who nevertheless, recognized cards 
entirelj new and read trom a book open before him. In short, 
the interior 1 fe the perception of the state of the body, the 

forcibly attested m the Report 

"The magnetued pereon it says can not only be acted 
upon, but he can w thout hie knowledge be thrown into and 
aroused from a complete sommmbulic condition, when the 
operator 1 out of his sight at a certain distance from him, and 
separated by doors The phenon enon of clairvoyance takes 

place eien with the fingers pres ed tightly over the eyelids. 
The preM ons of two somnambuii=t relative to their health, 
were rcil zed with remarkable accuracy 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTE. 

The 

Facts 
oblivio 

the som 

the exf 

two senses of sight and hearing. . . 

of somnambuliets are so insensible tc 

been burned without their testifying the least impression ; if the 

lids are raised, and the fingers passed rapidly in front of the 

eye, the immobility remains complete. . . . And yet they are 

conscious of the objects which surround them; they avoid with 

the greatest address obstacles in their path." 

The French commissioners mention some experiments in 
which rare powers of detecting disease were manifested by 

Hosted by Google 

ARAGO ON MESMERISM. 165 

somnambulistB. Internal symptoms, inappreciable to the eve, 
were described by them, and the correctness of the descrip- 
tion afterwards verified by a post-mortem examination of the 
bodies. 

M. de Puysegur says of a peasant whom he had magnetized, 
" I have compelled him to move quickly about on his seat, as if 
dancing to a tune, which, singing mentally myself, I made him 
repeat aloud. ... I have no occasion to speak to him ; I think 
in his presence; he understands and answers me." 

" Having performed," says Dr. Bertrand, " on my first som- 
nambulist the process by which I usually awakened her, exer- 
cising at the same time a firm will to the contrary, she was 
seized with strong convulsive movements. ' What is the matter 
with you?' said I. 'Indeed,' she replied, 'you tell me to awake, 
and yet you do not will that I shall awake.' " Dr. Bertrand says 
that he has thrown into the somnambulic state a nerson a hun- 

the most rigidly critical minds will be removed, after 
reflected on the ingenious experiments in which Mot 

Hosted by Google 

1 66 

PLANCH ETTE. 

duced, a 
objects c 

Iso at a distance, very distinc 
in all sorts of bodies, and in i 

:t images of all sorts of 
the most complete dark- 

" The phenomena wc are made to observe in somnambulism," 
Bays Deleuze, "demonstrate the distinction of the two sub- 
stances, the double existence of the interior man and of the 
exterior man in the same individual : they offer the direct proof 
of the spirituality of the soul, and the answer to all objections 
that have been raised ag:ainst its immortality." "Among the 
men who have made magnetism their study, there are, unfortu- 
nately, some materialists. I cannot conceive how it is possible 
that many of the phenomena witnessed by them — such as sight 
at a distance, prevision, the action of the will, the communica- 
tion of the thoughts without external signs — could have failed to 
appear in their eyes as sufficient proof of the spirituality of the 

" The repose of the outer," says Townshend, " is an absolute 
condition for the revelation of the inner, sensibility. We all may 
feel that, in order to call up before our mind's eye the face of a 
dear friend, or the beauties of a familiar landscape, we must 
retreat from the obtrusive impulses of the entemai world. 
Would we rise to a yet higher discernment of remembered 
objects, we must yet more calmly check the beating of t 

pulses, until we pass into that s 
described by Wordsworth,— 

■Thai serene and bless 

i beautifully 

The mesmeric vision, or clairvoyance, has been gravely and 
grandly pronounced to be ' physically and physiologically im- 

Hostea by Google 

AUTHENTICATED PREDICTION. 167 

. To d.cid, .och • ,o=.tion, one ought to l,e great indeed. 
Eicapt, perhaps, in ihe fool's cjlendar." 
Dr. Edwin Lee, in hi. " Report upon the Phenom.n. of Cl.lr- 
„j,nc. - (London, .843), -entions the c..e ot he pr.d.et.on 
of the de.th of the king of WUtU^mherg Ij t.o d.it.rent o„ 
„.„b«liM,, the one having foretold the event f»«' J"'J 
beforehand , the other, in the .p.Ing of the ..me ?'"■ ™™ 
the e,.ot day, in the month of Oetoher, a. al.o the dr.ea.e 

"EmTSac. cincidenee,- ..,. Dr. Lee, "of the even, with 

the p'r'iS.- no. .--^--S^rL'otpa-n^rg-S; 
aso. Dr. Klein, who 1. now in England, acco. p ^^ , 
Crown Prince of WUrtemberg, having been introduced to me, 
Took "he opportunity of ..king him about the .ircum.t.nc., 
Iteh'he afknovvledidwa. a. ha. been «..ed ..^mg,m^^^^ 
over, that his father was phyfiic.an to the kmg, wno, 
morning of the day on which the attack occurred, »as- in very 
good health and spirits." _ ™,„,„hidii- 

Shelley, the poet, appear. .0 have '~P""»'''<™ '">£„. 
on several occa.lon.. He wa. al.o .en.itive to mesmeri 
enee. William., who wa. drowned with Shelley, .ay. in • note 
In hi. diary .hortl, before the event, "After «. walked with 
in nis uia J 1 nh«.rvinir him .enslbly affected, 

Shelley on the terrace. . . . Obeerving mm ^ ^ 

I demanded of him if he wa. in p.m-, but he only '"■"■«». 
bv .aving ■ There it 1. again 1 there 1 ' He recovered aller .ome 
'fmeC declared that 'e .aw, a. plainly .. he *=" ■"»^; 
naked child (Byron'. AUegra, who had r.ccn ly died) ri.e fmin 
the «., and cla.p «. hand, a. if in joy, .miling at him. Tbi. 
wa.T r'nce that it required .ome reasoning and pbilo.ophy to 
wake him from emlrely, .0 forcibly had the vl.i.n. operated 0,, 

Ho.t.abi Google 

i68 

PLANCHKTTK, 

Almost every family h«8 its tradition of some event like the 
following. The Pacific Hotel, in St. Louis, was destroyed by 
fire m February, 1858; and twenty-one lives were lost on the 
occasion. On the night of the fire, a little brother of Mr. Henry 
Rochester hving .t home with hi. parent., near Avon, in the 
State of New York, awoke some time after midnight with 
screammg and tears, saying th»t the hotel in St, Louis was on 
fire, and that his brother Henry was burning to death. So 
in ense were his alarm and horror, that it was with considerable 
difficulty he could be quieted. On the following day at noon 
the parents received a telegram from St. Louis, confirming the 
nttle boy s dream in every particular. 

Well-authenticated instances of spontaneous clairvoyance like 
this could be collected from the newspapers of the last ten years 
hU the record would fill volumes. Not many years since a New 
Orleans merchant, being in Paris, woke up from sleep one night 
having heard, as he thought, the voice of his son uttering the 
words "Father, I'm dying." So much impressed was he by 
this, that he got out of bed, lighted a candle, and made a record 
of the occurrence, stating the exact hour by the clock in his 
note-book. When he arrived in New Orleans, a few weeks 
afterwards, the first friend he met told him of his son's death 
and added, " His last words vrere, ' Father, I'm dying • v The 
merchant took out his note-book, pointed to the record, 
and afterwards learned that his son had died at the precise hour 
named, after making the proper allowance for difference of lon^i 
tude between Paris and New Orleans. 

_ Bacon recognizes a natural divination proceeding from the 
.nternal power of the soul. " The mind,*' he tells us, '• abstracted 
or collected m itself, and not diffused in the organs of the body, 
has, from the natural power of its own essence, some forcknowU 
edge of future thmgs; and this appears chiefly in sleep, ecstasies, 
and the near approach of death." 

^ "The phenomena of clairvoyance, prevision, and second 
sight, says De Boismont, " depend on a sudden illumination 
of the cerebral organ, which calls into activity sensations that 
have hitherto lain dormant." 

Hosted by Google 

NARRATIVE OF REV. DR. BUSHNELL. I<>9 

Rather do they depend, we should say, on an intromission 
from latent spiritual forces, called into action by some abnormal 
conditions affecting the relations of the physical to the spiritual 

De Boismont, whose work on " Hallucinations" (Paris, 1853) 
has a high reputation in France, admits that some cases of 
prevision " appear to spring from an enlarged faculty of per- 
ception, a sisperaaiural intuition." 

To our instances of clairvoyance in dreams, we add the follow- 
ing perfectly well -authenticated case, related (1858) by the Rev. 
Dr. Horace Bushnell. "As I sat by the fire," he says, "one 
stormy November night, in a hotel-parlor, in the Napa Valley 
of California, there came in a most venerable and benignant- 
looking person, with his wife. The stranger was Captain Yount, 
a man who came over into California, as a trapper, more than 
forty years ago. Here he has lived, apart from the great world 
and its questions, acquiring an immense landed estate, and 
becoming a kind of acknowledged patriarch in the country. 
His tall, manly person, and his gracious, paternal look, as 
totally unsophisticated in the expression as if he had never 
heard of a philosophic doubt or question in his life, marked him 
as the true patriarch. 

" The conversation turned, I know not how, on spiritism and 
the modern necromancy; and he discovered a degree of incli- 
nation to believe in the reported mysteries. His wife, a much 
younger person, and apparently a Christian, intimated that 
probably be was predisposed to this kind of faith by a very pe- 
culiar experience of his own, and evidently desired that he might 
be drawn out by some intelligent discussion of his queries. 

"At my request, he gave me his story. About six or seven 
years previous, in a raid-winter's night, he had a dreara, in which 
he saw what appeared to be a company of emigrants, arrested 
by the snows of the mountains, and perishing rapidly by cold 
and hunger. He noted the very cast of the scenery, marked by 
a huge perpendicular front of white-rock cliff; he saw the men 
cutting off what appeared to be tree-tops rising out of dc?p 

Hosted by Google 

'7° PLANCHETTE. 

gulfs of snow ; he distinguished the very features of the persons, 
and the look of their particular distress. 

"He woke, profoundly impressed witli the distinctness and 
apparent reality of his dream. At length he fell asleep, and 
dreamed exactly the same dream again. In the morning he 
could not expel it from his mind. Falling in, shortly, with an 
old hunter comrade, he told him the story, and was only the 
more deeply impressed by his recognizing, without hesitation, 
the scenery of the dream. This comrade had come over the 
Sierra by the Carson- Valley Pass, and declared that a spot in 
the pass answered exactly to his description. By this the unso- 
phisticated patriarch was decided. He immediately collected a 
company of men, with mules and blankets and all necessary 
provisions. The neighbors were laughing, meantime, at his 
credulity. 'No matter,' said he: 'I am able to do this, and I 
will ; for I verily believe that the fact Is according to my dream.' 
The men were sent into the mountains, one hundred and fifty 
miles distant, directly to the Carson-Valley Pass. And there 
they found the company in exactly the condition of the dream, 
and brought in the remnant alive." 

Dr. BuBhnell adds, that a gentleman present said to him, 
" You need have no doubt of this ; for we Californians all know 
the facts and the names of the families brought in, who now 
look upon our venerable friend as a sort of savior." These 
names he gave, together with the residence of each; and Dr. 
Bushnell avers that he found the Californians everywhere ready 
to second the old man's testimony. " Nothing could be more 
natural than for the good-hearted patriarch himself to add that 
the brightest thing in his life, and that which gave him the 
greatest joy, was his simple faith in that dream." 

Instances similar to the foregoing could be multiplied indefi- 
nitely. We have heard of the case of the brother of an ancestor 
of our own, whose ship was struck by lightning, the consequence 
of which was that he and his crew were compelled to escape 
from the wreck in the long-boat, where they were exposed for 
many days, at an inclement season, in the middle of the Atlantic. 

Hosted by Google 

CLAIRVOYANCE PROVES IMMORTALITY. I?! 

The captain of a vessel sailing from the same port dreamed of 
seeing them, and was so vividly impressed by the vision, that 
he determined on altering hie conree, and going back in search 
of the boat. This he did, against the expostulations of his 
mates. On the morning of the third day he fell in with the 
boat, and rescued the occupants of it. 

The phenomena of clairvoyance in the somnambulism mduced 
by mesmerism were first noticed, in modern times, in the year 
i;84, by the Marquis de Puystigur, a disciple of Mesmer. That 
these phenomena afford conclusive evidence of spiritual faculties 
latent in man, and developed under certain circumstances even 
in this life, is a conviction at which most persons, who have 
given much thought to the subject, have finally arrived. We 
see no escape from the conviction. The added marvels of 
Spiritualism are hardly needed to give it force ; but let them be 
none the less welcome on that account. 

We need not multiply instances of clairvoyance, clairau- 
dience, &c. The fact is established, if any fact can be by 
human testimony. It needs but a single experiment with Mr. 
Charles H. Foster, in pellet-reading, to shatter the most elab- 
ture of Sadducean materialism from turret to founda- 
If thetaculties of oight and hearinf, in their highest 
minifestat ons are not dependent on their proper physical 
organs who can rationally argue that they are likely to be 
destroved bj the dissolution of the physical body itself ? 

Mr fa B Brittan one of the earliest to accept the facts of 
phenomenal Spiritualism remarks The indiv duality of man 
does not belong to his body , but inheres in a supra mortal and 
indestructible constitution. . . . Within this corporealframe there 
is another body of more ethereal elements. . . - Iftherewereno 
inward form or spiritual constitution, the molecular eliminations 
would periodically destroy the identity of man." 

"Our soul," says Joubert, " is ever fully alive. It is so in the 
sick; in those who have fainted; in the dying; it is still more 
alive after death." 

"The soul," says Zschokke, himself a clairvoyant, "has the 

Hosted by Google 

172 PLANCHETTE, 

faculty directly, and without inference, both of perceiving occur- 
renees at a distance, and of being sensible of future events. The 
ancients, who knew as much as we do of the properties of the 
human soul, observed this inexplicable power of perception 
and foresight, eepeciallj in cases of nervous weakness, and in 
the dying." 

That the instances of clairvoyance on the part of the ancient 
oracles were numerous, no student of history can deny, without 
rejecting, through simple prejudice, a vast amount of explicit 
and concurrent human testimony. The genuineness of the 
oracles was conceded by Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Theophi- 
luB of Alexandria, Tatian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origen, Eu- 
sebius, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Cyril Alesandrinus, and others 
of the Greek fathers ; and bjMinucius Felix, Cyprian, Tertullian, 
Lactantius, Maternus-Firnicius, Jerome, Augustine, and others 
of the Latin. Thus, Augustine writes, "They [the spirits] for 
the most part foretell what they are about to perform ; for often 
se ing the atmosphere. 

S m th ee by natural signs, 

w d h m thera they learn, by 

w d m p though unspoken, 

m nt of those ignorant 

w C d h F after, believed that 

departed spirits lurked about images, spoke in oracles, controlled 
omens, and in various ways encouraged men to worship them. 

If human testimony is to be taken as of any account, com- 
pared with the mere speculations of closet professors, putting 
forth decisions on matters they refuse to investigate practically, 
this question of spiritual phenomena is decided ' Why, then," 
asks Cicero, " doubt the certainty of this argument, if reason 
consent, if facts, people, nations, Greeks, barbariins, our ances- 
tors, and the universal faith? If chief philosophers, poets, the 
wisest of men, founders of republics builders of cities? Or, 
discarding the united consent of the human kind, shall we wait 
for brutes to speak?" 

Hosted by Google 

THE 

; MATEKIAI,. 

" Si divinatio est, dii sunt," if there h divination, there must be 
god, (or spirits), was a common saying of the ancient Romans. 
One authentic instance of clairvoyance satisfied them of the 

terywhere vi 

great fact of spiritual e.__. 

" That we should rather evolve from our present corporeal 
elements the body that is to be ours, than begin esistence de 
novo " says Townshend ; " that, in other words, we should really 
possess a fundamental life, or body, incapable of passing away 
with the grosser covering that envelops it; that, at death, we 
should retain something physically from our actual condition,— 
seems pointed out to us by all the analogies of nature. 

e behold that one state includes the embryo 
netaphysically, but materially, and entering 

tinuation of what went before. The very rudiments of organs, 
intended in a higher stage of anima! life to be useful, are found, 
uielcGsly, as it were, appearing in the lower classes of animated 
creatures'; or, stranger still, lying in embryo in the same creat- 
ure in one state, only to be developed in another. The wings 
h m th b tf rfl r folded in the worm 

dpndd AL h 

There h„d th dbd dh 

rigorous and metaphysical accuracy. The soul never quits com- 
pletely the body with which it is united, nor does it pass from one 
body into another with which it had no connection before : a 
lorphosis takes place ; but there is no metempsychosis.' • 

Hosted by Google 

shown by the facts of mesmerism to be capable o! 
insitive power. To what end, if hereafter this in- 
crease of power become not permanent ? Would wings be 
m ay to enable it to %? 

power, or of thrifty 
e view of man which 
me; which does not 
m nts, as intended _/bf- a 

W nil <if,iritualf" says the 

R- B B e upon the common 

alitj, and that mani- 
tw m ems self-evident. It 

on, and that receives 
m t out all impressions. It is this that constitutes the /or 
the me, and to which we refer when we use these pronouns. 
We are all conscious of this unseen self. And when we speak 
of seeing, of hearing, of tasting, of smelling, of feeling, we 
refer to a being who possesses all these senses, but who exists 
behind the organs of their outivard manifestation. I do not 
properly say ' my eye sees,' or ' my hand feels,' but rather ' / see 
tbroagb my eye,' and ' feel -aiith or throagh my hand.' Nor do 1 
say, 'ray brain thinks,' but '/think -Kith my brain.' And our 

"And the one who possesses all these senses is never seen. 
I never have seen you, nor you me. We have only seen the 
manifestations of each other. The individual who dwells in 
either of the living forms before me, or the one who occupied 
the form that is dead, has never to material senses been tangible. 
We have never come directly in contact with him or her, but 
always through the mediation of the outer form. Each of us, 
then, in our real self, answers to the common idea of spirit: 
we are intangible. 

"And, again, each of us, in his voluntary action, betrays 

Hosted by Google 

THE SPIRITUAL BODY. 175 

purposes and desires, intelligence and thought; and surely we 
cannot attribute these to tangible matter. It would be repug- 
nant to all our sense of fact, to affirm ths^t^esA could t/iiiii and 
purpose. We inevitably refer all such action to the unseen. It 
is the unseen one that loves, and that we love. 

" And now with reference to the spiritual dody, it seems 
natural to conclude that these secret powers exist in combina- 
tion, forming an intei-ior being. We refer them all to one, and 
yet each is distinct. The same being sees, thinks, and loves. 
And yet seeing, thinking, and loving are quite diiFerent. There 
is, then, an organization interior to this physical organization, 
possessing in itself each of the senses, and all of the intellectual 
and emotional power we see expressed through the exterior 
form. And, being so, it is in a proper sense a body. It is in all 
things, but its J'eKftire, like the body we see. Only in this (its 
texture), can we mention au^ht that the body possesses that the 
spirit hath not. Indeed, except this and the shape of humanity, 
the body hath nothing when the spirit hath gone out. It hath 
no senses, no power. Here, then, we have not only the exist- 
ence of a spirit, but a spiritual body, in the sense of organi- 

"But what of its substance? Hath it substance? or, is it 
without? I have often received the impression from friends, 
that they supposed a spirit to be without substance. Perhaps 
they had no clear conception of what a spirit is. Perhaps I was 
unable to receive their conception. But, so far as able, it 
seemed to be, in the words of another, ' the most definite con- 
ception of nothing ever given to mankind.' And yet I think 
it manifest that spirit hath substance. To see this truth, let us 
inquire what we mean by substance. Do we mean ^orat. farticu' 
lar thing? No; for every thing is substance. Do we not mean 
by this term jomething, in distinction from nothing? Can we 
mean any thing else? Borrowing an illustration, then, think 
of the millions of human bodies now being moved about by 
spirits. They would all stop, were the spirits to go out. Is this 
immense amount of substance moved without substance, 
moved by nothing? 

Hosted by Google 

176 PLANCHETTE. 

" Further, to illustrate, think of the material universe all in 
motion. Go with the astronomer and count the worlds. En- 
deavor, then, to- conceive of those unseen even hy him. Ask 
yourselves of the immensity of their weight. You cannot 
answer. Well, thej- are all upheld ; they are all in motion with 
inconceivable velocity. And by what? By nothing? By no 
substance, which is nothingi" No; but by spirit, which Is the 
greatest of all things. By an immeasurable organization of 
spirit. By that which constitutes all that is unchangeable 
in the universe. By God, who is a spirit, 'without variable- 
ness or shadow of turning.' And the effort to conceive of God 
without substance, is perilous to our conviction of his ex- 
istence. And so of the human spirit. In such an attempt, 
we grapple with the impossible, and are worsted in the strug- 
gle 

"Inspirituality, then, I think you.must bear me witness, there 
is nothing to forbid the thought that spirits out of the flesh 
reach and affec fl h mph he 

death of the bod b m h q ti n be 

determined by h d h b / this 

may be doubted., b if rf p s- 

ence of experie d p h h he 

evidence of thei h p m b fti d. 

By the use of their sensco they are to be judged, and must 
judge. 

" Such is some of the evidence I draw from our common ks&wl- 
edge; such the inferences from common ground, and which, for 
this reason, I think should find general acceptance. Evidence 
that ' there is a spiritual body,' iadestructiSle, independent of the 
physical, and hence immortal." 

It will be seen, however, as we proceed, that the spiritual 
hypothesis is not the only one which human ingenuity has 
invented for the phenomena of clairvoyance and of Spiritual- 
ism. Mr. H. G. Atkinson, who was associated with Miss Mar- 
tineau some years since in the authorship of an atheistic book, 
in which some of the phenomena of mesmerism were accepted 

Hosted by Google 

SPIRITUALISM ANTICIPATED. Ijy 

and attrEbuted, as they were by Dr. Eliiotson," to exclusivelj' 
material causes, professes to be not at all inconvenienced by the 
added wonders of Spiritualism. He admits thsm all, but is too 
uncompromising a Comtean to allow that they point to any 
thing outside of this barrier of flesh and blood. 

Seers and spirits may protest as much as they please ; nay, 
the latter may show themselves in their habits as they lived,— 
Mr. Atkinson is inexorable. 

"I think it can now be shown," he says, referring to the 
spiritual phenomena, " that there is not aay very essential dis- 
iiisciion beliveen these extraordinary facts and the ordinary ones 
of every-day life ! " 

Shut out from the spiritual hypothesis by his whole past phi- 
losophy, Mr. Atkinson consoles himself, after the manner of the 
antediluvian philosopher, mho, according to the profane, was 
shut out from the ark by Noah, and who revenged himself 
on the patriarch by telling him that "it was no sort of conse- 
quence; for he believed it was not going to be much of a shower 
after all." 

A fact of importance, in connection with the history of 
animal magnetism, has been recently brought to light by the 
French Spiritualists. This fact Is no other than that the 
magnetists of France anticipated, by at least half a century, 
tl:e knowledge, since made the world's property by the events 

sought in a bald malEriiiiam for a aofficfeni eiplanation of the [AeDomena of life. 
Bui, as we have already sxn (page »). Dr. EUioison <ame right al last. The " Lon- 
don Spirilual Magaiine " lelli us Ihal when modem Spiritualism was introduced, he 
ivas one of the most smraM of its opponents. He separated himself on the quenion 
from his old friend and colleague in the min^ement of the " Zoist." Dr. Ashbunier r 

that Dr. Eiliotson'a conviction of the truth of Spiritualisln was the means of le-estab- 
hshing Ih^ ibimer frieadship. Spritualism was not with Dr. Eliiotson a convicdon 
barren of lesnlts. It revolutionized the philosophy of a lifetime. He bitterly 
lamented the misdirected efforts he had made, how-over conscienlioosly, in the pro- 
mulgation of materialistic prindples. He became a thoroughly changed ma.,, and 

Hosted by Google 

1 7^" PLANCHETTE. 

at Hydesville; a fact which is proved by the publication of the 
correspondence of the two celebrated French magnetic philoso- 
phers, Messrs. Billot and Deleuze, in two volumes, in 1836. This 
correspondence commenced in 1819; and in it we find M. Billot 
asserting that there are none of these marvellous things that he 
has not witnessed during the last thirty years.* 

This carries his knowledge of spiritual phenomena back as 
far as 1789, the period of the commencement of the French 
Revolution ; into the period, in fact, of Lavater, Jung- Stilling, 
Kerner, Goethe, San Martin, &c. These phenomena, not only 
known to, hut avowed by, those distinguished men, were it now 
appears, equally well known to MM. Billot and Deleuze, » 

t scientific me. 
icts of the In 
itli these phei 

miliar only t< 

1, had not, however, dared 
itiated and the Illuminati ' 
lomena in the seventeenth 
only difference to note is, 
> a few who kept the kno\ 

to reveal them. The 
ivere well acquainted 
and eighteenth cen- 
that then they were 
vledsfe of them to a 

Ttain te 
:atl g 

d h TV 

to the pub- 

But 

isdi y 

atth a 

.P ___»»" ' 

teworlhy in 
s, which is, 
n as a body 

sbautly pp d h dm Sp m s a fact. In 

England kwthwhp yDE liotson and 

""'^'"s <1 y h n hat spiritual 

phenom d m g m n ther words, 

mesme m S n F n D p t, M n d the rest of 
them fought hard against this conviction ; and so much so, that 
M. Morin, the successor of Baron Dupotet, has aonstantly re- 
sisted the invitations of the Spiritualists to witness spiritual 
phenomena. 

Here, however, we have the curious fact of two of the most 
e correspondeiice, we arc laigely in^bted to a paper by 
3 ID his advocacy of Ihe Inilhs of Spmtualism Ihin Mr. 

X this a 

Hosted by Google 

BILLOT AND DBLEUZE. lyg 

celebrated magnetic philosophers of France avowing ifler a 
toncealment of the fact through a Lareer of half a century that 
hev all the t me whil t pro&ecutmg the r n agnetii inqu ries 
had become fullv aware of other and Mill more wonderful phe 
n mena superiei mg and arisu g out of tho e mqmr e which 
thej prosecuted with no such expectation These arose I ke 
ippantians upon them startling ind astonishing them like the 
genius which stood belore Aladdin when he rubbed his lamp 
mean ng onh to polish it ind Hith no idei further from his 
mind than that hi friction was the imocation of a spirit So 
MM B Hot ind Deleuze experimenting only in magnetism 
and expett ng none but stncth natural though ab tru«e results, 
lound tl at they were prts mg on those secret and mysterious 
spr ng and laws (f life which awake the attention ol the 
inhab tants ol the ini ible a d cause them to man fest their 
presen e 

If s still more lemark^ble that these t«o greit magnetists — 
who had pubh hed eaL.h work alter work ind whose names 
were famous in that science — did not work in company, or with 
a knowledge of each other's proceedings. They had each their 
own avowed theory, differing greatly one from the other; and 
these they had propounded and defended with zeal and persist- 
ency, till they had acquired a certain character of antagoni-sm. 
All this time, however, their writings bore to the ordinary reader 
no traces of any thing but the legitimate facts and doctrines of 
magnetism. But, to these great antagonist magnates of science, 
s something in their language which awoke a more 

than ordinary sensation in each other 

, opening a. 

spondence, they began to approach each other, putting forth the 
delicate feelers of an intense curiosity, grounded on a conviction 
that each possessed secret knowledge that he had not yet laid 
open to the light, and that this knowledge was, in reality, the 
property of both. They had each a consciousness that, whilst 
they had been going along separate and even hostile paths, they 
had been treading the very same enchanted ground, and were 
twins in a life which they had hitherto hidden from each other 
and from mankind. 

Hosted by Google 

loo P1.ANCHETTE. 

On the 24th of March, 1829, M. Deleuze wrote to M. Billot, 
complaining that certain magnetizers made their experiments 
out of mere curiosity. To this implied censure Billot replied, 
on the 9th of April, that modern magnetizers had many humilia- 
tions to suffer from the jealousies of their confrires ; but he now 
ahandoned his cause to God, who had done great things for him. 
"Yes!" said he, advancing more boldly, "I have seen, I hare 
understood all that it is permitted to man to see and know!" 
Still going further in his enthusiasm, and stimulated by the 
conviction that Deleuze himself had arrived at discoveries like 
his own, he says, " Permit me to observe that all that you write 
seems to me to betray use arriere peasie (an after thought). 
Your theory is only a solemn ruse to avoid scandalizing the 
eiprils forts who will have nothing of the positive." 

The ice was now broken, and the two great magnetlsts pro- 
ceed to make a ciean breast of it to each other. M. Billot, never- 
theless, is by far the more open, and is ready to throw off the 
cautious disguise that they both had worn for so many years. 
It turns out, in the end, that they have seen nearly all the phe- 
nomena of modern Spiritualism, — apparitions, elevations of the 
person into the air the fact of material substances being brought 
bi 'jpirite obsessions and possessiono by pints and nearly all 
the wonders which the ancient philosophers and the priests of 
different churches ha\e decl-ired as truths and all this, be 
It remembered long before the knocking it Hy desi ille opened 
up the great drama ol renewed spirit intercourse in our time. 
But it will be interesting to trace this remarkable correspond- 
ence a httie turther in its natural course 

On the 27th Februar> 1830 M Billot wr tes to M. Deleuze, 
assuring him that he stated to him the whole truth regarding 
the e\traordinarv phenomena manifested through his clairvoy- 
ante Mademoiselle Mathieu and that he will never deviate 
from this in his communication of h s experiences and he pro- 
ceeds to reveal to him th ngs which, he says he will probably 
regard as reveries, and then adds, "You would not have com- 
bated the theory of spirits for these forty years, if, like me, you 

Hosted by Google 

ISM ANTICIPATED. 

i factE 

ider your eyes and your hands the m: 
compelled me to adopt it." He thcr 
iiig a clairvoyante in a st; 

! of wake- 

ful nes 

Deleuze, on the 15th of May, avows that lie has see 
in that state. "Dr. Chase," he says, "reports having 
same;" and then he makes the candid confession, 
suppressed many things in my works, because it was no 
time to disclose them." Billot, on the i6th of June, 
on certain particulars of somnambulism, which Deleuj 
writings had affected to treat as inexplicable; but he ii 
that he is quite satisfied that they now understand each other on 
these points. After referring to various passages in Deleuze's 

"between 1 

dof SI 

, Mont 

.' In spite of you 

Billot, 

In his reply, on the 24th of September, Deleuze treats of 
natter at great length, and at first professes to think that the 
■nly thing which proves the communication of spirits with us. 

which M 

k w 

131, M. Billot wrote to M. 
he had seen that certain phen 
^o him before he himself had entered 
is nothing of the marvellous of 
during the thirty or forty years 
f you have not made mention 
of these things," he added, "you have lost your reason for 
keeping silence." To this M. Deleuze, on the gth of July, re- 
plied that he had designedly avoided the statement of marvel- 
lous facts, considering it not always necessary to show these to 

k h I 

On the 24th of June 
that in reading his woi 
had been already famili 
on his career, and that there 
which he had not been a witnt 
of his magneti 

Hosted by Google 

the incredulous, as being indeed not the most likely way to con- 
vince them. 

Billot then went on much further with his cautious corre- 
spondent, who, thougti he did not reveal much, was forced to 
confess that his friend had penetrated into his secret, and that 
he knew a great deal. "The time," said M. Biliot, "is come 
when I ought to have no further concealment from you. I 
repeat that I have seen and known all that it is permitted to man 
to see and know. I have been witness of an ecstasy, not such as 
Dr. Bertrand imagines, hut I have seen magnetic clairvoyants 
with stigmata. I have seen obsessions and possessions, which 
have been dissipated by a single word ; I have seen many other 
things, which others have seen also, but which the spirit of this 
age has not permitted them to reveal. I am an esfrit fort ; and 
that which the priests have not been able to do now for many 
years, magnetism has accomplished. The truths of religion 
have been demonstrated by it." 

He then proceeds to relate some of these revelations, which 
very much resemble the teachings of the ancient philosophers, 
mingled with that of Christianity, — doctrines which prepared 
the way for the inculcations of Spiritualism. Superior inteUi- 
gences, he says, presented themselves; presided at stances, and 
manifested themselves by the delicious odors which they diffused 
around them. The ambrosia of the mjthologists, the odor of 
sanctity of the Church were discovered to be realities. Evil 
and unclean spirits also presented themselves; but the clairvoy- 
ants immediately recognized them (July 33, 1831). These and 
other statements, M. Billot says, which he extracted from the 
journals of the stances, could never have seen the light of day, 
had he not deemed it for the interest of the great science to 
confide thera to the bosom of prudent and discreet friendship ; 
and, on the 9th of September, he announces that he is about to 
proceed to more substantial proofs of the apparition of spirits, — 
such as, he says, it will be impossible to deny or to diminish r 
for tiese sfirils were tangible ; you both saw and touched tiem. 
Perhaps, he adds, M. Deleuze may think these things a little 

Hosted by Google 

ONG MAGNETISTS, I03 

too marvellous for belief; but h[s doubt will no longer be par- 
donable when he may touch them himself, and touch them 
again. What he sajs on September 30, must convince the most 
skeptical : there is neither illusion nor vision. He and his co- 
secretaries have seen and felt, and he calls God to witness the 
truth of it. 

On the 6th of November, 1831, Deleuze writes, that he is 
greatly grieved that the state of his health and his great age will 
not permit him to make a journey to see M. Billot, as he most 
anxiously desires ; that the iiitiaartaliiy of t&e soul is proved to 
Aim, and Ike possibility of communicating' viith spirits ; but that, 
personally, he has not seen facts equal to those cited by Billot. 
Nevertheless, persons worthy of all contidence have made the 
like reports to him. "I have this morning," he continues, 
"seen a very distinguished physician, who has related to me 
some of your facts, without naming you, and who gave me many 
others of a like character. Amongst others, his clairi-oyants 
caused material objects to present themselves. I know not what to 
think of all this, though I ara as certain of the sincerity of my 
medical friend, as I am of yours. I cannot conceive how spiritual 
beings are able to carry material objects." 

M. Billot, on the 2sth of June, 1832, wrote that in the doctrine 
of Spiritualism the question is not of opinions but oi facts : these 
are the things which lead to the truth f but neither the mag- 
netizers nor the magnetized can reproduce these at will. 

On another occasion, M. Deleuze remarks that " the clairvoy- 
ant seizes rapports innumerable. He catches them with an 
extreme rapidity : he runs, in a minute, through a series of ideas 
which, under ordinary circumstances, would demand many hours. 
Time seems to disappear before him. He is himself astonished 
at the variety and rapidity of these reflections. He is led to at- 
tribute them to the inspiration of another intelligence. Anon, 
he perceives in himself this new being. He considers himself in 
the clairvoyant sleep a different person from himself awake. 
He speaks of himself in the third person, as some one whom he 
has known, on whom he comments, whom he advises, and in 

Hosted by Google 

104 PLANCHETTE. 

whom he takes more or less interest, as if himself in somnam- 
bulism and himself awake were two different persons." 

M. Deleuze finishes by urging M. Billot to publish his experi- 
ences, but with his habitual caution counsels him to suppress the 
most astounding facts. Biilot heroically determines to victimize 
himself for the truth, to brave the sarcasms of the learned; 
"For," he observes, "to talk of spirits in France, where the 
majority of the magnetists hold fast by their accepted theory, of 
merely material agencies, is to become an object of contemptuous 
pity." 

He was also aware of another difficulty, — the uncertainty of 
securing successful s^ancesj which, whilst the causes affecting 
them are but partially understood, so often fail in the presence 
of the determinedly skeptical. 

Such was the correspondence of the two celebrated magnetists, 
at a time when Spiritualism in its present phase was yet unheard 
of. The great facts of spiritual life thus bursting upon them in 
pursuance of their scientific experiments in magnetism, and in 
opposition to all thetr prejudices, as well as most contrary to 
their expectations, must be regarded as one of the most curious 
and most interesting events in the annals of Spiritualism. Be- 
sides the transport of material objects by invisible agents, the 
spirits which appeared' to them were solid to the touch, as they 
have so otlen made themselves since. Living persons were elt 
vated in the air in their stances. Dr. Schmidt, of Vienna, and Di 
Charpignon, of Orleans, also give some striking cases of deii 
cious odors, or cadaverous effluvia issuing from pure or impur 
spirits which presented themselves : the most startling commt 
nications of facts otherwise unknown were made; and they had 
cases of obsession and possession as well as of successful exor- 

Atter all the confessions of M. Deleuze, he afterwards was 
greatly tempted, like Sir David Brewster, to recover favor with 
his scientific and incredulous contemporaries. Becoming one of 
the chiefs of magnetic initiation, he endeavored to weaken or to 
neutraliie the force of his avowals. A gentleman well instructed 

Hosted by Google 

BILLOT AND DELEUZE, 1S5 

in these mysteries, wrote to him thus : "Yoq have endeavored to 
fortify your readers, in your journal, against the system of the 
magnetists of the North, who admit superhuman powers as 
intermediates in certain magnetic phenomena. I would take 
the liherty of observing to you that this is not at all a system 
with them; but the simple enunciation of a fact, that a great 
number of their somnambulists, raised to a high degree of lucid- 
ity, have asserted that they were illuminated and conducted by a 
spiritual guide." 

The answer of Deleuze is worthy of attention: "The facta 
which aeem to prove the communications of souls separated from 
matter with those who are still united to it, are innumerable, as 
I know. These are existent in all religions, are believed by all 
nations, are recorded in all histories, may be collected in society ; 
and the phenomena of magnetism present a great number of 
them. Yes: a great number of somnambulists have affirmed 
that they hare conversed with spiritual intelligences ; they have 
been inspired and guided by them : and I will tell you why I 
have thought it best not to insist on such facts and proofs of 
spirit communication. It is because I have feared that it might 
excite the imagination, might trouble human reason, and lead to 
dangerous consequences." 

Deleuze did not, when thus challenged, walk backwards out of 
his previous avowals, like some on the other side of the water: 
he was only timid and cautious, not untruthful. The frank 
bravery of M. Billot, in regard to a truth which he knew would 
be unpopular, is deserving of the Tiighest praise. 

The author of these valuable papers has given a number of 
other instances amongst the magnetists who have arrived at the 
same conclusions as MM. Billot and Deleuze, in the same man- 
ner. They have found themselves in contact with unmistakable 
spirits, when they have been expecting merely the operations of 
magnetic laws. Amongst these were M. Bertrand, physician, 
and member of the Royal Society of Sciences. Baron Dupotet 
declared that he had rediscovered in magnetism the spiritologj 
of the ancients, and that he himself believed in the world of 

Hosted by Google 

loo PI.ANCHETTE. 

" Let the savant" he says, " reject the doctrine of spLritual 
appearances as one of the grand errors of the past ages ; but the 
profound inquirer of to-day is compelled to believe this by a seri- 
ous examination offsets." 

Dupotet asserts the truth of all the powers assumed by anti- 
quity and by the church, by all religions, indeed, such as work- 
ingmiracles and healing the sick. "When," he says, " lightning, 
or other powerful agents of nature, produce formidable effects, 
nobody is astonished ; but let an unknown element startle us, let 
this element appear to obey thought, then reason rejects it ; and, 
nevertheless, it is a truth ; for we have seen and felt the effects of 
this terrible power." Terrible, however, only when nature is not 
understood as Spiritualism has revealed it. " If," adds Dupotet, 
"the knowledge of ancient magic is lost, the facts remain on 
■which to reconstruct it." He exclaims, " No more doubt, no 
more uncertainty: magic is rediscovered." 

He then gives a number of phenomena produced of a most 
extraordinary kind, and laughs at those brave champions of sci- 
ence who, far from danger, talk with a loud and firm tone, reason 
on just what they themselves know, and pay no regard to the 
practical knowledge of others ; who, in fact, hug their doubts, as 
we, with more reason, hug our faith. 

These avowals were made in 1840, long before the American 
phenomena or those of Vienna were heard of. But as Spirit- 
uaUsm began to show itself as a distinct faith, the majority of 
magnetists took the alarm. Those who, like Messieurs Bertrand, 
D'Hunin, Puys^gur, and Seguin, had stood on the very threshold 
of Spiritualism, began to step back a step or two, and to shroud 
themselves in mystery, and to shake their heads at the prospect 
of awful consequences in pushing further on such a path. 

"The magnetic forces cannot be explained," said Puysdgur. 
"We have no organs," said M.Morin, " for discovering spiritual 
beings." "The real causes of apparitions, of objects displaced, 
of suspensions, and of a great portion of the marvellous," said 
D'Hunin and Bertrand, " are inscrutable." 

Seguin, who thought that magnetism would revolutionize the 

Hosted by Google 

IT IS ALL CLAIRVOYANCE. igy 

whole of science, starts, and stands still : he finds himself on 
the brink of a precipice. Inaccessible to danger, however, M. 
Seguin would wish to pursue his researches ; but wisdom com- 
mands him to stop on the edge of an abyss, which no man, he 
affirms, can ever pass with impunity. 

What is the precipice which M. Seguin and his fellow-raagne- 
tists see at their feet? Simply, the precipice of Spiritualism. 
The spiritual world opens before them when they desire only to 
deal with this. In the words of Baron Dupotet, " There is an 
agent in space, whence we ourselves, our inspiration, and our 
intelligence proceed) and that agent is the spiritual world which 
surrounds ns." A step further, and the magnelists were aware 
that they must cut the cable which held them to the test of the 
scientific world, and float away into the ocean of spiritual 
causation. They must consent to forfeit the name of philoso- 
phers, and to suffer that of fanatics in the mouths of the ma- 

We find in a late number of the " London Spiritual Magazine," 
a paper, by Mr. R. H. Brown, on the relations of clairvoyance to 
the facts of Spiritualism. We do but condense his admirably 
clear and logical statement in the remarks on the subject, which 
follow to page 195 : — 

" It is all clairvoyance I " Such is the objection made by many 
who have slightly investigated the spiritual phenomena. Thus 
it is that Spiritualism has come to the aid of clairvoyance. 
Before the advent of Spiritualism, clairvoyance was denounced 
as the great "humbug" of the day. Nearly all the scientific 
men of the land shook their heads, and lamented the credulous, 
wonder-ioving ignorance of poor human nature. Now, as the 
world moves, and as the phenomena of Spiritualism come Tip, 
these same wise gentlemen would use what they denounced as 
the "humbug" of yesterday as the truth of to-day; that is, to 
help them to explain these more advanced facts! 

"It is all clairvoyance I " But what is clairvoyance? Its 
phenomena may tie briefly described as follows ; Persons thrown 
into the somnambulic trance by animal magnetism, through the 

Hosted by Google 

I8» PLANCHKTTE. 

agency of an operator, or falling into the same state involunta- 
rily, have been known to see without the aid of the physical or 
external organs of vision, and luithout the assistance of light. 
Books are read as well in the darkness of night as in the full 
glare of noonday. Ohjects and scenes, at great distances, far 
beyond the reach of the external organs of vision, are seen and 
described. The clear sight of the clairvoyant mind not only 
penetrates through the most opaque and dense substances, hut 
also sees the thoughts that bud and blossom in the inmost re- 
cesses of the soul. The past is illuminated, and its most hidden 
passages revealed ; and the future, hidden by an impenetrable 
veil from the normal eye, prophetically presents its yet unrolled 
panorama, and stamps upon the clairvoyant mind the impress 
of its coming form. This is clairvoyance. Now let me ask the 
candid investigator ixkat it is that sees vjithoat the physical eyes, 
and ■aiilkottt the assistance of light f 

It is evident that neither the optic nerves nor the crystalline 
lens are employed by those who read a book, amid the darkness 
of midnight, unaided by a single ray of light. The answer to 
this question is a II- important; for therein, hidden, lies the golden 
key which will unlock all the mysteries of Spiritualism. What 
is normal sight.' What is it that sees when the natural or 
external eye, together with light, are the mediums of perception? 
It is evident that the mere fluid called light cannot see, neither 
can the iens or humors of the eye, nor the optic nerve, nor a 
combination of these ; for light and visual organs are only the 
media by which perception is conveyed to that mysterious 
something which lies hidden within. 

In ordinary or normal sight, three things are employed ; the 
object, the eye, and the light which senes as the connecting link 
or medium of contact between the eye and the object. The eye, 
like a beautiful and delicate camera obscura, paints with fidelity 
tlie picture of the exterior world upon the retina. It is the 
immortal soul which stands behind tie curtain, aad gazes oa the 
shifting fauora m a . 

Let the soul be absent, and sight ceases, though the organ be 

Hosted by Google 

"ANCE ENDS MATERIALISM. I09 

perfect: it becomes but a common camera obscura, the mere 

arrangement of parts for the production of a picture. The 
picture is perfect, but there is no spectator. When a person falls 
into a state of profound abstraction, the eyes, though open, often 
cease to convey any idea of sight to the soul. This is because 
the attention of the spectator behind the curtain is turned in 
another direction: he does not regard the panorama which 
moves along the darkened curtains of the eye. The materialists 
reply to this, that sight is not the result of the attentive percep- 
tion of the soul to the pictorial sensations of the optic nerve. 
They tell us that the soul has no separate and distinct existence 
apart from the body. Light, they claim, is but sensation ; and 
sensation is the result of organiiatjon. When the organization 
ceases, sensation will cease; and when sensation ceases, the 
whole being ceases to be; for organization and sensation, say 
they, compose the whole of man ; there is no soul. 

This method of argument is plausible. But the moment that 
sight is proved to exist -luithoul the use of either light, sensation, 
or any of the physical and material organs of vision, the whole 
pyramid of their logic falls to the ground. 

Thus it is that clairvoyance furnishes the most conclusive 
answer to the materialists, and presents the most satisfactory 
proof of the existence of the soul, separate from the body, re- 
siding within it, generally employing its organs for the reception 
of ideas, but at times acting independently of them, and obtaining 
information without their aid. By clairvoyance, we have thus 
shown the truth of the first proposition upon which Spiritualism 
rests,— the existence of a dual nature in man, a soul as well as a 

The second proposition, which lies at the basis of the new 
philosophy, is the existence of a spiritual body, interfusing and 
permeating the physical, material, or natural body. 

If, in an obscure field, you should pick up the fragments of 
the bones of an arm, the inference that there had once been a 
full and complete organization, of which the fragments before 
you were a part, would be logical and correct. The naturalist 

Hosted by Google 

is enabled, from the fragment of the skeleton of an extinct ante- 
diluvial animal, to reconstruct the whole, and draw the portrait 
of a creature which existed before the flood. 

Let us apply this method to the subject under consideration. 

The clairvojfant mind sees without the aid of light, or the 
assistance of the external or physical eye. 

The soul does not leave the body to place itself in direct 
contact with the object seen ; therefore the mind must have 
some medium of sight. This medium of perception is neither 
light nor the optic nerve. What, then, is itf It is not theodic* 
force simply; for there must be some means iv^ereby the character 
of the impression com/eyed by the odic force is deteriained and 
individualized, — some agency whereby the impression of sight 
is made distinguisnable from that of hearing, or the impression 
made by an abstract idea. It is the peculiar function of an organ 
to individualize and characterize the nature of an impression 
received. 

A simple object — for instance, a tree — makes upon the 
physical body a multitude of impressions ; and it is the various 
organs of the body which individualize these impressions. The 
impression which the size, form, and color of the tree makes is 
individualized and characterized by the organs of sight. The 
impressions which its hardness and impenetrability make are 
individualized and characterized by the sense of touch. If it 
were not for this, the mind would receive a mass of confused 
impressions, without possessing any means to analyze, arrange, 
or distinguish them. As a prism separates and individualizes 
the various colors which compose a ray of sunlight, so the senses 
separate and individualize the combined impressions which an 
object makes upon the physical organism, and present them in 
an orderly and defined spectrum to the mind. 

ns odyls, or liie odyllk or odic fo 

Hosted by Google 

nature's guarantee. ioi 

If the reader has followed with close attention our train of 
reflection, he will be prepared for the conclusion at which we 
liave arrived, to wit : If the mind sees without the aid of light or 
the assistance of the optic nerve, it must have some other medium 
bj' which the simple impression of sight can be individualized, 
and presented separate and distinct from all other impressions; 
or, ill other words, there must be a spiritual organ of sight, 
distinct and separate from the physical organ of sight. 

The remainder of our task is now simple and easy; for if 
there is a spiritual organ of sight, there must also be a spiritual 
organ for the individualization of all the other impressions. In 
nature, each part is adapted to all the other parts, and the exist- 
ence of one part presupposes the existence of all the other parts. 
If there is a spiritual organ of sight, there must also be a 
complete spiritual organization or body, interfused with and 
permeating the physical body. 

Nature, our wise and powerful mother, fore-adapts every 
thing for the conditions amid which she intends it shall live. 
How shall we escape the conclusion, that by adapting the soul 
to another state of being, and endowing it for that purpose with 
the power to exist, act, think, see, and hear, without the aid of 
the body, and separated from it, Nature has given us ker solemn 
and sacred guarantee thai -me shall live Aereafier F To arrive at 
any other conclusion, is to charge Nature with the weakness of 
creating that which is useless, and God of the folly of adapting 
man to a sphere of existence which he does not intend iiim to 
enjoy. 

All the arguments which have ever been made against the 
immortality of the soul are based upon the idea, that the soul 
has no identity of being separate from the body. From wiiich 
premise the conclusion is correctly drawn, that the soul and body, 
being one in substance, must perish together. But clairvoyance 
demonstrates to us that this premise is false, and teaches us that 
the soul and the body are not one in substance; but, on the 
contrary, that the former can think, act, see, and hear without 
the aid of the latter, and independent of all its organs. It is 

Hosted by Google 

thus thnt clairvoyance, with a mighty hand, crushes to powder 
the labored logic of the materialists, and places the belief in our 
immortal nature upon a firm and acientlBc basis. 

But again, clairvoyance, by demonstrating the truthful char- 
acter of the teachings of iiiluilioa, has afforded conclusive proof 
of a higher sphere of existence. God has given man two methods 
of attaining a knowledge of truth, — intuition and reason. The 
one is intended to prove the correctness of the other, thus 
affording man the highest evidence of truth, by giving hira the 
power to arrive at the same results by two distinct and totally 
diverse mental operations. What intuition and reason both 
affirm to be true, no man need doubt. 

It is true that neither is infallible ; and he who expects to find 
any human faculty infallible in its nature, only betrays his own 
ignorance of the laws of mind and matter. Nevertheless, intui- 
tion is a faculty of the soul, just as reliable as that of reason, and 
the teacliings of the one may be reposed upon with as much con- 
fidence as those of the other. Clairvoyance has demonstrated 
beyond all cavii the truthful character of intuition. 

What does intuition say in regard to the immortal nature of 
the soul? 

There is not a clairvoyant in the world, no matter what may 
be his ncrtnal belief, who does not affirm the existence of the 
soul after death has destroyed'the clay-built palace wherein it 
dwells during its brief residence upon earth. 

Many philosophers have puzzled themselves about the theory 
of "innate ideas." And the belief in our immortality has been 
classed as an " innate idea." But the philosophers may learn a 
lesson from clairvoyance. It is no " innate idea," but only the 
divine voice of intuition, which, deep within each man's soul, 
proclaims a life to come. 

We must look to intuition for the true cause of that faith in a 
future beyond the grave, which has prevailed in ali nations and 
all ages. 

Clairvoyance, then, in demonstrating the truthfulness of in- 
tuition, has also demonstrated the immortality of the soul. 

Hosted by Google 

SCIENTIFIC PROOF, 192 

Wc have now arrived at the last of the propositions which is 
to be considered; the proof which clairvoj'ance affords of the 
po-wsr of spirits who have left the earth-form to communicate 
with those who remain behind. 

As a matter of course, this portion of the argument, as well 
as the former, is addressed only to such as believe in the phe- 
nomena of clairvoyance. To those who are jet so far behind the 
great age in which they live as to doubt or sneer at magnetism 
and psychological science, all that has been said or will be said 
by the writer can be of no use. Such persons have yet to learn 
the abcoi that great science which lies at the basis of all others, 
and is the most important of them all. 

In order to make it plain that clairvoyance does afford scien- 
tific and conclusive proof of the power of spirits to communicate 
with us, it will be necessary to refer to some of the familiar and 
ordinary phenomena of animal magnetism- Those phenomena 
may be divided into three classes : — 

1. Profound abstraction, magnetic sleep, and insensibility to 
all external influences. 2. Sympathetic clairvoyance. 3. Inde- 
pendent clairvoyance. 

Attention is more particularly requested to the second class ; 
namely, sympathetic clairvoyance. The subject, while in this 
state, IS almost entirely under the control of the operator. No 
vocalization of the will of the positive operator is required to 
induce obedience in the negative subject. The simple concen- 
tration of the unspoken will is all that is required to direct and 
control the subject. So great is the sympathy induced between 
the two, that the will of the one acts freely upon the muscular 
system of the other, and compels him to rise up, sit down, walk, 
stand, or talk, according to the volition of the operator. The 
nervous systems of the two are united by a constant interchange 
of the odic fluids. The result of this intimate union and sympa- 
thy between the operator and the subject is, that the thoughts 
of the one are known to the other. An idea evolved in the mind 
of the operator, thaugi unspoken, immediately becomes present 
in the mind of the subject. But you will remember that the will 

Hosted by Google 

•94 PLAMCHETTE. 

of the operator also has control of the muscular system of the 
subject. Hence, tio sooner is the idea of the operator present in 
the mind of the subject, should the operator will that idea to be 
spoken by the subject, than the subject is compelled to speak it. 
In other words, the operator, for the expression of his own silent 
thoughts, can use the vocal organs of the subject. 

Example. —A, in the presence of C, magnetizes B, and 
throws him into the symfathetic clairvoyant state. This being 
done, A silently thinks in his own mind these words: "Good- 
evening, friend C." Now, by virtue of the sympathy established 
between the operator A and the subject B, those words are im- 
mediately impressed upon the mind of B, and become present 
there. A now silently wills B to speak those words, which B is 
compelled to do ; and so he turns to C, and says, " Good-evening, 
friend C." Thus you perceive A, instead of using his own organs 
of speech, has employed those of B. In other words, A has been 
speaking to C through a medium. This is an experiment which 
we have repeatedly performed with success. 

It will be observed that' the body or physical organism of the 
operator was not employed in the above experiment. The operator 
used two things only ; first, his will ; second, an odic force, which 
was controlled and directed by his will, and made the agent for 
the transmission of his thoughts and commands to the subject. 

It is evident, therefore, that though the operator be deprived 
of his body, he will not lose the power to control and speak 
through B, provided he yet retain the power of volition and the 
command of the odic force. 

It needs no argument to show that the escape of the soul from 
the body will not deprive the soul of the power of volition. The 
will is an essential attribute of the soul. Without volition, a soul 
would not be a soul ; and nothing short of a total annihilation 
of the soul can destroy its volition. The whole is equal to the 
sum of its parts. If the whole is immortal, all the parts must 
be immortal. Hence, we see that the immortality of the wilt is 
just as certain as the immortality of the soul. 

But will the disembodie^-Volition still retain command of the 

Hosted by Google 

MATERIALISM TESTED. I95 

iidic force? There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual 
bodj. This spiritual body is very rare and refined in its nature, 
but is yet lese refined than the soul enshrined within it. The 
souJ, therefore, needs some agent by which it can put itself in 
connection with that spiritual body. The soul cannot come in 
direct contact with that body: it requires an agent which may 
transmit its commands to the various parts and members of the 

What Nature requires, Nature supplies; and such an agent 
exists. The agent which serves to put the soul in connection 
with its new spiritual organization is an ethereaiization of what 
we term the odic force or vital fluid. It has been termed spirit- 
ual magnetism, in contradistinction to animal magnetism. 
Hence, we have surviving the destruction of the human form the 
only two conditions needed to enable A to control and speak 
through B. 

This, then, is the true philosophy of the method by which 
spirits speak through media. It is syrapathetic clairvoyance in 
both cases. In the one case, the operator is a spirit in the form ; 
in the other case, the operator is a spirit oa^of the form. In both 
cases the subject is the same. In the former case, the spirit in 
the form uses his will, and the odic force evolved from his 
physical organism. In the latter case, the spirit out of the form 
uses his will, and the odic force flowing from his spiritual 
organism. The analogy between the two is perfect, and the 
means used are the same; and this view being true, it antici- 
pates and answers all the objections to the spiritual hypothesis 
which we present in the chapter which follows. 

We have offered some positive physical reasons for our rejec- 
tion of the theories of the physiological materialists of our day. 
Let us give a little space to a metaphysical analysis of their 
arguments. " Moleschott, Vogt, Biichner, Wiener, and others," 
says Professor Reubelt, " maintain the following propositions : 
It is not the mind that thinks ; thoughts are the secretions of the 
phosphoric brain. There is no liberty of the will, but a man is 
ivhat he ea/s; there is no immortality but a resurrection, of the 

Hosted by Google 

body when it is used for the manuring of the fields; there is no 
personal God, who would be as much as a gaseous, vertebrated 
animal ; ,but the universal law of causation is God. There is no 
a priori knowledge. There is no knowledge without sensual im- 
pressions, and no such impressions without a material object. 
The human mind is no spontaneous and productive, but only a 
receptive and digestive, organ." 

Of this coarse materialism, Professor Gustave Franck, of Vi- 
enna, lately said, in his inaugural address, ''Sdentilic criticism 
has first to take in hand the principle of materialism ; and that is, 
all is matter, or there is nothing but matter. But this leading 
idea is not met with in matter. Materialism is thus baaed on an 
immaterial principle, which cannot be proved 'from matter, and 
which thus contradicts itself. If materialism could account for 
every thing else in the universe, it could not account for Its own 
first principle, and thus rests on the belief of a dogma or a prej- 

" If all is matter, thought is likewise a product of matter, an 
accidental conglomeration, as Vogt says, of atoms in the brain. 
Each sphere of thought is, therefore, an accidental phenomenon ; 
each lacks the character of logical necessity. If two men think 
the same thoughts, it must be owing to the accidental sameness 
of the substance of their brains. Universal and necessary truths, 
that is, truths which each and every one has, by necessity, to 
recognize, there cannot be. 

"But if this is so, what right has the materialist to proclaim 
his idea of the world as the only true one, and what interest 
prompts him to attack opposite views? If he is consistent, he 
cannot do any thing else than complain bitterly of fate or acci- 
dent, by which, in the brains of others, atoms conglomerate in a 
manner so vastly different from that in his own. 

"Now what is the position of materialism when tested by 
mathematics P Are its propositions and axioms universal and 
necessarily ti-ue, or are they accidental? To admit the first part 
of this question involves a denial of the very first principle of 
materialism ; and to assume the second is absurd. 

Hosted by Google 

31CTS irSELFi 

197 

" Philoaophicallj neither proved, nor capable of being proved, 
and perfectly' unable to account for the n 
mena, modem materialism has sought : 
natural science. The materialist reasons t 
^ " 'The most minute and thorough eKamination and observa- 
tion of nature has not yet been able to discover a spirit,* and 
there is consequently no spirit.' 

" But with the same right a man may say, I have never seen 
music with my eyes; and there is, therefore, no music. All that 
natural science can do is to confine itself to a relative negation, 
and to say, ' With lie means at my command, I cannot discover a 

t oversteps this limit, and makes i 
6 left its 

nega- 

ie and all 

tion absolute, i 

sphere, and enters another of which i 

which it has, therefore, nothing to say. 

"Materialism is atomistic: it accounts for the univerj 

the phenomena taking place therein, by assuming the _ ^ 

of eternal infinitesimal bodies that are endued with force. But 
as these atoms cannot be perceived by the senses, materialism 
to be consistent, has nothing, can have nothing, to do with them. 
Again the forces of cohesion and expansion, supposed to inhere 
in the atoms, cannot possibly produce any connection conform- 
able to design ; and the materialistic philosopher must, therefore, 
deny the existence of any thing of the kind in organisms. 

" As these atoms are entirely destitute of intelligence, the ori- 
gin of a self-conscious intelligence and the identity of this self- 
consciousness during the whole life, amid the constant changes 
of matter, cannot be accounted for on materialistic principles; 
and the materialist has to doubt his own self- consciousness in 

" But as thinking, so is volition, a purely physical mechanism ; 
and there is, therefore, no freedom of will, but every apparently 
free act is the necessary resuit of a chain of mechanically act- 

Hosted by Google 

I9S PI.ANCHETTE. 

ing causes : there is no moral self- determination. Materialism 
has, coneequently, no morality; but leada consistentlj to the 
doing awaj with all moral and human order. 

" Where there is no room for morality, there is of course none 
for religion. Thus materialism is everywhere a sad negation of 
every thing ideal ; yea, a mere negation itself, a heap of ruins." 
In dismissing the materialism of Moleschott, Biichner, Mauds- 
ley, and the rest, we are happy to quote Professor Tyndall, who, 
though he has shown, like some other men of high scientific cul- 
ture, a lack of courtesy, if not of courage, in dealing with the 
spiritual phenomena, discourses well in regard to the unphilo- 
sophical attitude of the German Sadducees. Speaking of the con- 
nection between physical and mental pi-ocessee, he says, " Were 
our minds and senses so expanded, strengthened, and illumi- 
nated as to enable us to see and feel the very molecules of the 
brain; were we capable of following all their motions, all their 
groupings, all their electric discharges, if such there be; and 
were we intimately acquainted with the corresponding states of 
thought and feeling, — we should be as far as ever from the 
solution of the problem, 'How are these physical processes con- 
nected with the facts of consciousness?' The chasm between 
the two classes of phenomena would still remain intellectually 
impassable. Let the consciousness of love, for example, be 
associated with a right-handed spiral motion of the molecules of 
the brain ; and the consciousness of iate with a left-hand spiral 
motion. We should then know when we love that the motion is 
in one direction, and when we hate that the motion is in the 
other; but the 'why?' would still remain unanswered. In 
affirming that the growth of the body is mechanical, and that 
thought, as exercised by us. has its correlative in the physics of 
the brain, I think the position of the materialist is stated as far 
as that position is a tenable one. I think the materialist will be 
able finally to maintain this position against all attacks ; but I 
do not think, as the human mind is at present constituted, that 
he can pass beyond it. . . . 
"The problem of the connection of body and soul is as insol- 

Hosted by Google 

THE MISSING LINK. igg 

ubie in its modern form as it was in the pre-scientific ages. 
Phosphorus is known to enter into the composition of the human 
brain \ and a courageous writer has exclaimed, in his trenchant 
German, ' Oiae Phosphor keine Gedanke.' * That may or may 
not be the case ; but even if we knew it to be the case, the knowl- 
edge would not lighten our darkness. On both sides of the zone, 
here assigned to the materialist, he is equally helpless. If you 
ask him whence is this 'matter' of which we have been dis- 
coursing, who or what divided it into molecules, who or what 
impressed upon them this necessity of running into organic 
forms, he has no answer. . . . Science, also, is mute in reply to 
these questions." 

Long before these remarks were made, in some comments 
upon the physiological writings of Mr. Bain, Mr. James Marti- 
neau expressed similar ideas, as follows : " If modern cerebral 
researches were ever so successful ; if we could turn the exterior 
of a man's body into a transparent case, and compel powerful 
magnifiers to lay bare to us all that happens in his nerves and 
brain, — what we should see would not be sensation, thought, 
afiection, but some form of movement of other visible change, 
which would equally show itself to any being with observing 
eyesight, however incapable of the corresponding inner emotion. 
Facts thus legible from a position foreign to the human con- 
sciousness arc not mental facts, are not moral facts, and have 
no place in the interior of a science which professes to treat of 
these, and reduce them to their laws." 

"Whatever force," says Mr. Shorter, "there may be in the 
argument from metaphysics for the soul's immortality is unaf- 
fected by Spiritualism, save in the way of confirmation to its 
conclusion. Spiritualism converts what before was but proba- 
bility into certitude ; it supplies the missing link; it makes good 
that embarrassing defect in the evidence which has perplexed so 
many, leading them to question or reject the belief in immortality 

Hosted by Google 

300 Pr.ANCHKTTE. 

as not adequately sustained. Let, then, the metaphysician mar- 
Ehal all his forces, and do what service he may in the cause of 
this great truth : I would only say, in the language of an elder 
Spiritualist, ' Yet show I you a more excellent way.' " 

To many minds, familiar with the facts of Spiritualism, all argu- 
ments in proof of the soul's immortality ivill seem as superfluous 
as it would be to argue to a photographer that pictures can be 
made by the aid of light. To thera the question is no longer an 
open one; for to them the fact of spiritual existence has been 
proved, as far as it can be to our limited human faculties. 
Enough has been given to satisfy them that to give more might 
be to cross some of the purposes of this disciplinary mundane 
existence. And so they wait serenely for the dawn of the great 

Like 3. parchfed acroU, 

befoK our amazed sighi uii 

And, without a scrcBD. 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER IX. 

MISCELLANEOUS PHENOMENA. 

^nigh!' 

ry ELL authenticated accounts of apparitions of the departed 
may be found in Mr. Owen's " Footfalls on the Boundary 
of Another World," and in Mr. Howitfs comprehensive " His- 
tory of the Supernatural." 

" The department of apparitions alone," says Mr. Howitt, " is 
a most roluniinous one, and that on evidence that has resisted 
all efforts to dislodge it. Amongst those of recent times is that 
which warned Lord Lyttleton, in a dream, of the day and hour 
of his death ; the truth of which has been assailed in vain. 
Equally well attested is that which appeared to Dr Scott in 
Broad Street, London, and sent him to discover the title-deeds 
of a gentleman in Somersetshire, who would otherwise have 
lost his estate in a lawsuit with two cousins. That which drove 
Lady Pennhnan and her family out of a house in Lisle at the 
commencement of the French Revolution, is well known and 
authenticated. That which announced to Sir Charles Lee's 
daughter at Waltham in Essex, three miles from Chelmsford 
her death that day at twelve o'clock, and which took place then 
IS related by a bishop of Gloucester. That of Dorothy Dingle 

Hosted by Google 

202 PLANCHETTE, 

related by the Rev. Mr. Ruddle, a clergyman of Launceston in 
Cornwall, occurring in 1665, is well known. Still raore cele- 
brated is that of Lord Tyrone to Lady Bcresford, to warn her 
against a most miserable marriage, and to predict the marriage 
of his (Lord Tyrone's) daughter with Lady Beresford'a son, and 
her own death at the age of forty-seven. In proof of the reality 
of thia ghostli iisit the spirit took hold of her ladyship's wrist, 
which became marked indelibly eo that she always wore a black 
ribbon over it The apparition to Dr. Donne of his living wife, 
when he was in Pans, representing the death of his child, is 
related by Dr Donne himself, that of the father of the Duke 
of BuLkingham warning his «on of his approaching fate, is 
■«ell attested Baxter relates several cases as communicated to 
hira at first hand. But of all cises, ancient and modern, none 
are better authenticated than that of Captain Wheatcroft, who 
fell at the storming of Lucknow in 1857." 

In this last caoe, the apparition presented itself to two differ- 
ent ladies, one of them the wife of Captain Wheatcroft. Nor 
could it be said that the recital of one lady caused the apparition 
of the same figure Co the other. Mrs. Wheatcroft was at the 

time at Cambridge, and Mrs. N in London ; and it was not 

till weeks after the occurrence that either knew what the other 
had seen. Those who would explain the whole on the principle 
of chance coincidence, have a treble event to take into account: 

the apparition to Mrs. N , that to Mrs. Wheatcroft, and the 

actual time of Captain Wheatcroft'a death, each tallying exactly 
with the other. 

Examples of apparitions at the moment of death might be 
multiplied without number. In the case of the Wynyard 
apparition, which took place Oct. 15, 1785, at Sydney, in the 
island of Cape Breton, off Nova Scotia, Sir John Sherbrooke 
and General George Wynyard, then young men, both witnessed 
it at the same moment. " I have heard," said Sherbrooke, " of 
a man being pale as death; but I never saw a living face as- 
sume the appearance of a corpse, except Wynyard's at that 
moment." Both remained silently gazing on the figure as it 

Hosted by Google 

APPARITIONS. 303 

passed slowly through the room, and entered the bed-chamber, 
casting on young Wynjard a look of melancholy affection. 
The oppression of its presence was no sooner removed, than 
Wynyard, grasping his friend's arm, exclaimed, "Great God! 
nv brother I" 

The* instintlj proceeded to the bedroom, searched, but found 
t untenanted The case was made known to their brother- 
ofbcers With the utmost anxiety they waited for letters from 
England At length came 1 letter to Sherbrooke, begging him 
to break to Wjnvard the news of the death of his favorite 
brother who hid expired on the ijth of October, and at the 
Slime hour at which the friends saw the apparition. 
Recently, while in England, Mr. Owen took pains to authen- 
irill not, I think, be questio 

writes, "that this ev 

idence is as direct and satisfactory as can 

well be, short of a r 

ecord left in writ 

ing by one or other of the 

seers, — which it doi 

;s not appear is 

to be found. A brother- 

officer, the first who 

entered the roon 

1 after the apparition had 

been seen testifies in 

writing t th m 

■ fcts. Sir John Sher- 

brother ffi 

sed by, repeats to a 
t it w«j the spirit of 

his frie 

m in the barracks at 

Sydney 

onvinced of the fact 

Co'o ft w ewels in the Tower, 

London m N Queries" of Sept. 8, 

'^>^' ^" -itnessed by himself 

and fam O m hat ancient fortress, 

famous m m ecutions; and adds, 

that, soon afterwards, a sentinel on duty before the door of the 
jewel-office was so frightened by an apparition, that he died. 

The Cambridge Association for Spiritual Inquiry, familiarly 
called the Ghost Club, have stated that their carefully conducted 
researches on the subject of apparitions have led them to re- 
gard such appearances as a settled fact. A member of this 
-mcd Mr. Owen that he had collected two tliou- 

appar 

by Google 

^nborg," says 

Dr. Garth Wilkinson, in 
truly, ''The lowest experience of all time is rife in spiritual 
intercourse already; man believes it in his fears and hopes, 
even when his education is against it; almost every family has 
its legends ; and nothing but the wanting courage to divulge 
them keeps back this supernatural ism from forming a library 
of itself" This was also the candid confession of Kant. 

In "Recollections, Political, &c., of the Last Half Century," 
by the Rev. J. Richardson (London, 1856), there is a circum- 
stantial account of the appearance of Mr. John Palmer (an actor, 
who died suddenly on the stage at Liverpool on the 2d of August, 
1798), on the night of his death, to a person in London, named 
Tucker The fia of his absence from London wa.^ known to 
Tucker but he was not aware about his arrangement for his 
return On the night just mentioned, Tucker had retired at an 
earlier hour th in usual but the company in the drawing-room 
was numerous, and the sound of their merrimept prevented him 
from falling asleep. He was in a state of morbid drowsiness 
produced by weariness, but continually interrupted by noise. 
As he described the scene, he was sitting half upright in his 
bed, when he saw the figure of a man coming from the passage 
which led from the door of the house to the hall. The figure 
paused in its transit for a moiner - 

looked him full in the face Th 
the inhabitant of the wo Id f 
outline of the figure, wh h p 
up the staircase. Tucke f 1 
nized in the fig h g 

d, h 

g h 

t of John P 
Liverpool, 
availed hi 

that he had see M P p 

pressed a hope h p 

health. The lady stared at hin 

the foot of th 

e couch, and 

th'n 

P 

tral, or like 

th 

itenance or 

and 

PP 

ently went 

wl t 

he rccog- 

d d 

S 

ral appear- 

d 1 d 

irned from 

th 1 

1 

1, as usual. 

N t 

ng, in the 

h f rm 

d Mrs. Vernon 

1 eh th 

h 

11. and ex- 

p 1 h d 

^ 

:d with his 

redulously 

lid he must 

Jt of his se 

nse 

s, as no Mr. 

Hosted by Google 

APPARITIONS AND HAUNTINGS. 30^ 

Palmer had joined the festivities in the drawing-room. His 
delusion, if delusion it were, was made a source of mirth to 
the people who called in the course of the day. He, however, 
persisted in his assertion of having seen Mr. Palmer ; and on the 
arrival of the post from Liverpool on the day after he had first 
made it, laughter was turned into mourning, and most of the 
guests were inclined to think there was more in it than they 

"it should be added, that this 'Tucker' was a sort of hall- 
porter in Mrs. Vernon's house, and slept on a couch in the hall ; 
and ' those who entered the house, and were about to go up 
stairs, had to pass by the aforesaid couch.' 

" It is very curious, also, that Palmer dropped down ^ead on the 
stage, while performing the part of the ' Stranger" in Kotzebue's 
well-known play of that name, and immediately after uttering 
these memorable words, ' There is another and a better -world '.• 
A benefit was got up in Liverpool for his children, which pro- 
duced £400." 

The positive statements of hauntlngs are so numerous, that, 
to deny them, or set them down as delusion, requires a skep- 
ticism akin to credulity. It turns out, on a thorough re- 
examination by Mr. Shorter of the celebrated " Cock-Lane 
ghost-story," for his belief in which Dr. Johnson has been so 
repeatedly ridiculed, that the phenomena of that case were in 
accordance with laws now familiar. The girl, a child of thir- 
teen, was simply a medium. To learn how the raps were made, 
she was tried in all sorts of ways, and with tied-up hands and 
feet, from the supposition that she made the noises herself; but 
in vain. The noises went on, and that in different rooms, and 
even different houses. Floors and wainscots were pulled up; 
but no trick was discovered, though the search was made under 
the supervision of Dr. Johnson, Bishop Douglas, James Penn, 
and Stephen Aldrich. "That such a deception," says Howitt, 
"should be carried on by a family on which it only brought 
persecution, the pillory, and ruin, was loo absurd for the 
belief of any except the so-called incredulous." 

Hosted by Google 

2o6 

PI.ANCHE- 

Beiimont in his Cleanings m Ant qu ties publ led in 
17*4 mentions the ro//(«^ phenomena and sijh There a 
house in London n whith for three ^ears last past haie been 
heard and atiU are heard almost contiiiuil knock ngs igainst 
the wainscot overhead and =oraetime= a noTse 1 ke tell ng 
money and ot men sawing to the great disturbance of the 
inhabitants and often lnjhts haie bicn seen like flashes of 
lightning and the person who rents this house has told me 
that when she has remo\ed eif,hteen miles from London 
the knockingb have followed her 

Glanvdle s'ns that there were knockings ind that a hand 
was seen at old Cast s House in Little Burton in 1677 The 
knockingo were on 1 btd 5 head and the hand was seen holding 
a hammer, which made the strokes Our times d not have the 
exclusive experience even of kno k t. B h p Heber says 
that the evidences of such things wh 1 Gl n lie gives, are 
more easily ridiculed than dispro d 

The cases on record of direct sp t v. t g ^\ -a xio medium 
was near enough to co-operate i > k » w j, are very 

numerous.* A work by Baron L D G Id t bbd, a Swedish 
nobleman, resident in Paris entitled ■• La R^aht^ des Esprits," 
■»nd published a fewye-irs since contains numerous _/a£-siB<i/ej 
of writings mide on paper by ^ome invisible and intelligent 
force The nimei of ten distinguished persons who witnessed 
the phenomenon are gnen The Baron is a gentleman well 
know n to personal friends of our o» n , and his character gives 
all possible weight to his testiraonv 

"The absurd feir of demons, he says, "has incapacitated 
our orthodox priests and theologians Irom combating the mate- 
rialists and the Sadducees with effectual experimental weapons. 
This demonophobta has unfortunately grown to be a veritable 
dtmonolairs The priests having fear ot demons, and, conse- 
quentl3, not wishing to occupj themselves with these spiritual 

at some wr^ cunous expetimenls of thjs sort. The late Chailes Colchesler was the 

Hosted by Google 

SURPRISING OCCDRRENCES. 307 

phenomena, have unwittingly formed a pact with the devil, by 
virtue of which the reign of incredulity and materiahsra, that 
-eign of the demon far excellence, continues to subsist in all its 
dclal. . . . 

" The two fundamental ideas of Spiritualism — namely, that of 
the immortality of the soul, and that of the reality of the invisi- 
ble world which reveals and manifests itself in different ways in 
our terrestrial world— are but the necessary corollary of the 
idea of God or the Absolute, and vice-vend. We may even 
assume that the idea of the immortality of the soul, and of its 
relations to the supernatural world, is more intimate and primi- 
tive Chan that of God, Creator and Supreme Author of the 

" The Bible does not formally teach the idea of the immor- 
tality of the soul, graven by the Eternal himself on the heart of 
man, but it supposes it everywhere. (Job six. 26, 27 ; Num. 
xxiii. 10; Isa. xxvi. 19.) , . . The practice of necromancy, 
according to Samuel (1 Sam. xxviii. 3-25), and according to 
Deuteronomy (xiii. and xviii.), necessarily presupposes the doc- 
trine ofthe immortality of the soul; and so with the visions and 
apparitions, of which the Bible is full." 

Dr. Henry More gives a remarkable story touching the stirs 
made by a demon in the family of one Gilbert Campbel, by 
profession a weaver, in the old parish of Glenluce in Galloway, 
Scotland, in November, 1654. Among other phenomena in this 
case, we read that " presently there appeared a naked hand and 
arm from the elbow down, beating upon the floor till the house 
did shake again." 

Certain surprising occurrences, which took place in 1S06 at 
Slawensick Castle, Silesia, are thoroughly well authenticated. 
Councillor Hahn, in the service of Prince Hohenlohe, had gone 
to Slawensick, and with an old friend, a military officer named 
Kern, had taken up his abode in the castle. " Hahn, during his 
collegiate life, had been much given to philosophy ; had listened 
. Fichfe, and earnestly studied the writings of Kant. The 

result of his reflections, ; 

1 pure 

Hosted by Google 

30S PLANCH ETTE. 

He had been reading nioud to hia friends tlie works of Schiller, 
when the reading was interrupted hy a small shower of litni 
which fell around them : this was followed by larger pieces ; bu 
they searched in vain to discover any part of the walls or ceiling 
from which it could have fallen. The nest evening, instead o- 
the lime falhtig, as before, it was thrown, and several pieces 
struck Hahn ; at tlie same time they heard many blows, some- 
times below and sometimes over their heads, like the sound of 
distant guns. On the following evening, a noise was added, 
which resembled the faint and distant beating of a drum. On 
going to bed, with a light burning, they heard what seemed like 
a person walking about the room with slippers on, and a stick, 
with which he struck the floor as he moved step by step. The 
friends continued to laugh and jest at the oddness of these 
circumstances, till they fell asleep; neither being in the least 
inclined to attribute them to any supernatural cause. "But, on 
the following evening, the affair became more inexplicable : 
various articles in the room were thrown about, — knives, forks, 
brushes, cape, slippers, padlocks, funnel, snufters, soap, — every 
thing, in short, that was movable; whilst lights darted from 
corner to comer, and every thingwae in confusion. At the same 
time the lime fell, and the blows continued. Upon this, the two 
friends called up the servant, Knittel, the castle-watch, and 
whoever else was at hand, to be witnesses of these mysterious 
operations. Frequently, before their eyes, the knives and snuf- 
fers rose from the table and fell, after Kome minutes, to the 
ground." So constant and varied were the annoyances, that 
they resolved on removing to the rooms above. But this did 
not mend the matter; " the thumping continued as before; and 
not only so, but articles flew about the room which they were 
quite sure they had left below." Kern saw a figure in the mirror 
interposing, apparently, between the glass and himself; the eyes 
of the figure moving, and looking into his. 

It is unnecessary to recount the means employed to trace out 
these mysteries. Hahn and Kern, assisted by two Bavarian 
otEcers, — Captain Cornet and Lieutenant Magerle, and all the 

Hosted by Google 

STONE-THROWING PHENOMENA. 

aid they could assemble, — were wholly unsuccessful in obtain- 
ing the slightest clew. And Hahn, from who've narratue this 
account is taken, declares, "I have described these events 
exactly as I saw them ; from beginning to end, I observed them 
with the most entire self-possession. I had no lear, nor the 
slightest tendency to it; yet the whole thmg remains to me 
perfectly inexplicable." 

Those who have read Mrs. Poole's "Englishwoman in Egypt," 
will recollect her curious account of the hauntings and appari- 
tions in the house of her brother, Mr. Lane, at Cairo. The 
account is fully confirmed by Mr. Bayle St. John. He relates 
having seen a ghostly Sheik enter the house at noon, where he 
himself lived ; having had the doors immediately closed, and the 
visitor actively hunted up, but to no purpose. He relates also, 
that, in Alexandria, cases of throwing of stones from the roofs 

perpetrators. 

M. Joseph Bizouard, in a work published in Paris, under the 
title of "Des Rapports de I' Homme avec le D^mon," relates 
some details, given by Gorres, of strange events at Munchshofe, 
situated a league from Voitsberg, and three leagues from Gratz. 
They occurred In the house of a Herr Obergemelner, and were 
observed and recorded by Dr. J. H. Aschauer, bis father-in-law, 
a very learned physician and professor of mathematics at Gratz. 
They commenced in, October, 1818, by the flinging of stones 
against the windows on the ground-floor, in the afternoon and 
evening. The noise generally ceased when they went to bed. 
As nobody could discover the cause, towards the end of the 
month, Obergemeiner, without saying any thing to his family, 
engaged about thirty-six of the peasants of the environs, and 
placed them In cordon ali round the house well armed, and with 
orders to allow no one to go in or out of the house. He then 
took into the house with him Koppbauer and some others, 
assembled all his people to see that none were missing, and 
thoroughly examined every apartment, from the attics to the 
cellar. It was about half-past four o'clock in the afternoon. 

Hosted by Google 

ZIO PLANCHETTE, 

The peasants formed their circle, and saw that no one wa: 
concealed within it, nor was able to pop in or out; notwithstand- 
ing, the throwing of stones commenced against the windows of 
the kitchen. Koppbauer, placed at one of them, endeavored to 
ascertain their direction. Whilst Obergemciner was in the 
kitchen witli the others, a great stone was launched against the 
window where he stood, and broke many of the panes. It was 
previously thouglitthat the stones were thrown from the interior; 
and it was in effect from that direction that they now continued 
to cotne till half-past six in the evening, when the whole ceased. 
Every place in the house where a man could possibly conceal 
himself was visited; and the guard without continued its posi- 

At eight o'clock in the morning, the stone-throwing re-com- 
menced before more than siity persons; and they were convinced 
that, issuing from beneath the benches of the kitchen, they 
struck the windows in a manner inexplicable. Pieces of lime- 
stone, weighing from a quarter of a pound to five pounds, were 
seen flying in all directions against the windows; and imme- 
diately afterwards all the utensils, spoons, pots, plates, full and 
empty, were launched from the midst of the -spectators against 
the windows and the doors with a velocity inconceivable. Some 
broke the glass, some remained sticking in the broken panes ; 
and others, only appearing to touch the glass, fell into the inte- 
rior. The spectators, when struck by the stones, felt only a slight 
blow. Whilst utensils were being carried from the kitchen, they 
were forced from the hands of those who bore them, or they 
were knocked over on the table on which they were placed. 
The crucifix alone was respected ; the lights burning before it 
were forcibly flung down. At the end of two hours, all the glass 
in the kitchen and all the fragile objects were broken, even 
those which they had carried away. A plate full of salad carried 
up to the first floor, in the act of being carried down again, by 
a servant, was snatched from her hands and flung into the ves- 
tibule. The disorder ceased at eleven o'clock. We omit many 
particulars which took place at this time. 

Hosted by Google 

DOINGS. 2 I I 

M. Aschauer, having heard this strange news from hie soii-in- 
.aw, desired to know when any Uiing further took place ; and, 
being sent for, as he entered he saw his daughter, with the man 
named Koppbauer, picking up the fragments of a pot, which had 
been thrown on the floor just as he entered. Then, all at once, 
a great ladie was launched from the shelf on which it lay, and, 
with incredible velocity, against the head of Koppbauer, who, 
instead of a severe contusion, only perceived a very light touch. 
M. Aschauer saw nothing further till the next day; when, issu- 
ing from the kitchen on account of the smoke, some stones were 
thrown against the windows. This physician examined the 
lightning-conductor, and every thing else, with an electrometer; 
but neither he nor Obergemeiner, who had offered a reward of a 
thousand francs to any one who could discover the cause, couid 
detect any thing. On the second day, about four o'clock in the 
afternoon, Aschauer, troubled at these strange occurrences, was 
standing at the end of the kitchen, having opposite to him a 
shelf on which stood a large metal soup-tureen, when he saw the 
tureen suddenly dart towards him in a nearly horizontal position, 
and with surprising velocity, and pass so near his head that the 
wind of it raised hie hair; and the tureen then fell to the earth 
with a great noise. 

Curiosity caused people to hasten from all parts, who were 
struck dumb with astonishment at these phenomena, and others 
of a similar nature. Towards five o'clock came a stranger, who 
pretended that a man must be concealed in the chimney. This 
ridiculous explanation excited the anger of M. Aschauer ; and lie 
led him towards the door, whence nothing could be seen from 
the chimney, and, pointing to a copper dish upon a shelf, he 
said, "What would you say, monsieur, if that dish should, 
without any one touching it, be thrown to the other side of the 
kitchen ?" Scarcely were the words uttered, when the dish, as 
if it had heard them, flew across. The stranger stood con- 
founded. 

We omit many particulars, because they are of the same kind. 
A pail of water, weighing fifteen pounds, which had been set on 

Hosted by Google 

212 PLANCHETTE. 

the floor, fell from the ceiUng without any one being able to 
conceive how it got there ; for there was nothing to hang it upon. 
As they were seated round the fire, a pot, which none of them 
could touch, was suddenly turned over, and emptied itself little 
by little, contrary to the law of euch a fall. Then came egg- 
shells flying from every corner, nobody being there to throw 
them, and no one being able to imagine whence they came. 
After the departure of M. Aschauer, tiie wheels of a mill, about 
six minutes' walk from the house, stood still from time to time ; 
the miller was thrown out of hia bed, the bed turned over, the 
lights were extinguished, and various objects were thrown to 
the ground. 

After this, nothing more is said to have happened; at all 
events, M. Obergemeiner, who did not love to speak of these 
things, made no report of any. They made a great sensation, 
however, amongst the government officials ; and the district of 
Oher-Greiflenneck sent its report to the circle of Gratz. " Al- 
though it is said that we exist no longer in the times of 
ignorance, when phenomena which could not be comprehended 
were attributed to demons, &c., it is remarkable that, at an 
epoch in which civilization and the progress of the natural 
sciences have put them to flight, we yet see extraordinary things 
which the savans cannot explain." The report accords with the 
recital of M. Aschauer, and a mention is made in it of an inquiry 
by order of the magistrates, conducted by M. Gayer, with his 
electric apparatus; and the report concludes by recommending 
a further inquiry, "as a natural solution can alone combat the 
hypocrisy of some and the superstition of others." 

We do not ask the reader to imagine the conclusion to which 
the government came on this matter, for he never could divine 
it. It was " that a man concealed in the tunnel of the chimney 
was probably the cause"! These professors of natural science 
were, however, charged to proceed to a further inquiry ; but they 
considered it beneath their dignity, and refused. Afterwards an 
agent of the police visited the house ; and Gorres says, that, 
amongst the various causes that he imagined, the most amusing 

Hosted by Google 

BBOWNSONE HEPI.Y TO BABINKT, 213 

was that M. Aechauer had only astonished the people by a series 
of scientific tricks. G5rres, however, stating that hie account is 
1 te all found n a lette of M. Aschauer to a friend, dated Jan. 
82 and n deta Is coramnnicated to himself, at a later 
p od a u e that M. Aschauer was not only a man of the 

). ofo n 1 t en e but of the profoundest regard to truth, and 

ho f a ed no d cule in slating it, however strange it 
n g] t be On th o asion, he asserted that no master of 

1 _ d ma n as apable of producing the things which he saw. 
Neither was the force employed a mere scientific or physical 
force : it was a force free and reasoning ; and these effects were 
the sport of a spirit or spirits, immaterial or invisible. 

M. Babinet, in an essay in the " Revue des Deux Mondes," 
reasons, like Faraday, that these, and similar phenomena at- 
tested by Spiritualists, are impossible, because they contradict 
the law of gravitation. Dr. Brownson urges in reply, that when 
he sees a fact of this kind, he does not pretend that it is in 
accordance with the law of gravitation, but the essence of the 
fact— that which constitutes its marvel lousness — is precisely 
that it is not. " Now, to deny the fact for that reason," he says, 
" is to say that the law of gravitation cannot be overcome or 
suspended, and precisely to beg the question. How," he asks, 
" does M. Babinet know that there are not invisible powers who 
can overcome this force as easily as we ourselves can do? The 
fact of the rising of a table, or a man to the celHng, is one that 
is easily verified by the senses ; and, if attested by witnesses of 
ordinary capacity and credibility, must be admitted. That it is 
contrary to the law of gravitation, proves not that it is impossi- 
ble, but that it is possible only preternatu rally." In the words 
of Mr. Mill, there must be an " adequate counteracting cause." 

" Scientific men," says Mr. Shorter, " should learn from expe- 
rience to be cautious in affirming the limit of the possible. The 
more completely they prove that the phenomena in question are 
not due to, and ai-e impossible by, any physical agency, the 
more completely do they establish the necessary spiritual causa- 
tion of such phenomena. Those men of science who have 

Hosted by Google 

314 PLANCHETTE. 

erected theories about the inipossibic, have not unfrequently 
built a monument to their own folly and shame. The circula- 
tion of the blood, the prevention of smal]-pox hy vaccinatEon, 
the fall of meteoroiites, the lighting of towns by gas, convey- 
ance by steam, painless surgery, clairvoyance, — these, and 
many other things now familiar to us, have, each in its turn, 
been pronounced impossible by high authorities. One age 
laughs at an idea; the next adopts it. The impossible of yester- 
day is the familiar fact of to-day. In an age when steam is our 
conductor, and electricity our messenger, and the sun our por- 
trait-painter; when the every-daj facts of life would have been 
a fairy tale a hundred years ago; who, especially with the 
knowledge that spiritual forces are working around and within 
us, will have the presumption to affirm that it is impossible for 
spiritual beings so to operate upon ourselves and surrounding 
objects as to make their presence evident even to our senses? 
Lord Bacon says, 'We have set it down as a law to ourselves to 
examme things to the bottom, and not to receive upon credit or 
reject upon improbabilities, until there hath passed a due exam- 

ting was intuitively a Spiritualist. 

The late Thomas Starr Kin„ 
"What more arrogant and presumptuous folly can there be," he 
says, "than that which a person exhibits, who maites &is e*?te- 
n'ence of nature the measure of the ^assidilities of nature? Yet 
this is what all of us do who object to the doctrine of the soul's 
immortality, that we cannot conceive io7« it is released from its 
fleshy bondage, nor what are the methods of its disembodied 
life. If we should hear any man soberly alHrm that he did not 
believe that any process could go on in this universe, or any 
thing be true, which baffled his powers of comprehension, we 
should probably think that the application to him of Paul's 
apostrophe to the Corinthian doubter involved no dangerous lack 
of charity. It has pleased God to endow us with five senses, 
through which we hold conversation with the created realm. 
We do not know that f5ve other media of communication might 
not be opened that would make the physical universe seem as 

Hosted by Google 

THOMAS STABR KING'S .REMARKS. 215 

different and as much higher than it now does, as if we were 
transported into another sphere. Who has told us that there 
cannot be anj' other avenues between the soul and matter than 
the touch, the taste, the ear, and the eyef Who has told us that 
all which exi'sis right about lis is reported by the limited appara- 
tus furnished to our nerves? . . . 

"It has been truly said by another, that we should 'easily 
believe in a life to come, if this present life were the wonderful 
thing to us which it ought to be.' Here is the point. Not that 
there are startling difficulties in the way of conceiving a future 
existence, but that we lose the fine sense and the nice relish of 
the mystery and miracle that invest us here. There are a thou- 
sand scientific facts that would seem as' marveilous to a culti- 
vated mind, if they had not been demonstrated and published 
in veracious treatises, as the continued existence of the body. 
What would Plato have said, could he have seen a man, without 
using any flame in the experiment, cause fire to burst out of a 
lump of ice? Suppose that Newton had never heard of a load- 
stone, what would he have thought, could he have seen an iron 
weight, in defiance of the law of gravitation which he had just 
demonstrated, spring from the floor to the wall? Before seeing 
the fact for the first time, would not the proposition have 
seemed as surprising to him, and as difScult to be believed, as 
the return of a dead man to life before his eyes, or the appear- 
ance of a spirit? And after he had seen it, how could he explain 
it? How can any man explain the phenomenon now? 

"Ib the statement that there is in enduring spirit within us, 
entirely distinct from the corporeal organization, and which the 
cesoation of the heart liberate" to a higher mode ol existence, 
in> more st'irthng than the statement that a drop ol water, 
which may tremble and gluten on the tip of the finger, seem 
mglj the most feeble thing in nature, from whiih the tiniest 
flnwer gentlj nurses itn strength while it hings upon its leaf, 
whiu.h a sunbeam may dissipate, contains mthm its tmj globe 
electric energ> enough to charge eight hundred thousand Ley- 
den jars, energj enough to split a cathedral as though it were a 

Hosted by Google 

toy? And so that, of every cup of water we drink, each atom is 
a thunder storm ? 

"Is the idea of spiritual communication and intercourse, by 
methods far transcending our present powers of sight, speech, 
and hearing, beset with more intrinsic difficulties than the idea 
of conversing by a wire with a man in St. Louis, as quickly as 
with a man by your side, or of making a thought girdle the 
globe in a twinkling? And when we say that the spiritual world 
may he all around us, though our senses take no impression of 
it, what is there to embarrass the intellect in accepting it, when 
we know that, within the vesture of the air which we cannot 
grasp, there is the realm of light, the immense ocean of elec- 
tricity, and the constant currents of magnetism, all of them 
playing the most wonderful parts in the economy of the world, 
each of them far more powerful than the ocean, the earth, and 

the rocks, — neither 

While the existence of two of then 

mprehensible by our i 

is not apprehensible by any 

" Sweep away the illusion of Time," says Carlyle, " compress 
the threescore years into three minutes," and what are we our- 
selves but ghosts? "Are we not j/iViVs, that are shaped into a 
body, into an appearance? This is no metaphor: it is a simple 
scientific fact. We start out of Nothingness, take figure, and 
are Apparitions : round us, as round the veriest spectre, is Eter- 
nity; and to Eternity minutes are as years and leons. . . . 

" O Heaven 1 it is mysterious, it is awful to consider that we 
not only carry, each a future Ghost within him, but are, in very 
deed, Ghosts 1 These Limbs, whence had we them ; this stormy 
Force; this life-blood with its burning Passion? They are 
dust and shadow; a Shadow-system gathered round our Mk; 
wherein, through some moments or years, the Divine Essenci 
is to be revealed in the Flesh. That warrior on his strong war- 
horse, fire flashes through his eyes; force dwells in his arm 
and heart: but warrior and war-horse are a vision ; a revealed 
Force, nothing more. Stately they tread the earth, as if it were 
a firm substance; fool! the Earth is but a tilra ■ it cracks in 

Hosted by Google 

CARLYLE ON SPIRITS. 217 

twain, and wnrrior and war-horse sink beyond plummet's sound- 
ing. Plummet's? Fantasy herself will not follow them. A 
little while ago they were not; a little while and they are not, 
their very a.sheE are not, 

" So it has been from the beginning; eo will it be to the end. 
Generation after generation takes to itself the Form of a Body; 
and forth issuing from Cimmerian Night, on Heaven's mission 
APPEARS. What Force and Fire is in each he expends; one 
grinding in the mill of Industry; one, hunter-like, climbing the 
.,.^.1.. SI u„;™i,.. -c o„.- _.jr_. j-Lgj ji, pieces 

nd then the 

Thus, like 
■tillerj, does 
long-drawn, 
Deep. . . . 

[hardest ada- 
Rear of the 

s not; only 
1 to God." 

world and fettered to his clog of flesh. The great facts of 
Spiritualism reveal man to us as he is when he emerges into " a 
purer ether, a diviner air," with his individualism unimpaired, 
and all that he has gained of good, through his affections and 
his understanding in this life, left whole as the vantage-ground 
of future progress. 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER X. 

THEORIES IN REGARD TO THE PHENOMENA. 

lo he the prevalent fiiiih of Christendom; and parallel wiili this decline has been the 
denial of all revelation and the apreadofathei51ical philosophy, God, hovrever, has not 

dences of a spiritual world have been mulliludinous." — 7-fe«ai Skorttr. 

TTTE have seen what the first theories wet^ in explanation of 
** the phenomena of 1848. It was soon found that these 
theoriefi were insufficient. Liise Faraday's notion of an uncon- 
scious exercise of muscular force, thej did not cover the new 
facts as they came up and multiplied. 

So long as the manifestations were confined to raps and table- 
tippings, it was surmised that they might proceed in some 
mysterious way from animal electricity, put in operation by the 
unconscious will of the medium or of other persons present. 

The late Dr. E. C. Rogers, a gentleman personally well known 
to us at the time the Rochester phenomena hegan to excite pub- 
he attention, was the author of a work bearing the following 
title; "Philosophy of Mysterious Agents, Human and Mundane, 
or the Dynamic Laws and Relations of Man." His theory is 
that the whole body of phenomena, physical and mental, are 
referable to cerebral or mental action, through the medium of 
" a physical force associated with the human organism ; and, 
under peculiar conditions, this physical force is made to emanate 
from that organism with a most terrible energy, and without 
any necessary conjunction with either spiritual or psychological 
agency." This agent may be the od, or odic force, of Rcichen- 
bach. It is not under the general control of the will, but is the 

Hosted by Google 

, ROGEHs's THEORY. 

319 

mere agent of the unconscious organs, playing its part automat- 
ically, as tlie brain is affected. 

The material agent is thus put in operation by the peculiar 
changes that take place in the cerebral organs. That every 
thought, emotion, or passion is accompanied with a change of 
the motion of the brain, is assumed as one of the undisputed 
facts in physiology. If is the prerogative of every man's mind 
or spirit to control the motions, and, consequently, the changes 
of his brain, within prescribed limits. But, in certain condi- 
tions of the latter, such as mesmeric trance, catalepsy, sleep, cere- 
bra! inflammation, passiveness of mind and will, and many 
others, the man's own personality is suspended in its prerogative 
action. The predominant influence upon it, then, becomes 
material or sensuous; and here, according to Dr. Rogers, the 
reflex action of another's brain will readily take effect. Anoth- 
er's wish or request will act like a law ; and a fictitious person- 
ality may be induced in the brain, and represented independently 
of the conscious personality, reason, and will of the individual. 
It therefore follows that the specific action of one person's 
brain may be unconsciously propag d d 

there be exactly represented in a T 

may propagate itself to the auto p 

axis, and thus the involuntary p m p o- 

duce the rappings, i 

In view of the many evidences 
fion, Dr. Rogers regards it as p 
influence of disembodied spirits th 
sphere of the human organizatio 
He then proceeds to show how t 
influenced by drugs, so as to alte 
that, inasmuch as the agent, the su 
the new condition, are purely p 
physical also. It follows, therefore 
ecstasy, which are pathematically 
by the Influence of drugs upon the { 

Hosted by Google 

*20 PLANCHETTK. 

the material conditions of that organism, and do not require the 
spintuai hypothesis for their explanation. 

Br. Rogers's conclusion k, that the whole body of phenomena 
of Spiritualism, induding the past and the present, "offer to 
the philosopher a new view of man and his relations to the 
sphere m which he lives, by neglecting which the deepest mys- 
teries of the human be'ng are left unsolved." 

Th s ngen ous wr te died hefore the more advanced phenom- 
ena eco ded n th olume were made known to the world. 
Had he 1 ved to become acquainted with them, he might have 
lound that whate e here may be of truth in his theory, is not 
neons stent w th 1 e t of the agency and appearance of dis- 
embod ed p t 

Professor A. Mahan, Mr. Charles Bray, Dr. Samson, of Co- 
lumbia College, and others who have adopted the apneumatic or 
no-Sfir,/ view in regard to the phenomena, have done little more 
than either to put in new and expanded form the arguments of 
Dr. Rogers, or to substitute for his notion of an odic force the 
simple hypothesis of nervous action. None of these opponents 
of the spiritual theory deny the facts. Professor Mahan says 
" We shall admit the facts claimed by Spiritualists. We admit the 
facts for the all-adequate reason that, after careful inquiry, we 
have been led to conclude that they are real. We tk!»k that no 
candid inquirer -who carefully investigates can came to any other 

The facts being admitted, Professor Mahan finds in Reichen- 
bach's odic force the mysterious agent by which they are mani- 
fested. But it is somewhat remarkable that Reichenbach himself, 
the ongmal hypothetist of this odic force, modestly disclaims for 
xt all such power as these writers attribute to it. He avowedly 
regards it merely as the means by which spiritual intelligence 
manifests itself; as the channel through which it sends its 
forces. That .t is in itself an intelligent, personal principle, 
able to take the shape of the human body, and to conduct itself 
like an individual in the flesh, makes no part of his hypothesis ; 
and this notion certainly demands as great an effort of credulity 
as any theory of direct spiritual action. 

Hosted by Google 

agenl 

ARAOO ON THE PHENOMENA, 221 

President Samson is of opinion tliat all the manifestations, 
upposed to be spiritual, are really natural, the working of an 
t intermediate between mind and matter, for which agent 

... n e«ve no better name than the nervous fluid. 

He tells us that, when, in 1848, Arago witnessed the attraction 
and repulsion of heavy bodies at the presence of Angelique 
C ■ s factory -irl who having begun suddenly to 

m w carried up to Paris, 

h A d m g t philosopher, being 

k Tliat is yet to be set- 

electricity; and yet, 
m there is a shock, like 

no identity with magnetism propei, for it has no re-action on 
the needle ; and yet the north pole of a magnet has the most 
powerful re-action on her, producing shocks and trembling. 
This is not effected through the influence of her ' 

lagnet has the s 

;, whether brought secretly 

„, _r otherwise.* It seems a nei« force. At all e 

whatever it be, time and research will determine, with a suffi- 
cient number of cases. One thing, however, seems to be certain : 
the phenomena of this case show, very plainly, that whatever 
the force is which acts so powerfully from the organism of this 

young gi 

., it does not act alone. It stands in mysterioi 

^,„.. .„ mundane force, which t 

This is witnessed in the re-action which external things have 
upon her person, often attracting her with great power. It is a 
curious inquiry, and may open to us new resources in the nature 
of man and of the world, of which we have little dreamed." 

In two bulky volumes, published in 1855, Count Agenor de 
Gasparin, takes a view of the question not dissimilar to that of 
President Samson, whom he quotes and commends. The Count 

Hosted by Google 

233 PLANCKKTTB. 

18 a leading Protestant writer of the evangelical school, and is 
Avell known to Americans. He avows his belief in the reality of 
the early phenomena, gives an extended narrative of facts elicited 
by himself at a series of sittings, in 1853, and shows the fallacy of 
Faraday's attempted explanation. He replies, at length, to the 
suggested fear that to admit the facts will give ground for super- 
stition and credence in false miracles. He shows the marked 
line between just confidence in undeniable facts and the perver- 
sions of imagination, by reference to Amraianus Marcellinus, the 
old Roman historian, who refers to (aS/e- revelations the perfect 
counterpart of those of 1848. The people of Rome were expect- 
ing that Theodorus would become the emperor ; and, of course, 
when the tables were consulted, they gave the letters of that 
name; whereas it proved that Theodosius became the emperor. 
Hequotes, also, TertuUian's mention, in these words; "Mensas 
divinare consueverunt : " Tables are accustomed to divine. 

He quotes a case examined by Chamillard, doctor of the Sor- 
bonne, in the seventeenth century, in which the same result was 
reached as that reported by the French Academy's commission to 
report on Mesmer-s experiments, which prior result was thus sen- 
tentiously recorded : "Mnlta fief a, pauca vera, i d^mone nulla : " 
Many things fictitious, afe-u, true, from a demon none. Coming to 
the consideratton of the natural cause of the phenomena, Gaspa- 
rin ascribes them to the excess of nervous susceptibility. All that 
is real in such as are regarded as supernatural is to be found, he 
thinks, in an undue and diseased action of the nervous organism. 
He quotes from Arago what that philosopher says on the subject 
of Mesmer's experiments: "Effects, analogous or inverse, might 
evidently be occasioned by a fluid subtle, invisible, impondera- 
ble; by a sort of nervous fluid, or of magnetic fluid, if this be 
preferred, which may circulate in our organs." He also quotes 
from Cuvier, who was of opinion that the effects of mesmerism 
are dearly due " to some sort of communication estabhshed be- 
tween the nervous systems " of the subject and the operator. 

His conclusion is substantially like that of the Report of the 
French Commission on Mesmerism; namely, tliat Che reported 

Hosted by Google 

THEORY OF HALLUCINATION. 

fl 
phenomena analoo-ov 

g d d h 
,s to those in tlectricitj 

wrought. 

The new and 

Gasparin arrived 
unsatisfactory a h 
cination the re 

w d 

h m 

thousands, of c p 

S 

g th p m 
ued m 

composure whi 
actuated by n 

There are a rau 
well as to the ordLi 

lary, 

facts of Spiritual! 

ism; and some other 
hypothesis roust be resorted to than that °f " «"°" '" te^iti- 
mony" When such men as De Morgan, Wallace, Varley, 
Denton, Owen, Wilkinson, Shorter, Howltt, Leighton, Cole- 
man Gunning, Gray, Mountford, Aehburner, Bell, Farrar, Liv- 
ermore Brittan, and hundreds of others in all the various 
professions, testify to a certain class of phenomena, the pooh- 
p oh a gumen n ply, has lost its power, and falls flat, 
e pt on he ea of the uninformed. 

To adm a h n arvellous facts of Spiritualism, and still to 
e ec he p ua hypothesis in accounting for them, seems 
o equ e at the first thought, a greater stretch of credulity 
a e de t sp tual belief. But Mr. J. W. Jackson, of 
lesmerist, a man of science, and a 
al realities, admits the most startling of 
...; but, like Sir David Brewster, will not 
ory of spiritual agency in their production. 
1, minus spirits, explains ali. He 
.6 Comte treats all religious creeds. 

Eng nd an expe 

encec 

he ? e n p 

al 

e ecent phenon 

na; ■ 

gen o he h 

eory 

He assumes that r 

treats modern Spir 

ituali 

Hosted by Google 

2Z4 

Eimplj as a new illustration of the same tendency of mind which 
induced the human race, in earlier ages, to attribute great natu- 
ral phenomena, such as thunder, eclipses, volcanoes, &c,, to the 
intervention of spiritual beings, angry deities. 

" The spiritual hypothesis," he says, "is the product of a. law 
of the human mind, in virtue of which it is impelled to supple- 
ment knowledge by superstition ; and so, when there is no as- 
signable cause for a phenomenon, it is at once relegated to the 
realm of miracle." — "Originating in a mental necessity for 
assigning some cause, real or imaginary, for every clearly recog- 
nized effect, the spiritual hypothesis is an inevitability with 
minds at the theologic stage, whenever a phenomenon tran- 
scends the range of recognized scientific knowledge." — " In 
earlier ages, the spiritual hypothesis, or, in other words, a 
theory of the miraculous, amply sufficed as an explanation of 
all otherwise inexplicable phenomena." 

In reply to these views, Mr. Andrew Leighton remarks, " I 
doubt not every competent and patient investigator will find 
that, after the most careful discrimination of facts, after dis- 
counting all that is clearly mundane, and all that is not clearly, 
but only possibly, mundane, (here will remain a residuum, which, 
if we are to attempt the resolution of the facts at all, will necessi- 
tate the supramundane hypothesis, and thus render it, so far 
from being ' inadmissible,' really the only rationally admissible 
one, since it will be found to be the only hypothesis adequate to 
cover all the facts." 

The rival hypothesis he sets down as this : " That the brain 

only unknown, but opposed to consciousness ; to which poten- 
tialities, as a last resource, must be referred the otherwise inex- 
plicable and indomitable facts." 

"Notwithstanding," adds Mr. Leighton, "what lias been 
said as to the rationality, and indeed necessity, of the spiritual 

hypothesis, ready to be yielded up immediately that another 
capable of more perfectly explaining the facts, in accordance 

Hosted by Google 

MB. J. w. Jackson's theory. z^S 

with all other truths of science, can be produced. Until the 
scientific n^md,fiar excelU«ce,.ehM produce that, it had better 
suppress its scorn and its supercilious condescensions." 

With respect to the fads of Spiritualism, Mr. Jackson makes 
as large admissions as any Spiritualist could desire; yet h,s 
esplanation is substantially the same as that of other upholders 
of the anti-spiritual hypothesis. 

.' Spiritual manifestations," he says, " are divded into mental 
and physical; and the spiritual hypothesis presupposes that, 
under each, there ar^ phenomena to whose production Nah..^ 
is inadequate. Let us now test this in leference to the first 
class where it may be freely admitted that jou not only have 
intelligence, but supersensuous intelligence; that is, you obtain 
information beyond the ordinary cognition of the medium, and 
sometimes beyond the knowledge or experience of any one 
present at the circle, and this, too, in reference to things past, 
distant, or future. It is in this way, indeed, that you have 
obtained a very large moiety of your converts, and those too 
often of a rather superior order of intellect; and yet there is 
nothing here but a manifestation of that clairvoyant power with 
which the mesmerist has been long familiar. 

"After more than twenty years' experience, in which 1 have 
employed iucide, of various ages and of both sexes, I could not 
fix the limits of this extraordinary faculty, and say. Here the 
natural power of the medium terminates, and there spiritual aid 
must have supervened. This probably reveals to you the key 
by which I propose to unlock the mysteries of the circle. The 
latter, when rightly constituted, is a most powerful ";«^"\"J^ 
battery of whose nervo-vital current the medmm is the duly 
susceptible recipient. Now, in the present very imperfect state 
of our knowledge, it is quite impossible to predicate the maxi- 
mum of result obtainable under such conditions, and unless we 
can do so, the assumption of spiritual aid, in any particular 
case, is perfectly gratuitous; quite permissible as a soothmg 
succeedaneum to undisciplined minds, but altogether madmiss.- 
ble as a scientific hypothesis. The same remark applies to 

Hosted by Google 

226 PLANCHKTTE. 

spontaneouB exaltation, whether of a literarjF, artistic, or even 
prophetic character, on the part ofa medium. Such unusual 
displays of mental power are simply manifestations of ecstatic 
lucidity, taking that particular form ; and, in the present statt 
of our knowledge, it is quite impossible to say what are the 
unaided limits of a gifted human mind in this direction," 

On the subject of levitatlon, elongation of body, and other 
phenomena, Mr. Jackson says, " But when we find lightness of 
body frequently recorded as an accompaniment of ecstatic illu- 
mination, not only in Christian, but also Brahminical and 
Buddhistic legends, the idea is at once suggested that it may be 
"n temperaments, of unusually exalted nervous 

function. Such facts suggest the institution of further 

ments, rather than the hasty formation of a spiritual hypothes 
for they seem to indicate that nervo-vital power has in it an 
element antagonistic to the action of gravitation ; and lightness 
of body may be only an eitreme manifestation of this force, the 
accompaniment of a crisis, or the effect of consentaneous action 
in a well-constituted and harmonious circle of human organ- 

lents of ponderable articles, these are referred, 
by Mr. Jackson, to " the intervention of iife-power under condi- 
tions not yet known to science." 

Upon this Mr. Leighton remarks, " We hold that the intelli- 
gence and will implied in the physical manifestations are not 
those of the passive media in whose presence they occur, but are 
demonstrably those of beings distinct from the members of the 
mundane company. Sometimes, as Mr. Jackson knows, they 
are said to be actually visible to one or more of the company, 
though invisible to the rest. The moral argument of the integ- 
rity of the seers — not to be got over by mere psychological 
imputations — has therefore to he met, besides the evidence of 
seers and non-seers alike, when the physical manifestations 
alone are considered. That 'there is really nothing more 
miraculous in the apparently spontaneous ascent of a table to 
the ceiling than in the corresponding ascent of a needle under 

Hosted by Google 

THE SPIRITUAL HYPOTHESIS. Z^? 

Ihe in«u.,,a o! a n.Enet,' U ,.i» •• «"»lj ""*'','''"" 

iLw .-a .0 con.t.ntl, Uerrte, the tapliuttan to Ihe co„»r,! 
HI. .otlon of the intemntlon of . «E»e ■ hfe-power —n 
iLZdl. effl.. of the company, .eeo„pU.hl„g all the mtel- 
,„e.t voluntary motion. Impo.ed upon the table "-''■"I'"; 
- r f r„;hi,^ soTnetitnes according to the desire ol 

,„e piece of furniture, .ometim i 

c »,e.=nt .ometlme. .^..1../ their wi.be., and in deJance 
Tlhelr every effort to prevent thcra — approaches far more 
fea'Vythe ■miraculous' than the hypo.b.si. he so persistently 
attemots to identify tlierewitli. 

™'pc.ting the sophism already „po.ed in other relation., 
Mr.JaLoi. says, ■ A. we are ignorant .1 the power of a hf. 
drcle it i. impo.sibl= to assign limit, to its effects ; and unti 
"e e are reached, spiritual intervention is , needles, accessory 

Was It the „r,-f.~.^ 'f «•• '"•"• ""■"■ " "■" T"7 Z: 

"™:.r,;:ir:~;i:;"":t--»'«"^ 

!,err visibly pr-sent? Was it the same power which mauipu- 
r.rd the key. of an accordion, and played, with arti.tic abihly 
and feel ng never ..rp.s.ed, the tune of -Home, Sweet Home,' 
" opptitL to theTi.pre...d wi.hcs of ,e,e„l P""'' ->■<; 
a.ke5forothertu„e., T^mof.h.mir.„l.„^^^ 

Si"; r;S. "rroHrce m hi.\.deavor. .o escape ^e 

of the eirelc, in any form or degree, 1. capable of .c„u„Ong for 
4., .., ,^ m-otnltniiR not to sav ridiculous, as 
such facts, appears to us as gratuitous, hul iv j 
to apply Faraday's uucouscious muscular hypothesis - -P^-- 
tio/of the movement of physical objects upon which there waB 
no m lar impact or upon which the muscular impact waa 
strenuou 1 xe d he opposite way." 

The e ak of le "London Spiritual Magazine (May, 
,868) n el ton o Mr. Jackson's theory, deserve to be quoted 
in thi nn o \\ e hei-e subjoin them : — 

Hosted by Google 

2ZS 

PLANCHETTE. 

"Mr. Jackson, the author of ' Ecstatics of Genius,' and of 
various lectures on mesmerism, has long, like other magnetists, 
found a great ditKculty in accepting the phenomena called spir- 
itual as actually proceeding from spirits. Some years ago, a 
friend of ours, on reading Mr. Jackson's mesmeric publications, 
told him thatheeawexactly wherehe was, — thathewason the 
staircase leading to the chambers of Spiritualism but had not 
reached therom hhhaa b MJak 

son is on the d pp k 

remain there. d d d m n g h 

Glasgow. Spiri h d h n h d d 

the reality of th ph m w h h b d p 

influence, butt hnq fidhm hp hd 

nothing whate to do witli them. In this assurance we are 
persuaded that Mr. Jackson is perfectly sincere ; and, still more, 
that he cannot possibly come to any othei conclusion. It is the 
result of the pre-occupation of his brain with lucid magnetic 
theories, from which he can no more escape than the bird that 
is once enclosed in the net of the fowler. That he will ever 
persuade a single Spiritualist, however, to adopt his convic- 
tions, we cannot encourage him to hope. Louis Buchree, in his 
'Natur und Geist' and 'Kraft und Stoff,' and Cams Sterne, in 
his ' Naturgeschichte,' have gone over the whole of his ground 
most elaborately and ably, but with the discouraging result of 
convincing nobody who had come to the examination of these 
phenomena with a mind free from professional theories. 

" Many men, eminent for their habits of metaphysical re- 
search; many men of profound science, — have tested the char- 
acter of these phenomena, and have been compelled to adopt 
the spiritual theory as the only one capable of explaining them. 
Professor Hare, of America, entered on this inquiry with as 
strong a persuasion as any man has ever entertained, that he 
should rout the spiritual theory altogether. As a man of prac- 
tical science, a profound electrician, and an avowed disbeliever 
in revelation, he entered on the inquiry with the utmost care, 
and piir6ued it with the utmost pertinacity for two years ; but he 

Hosted by Google 

THE ANTI-SPIRITUAL HYPOTHESIS. 2 30 

came out of it a firm believer in the spiritual agency, con- 
:urred in the manifestationa, and proclaimed himself a thorough 
Christian. Judge Edmonds, as a lawyer, went through the same 
laborious inquiry with the same result. Professor Mapes and 
Dr. Gray, of America, are also examples of philosophers as 
accomplished and as practical as those who are likely to follow 
in the same track. If philosophers, as Mr. Jackson affirms, be 
the only men capable of unravelling the mystery of these phe- 
nomena, here we have a number of them ; and their decision is 
adverse to his position. 

"Mr. Jackson in a stately and ex cathedra style assures us 
that, in his opinion, physical laws will explain the whole of 
the phenomena. That such laws, and others yet little known, 
are at work in these matters, every one knows; but it seems to 
us to require very little acquaintance with these things, to per- 
ceive that the laws which operate in them are conjointly resident 
in spirits incarnate and spirits de-carnated. Mr. Jackson refers 
to the great fact, that the intelligences involved in these phe- 
nomena have uniformly asserted that they are individual and 
actual spirits, and not mere laws and forces ; have asserted this , 
in every country and to every class of people; and he thinks he 
has an answer to this rather string fact. In all ages and coun- 
tries, he says, communications, professing to proceed from spir- 
its, have reflected the creeds and opinions of those to whom 
they came. Pagans, Greek, and Roman philosophers, Buddh- 
ists, Brahmists, Chinese followers of Fohi and Lootse, Chris- 
tian, Catholic, and Protestant, all have received communications 
in accordance with their own beliefs. Nay : mythologic gods 
have appeared to my thologists ; the Virgin Mary and Catholic 
saints toCatholics. Mr. Jackson's conclusion, therefore, is, that 
all these communications and apparitions are the objective re- 
suits of the subjective powers and spirits of those who indulge 
in these occult practices and speculations. 

"The fact is correct and historical; but the explanation, In 
our opinion, comes from a very different quarter. It is the 
result of a fixed law, ^' like draws to like.' Beyond this, we 

Hosted by Google 

230 PLANCH ETTE. 

know enough now to understand that spLrits carry with them 
into the other world the views, opinions, habits, creeds, preju- 
dices, and self-wills which had taken possession of them here. 
The immense hosts of spirits, 'gone before,' are always anxious 
to perpetuate their peculiar faiths and opinions amongst their 
successors on earth, and spare no pains or disguises to effect 
this. To the old Greeks and Romans they came in the shape of 
their gods ; they delivered oracles to them as their gods ; to the 
Roman Catholics they came as the Holy Mother, and as saints 
and saintesses. To those who think themselves philosophical, 
they fitilf come as Socrates, Bacon, Shakespeare, Franklin, and 
the like, though with very little evidence of the intellect or 
genius of those great souls. As the Romans believed that, at 
the battle of Canna;, their soldiers and those of the Carthagi- 
nians still continued the conflict in the air after they were slain; 
and as the hosts of Attila, in the battle of the Huns, were said 
to do the same, —we believe and have 'no doubt, that every 
species of departed spirit, and that in hosts and countless bat- 
talions, are still zealously infusing their own views, and the 
views of their partisanships, into the minds of their successors 
on earth, and endeavoring to rule here still, and thus stir up the 
worst passions and practices of this affiicted world. 

"Now, though the forces operating in these phenomena, pro- 
fess themselves to belong to different churches and religions, 
different creeds and philosophies, they all agree in one point; 
namely, that they are individual spirits, and not mere forces, 
or laws physical or spiritual. Their evidence regarding this fact 
is clear, uniform, and persistent; and for this universal and 
unvarying expression there must be a cause, and that cause can- 
not be a lie. Why should mere laws, physical or spiritual, 
be lies? How can they be lies, if they are laws and forces 
impressed upon the living cosmos by its Creator? Mr. Jackson, 
on reflection, must perceive the dilemma into which his theory 
has led him. And let him for a moment suppose that these 
powers, whatever they be, had as uniformly, as clearly and 
persistently declared themselves to be merely laws and forces; 

Hosted by Google 

JUDGMENTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC. 23! 

suppose, in fact, that they had declared themselves on the side 
-.f the philosopher, -does he not see with what an lo Piean of 
triumph they would have been received? with what a clamor 
ihe philosopher would have denounced all attempts to declare 
them not laws and forces, but spirits ? 

" Mr. Jackson is of opinion that scientific men are the only 
ones qualified to judge of these phenomena, and to bring to 
light what they really are. No idea can be more delusive. 
That seientmc men are the best judges of their own natural 
laws and processes, we readily admit; but in these phenomena 
there are laws in operation which they are totally ignorant of, 
and which they cannot possibly test by any apparatus or mate- 
rials in their laboratories. Beyond and besides this, they are, 
from their prejudices and adopted theories, totally disqualifi.ed 
for a clear and effective examination of this question. Their 
minds have become stereotyped in particular theories, to which 
the phenomena of Spiritualism run counter. Mr Jackson him- 
self is a living proof of such men being totally disqualified for 
the free and penetrating examination of such a subject He 
believes in all the phenomena, but denies the conclusions drawn 
by the common sense of many millions of men, and can bring 
himself to believe that intelligences which can come, and reason 
acutely, and make themselves seen, heard, and felt avowedly as 
individual spirits are mere laws and /or<:es tmanatmg from, or 
existing m the persons who perce ve them 

"And what IB really astound ng is that Mr Jackson whilst 
uttering so decided an opinion shows thit he has totally raisun 
derstood the nature of the phenomeni on which he d scoui^es 
He put-, into the same category the flowers fruit birds &c 
' which form the ftock wonders of the circle He imagines 
them to issue from the vital forces of the circle itsell and 
to disappear and dissolve afeain rapidlv This maj apph tt 
the hand which appears at the Da.enport ^««f«^"'l Jo the 
flowers which «er^ brought bj the appar tion wife of Mr Liver 
more of New York; but the flowers, fruits, &c., which are pro- 
duced at the ^eance^ of Mr. Guppy, and the birds which have 

Hosted by Google 

333 PLANCH ETTB. 

appeared at these stances, are real earthly flowere and birds, 
which are brought through walls and doors of closed rooms, 
and remain. One of the birds remains in a cage to this day. 
Some of the fruits are kept hy those who received them. They 
were not produced by any physical power of the circle. They 
came whence no one knew; and they could not, therefore, come 
in consequence of any internal power exercised by the party 
assembled. They must be brought by beings, reasoning beings 
out of the flesh ; and no philosopher can possibly propound a 
._ ^^1 ^^^^ ^^^^ 

made to pass 
en inches less 
;ollar evolved 
he persons of 
any hinge or 
shall explain 

xcept on the 

hen operated 

n's idea that 
hese singular 
re compelled, 
leir scientific 
prejudices will lead them vehemently to endeavor to treat them 
as the results of material laws, as he himself does. This will 
assuredly become the philosophical phase of the question, when- 
ever the denial of the fad is at an end. We cannot hope, that, 
on having made this step of advance, the philosophers will 
have got much nearer the truth, because they will, from habit, 
persist in seeking for the solution of the mystery in a direction 
in which it is not to be found. The plain sense of mankind will 
still march on far ahead of them." 

Hosted by Google 

DOUBLE-GOERS. 233 

Another critic asks, "Has not Mr. Jackson resuscitated the 
theories of Democritus and Epicurus, peopling the universe with 
E;Aj;Ui, or imagery the objective world has mirrored forth into 
space? Epicurus tell us that our brain imagery is constantly 
flitting about, distinguishable from the reflected forms of an 
objective reality, by its greater subtileness and evanescent char- 
II T ■ g f th d of our phan 

ual intelligence or )o 

The narratives of apparitions of living persons are very 
numerous, and the facts collected in thisvolume are not incon- 
sistent with the possibility of such phenomena. The Germans 
have a familiar word to designate persons of whom tbey are 
related ; calling thera doffelgangers or double-goers. Jung Still- 
ing says, "Examples have come to my knowledge in which sick 
persons, overcome with an unspeakable longing to see some 
absent friend, have fallen into a swoon, and during that swoon 
have appeared to the distant object of their affection." 

In his " Footfalls on the Boundary of another World," Robert 
Dale Owen gives a number of narratives which he personally 
took pains to authenticate in relation to this subject. We select 
the following: — 

" In May, 1840, Dr. D , a noted physician of Washington, 

was residing with bis wife and his daughter, Sarah, near Piney 
Point in Virginia. One afternoon the two ladies were walking 
out in a copse-wood not far from their residence, when, at a dis- 
tance on the road, coming towards them, tbey saw a gentleman, 
' Sally,' said Mrs. D , ' there comes your father to meet us.' 

Hosted by Google 

234 PLANCH ETTE. 

'I think not,' the daughter replied: ' that cannot be papa ; it is 
not so tall as he.' 

"Ae he neared them, the daughter's opinion-was confirmed. 

They perceived that it was not Dr. D , hut a Mr. Thompson, 

a gentleman with whom they were well acquainted, and who 
■was at that time, though they then knew it not, a patient of Dr. 

D 's- They observed also, as he came nearer, that he was 

dressed in a blue frock-coat, black satin waistcoat, and black 
pantaloons and hat. Also, on comparing notes afterwards, 
both ladies, it appeared, had noticed that his linen was particu- 
larly fine, and that his whole apparel seemed to have been very 
carefully adjusted. 

" He came up so close that they were on the very point of 
addressing him, but at that moment he stepped aside, as if to let 
them pass ; and then, even ■while the eyes of both the ladies -mere 
upon him, he suddenly and entirely disappeared. 

" The astonishment of Mrs. D and her daughter may be 

imagined. They could scarcely believe the evidence of their 
own eyes. They lingered, for a time, on the spot, as if expect- 
ing to see him re-appear ; then, with that strange feeling which 
comes over us when we have just witnessed something unexam- 
pled and incredible, they hastened home. 

"They afterwards ascertained through Dr. D , that his 

patient Mr. Thompson, being seriously indisposed, was confined 
to his bed ; and thai he had not quitted his room, nor indeed his 
bed, throughout the entire day. 

'• It may properly be added, that, though Mr. Thompson was 
familiarly known to the ladies, and much respected by them as 
an estimable man, there were no reasons existing why they 
should take any more interest in him, or he in them, than in 
the case of any other friend or acquaintance. He died just six 
weeks from the day of the appearance. 

"The above narrative is of unquestionable authenticity. It 
was communicated in Washington in June, 1859, '^y Mrs. D— — 
herself, and the manuscript being submitted to her for revision, 
was assented to a 

Hosted by Google 

DUPLICATED FORMS. 

ns 

Our Mend, Mr. B.-jan-ln Co.m.n, .uppli.. the follow.ng 

.Sill .. .hi. ..-J-.^ "A~.nE.he ■"•V.t'fof.M; 

cu . 1.1 r,,^ that she was one of those present at the Davenport 
She,o.dn,eth.t*ewas^^^ „r Sir He.k.th Fieelwood. Sh. 

</n»ce held at the residence ot air ne^-^ei.. .--^ 

w" seated in the dark .i..« b, the side of a gentleman, who, 

™ :"s ieptiei-". »• '•"•"■" " -='■ '" '"' ■"■"S ™ 
?„ the faee of the tael. .h=J were witnessing, "h™ • hsh^ "'^ 
snddenl, strnek, and both ot them dlstinctlr saw Ihe form of Ira 
SatnpLt ghde close ."»>■- ^'.jf^tirStd';; 
tnrbed the confidence of L.dj L— , '"' '''""/' , 

:-tSnrE::riTi?S-^i:»^E:? 
rr;ti!;:^r°;:;i:.*:^-^:^-:h:x:. 

, holding, he said, the bo« of matches. ..^ he anally 

does, when the box wai 

'snatched from his hand, and a light w 

strnek b, the invisible operator-, and, during the "o™""';'- 
n'tton o? the m.«ih, he plainly saw a form, apparentl, of a hu- 
-in hgure He ..Id nothing at the moment, but .hispering .he 
rtoMr. F.y, ... confirmed it, and afterward. .-"^ ""h- 
preen. "-";»^, r.r*S.'~ ^ ;i"en. .u^po.Sir.c h; 
fte".ctnarpcr,on of Ira Davenport, as no observation to thai 
effect was made, and, a. Ir. ">""'''' r^'"" Z'Zi 
afterward., when .he Bgh. .as restored fast bo«"d to to^hair 

-"i:r^:r::?tri:s=rf^i^.h.. 

'"■ ,n»».ing fie, and dls.inct phase of .he.. Pu-hng my- 
, of spiritual appearance, i namely, M« d'fl"- 
iualfor 

,v.J.B, FB,eason,o; 

Hosted bi Google 

236 PI.ANCHETTE. 

"Mr. Ferguson, who did not on that o ..^,„.^ 

resemblance to Ira Davenport, nevertheless has, as he solemnly 
asserts, seen at other times, when alone with them, the entire 
duplicated form of Ira Davenport, and a part of Mr. Fay ; and, 
■n my first conversation with the Davenport Brothers, they told 
me, among other curious facts of their extraordinary history, 
that persons had said they had met one or the other of them in 
places where they had not been. On one occasion their father 
Avent lo a neighboring shop to order some fruit, when he was 
told by the shopkeeper that his son Ira had just been there, and 
had already ordered the fruit. * 
proved that Ira had not left th 
have seen his ' wraith ■ or ' double.' 

" I may as well anticipate the question that will no doubt arise 
in the minds of many: 'That supposing the spirit of a living 
person can assume a natural form and become an active intelli- 
gent agent, producing mechanical effects, may not that account 
for much of what we are accustomed to attribute to the presence 
of the spirits of departed persons?' 

"I answer, ' res/' hut not all. We have too much evidence of 
spiritual individual identity, and too many instances of direct 
mtellLgence, perfectly independent of surrounding witnesses to 
admit the possibility of our own spirits acting on all occasions 
the double, and deceiving our senses. 

"Again It may be asked, 'Do you think that a«y of the phe- 
nomena which we are accustomed to attribute to spirits of the 
dead may be produced by the spirits of the living? ' and again, I 
answp^. 'V^.>- After dose observation and calm reflection 

1 the whole range of thesi 

renport manifestations, I ai 

d to believe that the rope-tying and untying the hai _ 
and carrying about of musical instruments, &c., are partly 
effected by their ' doubles,' and it may be that these are in part 
assisted by other spirits. The unerring certainty with which 
the same phenomena are produced in the presence of the Daven- 
ports day after day tends to confirm the opinion that their own 
' spirits,' or ' doubles,- pioduce many of the mechanical effects 

Hosted by Google 

APPARITIONS OF LIVING PERSONS. 237 

which we witness. On one occasion when they were bound in 
the usual manner within the cabinet, and the test of filling their 
hands with flour was applied, a group of four hands was seen ; 
a»d one of ikem I fUinly saw was covered with flour. 

"And another idea occurs to me: as it ifi certain that four 
instruments are played upon at one time, requiring the agency 

ute to the sfirits of the departed are, in truth, effected by their 
OTijn doahles. 

" This idea can in no degree destroy our cherished belief in 
the power of departed spirits to communicate with ub. On the 
contrary, it tends to confirm it; for if spirits in the flesh can 
assume a tangible form and actually produce certain mechan- 
ical effects, why may not spirits out of the flesh be able to do all 
this and much more? Let it be once recognized that spirit is a 
living entity when separated from the fleshly body, having a 
dynamic power over matter, and the great difficulty which en- 
shrouds the materialistic mind vanishes. I am not wedded to a 
dogma on this or any other subject. I am only concerned to 

• Kemer relates a case In which Mrs. HauHe, who was ill in bed at Ihe time, sud- 

Hostea by Google 

238 P1.ANCHETTE. 

th m m h e a 

senses without the aid of those senses, then we may infer that tt 
is through the exercise of a faculty, independent not only of the 
particular organ of sense, but of the whole physical body. Mr. 
Jackson admits that, " in virtue of our being spirits, we possess 
the powers manifested by spirits," and that "there is not the 
least necessity for going outside of ourselves for these things." 
Why, then, should the mere dropping of our material husk at 
death disable us from producing, as disembodied spirits, the 
same effects we could produce, through our purely spiritual 
faculties, while we were in the flesh? 

Undoubtedly, many phenomena referred by inexperienced ob- 
servers to the agency of spirits do not require a supramundane 
solution. Whether in or out of the corporeal form, the human 
spirit may have certain powers; and its phenomenal manifesta- 
tions, whether it be in its embodied or disembodied state (and 
when we speak of body we mean only the -nisiiU earthly body), 
may have many points of similarity. It may sometimes be diffi- 
cult to trace the origin of facts occurring along that mysterious 
border-land, where the visible and invisible seem to blend. 

The advocates of the no-spirit theory have much to say of 
"unconscious cerebration" and the controlling agency of the 
will ; but may not this be only another name for that spiritual 
contact of our souls with the spiritual world, from which, ac- 
cording to Swedenborg, we get so many of our impressions? 

The puerile character of many of the communications for 
which a spiritual origin is claimed ; the reckless assumption of 
the names of great men and women by pretended spirits; the 
author of some imbecile doggerel, claiming to be Shakespeare; 
the designer of some atrocious picture, signing himself Michael 
Angelo ; and the utterer of some stupid commonplace asking us 

Hosted by Google 

FALLlBiLlTV OF SPIRITS. ^39 

1„ belie,, he i. Lord B.con,-or eour.e m.ke the .pWtu.l p,.^ 
.e„ie«.or.hece».«.ic..«Hdicu.„^^^^ 

ri S";„° .or sod., .h.. 0..,c.„, with .he„ the ch„.c- 
ters they formed in this, or, it may be, m anterior lives, t 
?h' re a™ among them the Irlvolon., the vain, the mendaeion., 
'at; the malignfnt, with ..i the,, imperteetion. on their te.d. 

J..t a. the, let. thi. wor.d -- '■;= '"'.X."* em ""I'r.it 

cation maj yet be spiritual in its origin ooeo 

""heL'' indieatton. that the next iife i. a .«,te .imi.ar in kind 
to thl. pre.ent life, and oni, a .tep Wgher in an a~"dms.em. 
of „i>tence>i one into whieh »e earr, onr hnman natnre, and 
in whieh proire.. • i. h.t gr.dn.l, - are contr.r, to th. general 

«..hiect derive some support from analogy, harmonizing as tnej 
d° til those f.et. of physieal progress tanght b, geol.gj and 

'^'•-""''"'^rltShrorfnr'n^Ji » grow In 
knowMgTand in vir.ne, wh, shonld we J-P-' f ™2 „",' 
once without any merit or effort of our own, to tne sum 

:rpo:.lbi. «..' .nd wisdom, si-'r""'"". '■"■* ";t;; 

stood, might teach u. that the trne kmgdom of heaven i. not 
S,.< man, either in this present or m any other home. wh... 
hi. .piril may .neees.ively dwell in those "man, ">■■« 
the scenes of the divine bonnty and power ; hnt, as Christ teus 
us wMin in the will, the affections, and the mind. 

bur .ketch of the noteworthy theories that have been put 

Hostsab, Google 

240 PLANCHETTE. 

forth on the subject of these phenomena would be incompleti 
without a mention of that of Professor Daumer, whose work 
'■ Das Geisterreich," appeared in Dresden in 1867. According k 
his pneumatologj, " Ghosts are neither bodies nor souls, but s 
third entity which he calls eidolon, by which he understands the 
direct self-manifestation and representation oSths^ycie (soul). 
The soul is restricted to the corporeal exhibition only so long as 
it animates the body. Once released, by the death of the latter, it 
can manifest its immanent reality in any way it pleases. It can 
even reproduce whole episodes from its former life, including 
any number of figures of itself or of other persons. It can also 
produce sounds, and perform other material acts." 

We have already seen that Baron Reichenbach, a distinguished 
German chemist, and the discoverer of creosote, finds in what he 
calls od or the odic force the medium of many phenomena. He 
reports that his sensitive subjects saw, at the poles of the magnet, 
odic light, and feit, from the near contact of large free crystals, 
odic sensations, which by Reichenbach himself, and others as 
msensible as he to odic impressions, v^ere wholly unperceived. 

At first distrustful of the spiritual significance of certain 
phenomena, Reichenbach, if we may believe Mr. D. Hornung, 
of Berlin, now entertains views not opposed to Spiritualism. 
While in London in 1861, at the residence of Mr. Cowper, son- 
in-law of Lord Palracrston, he attended a spiritual circle. 

" On that occasion," says Mr. Hornung, " two media, Mrs. 
Marshall and her niece were present, who did not understand a 
word of German. Reichenbach therefore, after the rapping had 
commenced, put his questions intentionally in German; and 
they were answered correctly by raps on the table, and he had 
the names of several members of his family correctly given. In 
regard to one name, however, he began to doubt the capacity of 
the table to give it; the name to be spelled being ' Frieder- 
icke,' while it spelled the letters ' R. L' But when the name 
' R I C K E ' was completed, the baron was much surprised, as 
his sister had been wont to be called ' Ricke.' 

"Now comes the most remarkable part of the performance. 

Hosted by Google 

REICHENBACH ON SPIRITUALISM. 

and I give it in the baron's own words. He says, ' The a 
were rapped by the foot of the table in a brightly lighted room. 
'. wished to aficertain whether the rapping could not be pre- 
vented,and for this purpose I leaned with my breast against one 
of the feet of the table, taking hold of two others with both 
hands, and pressing them down. The rapping of the feet 
ceased; but the rapping continued above me, on the top of the 
table. All at once, by a sudden jerk, the table dragged me for- 
ward, with the carpet on which it stood ; and* I lay prostrate in 
the middle of the room,' 

"This experiment convinced the baron that, besides the 
emanation of the odic element, higher spiritual powers can 
manifest themselves ; and these be now no longer ignores, but 
recognizes them as facts of experience, for which, however, he as 
yet knows no explanation." He regards " the great influences 
of od upon the human spirit " as the mere " physical aide of the 
matter," — "the roots by which it adheres firmly to the ground;" 
and he is thankful to see the day when all his former discoveries 
show themselves as the portal through which it is possible for 
him " to go forward into the spiritual department." 

A writer in " Human Nature," under the signature of " Ho- 
nestas," is of opinion that the transition brought about by death, 
though carrying with it a vast change, does not so completely 
alter our nature as to render mundane intercommunication im- 
possible. The laws governing the physical conditions of the 
nest sphere must be in harmony with those that rule this, to us, 
natural world; these laws being only an outgrowth from those 
of our present condition, and correlatives of them, 

Wliy then is the intercommunication restricted to the limited 
bounds of a medium's presence? The writer aphoristically 
replies. Within our coarser earth-body dwells an ether-body, 
which derives its elementary sustenance from the' ether or odic 
element, from out which this visible, ponderable world has 
grown forth, with its plastic, centralizing tendency. Our ether- 
body manifests its presence in the nerve aura, or odic element 
(first noticed by Reichenbach), in the streaming forth of a 

Hosted by Google 

mediated, organically centralized ether element, which ele- 
; ether-body, — in the same manner as the food 

■ h th 

p J p y T p y 

cal effects are produced by an action akin to the mesmeric 
action ; that is, the mind of the operating agent, by an action 
of the will, throws a current of the odic power of its nerve 
aura on to the nerve aura of the terrestrial being, and an effect 
similar to that of the mesmerizer upon his patient results; a 
phenomenon too well known to need explanation. 

The second, or physical effects, arise from an action upon the 
organicallj mediated free nerve aura of the body of the medium, 
which aura enables the spirit to create an organism or mechan- 
ism rendering action upon our ponderable matter possible, and 
allowing of the production of the physical phenomena of sound, 
movement of bodies, &c.; appearances familiar to the observer 
of spiritual manifestations. This centralization can only, how- 
ever, take place by means of the mediating presence of the 
nerve aura, enabling a condensation into ponderable matter to 
be effected. The visible, ponderable world is but a phase in the 
great chain of ever • continuing progress and development. 
The imponderable, and, to us, invisible world, is, in reality, 
the permanent and lasting state, from out which the soul brings 
with it its principle of life, that which is continuous and imper- 
ishable, the power of mediating for its own use the supplying 
element. It has, too, the power, by right of its earth-born state 
and bodily organism, of mediating the coarser, ponderable ele- 

Hostea by Google 

f HONESTAS. 343 

meiits of oiir present condition. But the terreetrial mediation 
can only be effected by tlie aid of an organism fitted for that 
special object and use. Thia mechanism our earth-body fur- 
nishes The spirit-BOul does not, however, possess this: its 
organism is different, finer, undoubtedly more complex than 

By the transition called death, the soul haB parted with this, 
for mundane purposes, adapted organism. But to enable a spirit 
to operate upon materia) things, an organism has to be formed 
adapted for that function : this embodying cannot, however, 
take place unless aided by the mediating presence of the organic 
nerve aura of a living being. In the embryonic evolution, the 
mediating element is the maternal one; and here, too, in obe- 
dience to laws of development, the embryo being, once having 
attained its growth, takes its place on earth with an inde- 
pendent central self-existence. The spirit-soul, when incarnat- 
ing itself in a material envelope, can only do so by the aid of the 
nerve aura of a living being, upon which it oniy momentarily 
acts, which action is rendered possible by the accident of an 
affinity, enabling a temporary use to be effected, - this use being 
restricted, however, within the narrow limits prescribed by the 
supply which the organism of the medium furnishes; and, 
further, subject to endless interruptions from external causes; 
as, for instance, over-excitement, or alarm, or atmospheric 

The extreme uncertainty of spiritual phenomena; the diffi- 
culty even when produced, of prolonging their duration beyond 
a few minutes ; and more especially the difficulty of giving a 
continuity to the more developed forms of spirit appearances, -- 
confirms this view of the dependence of visible, tangible, spirit- 
ual manifestations upon our organism, and the necessity of an 
agreement of our natures with the spirit operating upon the 
nerve aura of the medium. 

This writer gives the name of fre-developmmt to that change 
of organic form of our ether-body taking place during life, and 
by which the transition to the next state is mediated, prepared. 

Hosted by Google 

344 PJ.ANCHETTE. 

Th[a change is always in accord with the sphere we have to join 
after death. And the centre - second centre -is the organism 
thus changed to adapt itself to the onward and nest sphere 
Decay and death follow this change as ft necessary sequel; 
that IS, as pre-development proceeds, we cast off the organism 
adapted for this life ; it becomes old, not nourished by the sup- 
plying elements that hitherto sustained it. 

According to Leibnitz, every germ has its pre-existence 
Every grade or plane of development of phenomenal life is the 
outgrowth of a pre-existing state of things which has prepared 
the elei lents trom which it has been evoUed Th s ,s -i funda 
mental lav, ot nature The grade beneath and the grade iboie 
are intimately connected with the gradition in which we exist 
In even grade the next and super or grade exercises its influ- 
ence creates or rather renders the growth posoible of an 
organ sm adapted lor existence m the next sphere plane, or 
grade 

V,e owe to the I-iw of ^re development continuance of our 
individuality Were it not lor a growth preparatory to the 
entering into a nes^t sphere or state such grade not being 
mediated tendered b* prior growth ht lor our organi m con 
tinuoQs life would be impossible Step hy step mediated by 
prior growth the ".oul progresses onward and onward in never 
ending ascent to the h ghest conceivable unfoldment of our 
natures. The past is everlasting: the phenomenal life of the 
present is but an unfolding of the past ; and the future, of which 
this state will be the past, will be again only an unfoldment of 

Accepting the theory of progressive growth, as proved, the 
writer maintains that the forms of the world beyond this exist- 
ence, must have developed from the forms of the antecedent 
grades out of which they have been evolved, and that preserva- 
tion of the type of the human form follows the soul in its 
onward step into the next world. 

Our next organism is mediated, prepared, by our mundane 
organism ; and, this being so, it must depend in its development 

Hosted by Google 

DR. ASHBLTRNER S 1 

upon two conditions, physical and psychical; must carry with 
it as it passes into the next sphere, the impress of the character 
of its progress on earth Thu= our sins and shortcomings 
impress themselves on our very organism, and the hte that 
now IS shapes the lite that is to be 

Such IS in imperfect sketch of the theory of this ingenious 
writer, who brings to the discussion a lull practical acijuiint- 
ince with the most remarkable of the phenomena obtained 
through Mr Home and other mediums 

Dr. John Ashburner, the translator ol Reichenbai.h s ''Djna- 
mics of Magnetism," and who was one of the first men in Eng- 
land to investigate and accept the phenomena of 1848, in his 
latest work, entitled "Notes and Studies in the Philosophy of 
Animal Magnetism and Spiritualism," argues that every law in 
the natural or physical world depends on the " grand trunk force 
of universal gravitation," which being divisible into centripetal 
and centrifugal in other words attractive and repulsive forces, 
is, a ce g S 

whit g th m 

place S 5 

glob ry 

vege 

ulee m g 

ceeding with these laws, we observe the law of evolution regu- 
lating more complicated germ-cells in ammal existence, but still 
obedient to magnetic laws of polarity ; " for " human beings, as 
well as all other animals, vegetables, and minerals, within the 
magnetic sphere of this magnetic earth, must necessarily partake 
of the magnetic influences emanating from the grand trunk force 
of universal gravitation." The author shows that all the phe- 
nomena of the eo-called forces of heat, light, and electricity, are 
dependent on attraction and repulsion; and that these simple 

Hosted by Google 

246 PI-ANCIiETTE. 

antagonistic forces are the sole principles hy which every change, 
atomic or otherwise, ia effected, under Almighty guidance 
throughout the universe. 

The author is a stanch opponent of the materialistic notion 
that iraiH Ihinis, and consequently an assertor of the absolute 
inertia of matter, which the Creator has made Buhject to the at- 
tra p d w ch is called 

g m g F h fe and soul 

w h tr d dm nifests the 

ph m w h k the form. 

th 

o the a 

my: 

d wak m a repulsion, 

I the centrifugal agency constituting a part of the 
phenomena attendant on the great trunk force." The facts ad- 
duced in evidence of the truth of this position are highly illus- 
trative; and the author contends that cases recorded by many 
surgeons justify the conclusion that the molecules of the brain 
being subjected to a central attractive force, is the cause of sleep ; 
as the brain, when exposed, is seen to become smaller in that 
state;, and that a repellant action among its particles precede 
the wakeful condition. The cause of pain is summed up in the 
following: "The whole body, being a congeries of magnetic 
molecules, must necessarily be subject to the laws regulating 
polarities. Any change in the relations of the poles of living 
animal molecules must be productive of a change in the sensi- 
bilities of the part. Whether the change be the cause of pleas- 
ure or of pain, must depend upon the faculties of the individual. 
Endowed with a nervous system, the animal is susceptible of 
sensations, without which, the idea of pleasure or pain becomes 
absurd. The inference then remains, that pain is the result of 
an extreme disturbance of the polarities of a part." 

Dr. Ashburner accepts the spiritual hypothesis to the fullest 

Hosted by Google 

THE MABV JANE THEORY. *47 

e*„l. .nd .Mnk. th.t .nj other i. wh.llj um.li.ftaorj i» 
.few .f .11 the fact. .»d phenom.n. »hioh he h„ le..»d. 

in a wo 1- uMarv Tane- or, Spiritualism Chemi- 

ina estraordinary title. Mary janL, <j , i- _ 

caflv Explained." The author', hypothesis, audacious a. it may 
T~ I ur»ed with a certain show of scientific learning. He 
gives us the following summary of his conclusions : - 
, Man is a condensation of gases and elemenUry vapors. 

„ .„ -nnRtantlv exudinc from the skm. 

2. These vapors are conBtantij exoui. t, vv,i.,-,= . vii- 

, They charge (to use an electrical term) certain things v ., 

TU ;7Jt^^e nlant -and it droops. The human body (afi m 

The sensitive plant, i„lnsihle to pain. A table, — 

esmerism) and it becomes insensinie lo pam. 

^"1 men these vapors (which Reichenbach calls o die) emanate 
r 1 .,,;„ nprsnns who appear to have phosphorus in excess 

rh."t.T«;/;-.A"* 

;> „L„a „j. ".*'. '" —• - ""■' '■«•■ '-■' " '"" " 

TTh.'»hethe, pe„o.. .Mng .. .he t-hle ■»=. the ,u.li.j 
oAhe n...ir......=.., .l.h.«h the °dj^,7f JJ™, S^^^^^ 

-It sufficiently strong to move the taoie, 

TThatwe do not see the .die emanation. '"" .f*.";'!™, 

"fTtafif the medi™ Uno.. nothing of n...ic, and hold.. 
Jita,, the' .ound. given ootwill he di.cotJant c ..eh .. n..gh. 
S expected of a per.on 1'"""™'! ■■°""°=,°' """•"' ^"'j,.„ 
„.d S.*„e; .it. at the t^hl. a. the ...nc ^e ;» -he -ed-. 
the sounds will be harmonious, oo, a lu^ 
"thingof dv.»in5,andpapev.nd pencil heputnnde, the t*l, 

.crihble. will he prodncedi h.t If .n .rt..t .it. " ''•« »™; 
fl or otlier arti.tic drawings will be produced ; although, in 

ncttter care, could the .rti.t produce the .lightt.t movement of 
the table, or „.nife.tatlon whatever, without the medium. 

Hostsa by Google 

*48 PI.ANCHETTE. 

8. That this odJc being thinks and feels exactly as the persons 
from whose bodv it emanstpe. ,h,f ; . ""= P"*0"s 
^ ""uj^ It ciiianaies; that it dosspssps •.Ii h,^ „ 

, ■. '-' ■—■"""i that it possesses all the E< 

9- H" )t. power of ilght i, elMrlM; ta, it c.n ,ee undtr « 
don.™., or ,h.t i. i„ ,he .<,j„,„i„g „„„, _ ,„ , ^h" ,0!^ 

human eye cannot. 1 1. wnere ine 

na'n. ™" '" '"'"' °' '"'"'°'' " •'■° ='«*•! or „pe,h„- 
.o;;;rr.nV'ei^2?i ""p'^aVit. ™f '*'"" '" ""'" " 

..^L!!"" " "° '"" " *""■ ""- "'"»"' »-. p'— »»">- 

inS.w'ntt l?;r;.z rj."°"°' """'•'"°" '"'■ ■"'*"■»• 

.4. That it, co„,er,ation. mth Jifferent penon. mil be re- 
.po„,,ve to tbe atreetion., the ■enttaenf, and the r.hgiou. 
betaf ot each per.on it i, talking „i,|,, .„H„„gt ^^^ „^ ^f ~' 
ra one common source, — the odlc vapor concentrated at or 
w,th »h,ch the table i, eb.,p,d, -.nd although tho.e rellj™ 
OM, are ent.relj, at variance. And if a.ked for the name of 
the (p,e,uppo.ed) .pirit, It will gl.e the name either of the de- 
.,r.d rel.ttve, or of ,ome high authoritj (on religiou. matt.r.l 
.n the .pecUc creed of the per.on maki„i ihe inqnirv. ' 

ij. That, from various concurreni- fpstim..,.,. v - .- 

zr fT T ""' '"'" p—Hhe" or'o7rr;"t£ 

shape of hands, arms, dress, &c,, and even of an entf 
te..d, and .uch fact being certain, ,h. mtement aZ't 
Amenc. photograph, of both dead and living p,„o„. h„e been 
oblatned, cea.e, to be prepo,t.,ou., but that the .oul, of tho.e 
per.on, produced, or had any thing to do ,ith ,bo,e .hape, 
doe, not appear to be any more proved, than that If a good Turk 
"=ce,ved a nrcage ,igned, " Mahomet," it would be .Lpted a. 
proof, etfter of tbe truth of tbe me...g., or that the deca.ed 
Mahomet had any thing to do with it. 

Hosted b, Google 

THB THEORY ANSWERED. 249 

.6 That, nevertheless, tl.e high -thought, philosophy, inde- 
pendence, conciseness, and deep reflection evinced by many of 
the answers and sentiments expressed by the odic flu.d, point to 
its connecUon with a general thought-atmosphere, as all-pervad- 
ing as electricity, and which possibly is in itself, or is in intimate 
connection with, the principles of causation of the whole oni- 

^^sJch is the bold theory of this chemical investigator. That 
the emanations of the human body " may form themselves, with- 
out our knowing any thing about it, into a distinct personality, 
with the faculties of perception, memory, r 

a personality that may rap, ■* 

te, draw, carry on general ci 

versation, make witty and moral observations, and not only 
think, but 'think deeply and profoundly,' and take to itseli a 
, in the author's fanciful experience, it took the r— " 

' Mary Jane ')' ^nd, in short, in every way ■ 

onduct itself like 
an e'duca^te^d and' well-behaved member of society, — is certainly 
an astounding instance of the prodigious capabilities of ^odic 
vapor.' It is an hypothesis which, if it doe 
s likely to startle men of science even ^ore tnan .n« .p.iiL.,.. 

i._,r. „„^ *!.»!. «„rnrise is not likelv to be diminislied 

J intellect; 

1 the spiritual 
iheol^'usdfrand their surprise is not likely to be dit. 
on learning that the odic vapor is convertible into 11 
that the odic emanations actually create life and intelligence; 
and that there is a universal thought- atmosphere, re su ting, we 
presume, from the phosphorescent and other chemical emana- 
tions from the collective brain of humanity, from which these 
vaporaus personages get the information and ideas which at the 
time they may not in themselves possess. 

"Admitting the extravagant assumption of a being evolved 
from the chemical emanations of our physical ^"^f'' f ^• "^y- 
more, admitting even that these emanations are imbued w th our 
soecial idiosyncrasies, - with our mental and moral qualities, - 
sUU as a derivatWe leing, it could have only the knowledge, 
idea's, and qualities of those from whom it proceeded. That 
cannot come out of a man which Is not in him. Hence, as our 
author very consistently says in the words we have quoted: 

Hosted by Google 

^5° PLANCH ETTE. 

'This odic being thinks and feels exactly as the persons from 
whose bodies it emanates.' Of course, if the hypothesis were 
true, It must do so. But then, unfortunately for the hypothesis, 
this ' odic being ' will not do as he ought to do. He will some' 
times think and feel differently from the persons from whose 
bodies he is an out-birth. No fact in this inquiry is better known 
or more firmly established than that spirits exhibit powers, and 
maintain opinions surpassing, different from, and sometimes 
even antagonistic to those of both medium and circle. 

"In some instances mediums will give information altogether 
outside the knowledge of themselves, or of any person present • 
and exhibit a mental force transcending their own natural 
powers, as in others it will be equally below their natural ca- 
pacity. 

"We might pursue our argument from every phase of the 
manifestations: from vision and prevision; from dreams and 
apparitions; from impressions, presentiments, and warnings; 
from clairvoyance and trance; from prediction, possession, and 
personation; these all demonstrate the same conclusion, —that 
tiie actmg power is no way a part of ourselves, but is wholly 
discreted from us, with independent thought, aifection and voli- 
tion. The fact is, that our author confounds conditions and 
causes. Certain conditions are found necessary to certain effects ■ 
therefore, he reasons, they are the efficient cause of them. This 
IS just such a mistake as it would be to attribute a telegram to 
the wires, instead of to the operator at the end of them " 

William Howitt, of whom we may say, as Coleridge said of 
Baxter (another Spiritualist), ■' I could almost as soon doubt the 
gospel verity as his veracity," in a letter published in i86a, and 

nouDced Iheir addresses pure gpec 

Hosted by Google 

RBMAUKS of WILLIAM HOWITT. ^S' 

.„„„„li„B on Ih. o<ll= theory of th. to,. Mr. Mah... ..d 
othere writes as follows : — 

..The, who .Kribe the power, exereised by .pWtn.l .E.»ey to 
odlc force, betr., an e,o.l ig.or„=e of the "«' P'°P«*«'_°' 
th.t force, and of the pre.ent •>••- aiid '"of »' Sp.ntuah.rn. 
Search thrWh Reiche.b.eh.. ...ay "^thU force, and you w.U 

°lrfer.rf..""r.°a".''urow.VL,n=°h'S'dark,,i.ihfe 
to sensitive person., such a. the Spirituali.ts call mediums; that 
this «ame i. thrown from magnet, of great power, from crystal., 
from the light of the sun, fa. That by P™" "■'« «? "S' 
nets, or crystal., or by water impregnated w,th the sun s rays, 
certim sensaBoas, agreeable or disagreeable, a. the power 
applied, are induced, hut not a trace of any ,;.asom„g ,„ O,,. 
power, of an, rcelation of fact., of any prcMr.al "■■», of any 
Lult; of progno.tication. It cannot tell you what w.l take 
Saee to-morrow, much less at the Antipode., or in the .p.r.tu.l 
world. But .pint, do all this, and more. It doe. not attract 
iron or other physical substances, which, a. far as iron goes, 
eog,;.te, magnetism, does. =.' -f ■- » n^Jn »C"t 
rr.h.r'.-rLm'?";eTo^n.^pirit. ,i«,hea,y table. , 
I ha,e seen dining-tahles, capable of accoramodatmg mor^ than 
a dozen people, lifted quite from the ground. Spirit, play on .11 
ma.ical in.trament. : they can carry about hand-bell., and rmg 
them in the air, .. / »•« ■"» "•-. The mu..c wh.cb they 
produce is often exquisite. Spirit, will draw or wr, e dir.c ly 
'po. paper laid for them i. the middle of the «oor, or, .ndmc.ly 
through the hands of people who ne,.r took a lesson, and ne,er 
coulddraw. I am one ^f them. .„ R„„land 

..These are thing, which are not only going o 

..The.e are thmg. wnicn a,c ..o, „.../ ^..--0 
and among.t my own friend, e.cy day, but ha„ been go.ng on 
for these Ly year. , ten years in America, and th.rty before 
that in Germany. Bat, in America, the w,de diifusron and 
. „„.,iH™ nf fhi-se Dhenomena have conA'mcea some 

it repetition of these plienoi 

millions of people, and si 

le of thei 

Hosted by Google 

^5^ PLANCHETTE, 

and legal ability in the country. Those persons have not be- 
■eved on mere hearsay, or mere hocus-pocus and delusion, but 
upon the familiar evidence of facts; and, as I have observed 
for thirtj jears before that, in Germany there existed a consider- 
able body of the most eminent philosophers, poets, and scientific 
men, familiar with most of these things. Amongst these no 
less a man than Emanuel Kant; and also Gorres, Ennemoser, 
Escheiimayer, Werner, Schubert, Jung Stilling, Kerner- and 
pre-eminent amongst women, Mrs. Hanfft!, the Seeress of Pre- 
vorst, who professed, not merely to have spiritual communlca- 
t.ons, but to see and converse daily with spirits ; and she gave 
continual proofs of it, as any one may see who reads her story. 
Now It IB useless to tell us that the odic force acting some 
how mysteriously on the brain, can produce these results. It 
cannot enable people to draw, and write, and play e:,quisite 
music, who have no such power or knowledge in their brains- 
for on the old principle «: nii,7o nihil fit, no such things being 
m, no such tbines can come mil- Tf f-^n^^^ ^^.^ c ,, 

s" •-•" t-ome out. It cannot come from other 
brains, for there are often no other brains present If it could 
do such things, it would be spirit, endowed with volition, skill, 
and knowledge ; and there would be an end of the dispute. The 
condition, therefore, of those who ascribe these powers to odic 
force, IS that of one ascribing the telegraphic message to the 
wire, and not to the man at the end of it. Odic force may be 
the wire; for spiritual communications are, and ever have been, 
made thrxiugh and under certain laws, as all God's works always 
are: but it certainly is not the intelligence at the end of 

" Whilst the odises and aulomalists speculate about an action 
on the brain, we cut the matter short, and say. There stand the 
spirits themselves, seen, heard, felt, and conversed with. 

" More than six years aeo I began to examine the phenomena 
J to paid nor even to public me- 
i table with members of my own 
IS of high character, and serious 
saw tables moved, rocked to and 

Hosted by Google 

of 

Spiritualii 

5m. 

I did ni 

dii 

jms. 1 sal 

tdo< 

ivn at my 

far 

nily, or wi 

ith f 

riends, pi 

as 

myself in 

the 

inquiry. 

WILLIAM howitt's rkmabks, 253 

fro, and raised repeatedly into the air I heard the raps; 

a hundred at once, in every imaginable part ot the 

table, in all keys, and of various degrees of loi - _ 

ined the phenomena thoroughly Silly, but playful, spirits, 

came frequently. ... I heard accordions play wonderful music 
as they were held in one hand, of^en by a person who could not 
play at all. I heard and saw hand-bells carried about the room 
in the air; put first into one person's hand and then into 
another's; taken away again by a strong pull, though you could 
not see the hand touching them. I saw dinmg and drawing 
room tables of great weight, not only raised into the air, but 
when placed in a particular direction, persevenngly remove 
themselves, and place themselves quite differently. I saw other 
tables answer questions as-they stood in the air, by movmg up 
and down with a marvellous softness. I heard sometimes blows, 
apparently enough to split the table, when no one could have 
struck them without observation i and I breathed perfumes the 
most delicate. I saw light stream from the fingers of persona 
on the table, or while mesmerizing some one. As for commu- 
nications professedly from spirits, they were of daily occurrence, 
and often wonderful. Our previous theological opinions were 
resisted and condemned, when I and my wife were alone. ^ This, 
therefore, could be no automatic action of our own brains, far 
less of the brains of others, for they were not there. We held 
philosophical Unitarian opinions; but, when thus alone, the 
communications condemned them, and asserted the Divmity 
and Godhead of our Saviour. When we put questions of a 
religious nature to the spirits, they directed us to put all such 
questions to the Divine Spirit alone. ■ ■ ■ 

"Many persons that we know, draw, paint, or write under 
spiritual agency, and without any effort or action of their own 
minds whatever, some of them having never learned to draw. 
Several of my family drew and wrote. I wr^te a whole volume 
without any action of my own mind, the process being purely 
mechanical on my part. A series of drawings in circles, filled 
up with patterns, every one difi-ercnt from the other, were given 

Hosted by Google 

^54 PLANCllETTE. 

through „y h..d, „„, each evening, He drele, „„ „„ck „« 
a. eorreclly .. G.otlo or . p.ir of con,p.,.e, co.ld have done 
then, i ,,l ihey were made .taplj „l,h a pendl. Arti,,, „ho 
•aw them were a.tonl.hod, and, a. i, jenerallj. the case In ,uch 
matter., auEge.ted that .omc new f.cnll, was developed in me- 
when, lol ,,,, pewe, was entirely talen aw.,, a. if to show that 
.t d d not hclong to „,. The drawing., however, remain ■ b„t I 
codld not copy one of then in the .ame wa, if m, life depended 
on It. A member of my family drew very estraordinarv and 
beanllfnl ,hi„g., „,te„ with written explanations, b.t eiaell, in 
he ..me mechanical, involuntary manner. In f.n, mo.t of 
the.e drawing, are accompanied by explanation, .pirituail, 
g>ven, .homng that every line Is full of meaning. 

-I ma, add that I have never vi.ited paid medium., hut I 
have .een mo.t of the phenomena exhibited through Mr. Home, 
Mr. Sqmrc, and other.. / J,™ „„ ,,,„-,.,,,j. „„, .,., ! 

•f.rM. h, l,,,.g a f,.,,l a,d ffer ,„ lie „IMU ./ «. f,,^ 
and very good een.e wriuen l„„. i have hea,-d thing, J. 
nounced as about to come to p... , .„d the, have come to p..., 
though appearing very improbable at the moment I have seen 
pe,„ons very ohen, in clairvoyant trances, entering into com- 
mun.cation with the dead, of whom they have known nothing 
and giv.ng those who had known them the mo.t living de.crlj- 
tion ot them, as well as messages from them. . . 

"Now it Is idle talking of odic fo„e in the face of facts like 
these, wh,ch m occurring all over America, and in various 
parts of Eunipe, and which accord with the attestations of men 
of the highest characte d g 

Plato, Socrates, Pythag dm h 

thi. spiril-action. In R „ E ,, S d d 

aboriginal America, as w a J d dm 

eminent Fathers of the Ch h T g 

age but this have but o th 

"It is the last, vain cl g w d 

the substance, which mah d h n ^ 

Hosted b, Google 

REV. C. EEECHER ON THE PHENOMENA. 2$$ 

theories of the past ceiiturj., seize so eagerly on the "die force as 
^ . 1. It ,=;ll hf torn bv advancing truth from 

their forlorn hope. It will be torn oy aovai... g 
their grasp. The cry that all is imagination >s gone already . 
odic force is the present stage, and it must go too. 

^■And here I could give you a whole voh,r«e of the remark- 
able and even startling reveIatio«B made by our own departed 
friends at our own evening table ; those friends coming at wholly 
expected times, and bringing messages of the -"'^^ "'"■' 

imoortance,-carI-ying them on from period to period, some- 
hnes at intervals of years, into a perfect history. But these 
things are too sacred for the public eye. All Spiritual.st. have 

rea lor lli^ yu^^— --j^- — -- -i 
them i .nd the, >re ho.rd.d among.l the treuure. which m .»e 
we.lth of the .ireetioh., .nd the link, of „,ur.nee w.th the 
world of the hereafter- . 

" Now, I :,.l, wh.t right have we, or h., .nj one, to reject 
the perpetn.l, nnifornr, .nd voluntary ...ertion. of the .p.r.t. , 
to tell them th.t thej lie, .nd .re not .pirit., but m.rel, .d. or 
,ome .uch blind .nd incompetent force! Nothing but the h.rd- 
ne.> .nd de.dnc. of th.t .n.i-.piriln.l edue.tion, whleb h.. 
been growing h.rder .nd more uu.piritn.l evef ..nee the Rel- 
oro.lTon, could le.d nten to .neb .b.urd.tj, Prote.t.nUm, to 
deattx>y f.ith in Popish miracles, went, as is always the ca , 
fi in it. re-aelion and, not content with levelling the .buses, 
proceeded to .nnibil.tc f.ith in the .upern.tttr.l .Itogetber.- 

The Rev. Ch.rle. Beecber, in bis able rey.ew of the .pneu- 
matic theories, s.js, "Th.t mind, sep.r.fng .l.eif p.rt.fliy 
from the body, even d.ring this life, should be .hie to en.rg e 
.t a dist.nce, though mysterious, i. not meredtble. Cicero 
reeogniois it- Jambliebu. build, on it- It is easy to conceive 
a l.l by which it should be- But to s.y th.t tr.l. e.n push . 
door open at a distance, project odic speclra. visible .nd .udi- 
ble to dist.nt observers, perform on dist.nt mnsie.l instru- 
ments- and, in short, do whatever the person would do, it 
physically present ; or that every particle of the body is a minia- 
of the whole; and that these, constantly exhaling, remam 
,cars and coming in contact with sensitive brams, produce 

Hostsabi Google 

2S6 

PLANCHETTE. 

Por wh d 
n do? It ca 

1, by s< 

d d T 

uoue and mental state 
- hese, (hough stated as 

d." 
Mr, Beech er regards 
p to prove that Intelli- 
nintelligently i thus 

of spirits at all, and 
hey are disembodied 

t the emhodied spirit 

death- like tra 

IS, appear a 
uwn body, speak audibly, hear answers, move bodies, perform 
on instruments, and do whatever it would do through ' the body 
if that were present. It can obtain access to the contents of 
other minds, reveal distant events, past, present, and future. 
But if so, the further concession of a temporary going forth of 
soul from body cannot long be withheld. Mrs. Hauff^ firmly 
declared that her soul left the body and returned. Gilbert Ten- 
o the day of his death, believed that during that long and 

'■''"' ■■■'"" ■ left the body. All clairvoyants testify 

to the same. In this way Cicero accounts for prophetic dreams : 
"In dreams, the soul hath a vigor free from sense, and disin- 
thralled of every care, the body lying death-like. And since 
she hath existed from all eternity, and been acquainted with 
innumerable minds, she beholdeth all things that are in rerum 

_ All the writings of antiquity are eloquent with this grand 

But once admit this of the soul before death, and how can it 
be denied after .> 

Hosted by Google 

REV. C. BEECHER ON THE PHENOMENA. 257 

Take, for e..mp!e, the instance given by Cicero, as a favorite 
with the Stoics : Two Arcadians stopped at Megara, one at an 
inn, the other at a friend's. At midnight, the former appeared 
to the latter, asking help ; for the innkeeper was about to murder 
him Roused in affright, the latter thought it a dream, and 
aeain slept. His friend again appeared, asking him, as he had 
not come to him alive, to avenge him dead, as the innkeeper 
had now slain him, and concealed his body in a cart under dirt. 
In the morning he met the cart as directed, found the corpse, 
and the innkeeper was executed. 

"Here f t be adm tted sajs Mr Beecl er that the soul 
appeared it a d stance fro r, the body before death, how can it 
be de ed thit t d d th same af er ... 

" Fu thermore f the soul do after death con e m contact 
with tl e p r t tl ro g that env ron s how deny that it does 
the sa ewhen e ered from the body before -death? 

" How res st the tirm per uas on of G lb t Tennent, and 
others, that he did actually converse with spirits f Why should 
not a sleep, so deep as to be like death, produce .n part death a 
results, in introducing the spirit to scenes behind the veil ? 

" Is there no weight in the impressive declaration of the 
almost dying Mrs. HaulK, that while all sorts of ocular illu- 
sions passed before her eyes, yet ' >l -uxis impossible to express 
hav> entirely different these ocular illusions -mere to the real de- 
cerning of spirits I and she only wished other people ^erem a 
condition to compare these Ime hinds of perception i»>th one 
another, both of ^h!ck ^ere equally distinct from our ordinary 
terceHion, and also from that of the second sight. 

"Yet if such converse with the dead be admitted, m even 
one well-authenticated instance, the whole apneumatic argu- 
ment falls. With all the gross consequences, then, of the cere- 
bral hypothesis, it is the only alternative. 

■' If, then, such difficulties embarrass the apneumatic hypothe- 
sis, why not adopt the pneumatic? It is an admitted prmciple 
of science, that that theory is preferable which accounts most 
naturally for all the facts known. The pneumatic theory ac- 

Hostea by Google 

^5^ PLANCHETTE, 

counts for all facts alleged by the other theories as well as either 

of them; for some, better; and for many, which they cannot 

account for at all without ahsurdity. 
" One of the facts most relied on by the apneumatic argument 

15 the misspelling, which, it is asserted, always follows the 
hab.t of the medium. Such, however, is not the fact. Cases 
are on record of misspelled communications coming through 
mediums who could spell correctly, much to their chagrin. 
But even if the fact were, as claimed, it might be accounted for, 
either by supposing that illiterate mediums attracted illiterate 
spirits, or by supposing that spirits, in order t 

medium, and to take 

partially to incarnate themselves in the body of the 

, 111 part, its organic and mental habits. 

"So, also, of the influence of drugs, manipulations, diseases. 
The pneumatic theory is, that as the soul may by thes 

•be assisted, or disabled, 1 

bodied spirits may, in the use of an invaded brain. When the 
odylhc conditions are by these means prepared, the spirit can 
insinuate itself; when they are by these means destroyed, !t is 
compelled to forego its hold; so in regard to nervous epidemics. 
The theory is, that these may exist without the agency of disem- 
bodied spirits; but that vihen they exist, developing proper 
odyliic conditions, spirits may be expected to take advantage of 
them. Hence, to find cases of nervous epidemics, where no 
indications of spiritual agency are apparent, proves nothing, 
except that the odyliic conditions were not favorable. 

" While, then, the pneumatic hypothesis accounts for all the 
facts adduced by the other theories, as well as they, it also 
accounts naturally for other facts by which they are embar- 
rassed. It is, therefore, probably the true hypothesis. And 
before rejecting it, let that saying of Isaac Taylor's be well 
pondered, that we ought not to reject the almost universal 
belief of occasional supernatural interference, till we can prove 
an imfoismiily. ' An absolute skepticism on this subject can be 
maintained only by the aid of Hume's oft-repeated sophism, 
that no testimony can establish an alleged fact which is at vari- 

Hostea by Google 

REV. C. BEECIIKR ON THE PHENOMENA. 359 

a nee with common experience; lor it must not bs denied that 
some few instances of the sort alluded to rest upon testimony, 
in itself, thoroughty unimpeachable; nor is the import of the 
evidence in these cases at all touched by the now well-under- 
stood doctrine concerning spectral illusions.' 

" Now the apneuniatic argument virtually implies an iinfossi- 

.rted spirit, the wife 

w revelation, not to 
se such potentiality 

w could she db it, in 
consideration? She 
s his dress, his per- 
in rapport with that 
locamyi one siiig=, [i.aj» ".^ s--- - i"ano, takes a pencil 
and writes, and he sees the pencil in free space tracing his wife's 
autograph, — automatic still ! She shows him a cloudy hand ; 
nay, a luminous form, and smiles and speaks as when in life; 
that is, an optical illusion, or hallucination, or a particle exhaled 
from her body has impinged on his sensitive brain, and created 
a subjective vision. She communicates facts, past, present, and 
future, beyond the scope of his knowledge ; that might be clair- 
voyance or cerebral sensing. Alas I then, what could she do 
more? She must retire baffled, and complaining that he had 
become so scientific that all communication with him was 
imposslbU. 

"But if the denial of the pneumatic hypothesis be unphilo- 
Eophical, it is no leas unscriptural." 

■ The philanlhropic Oberim (ij3s-iSo6)vbis a Spirilualisl, and ckimea to have &«. 
quenl intemews wilh Ihe spirit of his departed wife. When ialied how he coiild dis- 

dislinguish one color from anolher! " He lold them that they might as well tty to 
from his wife. Al the same lime, Oberlin wss temarklbly ftee from any trace of mvs- 

Hostea by Google 

26o 

PLANCHBTTE. 

In a review of Faraday's exploded argument against the 
spiritual phenomena, Mr. Isaac Rehn remarks as follows : " The 
doctrine of the Correlation and Conservation of Forces is based 
on the indestructibility of matter and force, or, aa by some 
stated, on the indestructibility of matter and the persistence of 
force. From this it is argued that all forms, however diversi- 
fied, are but the re-appearance of the primitive atoms of elemen- 
tary matter in new shapes; and, analogous to this, the poiaers 
of matter are but the re-appearance of the stored forces of the 
universe, as they are translated into heat, electricity, chemical 
affinity, gravity, light, vitality, mechanical force, &c.* Accord- 
ing to this theory, wherever mechanical force is expended, the 
given amount of this force must quantitatively appear as some 
other form of force ; it may be heat or light, or both, or in some 
other form of force than either; but yet, in whatever form or 
forms it may appear, it must be quantitatively the total of the ini- 
tial force, hoHfever much it may differ qualitatively from that, 
and can be no more and no less. 

"It is still further urged that the varied forms of matter and 
force, as they affect the transformations in the world, are also 
the efficient and only powers through and by which all vital 
fhenomena are produced, these vital phenomena being inter- 
preted in that large sense which includes all intellectual or other 
power, by whatever names called. Now, it is another postulate 
of the doctrine of the correlation of the forces that every form 
of force made to appear, may also be made to appear in any 
other given form of force. ThuSj if heat is made to appear as 
electricity, electricity may, in turn, be made to appear again as 
heat; and so on through the chapter. 

" The point sought to be made against the spiritual theory is, 
that, under the doctrine of the correlation of the forces, vitality, 
or vital force, is the re-appearance of some other form of force. 
According to the law, it may also be made to appear as the ini- 
tial force or forces engaged in its production, and so can have 
no continuity of e. 

Hosted by Google 

CORRELATION C 

261 

of this, that, in the retrograde decompositions of the organic 
compounds of high chemical formula back to the binary states 
of matter, all the forces appear in the putrefactive chemical 
changes of decomposition. And if sfirit, therefore, exists in 
man, it, too, must be hut a form of force ; a translation of some 
other force which, in its turn, shall aUo be translated, and, 
therefore, cease to be as 

" It presumes all forces ^' 

appear in which they ma '" 

is to say, that if all the ''^' 

and are, the evolutions *^ 

thereof, then they may, t 
" But to the point ; If i ^^' 

that ' the forces are indestructiOle, canvertioie, rmjioaaerin-n: ob- 
jects,' it is not yet settled &aw many such forces there are. Or, 
if it be assumed that all forms of force are but the translation of 

■.alfor. 

3 better settled whether there s 

■.siduaty forms, not converUble by any knowledge we 
possess, or that all force is,^er se, J'iysical, and that there can be 
no force but such as appears in transformations of matter, or in 
the phenomena of heat, electricity, gravity, &c. These points, 
I say, are not by any means settled ; and, until they are, it is but 
begging the whole argument to declare all spiritual phenomena 
impossible in view of them. 

"The whole argument might, therefore, be rested here, since 
it is the business of those who urge the argument, founded on 
the forces, against us, to show in what way they can demonstrate 
by the ' rigid test of fact and experiment,' that all phenomena 
are resultant esperimentally and logically from the physical 
forces. 

■■ We simply deny that such demonstration has ever been 
made or that even the vital force has by any such means been 
made to appear as a translation of the other forces. The most 
that can be said upon this point is, that where vital force exists, 
there the other forces are brought into play, and this nobody 
pretends to deny. We may also admit that vital force nowhere 

Hosted by Google 

^"^ PLANCH ETTB. 

nppesrs [n the absence of the others; and Mr. Faraday, or any- 

mtfion''' " """""' '" ^" ^"^ "'' ''"' '^" *"" '""'*^ "f '""'^ ''^■ 
" But who ever heard of cem ss g 

heat, gravity, mechanical force, i W ^ 

tions that the treasury of the ni m 
dents which make up the record * j 

the incontestable proof ot person d ts 

vertible into electricity or chemic ffi p h doc 

of the correlation of forces is to b g „ h 

a right to insist upon the terms u d m tr 

are had, which are, in brief, that ^ 

affinity, mechanical power, and m g m h m d 

With the affections, memory, co 

vitality, it has not been done, and „ S d 

be done. Until this latter has b mp m 

lively, our Spiritualism !s in no 

arguments founded on the correJ "* 

from damage by the other futile a gu ""dp 

fessor Faraday." 

A psychological theory, for wh 
entire originality, but which he 

ness, is that contained in a little vo m n t e. 

Co., London (1868), and entitled . 

Outlines of a Science of Comparat P g B C S 

Thou^^b !f °" °- '"' ^"^hropolog.^l Society of London." 
Though the theory is not based to ant extent on the recent 
scS^/'""""" "^^P'"'"""^'" the wnter bj a course of' 
1 c reasoning, arrives, at results not inconsistent with the 

soul, orpiyct,. ,„a the ,f„„ „ f„,„ „, „„ 

According to Mr. W,k., the p„„c,pt ofbem, on which m.n'. 
.npcHor ™n,.l d„el„pn,o„. depend., 1. ,hc .pl,l, of „ll,cdon! 

Hosted bi Google 

MR. WAKE'S PSYCHOLOGY. 263 

or simply, as distinguished from the soul essence, or fsyche, the 
spirit, or pneuma. "It is by the addition of such a spiritual 
agent we can alone account for the superior phenomena of the 
human mental life. Founded, as those phenomena are, in the 
simple sensational perceptions which the lower animals also 
possess, we see in them the gradual development of a perception 
so different in its objects as to be necessarily due to the activity 
of a superior principle of being. The final result of this per- 
ception is the knowledge of, the intuitions of truth, which are 
the very life of the soul essence; a knowledge which requires 
the operation of a spiritual principle existing beyond the soul, 
although intimately connected with it. Having no such exter- 
nal principle of spiritual activity, the lower animals can never 
obtain any knowledge of the soul's intuitions, or of those gen- 
eral truths which are the expression of them in relation to ex- 

" It is thus that the brute creatures are the mere instruments 
of the soul's activity, operating through the bodily organism; 
whilst man, having discovered the intuitions which are thus ac- 
tive, realizes them, and makes them instruments for his advance- 
ment in knowledge, and for the subjection of the forces of nature 
to his own purposes. 

" The relation between the soul and spiritual essences, or be- 
tween the/o-cie and fneun,a, is clearly seen from the nature of 
the spiritual activity, which leads, not to any change of mental 
operations, but merely to the improvement of thought objecUiJ- 
ity The soul can of itself perceive only the individual objects 
presented to the eye ; but when joined to the spirit, it takes cog- 
nizance, not only of the ever-varying phenomena of nature, but 
also of the qualities of objects on which the changes in such 
phenomena depend, and even creates those symbols which, as 
objects of thought, give it so increased a range and activity. 
The spirit, having to do only with the object, and not w.th the 
thought itself, may be classed with the bodily eye, as an instru- 
ment of soul vision, — the one giving perception of the mate- 
rial forms of nature, t'le other of its spiritual forces; and m 

Hosted by Google 

■*"+ PLANCHETTE. 

"?.o Loot, t" 1"/'"' '"■"•' " "'""'■' 'Sr"»; - 

■ng to l.ocke, IS a chief source of our ideas 

aJiof :';r,r'' ■" ■"' •■■""■ '■"•-y"'' •• '-i»M.d .o «, 

both of .„e,„, Tu'S lltj"o^°:,'" "•■""' ■"°""*'' 
to claim a l.r„h. ? """ °'^"'' °"" being, tiie spirit is entitled 
to clatm a h.gher natnre than that of the soui essence lo »hich 
.t IS joined , and 11 must be recognized as the Irne orlncinl. S 

^■:!z°i "('■ """■"* "' «■• ■"»" ...™ of r;.r ' 

That the spiritnal life, like the soul .cti.itv, ha' it, several 
l^bleTS ■"""•ir "*■ " '■""" <■">« -'"p^nre" 
tte Tan °' "° '"'* °' "« »«■"■»• •»■! * 

of'tif.' •■'■'f' ,'° "" "•"'"■ '"I"'"", -liow. Ihe first unfolding 
of the .pirilual perception i bnt that perception being as yet i^ 

imitation which is the result of simple thought. 

"IB the w»™, „e see the .ctlvit, of the spirilu.l principle 
« combination with that of the soul essence, fn au intuit"! re 

he qualities on which their value depends, which if necessary to 
be ge„eraii„,io.. of reason. We see here the aeUy"; .7,h^ 
nstmetiye soul, yiy,«ed by contact with the spiritual principle 
resulting in that almost intuitiye perception of simple Klaliou 

the possession of which hv wnma.. !^ 1. ,. f ^ 'emuon, 

" T„ 1 ^ woman is her peculiar distinction. 

In wa«, on the other hand, instinct giving place to reason as 
the stimulating prineiole of aciin., ii. ... , ^"^on as 

emp^yed in .n»pp^ingVb;r;Th;Strtr.S:"rSU^ 

bf man., nie.t.l deyeiopL'eC^nS-vrop-.Trof 2 
emotional soul essence being so perfectly combined with tta 
tan perceptiouof the rc.ec.ive spirit, that reason itself b.lS 
s"" ." "' °''""" ''■ " 1"°"" "' 'P''-«"»l i- 

o the quel 

ortality. 

Hostsabi Google 

SOUi-S OF THE LOWER ANIMALS. ^65 

Mr. W.ta tWnk, 11 can-ol be denied th« the .oi,l i. the re- 
,p„„.lble, tamorttl portion of ni.n'. beins- A. the enio lon.l, 
thinliiiig and willing essence, it is the real principle of being, 
and that which performs, through the physical organism, those 
action, to which moral re.ponslbiUlj h.s relation. Bnt the sool 
1, responsible for these actions only because it ha. a Irno.ledge 
of their nature as being good or e,il. This knowledge depends, 
however c. Ih. acMI, ./a, .tirlL.l (""t"". °» -^'f '" 
whole .pedal IntcUectnal development of man is founded, and 
of which conscience itself, the test of responsibility, is one of 
the fruits. 

A. the lower animal, have not the spirit, or #«»•«, they can 
have no knowledge of the nature of actions as being in them- 
selves good or evil ; and, therefore, they are not responsible creat- 
ures The question of brute immortality can receive a similar 
solution A. the soul, or fsycU, is the principle of being, it 
■ „< S. a, •••; •*■■■» ■■> immorlal. The lower animals, there- 
fore have within themselves the prinelple of eternal eitistcnce. 
We cannot believe that any substance, either material or spirit- 
ual, can be annihilated 1 and, therefore, the brute soul, after 
death, must continue to exist. 

B, Immortality, however, i. usually nnderstood ./.,-.•/ «»'- 
Bacein a state of teMrate identity. This state doe. not depend 
on the pcession of the soul essence, or ^yc*,, but on that of 
the higher spirit, or J>,..«, the activity of which can alone give 
the self-confidousnesB on which, apart from the bodily organism, 
eepartite identity is itself dependent. The brute soul, therefore, 
according to Mr. Wake, must exist eternally, but not in a sepa- 

"'wi'ethowever, it 1. asked, "In what state, then, doe. the 
animal soul exist after death!" the only answer which can be 
given is, tlutt it »« Mm t. the g-eett ee.ree ef beyfiem 
^Uch the .ml fret h.d it, erlgi: As matte, i. one and eternal, 
although its grosser forms are ever changmg, so it is with the 
soul eienee, whose phenomenal f„m,, numberless a. those of 
matur, are equally changeful, but which in its .ubstance ever 

Hostsabi Google 

2t>0 PIANCIIETTK. 

continues one and unchangeable. The noble privilege of r 
however, is to be individualized as a distinct and immortal spir 

The tendency of modern scientific thought is to correlate all 
the phenomena of nature as the manifestations of one simple 
energy, of which the inorganic and the organic are but more or 
less complex phases. The professed advocates of the doctrine 
of material development ultimately reduce all things to an eter- 
nally existing and infinitely extended matter, of which force is 
the phenomenal activity. 

" Such would appear to he the conclusion to which the hypoth- 
esis of Mr. Darwin tends. Stated in the words of Professor 
Huxley, it is, ' Given the existence of organic matter, i^s ten- 
dency to transmit properties, and its tendency accordingly to 
vary ; and, lastly, given the conditions of existence by which or- 
ganic matter is surrounded, — these put together are the causes 
of the present and the past conditions of organic nature.' 

"The existence of matter i 

1 organiz 

suraed; hut from Professor Huxley's supposition, that in fifty 
years' time, science will be able ' to produce the conditions requi- 
site to the origination of life,' we are justified in considering 
that organization ' is the accident, while the existence of mat- 
ter in Its simple, inorganic form, is the only fundamental re- 
quirement This is, moreover, confirmed by the assertion of a 
late writer Mr. David Page, the most recent advocate of the 
development hypothesis, that man, like the animal, springs from 
inorganic elements. 

If we turn to the positive philosophy, we see that it has the 
same material basis. Mr. Lewes, while atErming that there is 
no real distinction between vital and psychical phenomena, the 
latter being themselves vital, defines vitality as ' the abstract 
designation of certain special properties manifested by matter 
under certain special conditions.'. We have here the same funda- 
mental idea as that on which the hypothesis of Mr. Darwin re- 
poses. Mr. Lewes adds, ' Life is known only in dependence on 
substance ; its activity is accelerated or retarded according to the 

Hosted by Google 

NON-PERCEPTIBILITY < 

j67 

conuitions in which the elemental changes of the substance are 
facilitated or impeded ; »nd it vanishes with the disintegration of 
the substance.' " 
Tliis is the necessary conclusion of materialism. 
Jt is appan^nt that if this conclusion were esUblished, it would 
furnish an insnperahle objection to the spiritual theory as to 
man's nature enforced by Mr. Wake. He, therefore, proceeds to 
examine the grounds on which the materialistic argument is 
based. No objection, he contends, can bo made to the existence 
of s^'fit on the ground that it is not capable of d'fe^i proof. 
« Positive science allows the existence of matter in so attermated 
a condition, that it can be known only by the effects of its mo- 
lion, and on the • disintegration of the substance ' which attend, 
the destruction of life i the substance itself still remains, .1- 
though 11 may take a form which cannot be recogni.ed Ti, 
„,rf,im-f,rafliHlily' ^/ .ftrll .1, Uenfin, ., t""! 'f ,'" 
HOB-ei«i^c«ce. But,- further, supposing the animal organism 
possesses such . principle of being as this, its real hfe may con- 
tinue, notwithstanding the disintegration of the bodily sub- 
stance, without its existence being peiceiv.d. It is extremely 
probable that the ether can be rendered knowable to us, under 
the conditions of the present life, only by virtue of its action on 
the matter of the earth's atmospherei and if, therefore, this me- 
dium were removed, there would be no possibility of our guess- 
ing its existence In like manner, the disintegration of the 
bodily organism ma, destroy the only means by which the prin- 
ciple of animal life can reveal itself to us lu our present state, 
,„,fl, a may bt,n,JtraH.i-,fai'l '""""•■ 

■■ Notwithstanding the fact that there is no prim&Jacie oojec- 
tion to the spiritual view of life, the advocates of the m.tenal 
hypothesis may still .s.ert that materialism is quite suBcient to 
account tor .11 the phenomena of organic matter, without call- 
ing in the agency of any .peci.l principle of being. 

"When, however, we ask what beyond the mere fact of cnm- 
piexlty, which itself require, explanntion, determines the pas- 
sage of matter from the Inorganic to the vegetable, and l.om 

Hosts! b, Google 

3D8 PI.ANCWETTK. 

thence to the animal form of organization, the positive philoso- 
phy is silent. It does, indeed, declare that there is no ' essential 
distinction between organic and inorganic matter,' nor yet ' any 
essential (noumenal) separation ' between life and mind ; but, at 
the same time, it admits that it has no other object of inquiry 
than that of laws. Treating solely of the laws of phenomena, 
it does not concern itself with their cause; and, so far, tiiere- 
foi-e, as positivism is concerned, any of those phenomena may 
be due to the activity of an immaterial principle, the presence 
of which may be the coase of the complexity of structure that 
furnishes the special conditions necessary for such phenomena, 
and which can perhaps reveal itself only through matter." 

The Darwinian hypothesis requires consideration, according 
to Mr. Wake, only so far as it alFects to derive man, equally with 
both the animal and vegetable kingdoms, from a common and 
single progenitor. As to the former, Professor Huxley says, 
"There cannot be the slightest doubt in the world that the argu- 
ment which applies to the improvement of the horse from an 
earlier stock, or of ape from ape, applies to the improvement of 
man from some simpler and lower stock than man." 

The same argument may be used to explain the origin of the 
animal from the vegetable organism. On examination, how- 
ever, we find that the conclusion cannot be sustained. When it 
is said that "the structural differences which separate man from 
the apes are not greater than those which separate some apes 
from others," we have, independently of the fact that there is no 
evidence of the past or present existence of any such links 
between man and the ape, as there are between ape and ape, a 
statement which is not correct. This may, indeed, be proved 
by Professor Huxley's own admission. He is constrained to 
admit " the width of the gulf in intellectual and moral matters 
which lies between man and the whole of the lower creation " 
although he explains it as the result of " variation in function" 
rather than of variation in structure. 

According to Professor Huxley, it is language which " consti- 
tutes and makes man what he is; " and this language depends 

Hosted by Google 

THE DA«WimA!I HYPOTHESIS. »<«( 

, .■ " „f tt,p two nerves which supply the 
„n..th..,h.lltJof .ctton f tlTh "e "iructure of which, 
....de. or .he giolMi "«,".*. which wo.id he 
although imperceptible, might nave a 
.. practlcallj I"'-"';" ,„„ ^^d, ha. .o marvelloo, 

a consequence he a slight one. . . ^ „ith a g^«eral 

canoe is m.t.l, .pP-tent, for " " ""^Jj^, ,.„£„„„ 
superiority and rehnemeut of »"°" *"■;„„ „,,aui..lion, 
which give a higlier form •'■'' '™" ' , „„„„ of the nerve. 

:-^:rs;:rs:^r;.=-.:srr:»pe. 

iUiamosti^oJantln.™^^^^^^^^^ 

rS ™: Sd "tii; he ...tfy .nperior to «.e cja.ure. Mow 

rr^^:«S":xr;s:s;rt-=:.oh.,e 
■--?£r';^r:^Sr^of«:So?s:; 

accept, as reduchle to the genera .___.^.^^ ^„ . 

::d-:;:?rr.rrerhe°i«prohlmpr.sentedhyorganie 

— 'g,^::r"'iSs-e,con..^--sts::l 

evolution, why •■■"»''-''= «f„ ^^'.r.tion -hich can be 

-:X:iroS=c.».hoL™.^^-^^ 

of ^ Bpecial endowments — that naiure r ..^n.ltion ' — is in 

witho'ut our being able to 'J*; ^^^ftrthl ™™-"' 
reality fatal » »« hypothe.i. it.e f, «™S ' ^, ,„„,, f„.h 
such a power bespeaks the operation in na 

"ISr.!^*? i. evident .ha. «.e minu.e modihca.iou. of 

Hosted by Google 

PI.ANCHiiTTE. 

<lf 

Ssn; ■ : r " ••""""-< "• •"■«=■"'«.■ •■>•■= «<!..- 

den^v Th-*' °" ■ ? ^^^P""'^ '° '^ preceding functional ten- 
reMonrng of Profe„or Hnxie,, tliM . fnnctlon,] dilTerence 

2"ttan''rf ."h "'"" '"" ■ ■""" ""■""'"' ''"'S'- The modi. 

si;,re;:n„\,rn",;r..''rr,°:r"''''"'' 

ui n, . . , possess, it IS abso ute V imoossi- 

p"d".c' '; "•''•"»"'" >- ■•".=.".. di,re,„ei .iHr , 

■■Tliere m„,, be .„ .„,e„dent f„„aion.I lendenej, „, ,he,e 
en be no f„„„,on of ongnnie „.,„i.,, n,„eh le.fof , .„e! 
c,.l.z.d o,gnn.„„. The verj f.c, of ,he e«i.,ence of on.nil! 
so different in tlieir vitai piienomena as >h<. anl,^ ^ !,^' 
Piant, both Of ,bich an. Lde np of' .he '.Im"," ^ 

TiuZl'J^, t'""?' ". 'r '"■f"'-' /■•--■'<•• *»*.- 

«, wnicft cannot be explained hy any pecnliaritjof combination 

"b?r.tSr°d'H™" "* '""""" " ■»•"*" "> ■"' • °h 

combmatton, and d.rett.ve of the fo™ it .bail take. Snppo,- 
.ng, then, .pec.Hc organized form, a„ accompanied bv peenlla, 
•rrangement of their chemical element., ,hL tak."e fo m 

Hosted bi Google 

of ' physiological units,' the tendency of the primitive organic 
matter, to take this arrangement, has Ko he accounted for; and 
it can he only by its dependence on some still more ultimate 

This ultimate fact Mr. Wake finds in spirit, deity. The phe- 
nomena of life in man are quite distinct from those of either 
organic or inete animal vitality; and, although intimately re- 
lated to, and, it may he, necessarily connected with them, the 
union is one of actual addition, as by superposition of a per- 
fectly fresh and independent faculty. 

" The universe may he described as an infinitely extended and 
eternally existing organism. The possession, however, by man 
of the principles of animal and spiritual life requires the prior 
existence of someiliiiig analogous in nature to tkem from -whtch 
these principles can have been derived. There must, in fact, 
according to the reasoning of the materialistic argument, be an 
eternally existing principle of being, from which the soul of the 
animal organism can have had its origin ; and thus must it he 
to enable us to account for the existence of the higher spiritual 
principle which we see in man. 

But as in phenomenal nature we «ee the three discrete de- 
grees of life CO CXI tmg m a certain relation -the lower hemg 
essential to the existence of the higher and the h gher again 
direction to the activ ty of the 1 

justified in affirming that a 

ts between the 

several to cji.i>i ..g eternal pr nciple of being which 
reveal themsehes These three degrees ot Absolute Lile can 
not be independent of each other -ind therefore that Eternal 
and Infinite Existenue from wbith all phenomenal nature his 
been evolved must although manifesting his activity through 
a material organism yet be essentiiUv a spiritual being as 
possessing not only the principle of animal vitality but aUo 
that of the piritual life 

As however nature is an eiolution from the Dnine Organ 
ism, — man being the final result ot such evolution, — ue must 
see in man and nature a representation of God ; who, therefore. 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCH KTTE. 

A h m M W w h 

only ground for reconcilration between science and religion. 

The argument which we have thus presented, in an abridged 
form, is worthy the reader's study; and it will, we hope, call 
attention to the book itself, where some omitted links will be 
found supplied. 

As a fitting termination to our review of the principal theories 
which the phenomena have called forth, we quote fro'n the Lon- 
don "Morning-Star and Dial " the following remarks : — 

"The egotism which sets up its own finite comprehension as 
the test of possibility, rejects with scorn every thing alien to its 
experience, or antagonistic to its preconceived ideas. It can 
scarcely be necessary to urge, that such a mode of dealing with 
alleged facts is not only grossly unphilosophical, but would, if 
generally adopted, prove a positive barrier to the elucidation of 
important truths. 

" When a very large number of independent and respectable 
witnesses testify that they have repeatedly seen phenomena won- 
derful in their character, identical in their nature, and occurring 
always under certain fixed conditions, it is obviously our duty to 
sift their evidence, in order that we may either crusli an impos- 
ture, dispel a delusion, or establish a new and, possibly, -most 
important truth. 
"This is the position which the controversy with regard to 

Hosted by Google 

THE CONTROVERSY STATED. 3^3 

Spiritualism has unquestionably assumed. In England and in 
America thousands of men and women esteemed for their piety, 
their intellectual ability, and their social worth, aver that they 
have been eye-witnesses, not once, but repeatedly, of very strange 
manifestations, which can scarcely be accounted for by the oper- 
ation of any known natural agency. 

" They tell us that they have seen heavy tables lifted up a foot 
or more from the ground, and held for some moments suspended 
in the air; men raised from their chairs and floated across the 
ceiling of the apartment; accordions and guitars, held in the 
hand, played upon by unseen fingers ; bells carried about a room 
and rung at intervals by an invisible power, and passed from hand 
to hand of the quiescent circle; intelligible sentences written 
upon slates and slips of paper placed beyond the reach of any 
present; luminous hands appearing in the air, lifting articles 
from the floor and placing them upon the table; and a host of 
other marvels, to all appearances equally beyond the grasp of 
ordinary credibility. 

" Mr, Coleman, a gentleman whose word would be unhesitat- 
ingly taken on any ordinary matter, tells us of a drawing me- 
dium, who has the power of sketching perfect portraits of de- 
ceased persons whom be never saw, and with regard to whose 
personal appearances he had no means of forming any idea. 
He relates his visit to another medium, to whom he was person- 
ally unknown, who, in answer to his mental question, wrote a 
communication to him from his step-son, sometime deceased, 
signing it with the young man's full name, and adding his own 
residence in London; and he statesthat he listened to some 
speaking mediums, persons in their ordinary state wholly illiter- 
ate, who, under what was asserted to be spiritual influence, 
spoke in public for more than an hour at a time, with very re- 
markable eloquence and intellectual power. He recounts an 
instance, which he declares was certified to him on excellent au- 
thority, in which a communication was received through a me- 
dium, leading to the discovery of a lost document essential to 
the success of an important lawsuit; and he recites an example 

Hosted by Google 

a74 PLANCH ETTE. 

of an opinion obtained by the same means, which brought to 
light a new point, and put a stop to a harassing Utigation. 

"But, putting aside all that he gives on the authority of others, 
his narrative Of his own persona! experience is strange enough 
to satiate the most ravenous appetite for the marvellous. At one 
stance, for example, at Boston, he states that a guitar was car- 
ried rapidly about the room above the heads of those present, a 
melody being accurately played upon it as it moved through the 
air; that bells were similarly floated about, ringing all the 
while; that the medium, in her arm-chair, was lifted on to the 
centre of the table, from which position he himself removed her; 
that his own name was pronounced in a loud voice through a 
horn ; and that, when he complained of the heat of the room, a 
fan was taken from a drawer and waved before him, and a tum- 
bler of water was raised and placed to his lips." 

"All this, no doubt, is passing strange; and those who have 
never with their own eyes seen any thing of the sort, may be 
well excused for shaking their heads in doubt. It is true that 
the striking singularity of some of the phenomena reported in- 
duces UB sometimes to forget that, if we concede the possibility 
of one of them, we may without much difficulty admit that of 
9il. Grant that a power exists which can raise a heavy table 
from the ground and hold it suspended in the air, it is clear that 
the same agency may just as easily lift a man from his chair, 
carry a bell, wave a fan, or play upon a guitar. The simple rap- 
ping upon the table, if not fraudulently produced, is intrinsi- 
cally, though not apparently, quite as marvellous as any of the 
most elaborate manifestations. 

"But these physical effdcts are by far the least interesting of 
those which the Spiritualists allege to be of every- day occur- 
rence m their circles. They complain, indeed, that the use of 
the phrases, ' Spirit- Rapping,' and 'Table-Turning,' has tended 
to give the general public a very low and inadequate idea of 

■ These phennmena occuired at one uf the sittings al which MIk Lord was Uie nie- 

Hostea by Google 

CHARACTER OF THE VOUCHERS. 3^5 

]j p b BS of phenomena. According 

d n g eaks which are played with ma- 

b d d y to arrest attention, and to con- 

^ ji It p h gencies are present, capable of 

h d g rain w h m Is; and that, this end having 

n P P of ti"^' which they regard as a 

jl d p q 9 its needful scope and comes 

p Th p p h V hold to be the communication 

m d p rt d b g urviving relatives, of messages 

n agement, and of counsel, ■ — con- 

d y b d b ices, but much more frequently 

h ra 

Th b h h m te end of these ' Spiritual Mani- 

h d m owards moral and religious per- 

g gh he loving ministrations of the 

ddthp m dbg the counteraction of material- 

istic tendencveB by the exhibibon of cogent proofs of the reality 
of spiritual existence. 

" If the extraordinary narratives were vouched for only by 
men utterly unknown, or of dubious credibility, they might 
scarcely be deemed worthy of serious attention. Even then we 
could scarcely avoid the reflection that the idea which consti- 
tutes the postulate of the Spiritualists, so far from being novel, 
has had adherents in every age and every nation. The belief in 
the possibility of intercourse betweeen spirits and mortals has 
found a place in almost every religious creed ever held by man; 
and pagan traditions and biblical records alike bear witness to 
supernatural communion. Nor can we entirely exclude the 
thought that these phenomena, if sufficiently attested to be ac- 
cepted as real, would cast much light on many incidents in past 
secular history, which stand greatly in need of some rational 
elucidation, in place of the wholesale rejection of a mass of evi- 
dence which has hitherto been our desperate expedient. But are 
they so attested ? This is the first point to be settled. The prin- 
cipal witnesses are literary men of note, merchants, lawyers, 

Hosted by Google 

270 PLANCH ETTE. 

men of unblemished repute, artists, poets, and statesmen. Of 
minor witnesses, the name is legion ; but we have no personal 
knowledge of their claims to oar belief. This much we know, 
that in America, and in our own countr;', there are many whose 
sanity no one doubts, whose general veracity no one would im- 
peach, who aver that they have seen these strange things with 
their own eyes. It remains for us to say whether we will take 
their word. 

"If we stamp all those who declare that they have witnessed 
these so-called ' Spiritual Manifestations,' as liars, of course the 
inquiry will be at an end. If, on the other hand, we are will- 
ing to believe that, in the narratives which they have given us, 
they have honestly recorded the impressions produced upon their 
eyes and ears, we shall next have to consider to what causes 
these phenomena may fairly be ascribed. Four hypotheses have 
been put forward : fraud, -eif- delusion, the operation of some 
hitherto undiscovered natural law, and spiritual agency. The 
idea of fraud, as a general explanation of the manifestations, 
may, we think, be fairly discarded. Imposture there may have 
been in cases where money was to be gained ; but seeing that 
many of the most striking manifestations testified to, took place 
in private houses, where no paid medium was present, -- this 
being especially trueof the intellectuai communications purport- 
ing to come from departed relatives, — it is difficult to believe 
that those who formed the circle could have been fools enough 
to practise a deliberate cheat upon themselves for no object 
whatever, to saj- nothing of the blasphemy against the holiest 
affections, which was involved in simulating a message from a 
deceased parent, wife, or child. 

■' It is not easy to understand what invisible mechanism would 
take a man out of his chair, float him round the ceiling, and 
then replace him in his seat; and that must be a very knowing 
apparatus for the production of raps which would spell out to 
an unknown foreigner the name of his step-son, who had been 
some years in the grave. But in purely private c!rcles,-the 
vast majority of those which are held, — fraud is clearly out of 

Hosted by Google 

VARIOUS SOLUTIONS. Z?7 

the question. If self-delusion be the chosen explanation, then 
■we ought to have it explained how it happens that the same de- 
lusion operates upon a dozen or more persons at the same time. 
If the operation of an unknown natural law be the solution 
adopted, it must be one law capable of producing all the phe- 
nomena recorded ; for they appear to present themselves in very 

" It is a current, but very grave error, to suppose that the most 
startling of these physical manifestations are opposed to known 
natural laws. It is generally said, for example, that the liftmg 
of a table from the ground, — one of the commonest of the^ al- 
leged phenomena, — is opposed to the laws of gravitation. 
Clearly it is not, if an unseen force be applied to it, powerful 
enough to counteract its attraction. An unseen force is no nov- 
elty in nature. Life is unseen, electricity is unseen : heat ifi 
unseen, until, by igniting matter it gives birth to flame. But 
this force must be one, capable of accounting for all the effects. 
It will not do to say that this phenomenon results from hys- 
teria; that, from magnetism; the other, from thought-reading; 
a fourth, from the od force, whatever that may be. 

"If the spiritual theory be resorted to, a vital point arises. Is 
it a good or an evil agency? The advocates of the Satanic 
theory have this great stumbling-block to get over, that the ad- 
vice given in the messages communicated is said to be univer- 
sally* good, the sentiments moral, and the doctrine piously 
Christian ; and it can scarcely be supposed that the Author of 
Evil would labor for his own discomfiture. There may be a 
mixture of good and evil agencies ; then we ought to discover 
how we are to discriminate betvreen the two. For ourselves, we 
express no opinion on the subject; all we wish is to see the mat- 
ter fairly investigated, with a total absence of that spirit of ridi- 
cule which is always offensive and proves nothing, and which is 
in the present case especially out of place. With the considera- 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTE. 

tmn of ' Cui bono ' we have nothing whatever to do. The first 
question to be solved is, 'Is it true, or is it not?' The second, 
'Whence is it?' If the first be answered in the affirmative, then, 
even should the second remain without reply, we may tranquilly 
leave the rest to the good providence of God." 

Who, hoptles^ lays his dead away. 
Nor looks lo see Ihe breakiog day 
Acro!! the mournful marbles play ; 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER XI. 

COMMON OBJECT[0NS.-rEACHINGS OF SPIRITUALISM. 

ihan bow I should c^mm to be." - R^. OnttUi iiiiwy- 

■■ I qoofesa Ibe awfij mysterj of life, aud Uk ptiplf "ily "hidi bangs around (ht q 
d What U Is and wlial it all means. Neverllielesa, 1 am persuaded— as 

F" 

T fl th 

g 
be true. Like fairy money, they turn to du.t when they come 

*°(5r"ema'ncipation from this material hu.k does not alter 
thoee essentials of character which we have been born to here, 
or which we have failed to modify in the series of existences 
through which we may have pas.ed. The moulding of our 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTE. 

nd act (and 

R 

fi 

H 

regarded as 
as between 
e of life his 
nts. Fools 
suffer from 

Is of earth, 

by the Holy Spirit to hold in low esteem those goo. 

which we cannot assimilate to ourselves, nor take w 

to attend rather to spiritual and moral ifoods, which do follow 

us, and which will serve eternally not only to delightfully 

occupy us, but as steps by which we shall rise higher and 

higher, on the great Jacob's ladder, into the boujidless hierarchy 

It has been truly said, that the tendency of Spiritualism is to 
lift the phenomena of spiritual life out of the category of excep- 
tional events into the region of divine law and order; and thus 
to promote our spiritual emancipation and development. By 
the light of this infant, or rather adolescent science, we now see 
clearly, that l&e (rati of a doctrine cannot be proved by a so- 
called miracle. The meaning and worth of " a miracle " — i.e. the 
intervention of some intelligent, unseen agency — must rather 
e upon the 

Hosted by Google 

CAUSES OF OPPOSITION. 

ru th m m 

pial oplfish aims, and hebdoma „ 

™l.e. m Splritu.lU« . di.mb.r .f 1,1. fC Thi. .mpo,- 

.„.erved «.l,- » which he looted forward 1. th. other world, 
„d .1.0 of hi. repuftlor, » .h ln»lleet..l arr.locr.t ■» th,.^ 

.. S„eh . tear I. by „o me.h. . gro-ndle.. one i for who =«. 
measure the Inflaetice which this despised Spirituahsm is exer- 
3"n7on . .core of woro-oat .l.fi.. and i... ! !» negai™ 
cising on a 6 u i«..s at nre.ent It 1. a great truth, 

effects are those most obvious at present. " 1. s 

which has not ,et woven a dre.s for Itself, or el.bora ed appro- 
wnicn nas j ^,,^^r,rd and visible signs of its inward 

priate organizations as oatward ana via 01c s .i ,,„„„ and 
;„d spiritual grace. « wander, about in r.g, and tatters, ana 

Hosted b, Google 

3S2 

PL 

often in most disreputable company ; so thM some moral courage 
is required even to acknozuledge acquaintance, mucA mare to asso- 
ciate wili tAis truth, in the public roads of life. 

"We confess that we perfectly understand the aversion with 
--■-■-h many earnest minds have been led to regard this subject. 

' So far,' it is said, ' from these ii 

estigations having an elevat- 

ing or emancipating effect upon the mind, so-called s^ 

manifestations generally appeal to the lowest mental faculties, 
while pandering to idle curiosity and a thirst for sensational 
exhibitions.' There is much truth in this. And it is not enough 
to make the specious and oft-repeated reply to such taunts, that 
an evil and adulterous, or sense-bound generation needs a sign ; 
and that the fittest for them are dancing- tables, knot-tying, and 
volant trumpets in dark closets, &c. A cultivated mind cannot 
look upon such things except as most disorderly and undivine ; 
although they may have a spiritual origin, and, having such, are 
worthy the close examination of all who would acquaint them- 
selves with the grounds of a spiritual belief. 

"The higher manifestations of modern Spiritualism are not 
so obnoxious to contemptuous criticism. ... But these and a 
hundred other objections, whether valid or not, do not disprove 
the fact, that Spiritualism is exercising a most beneficial influ- 
ence on civiliiation, by leading to the discovery or illustration 
Of spiritual laws. Even supposing all these 'various mauijesla- 
lions to be disorderly and vicious, ivhich Ida not /or a moment 
believe, their illustrative value would be none the less. How 
much would the world know of physiology or the laws of health, 
if disease had not first necessitated the study of pathology?" 

The motto on the cover of that excellent publication, the 
" London Spiritual Magazine," fairly expresses all that can be 
consistently claimed as comprehended by modern Spiritualism. 
For individual idiosyncrasies and speculations, whether of 
spirits or of earthly residents, Spiritualism is no further respon- 
sible than collective humanity is responsible for the vagaries of 
a drunken man or a lunatic. The following is the motto re- 

Hosted by Google 

SPIEITUALISM . 

" SpiritualUm is based on the cardinal fact of spmt com- 
munion and influx : it is the effort to discover all truth relating 
to man's spiritual nature, capacities, relations, duties, welfare, 
and destiny; and its application to a regenerate life. It recog- 
nizes a continuous divine inspiration in man : it a-ms through a 
careful, reverent study of facts, ftt a knowledge of the laws and 
orinciDles which govern the occult forces of the universe; of 
Le relations of spirit to matter, and of man to God and the 
spiritual world. It is thus catholic and progressive, leadmg 
to true religion as it one with the highest philosophy." 

Etpanding the^e Mew the same m-igizme remarks : "Spirit- 
ualism IS a science bised soleU on ficte it is neither specula- 
t ve nor fanciful On fact a id facts alone open to the whole 
^orld tl rough in e=tten ive and probably unl m.ted system of 
medmm.hip ,t builds up a substant al psychologv on the ground 
of ^tr ctest logical induction Its cardinal truth imperishably 
e.tibl shed on th. e>tper ments and exper ences of millions of 
sai e men and women of all countr es and creeds is that of a 
world of sp rit= and the contmuity of the existence of indi- 
vidual spirit through the momentary eclip-e of death; as it 
d appears on earth re appearing m that spiritual world and 
becommg an inhabit-mt amid the e.er augment ng population 
of the .pmtual unnerse Along with this primal truth comes 
the confirmation of the ancient truths ol Deity revelation from 
Deit> to man and tie open communion of man in the body 
■with n an disembodied with that great multitude which no 
man can n imber ot all nat ons and k ndreds and people and 
tongues which stand belore the throne _ 

That IS the sum and sub.f^nce ot Sp.r.tu->l.sm : it .s the 
exponent and pract cil demonstrator of continuous spiritual 
being Whitever truths independent of this as ert themselves, 
must do so on the same Bubttantial evidences and must show 
their kmsh p to thi'^ grand centril truth by their perfect har- 
mony and oneness with it _ . 

The general character of the higher spiritual communications 
of the present day is the absence of dogmatic teaching, and the 

Hosted by Google 

^^H PLANCHETTE. 

assertion that it h only as we advance in Tirtue and in the 
deeper paths of knowledge that we can attain to further light 
m the science of things divine. 

Whenever friend or foe, therefore, undertaltes to commend or 
denounce any notion, good or bad, by the introductory claim 
that bpintuahsm teaches," &c., we may be pretty sure that 
the phrase ought to be so amended as to r^ad, ■' A certain spirit 
teaches, &c. 

If you ask why error and evil are allowed by Providence to 
exist in the spirit-world, you might, with equal propriety, ask 
why they ar^ allowed to exist in this. We cannot reply better 
than m the words of WoUaston (1724), who says, "To ask why 
God permits evil, is to ask why he permits a material world, or 
such a being as man is ; endowed, indeed, with some noble facul- 
ties, but incumbered at the same time with bodily passions and 
propensities. Nay : I know not whether it be not to ask why 
he permits any imperfect being ; and that is, any being at all ■ 
dK^fo'r us ""''' ''^"'^'"^' "'"' ""^ ^"*"^'" '" " '■«« P'"-''«PS too 
To ask why ev 1 eitsts maj to 1 ^he ntell gen es be qu te 
as irrational as t would be to ask why a tnangle h s three 

These remarks w 11 render t superfluou we hope for us to 
refer further to that fi«ht ng w th w ndm lis wh el ce ta n 
writers for both the el g ous and the secular pre s dul<^ n 
when they ins st on cha,^ ng iny ext avagant here y or act 
upon (he "teach ngs of Sp n'- -' - 

"Spirit commun cat ons says Mr W F Jam e on par 
take more or less of the d osyncras es of the ned ums through 
whom they are rec* yed On the part of ntell gent sp r ts 
there is no cla m to nfall b 1 ty They teach people to accept 
nothing without adequa e proof Seven tenths of the illeged 
spiritual phenomena ma, be of m ndine o gin though not 
impostures. Bnto„. ncontro ert ble fact proye p r t e/sten e 
and communion as positiyely as a million facts can do. Years 
since I witnessed phenomena under circumstances that nrv- 

Hostea by Google 

REPORT ON DARK CIRCLES. 

z85 

eluded tapo,ition o, triek of .»? kind. The,, m.j be 1» 
iou«„a Lnlerfei.., but .be, do n.l .b.te ,nj eonMenc. ■: 
,b„ wbleb 1. ire»"l»e£ _^,^ ^^^__^^.___ ^^ _j_^ ^^^_„., 

cliaTin-tpr of many of the communications. J. ■ 

t"e. "now pol.l to . ringle n,.di.m-.»d I bav. known 
„.„,-.nd .., Ib.t be or .be 1. P=*"lj,f't'*L *..fa/ 
To wbleb we mlgbt reply, >.r/.e< «!,<.»./.» .^fl- t-'J-" 
infUmUl,, .nd tbe i.dge m..t .eek fo, •'"'• "°' """"SlenS 
dim., or .plril., or .nljel., or .reb.ngel,, but ot Omni.e.enee 

''me "eon,mIlte. on .pirllnal pbenomena," wbo met .t Cle.e- 
l.nd, O., in ,86,, report tb.t "wb.l .t pre.en, p...e. for .p.r.t 
eonrmunlon .nrong the people, .. • mrxed, and, tor tbe nro.t 
part, „n.n.l,..d ma.., rendering the Identltj of .p.r.t pre.enc. 
verv nncertain." And Ihey add, « Man,, If not .11, of the dr.or- 
S manife.t.tion., jour committee deem wboll, nn.p.r.tnal, 
having their origin In h.lf-eontrolled, di^a.ed ■."'".?«>; 
dto.tU »rpid ll,er, and general dl.cord of n,.nd ...d bod, 
M the, eoncl.de, "We cannot .uppo.e that a -J"'"' ""J' 
phenomena under con.ldera.lon are P'")-"" •°""*t„« 
.plrlOl but rather tb.t while there 1, abundant ev.denccd.rect 
,nd coll.ter.l, of .pHt control, other cau.e. enter target, mto 

"'SlTMr«"c.n readil, admit, and Infer that It mer.l, 
.how. that .. ought to dUclmlnate between Pb.nomcn. th.t 
m., be explained b, .bno.m.l ner.ou. aet.on, and tho.e wh.ch 
„u.t be referred to ,on,e other cau.e ; that it would .eern to be 
not intended b, the Author of our nature tb.t we .bould .itr- 
render our individual rea.on to an, anthorlt,, human or .prrit- 
nail .bat we .bould « the .pirlt., for the, ■« ' "rf "The 
.et in.t like bum.u beins. ; and th.t an, .mpl.cl belief in the 

'J ., . .. „ _! fi„ne i= lilrplvto lead to a mental 

infallibility of spirit communications is likely to leaa 
re action quite as far from the truth as its opposite extreme. 
Perhaps the theory, held by certain Spiritualists, that there are 
no evil ^pirils, may have done something to color portions of 

Hosted by Google 

ZaO PLANCHETTE. 

the report of the Cleveland committee; and perhaps they have 
not yet fought their way out of the wilderness into a light 
which may one day he theirs. Their sweeping and indiscrimi- 
nate condemnation of the " dark-circle " manifestations, and 
their loose, unqualified assertion, that "darkness is a condition 
assumed and insisted upon hy tricksters," are so contrary to the 
experience of many investigators who have had as ample oppor- 
tunities BE they can have had to satisfy themselves on the sub- 
ject, that their report does not carry the weight it deserves for 
much in it that is true. It is signed by F. L. Wadsworth, J. S. 
Loveland, E. C. Clark, and M. B. Dyott. 

There is certainly notliing in the nature of the facts attested 
by Spiritualists (and by many who admit the facts without the 
hypothesis) to render it difficult to form a correct judgment as 
to the reality of occurrences whether in light or dark circles. 
Take the following instance quoted by Mr. Shorter: A distin- 
guished London physician and physiologist, Dr. Wilkinson, in 
an account of a sdaace he attended, mentions among other phe- 
nomena witnessed by him, that a hand-bell, which had been 
brought by one of the party, was rung by an invisible agency; 
at the same time as it moved towards himself, he' says, "I 
moved my fingers up its side to grasp it. When I came to the 
handle, I slid my fingers on rapidly; and now, every hand but 
my (nua being on the table, I distinctly felt the fingers, up to the 
palm, of a hand holding the bell. It was a soft, warm, fleshy, 
radiant, substantial hand, such as I should be glad to fee! at the 
extremity of the friendship of my best friends. But I had no 
sooner grasped it momentarily, than it melted away, leaving 
me void, with the bell in my hand. I now held the bell tightly, 
with the clapper downwards; and while it remained perfectly 
still, I could plainly feel fingers ringing it by the clapper. As a 
point of observation, I will remark, that I should feel no nii>re 
difficulty in swearing that the member I felt was a human hand 
of extraordinary life, and not Mr. Home's foot, than that the 
nose of the Apollo Belvidere is not a horse's ear. I dwell 
chiefly, because I can speak surely, on what happened to myself. 

Hosted by Google 

PALPABLE FACTS, 

thoueh every one round the table had somewhat similar expe- 
though every o ^^^^ ^^^j 

rried under the table to each, i 
™7n thihand ot each. . . . The, .11 fdl «.• l..»d «r h™. 

DacKui 11 J „„• „. „:np and once grasped the hand; 

H.th. whole "" "«"™„"^; ;„■„"" . . wSlethl,™ going 
on. and for about ten minuies, muic " ' -^ ^i.tinB- 

.leeve. ot h.i d«.. pulM taqueotlji md, .. .he w.. .Mmg 
.t,h her «nB6,-e„d, etopcd and h.nd. open, w,th p.lm .en„- 
: one "pon 'he Uh.e, .h' .nddenl, laughed ,nvol.n.„l,, end 
'"d .Ohl ....there 1. . little hand lying hetween mme i and 
not' a larger hand ha. eome he.lde it. The httl. hand ,. 
„ a let tl an any bah,'., and eaqui.itel, peiliiot. 
7, a . b.e,ae„t ,/L. at Mr. R,n,ef, ho.... a. Eahng. he 
def, he. a . milar eaperienoe. The hand on thi. oec..,on pur- 
ported (n a eon,n,unLtion „ade) to b. that of a dec.a.ed and 
tnateft end. "onee a nremher of Parliamnt. and a. nruch 
before the p '""JJ?. ^-J^^J/y'jfu^Xou -hi ".'"d. 
wti*°n" L°d'" put'n.J hand under the table; and now the 

„„e .oft and "Pf <■"• '"^i' ''SltaiC'TW.'ha^d i. 
cordial .hak ng. I could not help eaclaiming. ^ .^^^^^^^^^ 

:.rr:\h?d*'Ur.n^'^oMT;;:r.hej..^^^^^^^^^ 

g nrlnd powe'r. of oh.orva.iou 1. g""'""^ •^"'"aSbre 
L .l.o.t .Val degree of ^^^ ^'■; ^^^^^ n" n»Cho 

r.;.ra"rr:.":r,,."7„ Tel. Whether . t.h,. „ 

Hosted by Google 

'°° PLANCHBTTE. 

resting on the floor, or is raised above it; wiietlier a man is sit 
trng m h,. eh.ir, or is floating i„ th, „„,osphe„ „f a, „^. 
whether ,„„nfls nrade hj no vi.lW. agene,, and whieh respond 
to h,s qnesBons, mental or otherwise, are heard or not • whether 
a strong heavy tabie, is, at hi, request, broken in fragments by 
no v,s,b.e ageney, • in abont half . minate,. or wheSi, it re^ 
mains whoie. These things, and such a. these, which rest on 
seemg and feeilng and experimenting,' are so plain and palpa- 
ble that the man who eonid not Jadge of their „.|,ty 'migh, 
eonsetenttonsly say with Dogberry, • write me down an as. ■ n 
» very easy to prononneo these things impossible, to say thai 
they eanno. be Bn. that which ^, happen „„ il.ppen' and 
to tell people that an educated judgment would convince tb™ 
ftat the, did not see what they saw, and did not feel what tt" 
fell, can only furmsh an illustration of that particular specie, 
of rhetoric called >.,t. We are disciples of tie Baconian phil- 
osophy and cannot subscribe to that reasoning which denies 
fact, when they do not square with our pre-judgments and ac- 
commodate themselves to our favorite theories " 

Very frivolous and pointless are such objections a, the follow- 
ing, brought by a critical American journal, called the "Na- 
tion, against the phenomena so otTimant witk „. 

.,,. " . e ,-iio...ciij so pregnant with meaning to 

millions of investigators ; — * 

"If the wonders of Spiritualism,- say, ihi, authority, « are 
periectly real, they are ju.t as perfectly worthless. Thev otove 
nothing but the poweriessnes, of those who execute them 
whether they be spirits or mortals," ' 

"Theymoveehalrs, &C.I but it is nowhere asserted that the 
medrnm. move furniture half a. well as day-laborer, and pj. 

"They are unable to tell any particular person what he did 
not know already." 

This last objection has been so oiien disproved, and the narra 
tives of this volume confute it so repeatedly, that we need not 
occupy any more space in considering it. " 
given on page ira of this volume, will se. 

n experience. 

Hostsabi Google 

IRRATIONAI, OBJECTIONS. ZO9 

With regard to the other objections, which are mere repeti- 
tions of those brought by unreflecting persons ever since the 
phenomena of 1848 were promulgated, a few considerations will 
show how much weight they carry. 

Why, if these wonders, even though " real," are "worthless," 
have Faraday, Brewster, Babinet, the Cambridge profesBors, and 
many other eminent men of science, been so ansious to prove 
that they are not real ? 

If a phenomenon be worthless in itself, will it have no value 
if it carry evidence that it is the work of a spiritf 

Yet the aftirmative of this last question is the wholly heedless 
and irratiomt position taken bj this editor Every person of 
common sense will see its absurdity 

As for the objection that tlie mediums, or rather the forces 
operating in their presence though they may move furniture, 
' cannot do it as well as day laborers and porters," this would 
seem to be a verv blind ittempt at jocoseness, since the whole 
interest claimed tor the movements relerred to lies in the in- 
qulr^ by what power are they done, not how skilfully are they 
done 

And yet objections thus slight and trivial are fair specimens 
of the kind of opposition which 'ipintuilism has encountered. 
Is It surprising th'\t it ha, spread and grown as rapidly as it 
has? 

The attempts to make Spiritualism responsible for the heresies 
and vagaries of certain persons calling themselves Spiritualists, 
are manifestly unjust. Accusations are often brought that Spir- 
itualism teaches free love, paptheisra, socialism, &c. As well 
say that the Newtonian philosophy teaches these things ! Spir- 
itualism is no more responsible for nominal Spiritualists, than 
Christianity is for nominal Christians, among which last may 
be counted free-love Anabaptists, Mormons, and the brigands 
of Italy. 

" Pythonism " is the bad name which the " ministers of the 
Massachusetts Association of the New Jerusalem " (followers of 
Swedenborg) give to modern Spiritualism; the name being 

Hosted by Google 

290 

derived, thty tell us, from the Python, the mythological serpent, 
sprung from the mud after Deucalion's deluge, and which Apollo 
alone was able to destroy. " Hence the priestess of Apollo, at 
Delphi, was called a Pythoness." " Who cannot, in this mytho- 
logical tradition," say the ministers, " see the serpent, engend- 
ered by the very lowest things of humanity,"— Spiritualism, of 
course, being the chief of these " lowest things," 

By ordinary persons, the supposed communications from the 
spirit-world will, we think, in this nineteenth century, be re- 
ceived as we receive communications through books, newspapers, 
and even weekly critical journals. Various and sometimes con- 
flicting as these communications are, they merely show that 
spirits, like mortals, are very fallible, and often very conceited 
individuals, many of them it may be, groping in a moral and 
intellectual darkness denser than that which encompasses many 
souls yet fettered by the flesh. Spiritualism is merely an affir- 
mation of the great fact of spiritual existence. It leaves us just 
where all codes and ail revelations take us up; for the authority 
of a message, come whence it may, lies always in the complete- 
ness of its harmony, with the laws of our being as disclosed by 
the highest experiences of individuals and of the race. 

Nor is Spiritualism any thing new, though never before in 
human history have men been so educated and prepared to re- 
ceive its phenomena in a scientific spirit, and never before has 
priestcraft been so impotent to dictate terms, or to put its own 
convenient construction on facts appealing so directly to the 
e of mankind. 

"The idea of the existence of spirits," says one of our French 
collaborators (Edward de Las Graves), " and of their interven- 
tion in human affairs, may be traced back to the most remote 
epochs of antiquity. We find it in all the philosophies : it forma 
the basis of all the religious systems of the ancients, and the 
Biblical narratives are full of it. The Greeks, the Romans, the 
Egyptians, the Druids, the Indians, and the Chinese had their 
oracles which they consulted. The Middle Ages could not bury 
(he idea in the funeral piles which devoured their sorcerers and 

Hosted by Google 

CONTRAUICTIONS OF SPIRITS. 2<)t 

M, witch... II 1». come do.n even to oc, o« a^^,.ir.,-^S 
.11 per..cotio„., .urvlving .11 tho r.,otot.<m., phj..=>l and 
moral, of humanity. -. ■ . „ 

"Beyond a doubt this idea, imperishahle hecnuse it is true, 
has otten leen associated with a thousand absurdities. Cupidity 
and the lust of domiu.tlon have often made of it a powerful 
weapon and have not feared even to disfigure, and pervert, and 
play false with it In order to subject it to their e.prlccs, their ani- 
bitions, or their needs. But the time ha, come at length when 
the tmll, is destined to rise and glitter in all it. splendor, chas- 
ing pitilessly the errors which ignorance and superstition have 
heaped up during the centuries." 

All speech is spiritual All commnnic.tion, addressed to our 
moral or intellectual faculties are of spiritual origin, whether 
they come from spirit, incarnate or disincamate. 

Dr William B Potter, author of a pamphlet on the subject of 
m.diru Spirituahsm, .ays o. the communications which he 
himself ha. heard through mediums, that " endies. con r.dic- 
tions and absurditie. are mi«d up with the mo., exalted truth , 
and the mo.t profound phiio.ophies. We .re taught that God i. 
a p„.o„, that he i. imper.oi..li that he is omnipotent, that he 
is governed by nature's laws; that every thing i. God, there i. 
„„ God, that we .re god.. We are taught that the ""l ■> "o'" 
1 ■ that it commences its existence at conception, at birth, at 
maturity at old age. That all .re immortal, that some are im- 
mortal, that none are immortal. That the soul 1. a winged 
monad in the centre of the br.in ; that it gets tired, .nd goe. 
down into the stomach to re.ti th.t it is material, that it is im- 
material i that it is unchangeable, that it change. l*e lb. 
body, that it die. with the body, that it develop, the '"dy. »■' 
It i. developed by the body, that it i. human m tormi that i. 
in but one place at a time, that it i. in ah place, at the same 

""we are taught that the spirit-world is on earth, - ju.t above 
the air, - beyond the milky-way. That it ha, but one sphere, 
three spheres, six .pheres, .even spheres, thirtysix .phere., an 

Hostsab, Google 

^9^ PLANCHETTE, 

infinite number of spheres. That it is a real, tangible world; 
that It IS all a creat.on of the mind of the beholder, and appears 
diiTerent to different spirits. That it is inhabited hy animaU, 
birds, &c. ; that they do not inhabit it. That it is a sea of ether ■ 
that It is a plain, that it has mountains, lakes, and valleys; that 
It IS a belt around the earth. We are taught that spirits eat 
fbod,-l.ve hy absorption; live on magnetiam, thoughts, love. 
That they control media by will-power, by magnetism, by enter- 
ing media, by standing by their side, by an influence beyond our 
atmosphere, by permission of the Lord. 

''That spirits converse by thought-reading, by oral language. 
That the.r music is harmony of soul ; that it is instrumental and 
vocal. That they live single; in groups of nine. That they 
marry without having offspring; that they have offspring by 
mortals; that they have offspring by each other. That their 
marriage is temporary; that it is eternal. That spirits never 
hve again in the flesh; that they do return, and enter infant 
bodies, and live many lives in the flesh. That some are born 
first in the spheres, and afterwards are born on earth in the flesh. 
That the true affinity is born in the spirit-world at the same 
time that the counterpart is born on earth. That all spirits are 
good, that some are bad; that all progress, that some progress, 
that none progress. ... 

"That there is no high, no low, no good, no bad. That mur- 
der ,6 nght, lying is right, slavery is right, adultery is right. 
That whatever is, is right. That nothing we can know can in- 
jure the soul, or retard its progress. That it is wrong to blame 
any ; that none should be punished ; that man is a machine, and 
not to blame for his conduct. . . . That the spirit of the tree 
exists in perfect form after the tree is burnt. That monads are 
God's thoughts, and go through all forms of rocks, trees, ani- 
mals, and at last become men. That spirit is substance, in ah- 
solute condensation; that matter is substance, whose particles 
never touch." 

The reply to statements like these has been well made by Mr. 
A. E. Newton, who writes as follows: "To our view, the evi- 

Hostea by Google 

CONTRADICTIONS OF SPIRITS. 293 

detice of the basis- fact of modern Spiritualism — namely, 'the 
intelligent communication of spirits with minds in the flesh' — 
does not depend at all upon either the truiJifulness or the agree- 
ment of their statements about any subject. Even should all 
who communicate, agree in denying that there is a spiritual 
world, or that any spirits exist at alt, that denial would be no 
proof of such non-existence ; on the contrary, it would be a very 
strong corroborative evidence in favor of spirit existence, for 
such testimony could not be supposed to originate in the minds 
of the mediums. Tlie testimony itself must come from mind, and 
that mind must have existence. If not from the mind of the 
medium, or any one in the body acting through the medium, 
then it must be from a disembodied mind. The Cretans were 
once declared to be ' always liars ; ' and yet nobody doubts that 
the Cretans had existence, even though they themselves might 
affirm or deny the fact. The firoof of communication from the 
^irit-world depends oh the evidence of mental action aside from 
and be\and that of the medium, or any mind tn the flesh ind ot 
on the agreement wisdom or good sense manile ti.d n such 

But contrad Ltions eien as to matters of fact are often 
Tierely apparent rather tl an leat ans ng from n ut al m sun 
derstandings as to tl e meaning of terns and fro n too narrow 
and unphilosophicHi I lews of things. 

"We would remind all who are perplexed with the statements 
of spirits in respect to the spirit-world, that it is doubtless vastly 
more extensive than earth, and hence may present a far greater 
variety of objective realities, and of modes of life and thought, 
than pertains to the earth-life. And, furthermore, since the 
spirit-world is the world of causes, each external object must be 
to the beholder Just ivhat his perceptions make it; that is, it 
appears according lo Ms power of insight as to its uses and rela- 
tions. Hence the same object may appear as one thing to one 
person, and as quite another thing, to a person differently un- 

■ 'This principle i 

tent in this ritdimental 

Hosted by Google 

294 PLANCH ETTK. 

sphere. For example, we have known two persons to attend 
the same concert of instrumental music, — one having little or 
no musical culture, the other possessing a very exquisite ear. 
To the first, some of the finest compositions were for the most 
part a mere jargon of inharmonious sounds which pained and 
tired the ear; while the other was by these same sounds trans- 
ported to the seventh heaven of rapturous delight. 

" So of objects seen : to the child or the uncultivated clown, 
that most gorgeous of spectacles, the evening sky, is a solid dome 
of comparatively limited dimensions, in which are hung up a 
multitude of little lamps for man's sole use; while the astrono- 
mer sees worlds on worlds filled with life and beauty, among 
which this earth is but a tiny speck floating in immensity." 

Lord Lytton, whose abilities in many instances we have ad- 
mired, has shown, in hie novel of "A Strange Story," that he 
can both write a very stupid book, and venture to treat of things 
with which his acquaintance is superficial and inaccurate. He 
here gives no evidence that he has ever investigated the subject 
of the spiritual phenomena, ancient and modern, with any pro- 
fundity of research or meditation. He so mixes up the crudest 
and most incongruous fancies of an imagination in search of the 
sensational with fragments of genuine truth, that his book has 
the eflect on one of a wretched nightmare instead of a presenta- 
tion of credible phenomena that can be reconciled with existing 

In a letter bearing date the latter part of the year 1S67, Lord 
Lytton writes to Mr. Benjamin Coleman, "All the experiments 
I have witnessed, if severely probed, go against the notion 
that the phenomena are produced by the spirits of the dead; 
and I imagine that no man, who can take care of his pockets, 
would give up his property to a claimant, who could bear cross- 
examination as little as some alleged spirit, who declares he is 
your father or friend-, and tells you where he died, and then 
proceeds to talk rubbish, of which he would have been incapable 
when he was alive. I can conceive no prospect of the future 
world more melancholy, than that in which Voltaires and Shake- 

Hosted by Google 

MATTER AND SPIRIT. 295 

Hpearea are represented as having fallen into boobies, or, at 
best, of intellects below tnediocrlty." 

See Kerner's answer, and the answers elsewhere in this vol- 
ume, to obvious objections, like these, from persons who, like 
Lord Ljtton, have gone but a little way in the path of investi- 
gation. All inquirers, like the friend who wrote the letter on 
the Rochester knockings (page 34 of this volume), have to pass 
through that phase of doubt at which the distinguished novelist 
seems to have arrived and stopped. 

Because there may be mendacious, wanton, or frivolous spir- 
its, who choose to assume great names, it does not follow that 
they represent the whole spirit-world, any more than Falstaff 
and Pecksniff represent all humanity. 

Lord Lytton says that in ail controversies on this question, 
he has found no clear definition of what is meant by spirit. 
And yet he talks very glibly of marter, and of agencies "operat- 
ing upon or through matter," as if he well knew what mat- 

But we know just as much about spirit as we do about mat- 
ter. It is true that we know nothing of the essence of spirit : it is 
equally true that we know nothing of the substance or essence 
of matter. But perhaps the reader will say, " We cannot see 
spirit, and, therefore, we know but little about it." " Did it ever 
oc;cur to the reader," asks a scientific writer, "that we cannot 
see matter either? When we look at any object, it is not the 
object, after all, that we see, but merely the image of it formed 
on the retina of the eye. When I look at a house a mile distant, 
the object that I really see is not a mile distant, but within the 
eye. I do not see the house at all, but I see an image of light 
representing the house. Thus it appears that matter is just 
as invisible as spirit. We know some <ii\he,proferUes and Iotos 
of spirit, and this is precisely the extent of our knowledge of 
matter." 

Newton was of opinion that if sufficient pressure were put 
upon the earth, it would he compressed to the size of a globe an 
inch in diameter. And if to that size, why not to that of a pea. 

Hosted by Google 

396 PLANCH ETTE, 

and from that to a grain of mustard -seed, and from that to an 
invisible particle of dust. Newton virtually detiied the exist- 
ence of matter as substance. Nothing remains but a congeries 
of laws, " If the ultimate particles of matter are mathematical 
jioints,* as Newton assumed, it follows that if the particles of 
which the earth is composed were made to toack each other, the 
whole earth would be reduced to a mathematical point. And 
who can show that this hypothesis (that the laws of matter are, 
in fact, all there is of matter) is not scientifically correct? " 

It would seem that Providence does not mean we shall be 
spared the trouble of thinking for ourselves. And so neither 
mortal nor spirit comes to us with the credentials of infalli- 
bility. "The commonplace character of a large portion of the 
spirit communications, the extravagant and turgid character of 
some, cease to perplex when we come to view them as proceed- 
ing from beings lately ordinary dwellers upon earth, and retain- 
ing Btili their earthly dispositions and ideas. True, the difficulty 
remains as to why some small portion at least of these commu- 
nications should not bear the impress of transcendent wisdom 
and genius. The absence from them of any thing equalling, 
far less surpassing, the highest products of the human mind, 
argues, it must be admitted, some hinderance to intercourse with 
spiritual beings of an exalted order: may we not hope to over- 

In regard to the varied an< 
communications, " Honestas " 
"As our childhood prepares us for maturer age, so our present 
life mediatorially renders us fit for the enjoyment of a future 
condition. But mediation implies that the characteristics of 
the former condition shall be preserved, and that they aid in 
bridging over the guif that severs this life from the state here- 
after. And with the preservation of our individuality, is it far- 

• It was ihe conduMon of Faraday thai muter, in its last analysis, is rcsolyablo 

f Swdenborg tells us that the communicalions of angels and bpirila are llmiled b» 

Hosted by Google 

MADE BY DEATH. 207 

fetched to say, that the conditions which surround, Eustain, and 
render its continuance possible, cannot be so world-wide different 
in the future life as to make intercommunication between the two 
slates impossible; that the physical circumstances of spirits and 
of man have something akin, something in common, rendering 
superable that which was once believed insuperable? . . . 

"Now, in the varied character of the communications, we 
have a standard given us to measure the actual amount of the 
change which that death, that transition, into a perhaps more 
subtle and elementary condition, effects. The change does not, 
however, carry with it complete severance; on the contrary! 
"lediated by growth and development on earth, the soul is sus- 

tained by a condition of n 

■rially r 

applicable by prior growth. In a word, the state hereafter i 
not differ insuperably from that on earth. 

'^ Spiritualism has often given offence because it has failed lo 
satisfy the cravings of those who desire for perfection here- 
after,— a perfection, it is unreasoning, illogical, to ask for. The 
varied character of the communications, so far from making 
me hesitate, strengthens my belief in the reality of Spiritual- 
ism; for it brings me back from an ideal to a reality; and in 
this reality I recognize the law of gradual step-by-step progress ; 
no jump and bound into something uncongenial, but a progress 
into a mediatorially prepared and kindred state, in which the 
mdividuality of the soul is maintained. This individuality 
could not, however, be sustained, unless supported by the influ- 
ence of great physical laws, which again co-operate and harmo- 
nize with those we recognize as operative in this, to us, natural 
world." 

The "Banner of Light," the leading spiritual journal of 
America, introduces all its messages, purporting to come from 
the spirit-worid, with these words of caution; "We ask the 
reader to receive no doctrine put forth by spirits in these col- 
umns that does not comport with his or her reason. All express 
as much of truth as they perceive, — no more." 
Plutarch raises the same objections to the s/j/e of tlie o.ades 

Hosted by Google 

390 PLANCH ETTB. 

in his day that we raise to that of the spiritual C( 
of ours. "If the verses," asks one of his speakers, "are really 
bad, ought we to make Apollo their composer?" And the con- 
clusion is, that "the first inspiration alone comes from him, 
which is, however, adapted to the nature of every prophetess." 
An ingenious writer remarks, that to the reader familiar with 
spiritual phenomena, it is evident even from the sneering narra- 
tive of Gibbon, that the apostasy of Julian, and his intense 
enthusiasm in the cause of the fallen faith, was in truth due to 
communication with the invisible world. Spirits of departed 
pagans, still clinging to their earthly creed, seem to have im- 
pressed him powerfully, visiting him, and conversing with him 
in the forms of the Olympian gods. " We may learn," says Gib- 
b " f h' f 'thf If d th t L'banius, that he lived 
and goddesses, that 

g ed his slumbers by 

g d varned him of every 

m g m their infallible wis- 

S g character of many of 

mm om spirits, it cannot 

b th m m to be prompted by 

■n w , here is a wonderful 

agreement on certain important points. For example, this bet- 
ter class 6eem to be unanimous in rejecting the notions of the 
resurrection of the physical body ; the eternity of he!l torments ; 
and the doctrine of vicarious atonement, in the sense in which 
the so-called evangelical theology teaches it. 

They regard all punishment as remedial;* and the popular 
belief that the discipline of man and his moral responsibility 
cease at the period we call death, they denounce as a groundless 
assumption, in contradiction with the whole system on which 

• See a comniunksllOD in (he '■London Pall Mall GaieUe," of Nov, 9. 1866, for 

Hosted by Google 

ALL PUNISHMENT REMEDIAL. 299 

the moral and physical universe is conducted. Looking back 
myriads of ages, they bid qs see always one slow, unbroken pro- 
cess of growth and development; and they point to the same in 
the history of man as a race, and of each man as an individual. 
They tell us there is no precedent in creation for any such dislo- 
cation of the action of organic law as would be involved in that 
sudden cessation of the operation of moral and intellectual dieci- 
pline, which is popularly supposed to be the result of death; 
that to suppose that every person who has "faith" and some 
small " good works " is instantly elevated to an eternal happi- 
ness IB one of the most irrational of theories, as is likewise the 
doctrine that the good are subjected to a purifying process 
without ani further moral responsibility; that is, without any 
further real moral discipline whatsoever. 

Il it be asked How is this \iew to be applied to the millions 
in whom no moral disuplme is commenced before death, this is 
the reply We perceive that in the case of those in whom the 
moral discipline is really begun, and is carried on to the utmost 
perfection, a material portion of their existence is necessarily 
passed before the commentement of the discipline. 

For years we ill live a purely animal existence, and are ap- 
parently not a whit more like saints and sages in an embryonic 
stage thin ire the most digraded savages of Africa. How it is 
that an infancy and childhood of animalism and pission are an 
organic preparation tor an intellectual and moral probation, we 
cannot tell; but there is the fact not shocking or distressing, 
or bewildering, because we are familiar with it and we are 
cognizant of the subsequent development of the reasoning and 
moral character Just such mil be the whole terrestrial exist- 
ence of the saviges under the trop cs or in our own fields and 
cities. All analogy leads us to the suppos tion that it may be 
simply the infamy of an existence commenced here and devel- 
oped hereafter They live and die in ignorance of their nature 
and their coming destiny like 1 babe that dies alter a year of 
sickness and misery This ignonnLe 1 too in harmony with 
that geieral law t a" ranee slowlv pass ng into knowledge. 

Hosted by Google 

300 PLANCH KTTK, 

whose operation meets us wherever we turn our eyes. It is one 
of the great mysteries of our life. "If there is a God," we are 
tempted to ask, "why does he thus hide himself? And why 
cannot we speak with him as we speak with one anotherf" 
There is no answer. Wc do not know. But we do know that 
ignorance of things great and good and true is no proof that 
they do not enis T g G h age and the 

pariah ia no mo h d d orae day to 

make himself k h th h of the law 

of gravitation is a d p 

Should this s h m h sistence be 

thought to indie pp h nt doctrine 

of pre-existence d mp h n the less be 

admitted as in harmony with much of the speculation that pro- 
fesses to come from spiritual sources. 

As there are no acknowledged leaders of the present spiritual 
movement, it is of course impossible to lay down any state- 
ment of theological or religious doctrines in which Spiritualists 
agree. " Our cardinal rule of action," says Judge Edmonds, one 
of the best known of the American Spiritualists, "has been to 
build up no party, create no sect, cultivate no spirit of proselyt- 
iam, make no parade of faith, but let it enter jour soul and 
govern your life." 

A convention of Spirituahsts at Rochester, N.Y., September, 
1868, adopted a series of resolutions which embody many of the 
conclusions at which a large number have arrived; but the con- 
vention wisely put forth these resolutions as presenting the 
opinions of those persons only ■who •voted in the affirmative. 

Spiritualism, they say, teaches, "That man has a spiritual 
nature as well as a corporeal ; in other words, that the real man 
is a spirit, which spirit has an organized form, composed of 
sublimated material, with parts and organs corresponding to 
those of the corporeal body. That man, as a spirit, is immortal. 
Being found to survive that change called physical death, it may 
be reasonably supposed that he will survive all future vicissi- 
tudes. That there is a spiritual world, or state with its substan- 

Hostea by Google 

THE ROCHESTEK RESOLUTIONS. 

301 

tial realities, objective as well as aubjectEve. That the process 
of physical death in no -way essentially transforms the mental 
constitution or the moral character of those who experience it, 
else it would destroy their identity. That happiness or suffering 
in the spiritual state, as in this, depends not on arbitrary decree, 
or special provision, but on character, aspirations and degree 
of harmonization, or personal conformity to universal and 

" Hence that the experience and attainments of this life lay the 
foundation on which the next commences. That since growth, 
in some degree, is the law of the human being in the present 
life ; and since the process called death is, in fact, but a birth 
into another condition of life, retaining all the advantages 
gained in the experiencEB of this life, it may be inferred that 
growth, development, expansion, or progression is the endless 
destiny of the human spirit.. That the spiritual world is not far 
off, but near around, or interbiended with our present state of 
existence and hence that we are constantly under the cogni- 
zance of ipnituil beings That a indmduals are paEsing from 
the earthly to the spiritual state in all btages of mental and 
moral growth that state includeo all grades of character from 
the lowest to the highest 

"That as heaien and hell or happiness and misery, depend 
on internal states rather than external surroundings, there are 

as man* gradations of eich as there are shades of character, 

each one gravitat ng to his own place by natural law of affinity. 
They maj be divided into seven general degrees or spheres; 
but these roust admit of indefinite diversifications, or ' many 
mansions correspond ng to diversified individual character, — 
each individual being as happy as hi= character v^iil allow him 
to be. 

■'That communiLations from the spirit- world, whether by 
mental impression inspirition or any other mode of transmis- 
sion, are not necessarily infallible truth but, on the contrary, 
partake unavoidably of the imperfections of the minds from 
which they emanate, and of the channels through which they 

Hosted by Google 

30Z PLANCHETTE. 

come; and are, moreover, liable to misinterpretation bv those 
to whom they are addreBsed. Hence, that no inspired commu- 
nication, in this or any other age (whatever claims may be, or 
have been, set up as to its source), is authoritative any further 
than it expresses truth to the individual consciousness, — which 
last is the final standard to which all inspired or spiritual teach- 
ings must be brought for judgment. That inspiration, or the 
influx of ideas and promptings from the spiritual realm, is not 
a miracle of a past age, but a perpetual fact, the ceaseless 
method of the divine economy for human elevation. That all 
angelic and demoniac beings which have manifested them- 
selves, or interposed in human affairs in the past, were simply 
disembodied human spirits, in different grades of advance- 

" That all authentic miracles (so called) in the past, such as the 
raising of the apparently dead ; the healing of the sick, by lay- 
ing on of hands or other simple means ; unharmed contact with 
poisons; the movement of physical objects, without visible in- 
strumentality, &c., — have been produced in harmony with 
universal laws, and hence maybe repeated at any time under 
suitable conditions. That the causes of all phenomena, the 
sources of all life, intelligence, and love, are to be sought in 
the internal, the spiritual realm, not in the external or material. 
That the chain of causation leads inevitably upward or onward 
to an infinite spirit, who is not only Sl forming principle (wis- 
dom), but an affectional source (love), — thus sustaining the 
dual, parental relations as father and mother to all finite intelli- 
gences, who, of course, are all brethren. 

"That man, as the offspring of this infinite parent, is his 
highest representative on this plane of being, ~ the perfect man 
being the most complete embodiment of the 'Father's fulness' 
which we can contemplate; and that each man is, or has, by 
virtue of this parentage in his inmost, a germ of divine essence, 
which is ever prompting to the right, and which in time will 
free itself from all imperfections incident to the rudiraental or 
earthly condition, and will triumph over all evil. That all evil 

Hosted by Google 

DISCIPLINE OF BVIL. 303 

is disharmony, greater or less with this inmost or divine princi- 
ple; and hence whatever aids man to bring his more external 
nature into subjection to, and harmony with, his interiors, — 
wliether it be called ' Christianity,' ' Spiritualism,' or the ' Har- 
monial Philosophy;' whether it recognize the 'Holy Ghost,' 
the Bible, or a present spiritual and celestiai influi, — is a 
'means of salvation' from evil." 

Dr. Henry T. Childs, of Philadelphia, a medium, writes as 
follows : " Having seen and conversed with manj' spirits in 
different conditions, the facts are as clear to me as they can be, 
(hat the after-life and this are subject to progression, and that 
not from a pure stand-point of excellence in which there are no 
evil tendencies, hut from whatever condition the spirit may he 
in. I have yet to find a spirit who does not feel that progression 
and growth are synonymous, and they ever mean a reaching 
forward to something better and leaving something tliat is evil. 
Death is nothing more than an incident in the continuous life- 
line of humanity, changing the surroundings, but leaving the 
interior just as it -was. 

"With this experience, I knotv there are eliil spirits; spirits 
who, like men, may delight in mischief and perverseness ; who 
have not realized their own rights sufficiently to respect the 
rights of others ; and my reason teaches me just what these 
facts have demonstrated lo me. Seeing evil all around us, I see 
also the beautiful spiral pathway of progress, which is ever lead- 
ing us up out of these conditions." 

The following Hnes by Daniel Norton embody, we believe, the 
views of great numbers of Spiritualists on the subject of the 
ministry of evil: — 

Thus an, though e"il. is a Mvior; 
For in iu tiaio comes knowledge of those Ihingg 
To »iul and body hurtful ; and the slings 
Of conadence bring; us wisdom. Wisd™ brings 

The pletlge of futute good behavior. 
Blessed be Darkness, then ( It brinjeih light 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCH ETTB. 
Evil: for UbiingcthRighl, 

To this doctrine it is objected by the theologians, that, as it 
makes an entrance into evil necessary in order to serve as a self- 
conscious return to good, it exalts evil itself into goodness; the 
idea of sin and responsibility is destroyed, and views are intro- 
duced that would prove fatal to all true morality, as they would 
imply that no being can he properly educated, except through a 
process of sinning. 

Perhaps this is an extreme construction to put upon the doc- 
trine. If life he disciplinary, all our experiences must be 
designed for our information and our good. Then comes up 
the terrible problem of free agency; and from this, we shall 
see, as we proceed, many great and learned men can find no 
escape except in the hypothesis of a pre -existent state of 
the soul. 

As a specimen of the expositions of one of tlie most eloquent 
of American mediums, Mr. Selden j. Finney, we give the fol- 
lowing abridgment of one of his discourses. Of course it 
merely expresses the views of an individual in regard to the 
philosophy of modern Spiritualism; but we quote it as mani- 
festing no ordinary degree of philosophical culture and insight. 
"The great, distinguishing feature of this philosophy," says 
Mr. Finney, "is that it begins with the demonstration of a 
transcendent spiritual nature, called the soul, within the body 
of man. This it defines as an organic, spiritual entity; and 
proves that it lives on, after the physical body is dead, in higher 
spheres, subject to the same laws of intellectual, social, and 
moral being that rule us here; though, in those higher spheres, 
it has been translated into more refined conditions and rela- 

"It demonstrates that all angels are planet-born men and 
women. It proves the unity of nature, and so shows that our 
hells are kindled here by our own hands in our own breasts. 

Hosted by Google 

DISCOURSB OF A MEDIUM. 305 

It shows that when every physical sense is paralyzed, the mind 
and soul may be all the more untrammelled, — as in trance and 
clairvoyance, — and can soar afar into the deeps of external 
nature or hold blessed communion with spiritual intelligences. 
Tlie wonders of clairvoyance, of trance-mediumship, of Inspira- 
tional speaking, of table-moving, of impersonation, ^ in fact, 
of all the gi-eat classes of mediumship, — are the external proofs 
of the reality of our philosophy; while the vast revelations that 
constitute the contents of the best communications are the ideal 
elements. . . . 

"Even a brute can be surprised by the movement of a table 
without contact of visible power; while under the inspiration 
of the gifted seer and poet, the great fields of eternal day break 
on our rapt vision. This philosophy opens, on the one hand, 
the grand questions of physiological psychology; and, on the 
other, the profound questions of transcendental tiieologj. . . . 

" In demonstrating the independent entity of the soul, which 
can, even while in the body, transcend the limits of sensation 
and hold converse with immortals. Spiritualism destroys the 
sensationalism of Enghsh philosophers, the subjective atheism 
of Spencer, and the materialism of the French encyclopedists; 
while, on the other hand, it corrects the too ideal tendencies 
of Hegelianism in Germany, and holds it to account on that 
middle ground of philosophy where sense and soul touch and 
unite. 

"The idealism of Berkeley, which reduced all the external 

the nerves of the body, whose cause was for ever shut away from 
our reach ; and the pantheism of Spinoia, or more especially of 
his one-sided disciples, — here find their grave, in common with 
that subjective idealism of Spencer, Sir William Hamilton, and 
Mr, Mansel, which is of late so much in vogue. Sensationalism 
has a half-truth; idealism and pantheism have a half-truth; but 
so long as each claimed to be the only truth, all were false in a. 
double sense, and blind. 

"The truth in each of these schools is revived, emancipated, 

Hosted by Google 

S"^ PLANCHETTE. 

and united in the spiritual philosophy. Idealism would re- 
create the external world from the depths of unaided con- 
sciousness. Sensationalism would create consciousness from 
the external world as a mere material force, which goes out like 
any other fire in the ashes of its body. But Spiritualism, in 
demonstrating the dual nature of man, in showing that we live 
in two worlds at once, and are vitally related to each, having 
powers that lay hold on the forces and verities of both at once, 
unites in itself the truth of each, unmixed with the errors of 

"Does Mr. Spencer tell us that spirit is 'utterly inscrutable'? 
The spiritual philosophy answers, ' Man is a spirit per se, and 
can cognize spiritual beings of the immortal life; has done so; 
has identified the persons of the departed; your theory must be 
false.' Does Mr. Mansel set ' Umits to thought"? The spiritual 
philosophy pulls them down, and opens again the fair fields of 
spiritual naturalism to the contemplation of thinkers. Does 
Sir William Hamilton call the idea of God a ' revelation '? The 
spiritual philosophy answers, 'Yes;' but a 'revelation made 
through those natural powers and faculties of the soul, which 
connect us with the soul of the world, and which transcend the 
physical senses, as the immortal transcends the mortal life of 
man, and not by any means a supernatural revelation, made in 

"The great contest in philosophy has been and is waged 
over 'method.' The sensational philosophy reasons only induc- 
tively; from external facte toward their causes. Idealism reasons 
only deductively from ideas which it finds in the reason, toward 
their effects. But neither method can ^ive any facts or ideas to 
begin with. Both facts and ideas are assumed in the outset by 
both methods. Hence it is evident that neither method is alone, 
or often together, full and complete. How do we find the facts 
and ideas to start with, if, after all, we cannot ^i our facts by 
induction; for induction begins with facts as given, and cannot 
proceed one inch, except on the assumption of facts from which 
to reason and infer? Induction cannot set out from zero and 

Hosted by Google 

DISCOURSE OF A MEDIUM. 307 

reason to entity- It must begin with some previously known 
nnd acknowledged facts or principles. It cannot discover by 
induction the original facts from which induction can alone 

"So with deduction: it sets out with ideas which it finds in 
the mind. It cannot descend to effects from zero, any more 
than induction can rise from zero to causes. Neither can origi- 
note its facts Or its principles. Both are dependent for their 
respective data on some power superior to either method of 
reasoning. These methods are both second-hand processes; 
neither is aboriginal, primary. Now, what is that power which 
gives us the facts on the one side, and the principles on the 
other from which to set out ? Whatever it be, it is self-evidently 
superior to either induction or deduction; for on its directly 
given data botk methods froceed. Both methods are then 
secondary; both are the mere mechanics of that power which 
gives the data to begin with. Hence reasoning is only that 
process by which things and principles are accounted for and 
related, but never authorized. 

"There is, hence, the necessity for some power that is abo- 
riginal, direct, authoritative, and supreme, implied by both 
methods of reasoning. This power must, therefore, be in 
direct contact with both the facte and the ideas with which 
these two methods begin, and on which they depend. This 
power can be nothing less than intuition. Intuition is the 
direct and immediate perception of facts on the one side, and 
of principles on the other. No reasoning can begin upon any 
other ground. The data of all reasoning is given at first hand 
in intuition alone. Hence intuition is the only power of dis- 
covery. When it reveals the esternal facts, it acts through the 
external senses ; when it reveals ideas, principles, laws, it acts 
through the soul. 

"And here cornea to view the spiritual method of philosophy. 
It is direct, intuitive, aboriginal, authoritative, and supreme. 
All possible speculation rests at last on its revelations. I say 
'revelations.' When we see the external forms of the outward 

Hosted by Google 

3O0 PLANCHETTE. 

world, a revelation is made; when we discover an idea, another 

revelation is made. ' Revelation ' is the great aboriginal fact in 

all mentalitj'. We no more -mm to see the world than we will 

to he. We do not come to know that we are, or that any thing 

else is by induction any more than we will to be, hj induction. 

The consciousness of the existence of the me, and of the not me, 

is as direct a revelation as it is possible to conceive. These are 

the gt^at aboriginal intuitions of all souls, and form the ground 

of all possible reasoning. Now, if it be possible to get the 

greater it is possible to get the lesser facts of existence by 

such ibongmal intuition, — direct 'revelation.' Indeed, all the 

eenUnts of existence are included in this primal intuition of 

existence itself And if the existence itself can be thus given 

intuitively directl a d wth preme authority, so can all the 

be 

H d philosophy. All perceptions 

A s of all that sensation reveals 

p S and doubtless is, limited to 

d d p ual intuition perceives directly 

d fi w nd ideas which rule the whole 

p p w d Hence all reasoning is de- 

p n gr t revelator of all things and 

pri p h ce of the absolute in the soul 

m w d, the universe, of both phe- 

m w If-cognition. The conscious- 

m g f the universe. 

"Axioms of mathematics are self-revelations of eternal ideas, 
— ' self-evident truths.' They are eternal. Axioms are given as 
eternal, and as absolute. They admit of no contradiction, no 
limitation, and no suspension. They are absolute authority. 
Other axioms have the same character: Axioms are not infer- 
ences, not deductions. They do not depend upon logic; logic 
depends upon them. Al! reasoning derives from, not gives au- 
thority to, them. Hence these are intuitions of eternal princi- 
ples. Now, if the greater can be given by intuition, so can the 

Hosted by Google 

DISCOUBSS OF A MEDIUM. 309 

less. And hence the spiritual method opens anew the royal 
road to knowledge. Clairvoyance is a practical proof of the 
feasibility and utility of the intuitive method. If the uneducated 
shoemaker's apprentice, blindfolded and paralyzed, can, through 
supersenuous channels, inset the great facts of science (as has 
been proved and tested in this country often), then we have a, 
practical and experimental proof and exhibition of the reality 
and truth of the spiritual method of philosophy. 

"Mere metaphysical argument alone is inadequate to reach 
the masses. But when to spiritual metaphysics we add the ex- 
perimental illustration of the transcendent nature and relations 
of the soul, we secure both sides of the required demonstration. 
And when on the top of all this, we place the wonderful facts 
of spiritual intercourse, our ■philosophy becomes irresistibly 
demonstrative. It recognizes the intuitive method as authority 
in revelation, and the inductive and deductive methods as the 
two wings o( demonstration. The first reveals ideas and facts, — 
the original data of all philosophy. The last two show the 
logic and relations of those data. 

" Hence the completeness of the spiritual philosophy. Does 
sensationalism ask for 'facts'? The experimental branch of our 
philosophy gives them in abundance. Does idealism demand 
ideas and deductions f The ideal side gives them at first hand. 
Does pantheism demand recognition of the Infinite Presence 
and Power? Intuition gives us the direct revelation thereof in 
the very substance of the soul and its relations. 

"It is vain for Mr. Spencer, Mr. Mansel, and others, to deny 
to us any absolute knowledge, or any knowledge of the absolute. 
The ' absolute ' of Spencer, Mansel, and others, is nonentity de- 
fined as Being. This is evident from Mr. Spencer's summary 
of the argument for the ' relativity of all knowledge.' He says, 
' We have seen how, from the very necessity of thinking In re- 
lations, it follows that the relative itself is inconceivable except 
as related to a real non- relative.' We reply, A 'non-relative' 
related to the ' relative' is a contradiction in terms, and an im- 
possible conception. Mr, Spencer's 'non-relative.' is used to 

Hosted by Google 

3'0 PLANCHETTE. 

mean the ' absolute," ' the infinite, — the real reality underlying 
all appeara«ce»: Atid jet it is said to be out of all relations, — 
'non-relative.' And yet the relative itself is conceived as de- 
pendent for its conception on its relations to this ' non-rela- 
tive.' 

" If this is not self-contradiction with a vengeance, what can 
be? Mr. Spencer's ' non -relative ' is nonentity defined as the 
' absolute," ' the infinite,'— a ' real reality underlying all appear- 
ances.' Can the ■ infinite,' ' real reality,' be destitute of all rela- 
tions ? It is absurd. The very argument for the ' relativity of 
all knowledge," destroys itself; for the very idea ' relative," is 
acknowledged to be dependent on its relation to the ' absolute." 
The characteristics of Mr. Spencer's ' non-relative " are those of 
zero. The ' infinite " of Nature and of the soul are not identical 
with this 'absolute ' of Spencer. He is therefore wrong. An 
'infinite reality underlying all' things must be the aboriginal 
esse of the entire universe, the one indivisible substance and 
power of all forms and all force. Hence it is in contact with the 
soul, with the mind. Kay: it is the substance of both body 
and soul. 

" And who shall then attempt to set limits to our knowledge? 
No man can do it, until he can comprehend the infinite possibili- 
ties of eternal progress; until he can take the latitude and longi- 
tude of all possible truth; until he can measure all the possible 
developments of immortal ages ; until he can rise out of his own 
limitations to a realm where he can embrace and outline the 
whole future career of the immortal intellect of man. And this 
is self-evidently impossible. 

" The very ground on which Mr. Spencer plants himself to 
prove the ' relativity of all knowledge," is, by his own claims, 
and in his own words, ' the ever-freseni sense of real existence.' 
He confounds the idea of some knowledge of the ' infinite,' with 
infinite knowledge. His whole system is that of subjective 
atheism ; or, if you choose, of objective idealism. He plants 
us in an ontological vacuum between the objective world and the 
'absolute'Nature: and after granting the clear conception of 

Hosted by Google 

DISCOURSE OF A 

the one, and the ' ever-present sense' of the other, denies us aay 
absolute knowledge of either. 

" He attempts, it is true, to save religion ; but he saves it to us 
as the pursuit of an ' utterly inscrutable power,' of whose nature 
and character, whether divine or devilish, we can never have any 
knowledge whatsoever. And yet he bids us worship this ' utterly 
unknowable power.' What is that religion good for that bids us 
worship 'we know not what'? It may be deity, it may be devil. 
And are we to be told that, though religion can never rise to the 
idea of divinity, can never know there is a God, — in other words, 
can never have a philosophy of religion, — we must still push on 
after both deity and a religious philosophy? Is this the way re- 
ligion, the grandest pursuit of man, is to be saved to the nine- 
teenth century? What is this but atheism under another name? 
What is the difference to me, whether it be proved that I can 
never iaow God, or that there is no Icnowable God ? Is it not all 
one as to worship? Can we be rationally called upon to worship 
utter inscrutability Under pretence that it may be divine for 
aught we know? To such absurdities has modern sensational- 
ism and inductive philosophy driven itself. 

"But Spiritualism relegates man to the aboriginal sources of 
all inspiration and all revelation. It plants itself on the demon- 
stration of the spiritual entity and supersensuous relations of 
the soul. It illustrates its philosophy in its experiments. It 
rises inductively from this demonstration to the divine idea, — 
to God; or, starting with this divine idea, reasons deductively 
down to the idea of the soul and its immortality. Starting with 
the fact that man is a spirit jSe/- se, it rises to the inference that 
all aboriginal substance may be spirit, /er se. Or, starting with 
the idea of God as infinite spirit, shows that there is no room 
for 'matter' as aboriginal substance in the universe. If one 
admits the idea of infinite spirit, — God, — he cannot escape the 
great spiritual idea that there is but one substance in the uni- 
verse; viz.. Spirit. If one start with the idea of the spiritual 
entity of the soul, he lands in the same conclusion. Both paths 
lead to the same great idea. And when we perceive the unity of 

Hosted by Google 

j' ^ PI.ANCHETTE. 

nature; when we regard the mutual transformability of bodies 
and of all forces; when we discover in the analyzed sunbeam 
and starbeam the elements which have been precipitated and 
hardened into rocks and coal and iron and other metals; when 
we behold everywhere the reign of the same invisible power 
ever changing in form, but ever the same in es>e, - the soul is 
carried, as on the tide of inspiration, up to the same great idea 
that spirit ' is all, and in all.' 

" Our philosophy shows that man is made of the same stuff as 
the universe .s. Hence, his fraternity with all things. For how 
could man receive life, power, substance, light, heat, gravitation, 
electricity, beauty, and wisdom, if he were not composed at hot 
tom of substance and power and law, one and identical with 
these? All substance and power is one, or no universe could 
arise out of them. Hence man is the autocrat of creation. 
He carries sheathed within his flesh the potent secrets of all 
things. 

"And here, it will be seen, is a religious philosophy, which 
carries with it aU the causes of ultimate success. In its view, all 
creation is trembling with the tides of divine life. Hence' its 
high estimate of true science. Can science discover a truth our 
philosophy will not consecrate and use? No; for science is 
only the study of modes and symbols of divine life and action 
Spiritualism is the only religion on earth, that can ' have science 
for symbol and illustration.' It is the mathematics and ethics 
of eternal law. It is true it makes religion natural ; but then it 
makes nature spiritual and divine. It does not degrade God to 
matter;' it elevates 'matter ' to spirit. It does not reduce reli- 
gion to I material ' science ; it elevates science to the divine busi- 
ness of justifymg, explaining, and demonstrating religion. 
It is spiritual power alone that thus renews the world The 
meaning of spiritual is real, in our philosophy. 

"Hence the spiritual idea of man: man is nature, physical 
and spiritual, essential and phenomenal, gone up into organic, 
self-conscious moral unity and volition. He has a sense for 
each external phenomenon, and a spiritual faculty for all eternal 

Hosted by Google 

OF SPIRITS. 31; 

iration which moved the poet U 

The whole is ruled and founded : Ihal I ha>e 

"As the solid earth is but precipitated sunbeamB, so the na- 
ture of man is organized spirit. The body is hut the secreted 
shell of the soul. ... A daj will come to every soul, when into 
the channels of its purified being will pour the love, the truth, 
and the beauty of the world. To be passive to the spirit of na- 
ture, is the secret of genius, and the path of salvation. Thus 
does the spiritual philosophy revive the hopes, and strengthen 
the soul of man." 

We translate the following from the " Livre des Esprits " of 
Allan Kardec: — 

" The morality of the superior order of spirits is substantially 
that of Christ in this evangelical maxim : Do unto others as you 
would have them do unto you ; that is to say, do good, and not 
evil. In this principle, man may find the universal rule of con- 
duct for his slightest acts. 

" They teach us that egoism, pride, sensuality, are passions 
which bring us nearer to the animal nature in attaching us to 
matter; that he who here below detaches himself from matter 
by contempt of merely worldly futilities, and by love of the 
neighbor, draws nearer to a spiritual nature ; that each one of 
us ought to render himself useful according to the faculties and 
the means which God has put into our hands for proving us; 
that the strong and the influential owe support and protection to 
the feeble, for he who abuses his power to oppress his feilow- 
creatures, violates the law of God. 

" They teach, finally, that in the world of spirits, as nothing 

Hosted by Google 

514 PlJ^NCHETTE. 

can be concealed, the hypocrite will be unmasked, and all his 
turpitudes exposed ; that to the state of inferiority and of supe- 
riority of spirits are attached pains and enjoyments which are 
unknown upon earth. But they also teach that there are no 
faults that are irremissible, and that cannot he effaced by expia- 
tion. Man finds the means of remission and improvement in 
the differentexiatences that afford him an opportunity to advance 
according to his desire and his efforts, in the way of progress, 
and towards the perfection which is his ever-receding goal." 

In an able series of essays, entitled "What is Religion?" 
Mr. Shorter shows the fallacy of the notion that Spiritualism is 
a new religion ; or, indeed, a religion at all. He shows that 
religion is not the mere acceptance of other people's beliefs; 
that belief, simply as such, and separate from the moral element 
of faith, or, in other words, mere opinion about religion, no 
more makes a man religious, than his opinion about shoe- 
making makes him a shoemaker; that history is not religion; 
that literature is not religion ; and that morality simply is not 
religion ; for though religion comprehends morality, as the 
larger comprehends the less, yet morality may be practised 
from such motives as not to include religion. 

But, contends Mr. Shorter, if Spiritualism be not religion, it 
leads up thereto ; it evidences, illustrates, confirms, enforces 
it; and gives certainty to what in many minds had become 
doubtful. It brings heaven and hell sensibly nearer and more 
real to us as states of being, the necessary consequence of what 
we have been and are, and so opens out to us broader, grander, 
nobler views of man's nature and destiny than js possible to 
those to whom nature and the present life are all; or, than is 
common when religion consists mainly in the acceptance of 
tradition and dogma, which are held but as the accident of edu- 
cation and geographical position. 

It shows men, to use the words of Henry More, the Platonist 
('659)5 tliat " no other Nemesis should follow them than what 
they themselves lay the train of." 

While Spiritualism corroborates and elucidates the genuine 

Hosted by Google 

LAW OF MORAL GRAVITATION, 3l5 

truths of religion, it also exposes and corrects many of the 
delusions and mistaltes into which men have blundered in their 
speculations on matters associated with it. Mr. Shorter in- 
stances, as an illustration, the old controversy on which theolo- 
gians are still divided, and, so long as they move only in the old 
ruts, are likely to remain so, — the question, whether at death 
the soul retains its active, conscious powers, and at once enters 
on its new life ; or, whether it only wakes to consciousness to be 
re-united to its resuscitated body at some period unknown, when 
the great assize of all humanity is to be held, and the affairs of 
the world finally wound up. 

Now it needs no argument to show, that, if there be any truth 
in Spiritualism, there can be none in the latter of these two 
views. If the departed still perceive, remember, think, love, 
suffer, and enjoy, and communicate with us, it must be evident 
that they are neither in their graves, nor are they like an ante- 
diluvian toad imbedded in a coal seam, in a state of torpor or 
suspended animation ; but that, on the contrary, they are in the 
present plenitude of their life, with all that appertains to it. 

Religion, then, is something to be experienced and lived : it is 
not now to be discovered or invented. If modern Spiritualism 
dates from 1847, and constitutes a new religion, ■wherein is it 
ne-u)f What is there in religion since 1847 that there was not 
in it in 1846? The immortality of the soul; the existence of a 
spirit-world ; the manifestations and ministry of spirits, and 
communion with them ; the assurance that Divine mercy 
and spiritual progression are not limited to the natural world 
and the present life; that the future retribution is not arbitrary, 
penal, and vindictive, but the inevitable consequence of the acts 
here done and the character here formed, — these are all ideas 
of the old world and of the old faith. 

'•Our place and state, our condition and surroundings in the 
spirit-world are determined by a law of moral gravitation, - 
the attraction of spiritual affinity. Prudence, even at its best, is 
not religion. To set down that feeling as religious, which 
springs from a fear of hell, or a desire to secure the good things 

Hosted by Google 

3l6 PLANCHETTE. 

of heaven, is to degrade the ministrj' of religion. To inspire 
men with dread, — to supplement the jail and the gallows, — 
this, indeed, were hangman's work for religion ; and scarce less 
degrading were it to religion to employ her to coax men (as 
children are coaxed with sugar-plums) bj the promise, that if 
they will but be good, they shall certainly hereafter be made 
very comfortable and be well paid for it. 

" It is a terrible and mischievous burlesque of religion that 
would thus make it the minister to human selfishness, provided 
only that it be a little more subtle enlightened tnd far-sighted 
than od d dwh hf sentiment. 

The ai g fi of any kind, 

not to d gu nces ; but to 

deliver m m fi d ee, here and 

everywh re w m in eternity. 

Especi h C 

By b ce g m g 1, by prayer 

for St g d if w p urselves for 

heaven — d but to carry 

out m b f good uses 

toward sit supinely 

and en fl w A paying here 

daily i fi 

"We are immortal, says Andrew Jackson Davis, "because, 
I. Nature was made to develop the human body ; 3. The human 
body was made ta detielof the human spirit; and, 3. Every spirit 
is developed and erganhed suficiently unlike any other spirit, or 
substance in the universe, to maintain its individaality throughout 
eternal spheres. 

" Each human spirit possesses ivUhin itself an eternal affinity 
of parts and powers; which affinity there exist* nothing suffi- 
ciently superior in power and attraction to disturb, disorganize, 
and annihilate. 

"Death is but the local or final development of a succession 
of specific changes in the corporeal organism of man. As the 
death of the germ is necessary to the birth or development of 

Hosted by Google 

CREDIBILITY OF A FUTURE STATE. 31^ 

the flower, so is the death of man's physical body an indis- 
pensable precedent and indication of his spiritual birtk or resur- 
rection. That sera i -unconscious slumber into which the soul 
and bodj mutually and irresistibly glide, when darkness per- 
vades the earth, is typical of death. Sleep is but death unde- 
veloped ! or, in other words, sleep is the incipient manifestation 
of that thorough and delightful change, which is the glorious 
result of our present rudimental existence. Night and sleep 
correspond to physical death ; hut the brilliant day and human 
■wakefulness correspond to spiritual birth and individual ele- 

" There is every reason why man should rest, with regard to 
life and death, and be happy; for the laws of nature are un- 
changeable and complete in their operations. If we understand 
these laws, and obey them on the earth, it is positively certain 
that o\xi passage from this sphere, and our emer^ment into the 
spirit-country, will be like rolling into the blissful depths of 
natural sleep, and awakening from it, to gaze upon, and to dwell 
m, a more congenial and harmonious world," 

"As to the immortality of the soul," writes Bianca Mojon 
(who died in Paris in 1849), "I maintain that we all feel it 
independently of revelation. It is not a mathematical cer- 
tainty, (?) — that does not belong to moral questions; but it is 
precisely a moral certainty. Without this belief, there is neither 
religion, charity, nor possible virtue. Not that I believe those 
who deny immortality to be incapable of virtue ; but I maintain 
that they are actuated by a confused feeling of immortality, 
which, in spite of every thing, works in them. Their opinion 
is but a negative doubt, and the want of an intellectual sense, 
I conjure you, then, with tears in my eyes, not to withhold this 
support and consolation from your children. Do not throw 
them into the void and desolation of metaphysical doubt." 

The credibility of a future state of existence is fully suffi- 
cient to become a practical principle, however low the evidence 
may appear; for, at the very lowest, lue cannot prove the nega' 
U've. Death, even to our senses, is not an annihilation, but 

Hosted by Google 

3i8 

At a convention of Spiritualists In Cleveland Jn 1867, Mr. 
Burtis, of Rochester, an aged man, is reported to have said, 
"I am hardlj nineteen years old. It is about that time since 
these tiny raps came to my house, and awakened me to a con- 
sciousness not onij of the life beyond, but of this life also. I 
had been here many years, but it was only from that time 
I began to live." 

How well does this saying of the old man confirm these words 
of Jean Paul Richter: "A man may, for twenty years, believe 
the immortality of the soul; in the one- and- twentieth, in some 
great moment, he for the first time discovers with amazement 
the rich meaning of this belief, the warmth of this naphtha- 
well I" 

" Christianity, when rightly understood," says Mr. H. J. 
Slack, " presents itself as the synthesis of all that heathen 
times endeavored to reach. It is a purification and comple- 
tion of the wisdom of the past, not an antagonism, as some 
would teach." 

In the narrative by Plato of the last days of Socrates, his 
friend Crito is represented as asking him the question, " How 
and where shall we bury you?" Socrates rebukes the phrase 
instantly ; " Bury me," he answers, " in any way you please, if 
you can catch me to bury. . . . Say rather, Crito, say, if you 
love me, where shall you bury my body; and I will answer 
you, Bury it in any manner and in any place you please." 

But how can a soul issue from the lifeless iKidy without our 

seeing it.' asks the skeptic. To which it may be replied, that to 

I th g d h ' h 

Hosted by Google 

CATHOLIC TESTIMONY, 

3 '9 

centlyin New York, Father Hecker, an eminent Catholic dLvine, 
declared that " with the truth uiiderlpng Spiritualism there is 
no issue, so far as the Catholic Church is concerned. It has 
ever been a household atTair in the Church." As to the character 
of the manifestations, he believed they were demoniacal rather 
than angelical. "The Church," he says, "has an order of 
exorcists to combat the demoniac influence, and provides for 
the use of the exorcistic ritual whenever the signs establishing 
demoniac ' possession ' are clearly proved ; and, singular to saj, 
those signs are the identical ones now used by Spiritualists to 
prove their doctrine; namely, speaking in tongues with which 
the medium is not, in the natural state, conversant; disclosing 
a knowledge of things hidden; showing strength above that 
appertaining to the years and constitution of the medium. 
Spiritism, doubtless, has intercourse with the other world, but 
not with the heavenly portion of it. 

"No one who reads can doubt that there has ever been an 
intercourse between the human race and the spirits of the other 
world. This is the most deep, the most mysterious instinct of 
the human soul. And there is nothing connected with this that 
shocks u' bhakespeare the great poet ot rt d 

the ghost in Hamlet in order to corrob h 

theorj that the spir t» of the departed ar m 

Socrates belicicd that he saw and confer w h 
spirit. So strong is the belief on these p h h gr 

Dr. Johnson avowed that he would not m h d d 

were seen no more against the concurre m h 

world 

The theory that the modern spiritual phenomena proceed, 
without excepbon from fallen ipints or deiils his teen urged 
by several learned writers both Catholic and Protestant. The 
" Dublin Rev lew the great organ of Catholic theology in Ire- 
land, has an important art cle in ts issue for October, 1867, in 
which it admit" the phenomena bi t pronounces them infernal. 
It quotes from a work by Father Perrone, published at Ratisbon 
in 1866, in which that learned ecclesiastic gives a seiection from 

Hosted by Google 

330 PLANCH ETTE. 

the names of several eminent persons, lay and clerical ; among 
the latter, Lacordaire, Sibour (the late archbishop of Paris), the 
late Cardinal Gousset, and others, on whose minds a full con- 
viction of the genuineness of the spiritual phenomena had been 
wrought. The writer in the "Dublin Review" remarks as fol- 
lows in regard to these phenomena : — 

" Among men of keen and cultivated minds they were at first 
received, not only with disbelief, but with laughter and derision : 
they were rejected as untrue, not because not proven, but because 
incapable of proof, because they were impossible; and, indeed, 
impossible they are, as we shall see, to mere human power and 
skill. Among the characteristics of the world in modern times, 
a tendency to believe in the preternatural most certainly can not 
be reckoned. The phenomena of magnetism and spiritism at 
least afpear preternatural. The predisposition was dead against 
accepting them ; it was predicted that, before the generation that 
witnessed their rise had died out, they would have disappeared 
and been forgotten. Well, years have rolled on ; and men who 
formerly would not without impatience read or listen to the ac- 
counts of these phenomena (the present writer was one of these), 
had at length been led to examine what was making such a noise 
in the world, and from mature, and for a time prejudiced, exam- 
ination, have been led to conviction. In this way have been 
brought round several of the ablest and most learned men in 
Europe, Catholic theologians, physicians, and philosophers ; and 
others, Catholic, Protestant, and free -thinking. Authority does 
not necessarily, nor even generally, prove an opinion ; in a mat- 
ter of mere opinion, the most inquiring and cautious men may 
be greatly deceived, and have been so deceived. But here there 
is question of facts and of the testimony of the senses ; of facta 
sensible to the sight, the hearing, the touch ; of facts and testi- 
monies repeated over and over again, beyond the possibility of 
calculation, in the greater part of Europe and America, and re- 
corded year afler year down to the present day. It is quite im- 
a cloud of such witnesses 

Hosted by Google 

DIABOLICAL AGENCY. JZI 

In regard to the question. By what agency are these phenom- 
ena produced? our reviewer condenses very closely the author 
whom he follows. The various hypotheses put forward are ex- 
amined seriatim, until certain conclusions (given in the form of 
propositions) are reached. " His first proposition is, that though 
some of the /^_ysio/ii^('co/ phenomena of animal magnetism, som- 
nambuhsm and Spiritualism, viewed in themselves and apart 
from accompanying adjuncts, may be ascribed to material nat- 
ural causes, most of them, or the whole taken in the aggregate, 
can by no means be referred to such a source; " while to refer 
the psychological phenomena to unknown laws of nature, as 
some do, "is extremely unphilosophical and absurd; for they 
contradict laws of nature that are certain and universally known. 
For example, it is a iaw of our nature that we cannot read with 
our eyes closed and bandaged, that we cannot speak a language 
we never learned," &c. 

The closing propositions affirm that good angels cannot be 
the cause of these phenomena; of which no other cause can be 
admitted, save bad angels or devils. On these propositions. 
Spiritualists, according to their peculiar experiences, are likely 
to join issue, and to contend that the existence of bad spirits, 
able to manifest their power on this material plane, implies the 

But it is something to have proved a spirit, whether good or 
bad. If the modern phenomena have done this, they have done 
what many minds wiil accept as the evangel that will hft them 
from utter darkness into the light of immortality. Spiritualism 
will not be disturbed by this cry of diabolical agency. It was 
raised centuries ago against one of whom it was said, he " spake 
as never man spake." To the learned Sadducees of the nine- 
teenth century, it will be a great step out of the fog if they can 
be made to believe even in a devil. 

" If," says an eloquent writer, " we can make no other use of 
these lower spirits, — these stragglers on the outer boundaries 
of the spirit-world, — we may at least accept them as adventur- 
ous travellers seeking a new world; accept the floating weeds on 

Hosted by Google 

322 FLANCHETTE. 

the heaving waves — as signs that land is near. But how any 
one, with God's spirit to whisper to him, and nature to smile 
upon him, and angels in the flesh to love him, and the Bible 
open before him, can talk in this way, and seek to frighten us 
from the bright path now ofening before us,ti>iih the smell of fire 
and brimstone, and horrible phantasmagoria of nothing but evil, 
I cannot tell. For myself, I am resolved to go on ; for, at pres- 
ent, I have seen nothing of all this. The fiends have not mocked 
me, but the angels have whispered to me; and If I am told that 
they are only the children of falsehood in disguise, still I will go 
on. Surely, 1 shall come up with the outposts of the Great King 
before long; for surely God and the angels are not altogether 
banished from a world where, I am Cold, the spirits of evil arc 
allowed to lurk for prey!" 

Cudworth, one of the noblest of the English Platonists and 
Spiritualists, writing nearly two centuries ago, dismisses, with 
something like scorn, the notion that evil powers can ever estab- 
lish any evil creed ; for, whatever is evil or immoral, is in itself 
a standing proof against itself, though it came with all the 
power of miracles. "Though all miracles promiscuously," he 
says, "do not immediately prove the existence of a God, nor 
confirm a prophet, nor whatever doctrine, yet they do ail of 
them evince that there is a rank of invisible, understanding 
beings, superior to men, which the atheist cannot deny." 

We have already seen that the followers of Swedenborg give a 
bad name to modern Spiritualism. This is sometimes instanced 
in opposition, inasmuch as Spiritualists do not deny the limited 
seership of Swedenborg. But since the majority of skeptics in 
regard to a future existence would be relieved of their unhappy 
doubts, if it could be proved to them that there is any thing like 
spiritual agency, good or bad, going on in the world, would it 
not be more generous in our Swedenborgian friends to brave the 
perils of an investigation, and do what they can to place these 
phenomena, significant of spirit, on an impregnable scientific 
basis ? For our own part, we are quite willing to run all the risk 
which those who cTy'^Pylhonism '." and" Diablerie .'"brandish to 

Hosted by Google 

LAI MS. 333 

deter us, if we can.be the means of conveying light and hope 
to one poor human mind, groping amid the mists of unbelief on 
the great question of the ages, — Does the consciou= indi\ idual- 
i-.m of man terminate with the phenomenon called deafk f 

The lelation ol Swede n bo rgi an ism to Spirituahsm," sajs 
William White, "is a story for a humorist Years ago, when 
familiarity iMth spirits was rare, Swedenborijians used to snap 
up and treasure eieri scrap of supernatunl mtelligence The 
grand common objection to Swedenborg was his asserted ac- 
quaintance with angels and deMls it seemed an insuperable 
obstacle to faith Manj of the early Swede nborgians had won- 
derful private esperiencea to relate Spirits rapped in Noble's 
Etudi Clowes protessed himself an amanuensis of angels. 
Swede nborgians, it might be supposed, were ready to run wild 
after spirit manifestations But it so happened that clairvoy- 
ants and mediums, while thev confirmed la ^oejo/ Swedenborg s 
other-world revelations, cotiiradicled him la taaay particulars. 
This was intolerable, — contradict our heavenly messenger 1 At 
once the old line of argument was abandoned. Nothing was 
now wickeder than converse with spirits. Intercourse with them 
is dangerous, disorderly, and forbidden by the Word! True, 
Swedenborg did talk with spirits, but he held a special license 
from the Lord; he warned us of its perils; and his example is 
no pretext for ail, and sundry. ... In return, the Spiritualists 
rank Swedenborg among their chief mediums, and question and 
adopt his testimony a/ discretion; but this liberal indifference 
only adds fire to the jealousy of the Swedcnborgians, and fiercer 
and thicker fall their blows." 

With regard to this alleged danger of spiritual intercourse, so 
much insisted on by the followers of Swedenborg, it has been 
well replied that, were the danger to the full as great as repre- 
sented, the objection would still he insufScient. We have only 
to take up a newspaper to be convinced that it is very dangerous 
to hold intercourse with men in the natural world; that there 
are here plenty 'of spirits who lie, and cheat, and rob, and mur- 
der. Even in "respectable society," in "the Church," and 

Hosted by Google 

324 PLANCHETTE. 

among its ministers, there are many who g nd b w 
they are not; with whom, for instance, cha n h 

lip while bitterness is in the heart. Are we th o b 

don society, to abandon religion, to shut o h m 

course? God forbid ! The prosecution of n w 

know, attended with danger, sometimes with d a 

we therefore to abandon it? Is the knowledge of spiritual things 
leas important, less noble than of material things? And is the 
fear of danger the most noble and heroic virtue that Christianity 
has enshrined? 

If, as Swedenborg saya, spirits associate only with their like, 
then to false and malignant men alone is there danger from false 
and malignant spirits : those who earnestly seek truth and good- 
ness do not incur it. 

The literal sense of the teachings of the Old Testament is 
generally rejected by the Swedenborgians ; but it is now thought 
convenient to adhere to it, so far as it prohibits spiritual inter- 
course. That must be permitted to Swedenborg only. But will 
it be contended that all which was prohibited to Jews under the 
old dispensation, is prohibited to Christians under the new? 

There have been many seers who, like Swedenborg, Thomas 
L. Harris, and others, have claimed infallibility; but in reverent 
minds this very claim must be conclusive against them. Swe- 
denborg, it is well known; relates that, while he sat eating in a 
tavern in London, the Infinite One appeared to him in the form 
of a man, and talked quite familiarly with him, upbraiding him 
for eating so much, &c. 

Probably no medium, while subjected to the limitations of our 
earthly condition, can be implicitly trusted in what he may af- 
firm as to the identity of a spirit. " It must not be supposed," 
says Delachambre, author of a " System of the Soul," published 
in 1665, " that the form of the soul and of angels is fixed and 
determinate, like that of solid bodies : it is vague and change- 
able like that of the air and the liquids, which assume the form 
of all the solid bodies surrounding them: and the difference is 
this tliat the vivacity of the forma that upervene to the latter 

Hosted by Google 

OBJECT OF EARTHLY DISCIPLINE. 325 

is of necessity, and that which is found in spiritual substances 
depends on their will ; for, as they move as they please all their 
parts, Ihey also assume whatever form they desire." 

If spirits have this plastic power (and all the modem phenom- 
ena go to prove it), their capacities of deception as to identity 
may be far greater than we imagine. Perhaps our own spiritual 
insight, purity, and elevation must be the measure of our ability 
to detect spiritual impostors. Perhaps Supreme Wisdom inten- 
tionally keeps us unrelieved from the necessity of exerting our 
own faculties for the prosecution of truth. "If God," says Less- 
ing, "should hold all truth inclosed in his right hand, and in 
his left only the ever-active impulse to the pursuit of truth, al- 
though with the condition that I should always and for ever err, 
and should say to me, Choose! I should fall with submission 
upon his left hand, and say, ' Father, give 1 Pure truth is for 
thee alone I ' " 

A noble saying; offspring, we believe, of a profound insight 
into spiritual laws; signifying that our own individuality and 
the great ends of our being are best promoted by that discipline 
which compels us to think for ourselves, do for ourselves, and 
seek light for ourselves; seek it not only from the exercise of 
our meditative powers, but from communion with all good in- 
fluences and spirits and men. But if we think to find spirits 
who will relieve us of the trouble of exercising our own mental 
and moral faculties, we must not complain should we become 
the dupes of such as are unscrupulous, false, or fanciful. Good 
spirits, we may be sure, will not try to violate the laws of our 
being by making us mere passive instruments under their con- 
trol, thus taking from us all spiritual dignity and freedom. 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER XII. 

- METEMPSYCHOSIS. 

I^ke glitapsea of Ibrgollen drej 
OF somethinj filt, like somelhi 
Of something done, I know nc 

WE have said that the modern spiritual movement is leader- 
less. This fact is one of its remarkable features. All 
attempts to identify inj one man or set of men, with any expo- 
sition of Its prmciples daiming to be -luthoritative, and accepted 
as 8ui.h, have proved utter failures Even organizations and 
conventions seem bv the neceasitj of their nature, too narrow 
for its ever widenmg circles The unprecedented progress of 
Spirituihsm, numbermg as it does its recipients by miilions in 
the United States alone is a success that is to no extent due 
to the concentrat on and euchisneness of a creed, or to the ma- 
chinery of a sect It has baffled al! the calculations of those 
who belieie there can be no efficient propagandism without a 
creed and In organization 

All the arguments thit could disaflect the worldly and alarm 
the timid have been freelj used to check its advance. With 
some few hononble exceptions the learned and the influential 
have not onlj stood aloof, but ha\e denounced it either as an 
imposture or as a diabolical snare Many persons, calling them- 
selves Spiritualists or mediums haie done all they could to give 
It a bad name b} lai ing -it its door their own offences against 
good morals, good English, or good taste. It has been stabbed 
in the house of its friends, as well as mobbed and maligned by 

Hosted by Google 

AN UNHEEDED WARNING. 

327 

Its enemies ; and yet never did its great truths shine for so many 
eyes with an immortal lustre, as at this day. Never was it so 
secure in the triumphs of the future ; and never did it see Science 
herself so thoroughly rebuked and confounded by the over- 
whelming testimony by which it is upheld" above the sneers of 
the unthinking, and the arrogant hostility of those who decide 
without examining, and make their own experience the measure 
of God's truth. 

In France, when the news of the Rochester knockings began 
to make a noise, M. Latour, editor of the " Medical Union," who 
had experimented sufficiently to satisfy himself that they were 
not all fraud or delusion, wrote (May, 1853) as follows : "What, 
then, is this phenomenon? Grand Dieu! I cannot hazard the 
least opinion on the subject. But this I will say, that science 
should seriously seek to produce these singular facts, to study 
and determine their laws, and divine their nature, if it is possible. 
What is there hidden in the discovery of these phenomena, and 
what is reserved for the future? If the scientific -world neghci 
and disdainfully deny tkem -witkout experimeitting, tliey •will fall 
t«to UHiuortby hands, and be obscured by exaggeration and en- 
thusiasm, and serve for the propagation of mystical practices : 
they will serve to nourish folly and credulity and charlatanry; 
but if the savans wish it, they will perhaps find the germ of some 
great discovery. To animate inert bodies, and make them obey 
the will, is, no doubt, repugnant to human reason. Two thou- 
sand years ago it was observed by hazard that a piece of amber, 
on being rubbed, had the property of attracting light bodies. 
This phenomenon, passed over by the science of the ancients, 
has now become the pivot on which turns modem science. Can 
human reason fully explain why the needle always turns towards 
the north? Does It know the intimate nature of magnetism, 
electricity, of caloric, of light? And, while regarding this table 
on which I write, I cannot help crying, as Galileo trf old did of 
the universe, ' And yet you turn.' " 

The warning of this man of science to his brethren does not 
seem to have been heeded ; and much that he predicted has un- 

Hostea by Google 

328 PLANCHKTTE. 

doubtedly come to pass. Spiritualism has been tended and 
nursed bj the lowly and unpretending; and the stubborn facts 
that have been elicited are not now to be set aside. 

The man who has perhaps approached nearest to the character 
of a leader of the spiritual movement in France, is M. Hippo- 
lyte-L^on-Denizard Rivail, who, under the pseudonym of Allan 
Kardec, has had remarkable success, by his writings and teach- 
ings, in making a belief in the spiritual solution of the modem 
phenomena carry with it the Platonic doctrine, somewhat 
modified, of pre-existence and re- incarnation. Before Kardec, 
this ancient doctrine had been advocated by several of the 
French philosophers and mystics; by St. Simon, Prosper En- 
fantin, St. Martin, Fourier, Pierre Leroux; and, lastly, by Jean 
Reynaud, the literary associate of Leroux, and author of a re- 
markable work entitled " Terre et Ciel," of which we shall have 

Kardec was born in Lyons, in 1804. A pupil of PestaioKzi, he 
became one of the propagators of the educational system of that 
distinguished reformer. Born of Catholic parents, Kardec gave 
much thought from an early age to the subject of religious re- 
form. In 1850, he began the examination of the American 
spiritual phenomena. Becoming convinced of their genuine- 
ness, he applied himself to the deduction of their philosophical 
consequences. In this task, he employed both the inductive and 
the deductive processes ; investigating phenomena, interrogating 
the supposed spirits through a great variety of mediums, and 
then examining the results by the light of his own reason and 
spiritual intuitions. The information thus procured he has con- 
densed and arranged methodically, adding his own remarks and 
explanations in a manner to distinguish them from the rest of 
the test. 

To his system he gives the name of Spiritism. "The words 
Spiritualism, Spiritualist," he says, "have a well-defined accep- 
tation r to give them a new one by applying them to the doctrine 
of spirits, would be to multiply the causes, already so numerous, 
of amphibology. Properly speaking. Spiritualism is the oppo- 

Hostea by Google 

KARDBCS SPIRITISM, 339 

Bite of materialiBm ; whoever believes he has within him some- 
thing distinguished from matter, is a Spiritualist; but it may 
not follow that he believes in the existence of spirits, or in their 
communications with the visible world. To designate this latter 
belief, we employ, in place of the words Spirilaalism. Sfiriiual- 
ist, the words Spiritism, Spiritist." 

In 1858, Kardec established " La Revue Spirite," a monthly 
magazine, which is still published. He is the author of several 
volumes, in which his peculiar doctrines are set forth in a re- 
markably clear, matter-of-fact style, methodical and precise, free 
from all mysticism and prolixity. One great cause of his suc- 
cess is perhaps his lucid, intelligible way of treating the pro- 
foundest questions relating to the dual nature of man. 

According to the doctrine' of Spiritism, the soul is the intel- 
ligent principle which animates human beings, and gives them 
thought, will, and liberty of action. It is immaterial, individual, 
and immortal ; but its intimate essence is unknown ; we cannot 
it as absolutely isolated from matter, except as an ab- 
United to an ethereal or a fluid envelope at ptrtsjirit, 
concrete spiritual being, determinate and cir- 
cumscriptive, called spirit. By metonymy, we often employ the 
■words soul and spirit, the one for the other, speaking of happy 
souls or happy spirits. Sic. ; but the word soul, according to Spir- 
itism, suggests the idea rather of an abstract principle, and the 
■word spirit that of an individuality. 

The spirit, united to the material body by incarnation, consti- 
tutes the man ; so that in man there are three things : the sou!, 
properly so-called, or intelligent principle ; the perisprii. Or 
fluid envelope of the soul; the body, or material envelope. The 
soul is thus a simple being; the spirit, a double being, composed 
of the soul and the perisprit; the man, a triple being, composed 
of the soul, the perisprit, and the body. The body, separated 
from the spirit, is inert matter; the perisprit, separated from the 

• We are indebif d to " Le Diciiormaire UniverMl " of Maorice LacMtra fo. lh« 

Hosted by Google 

35° PLANCHETTK, 

soul, is a fluid matter without life or intelligence. The soul is 
the principle of life and of intelligence. 

It is not true, therefore, as certain critics have pretended, that 
in giving to the soul a fluid, semi-material envelope, Spiritism 
has made of it a material being- 

The first origin of the soul Is unknown, because the principle 
of things is one of the secrets of Omnipotence; and it is not 
given to man, in his actual state of inferiority, to comprehend 
ail. On this point, one can only formulate systems. According 
to some, the soul is a spontaneous creation of Divinity; accord- 
ing to others, it is a very emanation, a portion, a spark of the 
divine essence. The problem is one on which we can only estab- 
lish hypotheses, inasmuch as there are reasons for and against. 
Against the second of these opinions, the following objection 
is brought: God being perfect, if souls are portions of Divinity, 
tliey ought to be perfect, by reason of the axiom that the part is 
of the same nature as the whole; whence the question would 
arise. Why are souls imperfect and in need of further improve- 
Without stopping at the different systems touching the inti- 
mate nature and the origin of the soul, Spiritism considers it as 
it is manifested in the human race : it ascertains, by the proofs, 
of its isolation and of its action, independent of matter during 
life and after death, the great facts of its existence, its attributes, 
its survivance, and its individuality. Its individuality is shown 
in the diversity which exists in the ideas and qualities of each in 
the phenomenon of the manifestations ; a diversity which im- 
plies for each a proper existence. 

A fact not less important is proved by observation : it is that 
the soul is essentially progressive, and that it makes acquisitions 
unceasingly in knowledge and in moral wisdom, since we find it 
at all stages of development. The almost unanimous teaching 
of spirits tells us it is created lim^le and ignorant; that is to 
say, without knowledge, without consciousness of good and of 
evil, with an equal aptitude for either, and for acquiring all. 
Creation being incessant, and from all eternity, tliere are souls 

Hosted by Google 

OF KE-INCA"RNAT10N. 331 

arrived at the summit of the ladder when others are arriving at 
the consciousness of life; but, all having the Eame point of de- 
parture, God creates no one of them better endowed than an- 
other, and this is in conformity with his sovereign justice : a 
perfect equality presiding at their formation, they advance more 
or less rapidly, by virtue of their free will, and according to the 
pains they take. God thus leaves to each the merit or demerit 
of his acts, and the responsibility increases as the moral sense 
develops. So that of two souls created at the same time, the 
one may arrive at a certain height more quickly than the other, 
if it labors more actively for its amelioration ; hut those who lag 
behind have it equally in their power to reach that height, al- 
though not so soon, and after many rude experiences, for God 
does not shut the future to' any of his children. 

The incarnation of the soul in a material body is, according to 
Spiritism, necessary to its improvement, by the labor which the 
corporeal existence demands, and the intelligence it develops. 
Not being able, in a single life, to acquire all the moral and intel- 
lectual qualities which are needed to conduct it to its goal, it ar- 
rives there ill passing through an anlimiled series of existences, 
■whether span this earth or in other -worlds, in each of -which it 
takes a step in ike -way of progress, and gets rid of some of itt 
imperfections. Into every existence the soul brings what it has 
acquired in its preceding existences. And thus is explamed the 
difference which exists in the innate aptitudes, and in the degree 
of advancement of races and people. 

According to Spiritism, the universe is an immense labora- 
tory, where humanity, " emanating from an ethereal fluid, 
becomes elaborated, individualizing itself by incarnation, puri- 
fying itself in bodies as in so many crucibles ; and, through a 
progressive advancement, by virtue of its inherent perfectibility, 
arriving finally at the state where it is the crowning work of 
creation."* 

• "La Raison du Spirilisnie, par Michel Bonnamy. Paris: 1MB," S«, alio, 

Hosted by Google 

Such is the 

Sp 

m 

notions of divi 
moral and inte 
of birth. 

tu 

h m 

b 

To its doctri 

p 

the difficulty, b 

doe 

m 

may, we come 

P 

w 

d hat it shifts 
b k as far as we 

posed to have b a d q N w tue of their 

free will, one of these souls takes a bias to good, and the other 
to evil, how can there have been perfect equality in their condi- 
tions, or in the temptations to which they were exposed ? Per- 
fect equality throughout ought to lead to an equality of results. 
Why, then, should one soul get the" start of another in good- 

To this objection the Rev. Dr. Edward Beecher, the principal 
American advocate of the doctrine of pre- existence, replies, in 
his able "Conflict of Ages," as follows: "The reai and great 
difficulty lies, not in the idea that free agents should sin, but in 
the idea that God should bring man into being with a nature 
morally depraved, anterior to any will, wish, desire, ot knowl- 
edge of his own, or with a constitution so deranged and corrupt, 
as to tend to sin with a power that no man can overcome in 
himself or in others ; and that, in addition to this. He should 
place !iim in a state of so great social disadvantage, and, as the 
climax, expose him, so weak, to the fearful wiles of powerful 
and malignant spirits. This difficulty, pre-eiistence does touch 
and entirely remove, by referring the origin of his depravity to 
his own action in another state, and showing that the system of 
this world is a system of sovereignty established over beings 
who have lost their original claims on the justice of God.* 

" If now a difficulty is alleged still to exist as to their first 

* Here Dr. Beeclier diverges from the teachings of Spmiism, in h!a atlempl to 

Hosted by Google 

THE ORIGIN OF EVIL. 333 

sinning in a previous state, it is enough to say that tliis is not 
the same difficulty that existed before, but altogether a different 
one ; that is, how beings, created with an uncorrupt moral con- 
stitution, and in a spiritual system arranged in the best possible 
manner to favor their perseverance in right, could possibly sin. 
Suppose, then, that this question is not answered, and cannot 
be (although I do not concede that it cannot) ; but suppose it. 
What then ? It mereij leaves a mysterious fact ; but it does not, 
as in the former case, present an alleged fact, which the human 
mind can see to be within the range of its faculties, and to be 
positively unjust. It therefore removes a dispensation positively 
unjust, and, in place of it, presents one that is simply mys- 
terious. 

"But it resorts to mystery in a proper place; for, since the 
past history of the universe is not revealed in detail, nothing 
exists to forbid the idea that, whatever were the circumstances 
in which men sinned, and whatever were the reasons of their 
sinning, stiil they were such as in the highest degree to show 
forth the honor, justice, and love of God, and to throw the 
whole blame on man. What, then, if we cannot state exactly 
theie circumstances and'reasonsf What if we cannot recon- 
struct the past history of each manf Still we know nothing, 
and we see nothing, to forbid a full belief, based on confidence in 
God, that, in all his dealings with them, he vras honorable and 
just. . . . These disclosures of the Bible settle the question as 
to the origin of evil. They no less clearly prove that the origin 
of the sin of man is not to be looked for in this world." 

Another reply to the objection may he, that we know not 
through what equalities of struggle and temptation all souls 
may have passed. The saint of to-day may have been a direful 
sinner in some previous state; and many of the differences 
among souls may be simply the result of the different number 
of disciplinary existences through which they have passed, some 
having entered on conscious life in advance of others. Should 
this view strike us as a humbling one, it may be none the less 
salutary on that account; for why, when >i'e think of it, should 

Hosted by Google 

334 PLANCllETTE. 

me merit it of Providence tliat we shoyld be born with better 

propensities, or under more auspicio 

neighbor? 

The theological dogma that all the i 
Adam's posterity deserve the ineffable and endless torments 
of hell for a single act of his, before any one of them existed, is 
admitted by all to be repugnant to that reason which God has 
given us ; subversive of all possible conceptions of justice. 
Even Pascal, Calvin, Mansel, and other orthodox writers, while 
accepting the terrible doctrine, admit thus much, substantially, 
as to its character, humanly considered; but they escape from 
the difficulty, by assuming that we must not measure divine by 
human notions of jiistice; that morality maybe one thing on 
earth, and another in the heaven of lieavensi 

With irresistible force has Mr. John Stuart Mill replied to this 
attempt to pacify faith at the expense of reason and the moral 
sense. He says, " Mr. Mansel combats as a heresy of his oppo- 
nents the opinion that infinite goodness differs only in degree 
from finite goodness. Here, then, I take my stand upon the 
acknowledged principle of logic and morality, iikat wkea lue 
mean different things, -aie kave no right to call them by the same 
name and to apply to tiem tke same predicates, moral and intel- 
lectual. If, instead of the glad tidings that there exists a Being 
in whom all the excellences which the highest mind can con- 
ceive, exist in a degree inconceivable to us I am mformed that 
the world is ruled by a Being whose attributes are mfinite, but 
what they are we cannot learn, except that the highest human 
morality does not sanction then, — com nee me oi this, and 
I -BiiU bear my fate a' I ma-i But when I am told that I must 
believe this, and at the same time call this Being bi the nameo 
which express and affirm the highest human morality, / toy jh 
plain terms that I -will not Whatever power such a Being may 
have over me, he shall not compel me to worship him. I call 
no being good who is not what I mean when I apply that epithet 
to my fellow-creatures ; and if such a Being can sentence me to 
hell for not so calling him, to hell I -ivill go." 

Hosted by Google 

L. PREVALENT IDEA. 335 

lentiments, though in a ten- 

Kardec's ddctrine of pre-exi stance diflfere, it will have been 
seen, from that of those seers who proclaim the eternity as well 
as the_ immortality of the soul. Kardec Ijelieves in the unremit- 
ting exercise of the creative power of Deity. 

To many Spiritualists the doctrine of re-incarnation seems to 
be quite repulsive; though it is largely taught in cpmmunica- 
tions claiming to be from spirits. Mr. Shorter asks, What 
must be the thoughts of the pious mother who imagines the 
possibility that the infant at her breast is a graduate from the 
galleys or the prison ! To this objection it may be retorted. 
What must be the thoughts of those pure-minded and faithful 
parents, who, in spite of al! their parental care and afifection; 
see their children turn out criminals or sensualists? Would a 
theory that exempted those parents from the dread that some- 
thing for which they themselves were responsible — something 
vicious in their own souls — had dragged those children down, 
be wholly unacceptable? 

"Th p 1 t d w- h g d p Ka d 

P m fi gh 

w be th p 

m pp a ce h w 

h p J h p 

a dehned bemg, limited 
in the body, constitutes the 

Hosted by Google 

33^ PLANCHETTE. 

death it qu Es the bodj it is not diverted of all enielopment 
All spirits tell u that thej presene the human form and 
indeed when thei appear to us it i= in such forms as we can 

Let u ob^er e them attentively it the moment that they 
have quitted thi'i lile Thei are in a =tate ol perplexitj all 
icems confused around them On the one hand they behold 
their bodj whole or mutilated ac ord ng to the manner o( 
death on the other hand they see and feel themselve al ve 
Something teJIs them that this body belonj,s to them and they 
cannot understand being separated from it ThS) continue to 
see them«ehes in their original form and th s ght produces 
amongst some of them for a short tin e a most singular illu 
sion — that of belie\ inj themselves stili in the flesh The> re 
quire to become accustomed to the r new condition beiore the/ 
tan be convinced of it reahty This hret uncertainty being 
dispelled the earthly body becomes to them an old garment 
which they have thrown oft for ever and wh ch the\ no longer 
regret Thej feel I ghter and as if rel eved ol a burden They 
experience no longer physical pain and rejoice in bein^ able to 
rise and pass through space, as they sometimes fancied they did 
in their earthly dreams. 

"Nevertheless, notwithstanding the absence of their earthly 
body, they retain their personality. They possess a form, but 
one which neither impedes nor embarrasses them. In fact, they 
have still their individuality and consciousness of being. What, 
then, must we conclude? Briefly, that the soul leaves not all in 
the grave, but that she carries something away with her to her 

According to Kardec, death is the disintegration of the mate- 
rial body which the soul abandons. The spiritual body, or 
ferhfirit, now disengages itself, and accompanies the soul 
which thus still finds itself "clothed upon." This new body, 
though fluid, ethereni, vaporous, and invisible to us in its nor- 
mal state, is as real -s matter itself, though up to the present 
time we have been unable to seize and analyze it. 

Hosted by Google 

KAKDHC ON THB SPIRIT BODY. 337 

This BecoDd envelope of the soul exists, then, during the 
corporeal life. It is the medium of all the eensations of which 
the spirit is conscious, and through which the spirit conveys its 
will to its exterior hody, and acts upon the various organs. To 
use a material comparison, it is the electric wire which serves 
to receive and transmit the thought ; it is, in short, that myste- 
rious, imperceptible agent, spoken of as nervous fluid. To 
recognize this spiritual body, is to obtain the key to a multi- 
tude of problems hitherto unexplained. 

The spiritual body is not one of those hypotheses to which 
science sometimes has recourse to explain a fact. Its existence 
is not only revealed by spirits themselves, it is the result of ob- 
servation. Whether in the earthly body or out of it, the soul 
is never separated from its spiritual encasement. 

The spirit body, then, is an integral part of the man; but this 
encasement alone is no more the spirit than the body alone is 
the man ; for the spiritual body cannot think : it is to the spirit 
what the body is to the man, the agent or instrument of his 
action. The human form and that of the spirit body are iden- 
tical; and when the latter appears to us, it is generally with 
that particular exterior with which we were formerlj- familiar. 
We might think from this that the spiritual body, though sepa- 
rate from all parts of the outer body, moulds itself in some way 
upon it, and preserves the impress of it ; but it appears that this 
is not the case. Making allowance for the organic modifica- 
tions necessitated by the surroundings in which men are placed, 
with the exception of some details, the human form (says 
Kardec) is to be found in the inhabitants of all worlds; at least, 
so say the spirits. It is, moreover, equally the form of ail non- 
incarnate spirits, and those who have only the spirit body. 

It is the form in which, through all ages, angels and purified 
spirits have been represented, from which we may conclude that 
the human shape is the type of ail human beings, in whatever 
state or worlds they may be found. But the subtle substance of 
the spirit body has not the tenacity nor rigidity of the material 
body. It is, so to speak, flexible and expansive, and therefore 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTB. 

the form it takes, though traced or copied from that of the body, 
is not absolute: it bends itself to the will of the spirit. Freed 
^ .... .!.___ ;._.... i.:.i. c — J u ti,_ „„i-;t u^A,. can extend, 

: the spirit 
the bodily 

ipparitions. 

se hands — 

they are the 
tangibility, 
ey make on 

skin, to give blows so hard as to be painful, or caress most deli- 
cately,— prove that they are of some species of matter. Their 
instantaneous disappearance proves, moreover, that this matter 
is eminently subtle, and is of the nature of those substances 
which can alternately pass from the solid to the fluid condition, 
and vice-versd. 

As we have already seen, Spiritism teaches that the esstn- 
Ual nature of the spirit proper, that is, the thinking being, is 
entirely unknown to us. It reveals itself to us only by its acts, 
and its acts can afFect our material senses but through some 
intermediate substance. Thus the spirit requires matter to act 
upon matter. It has, for its direct instrument, the spirit-form. 

Hosted by Google 

PRE-EXISTENCE. 

339 

just as man has the bodj'! hence the spirit-form is matter 
we have seen. It has, further, the universal ether a sort 
vehicle on which it can act, as wc act on the air, to produce 
effects of dilation, compression, propulsion, and vibration. 

Looked ai 

n of spirit o. 

Kardec's philosophy, easily conceived; and hei 
understood that all the effects which result from it enter into the 
class of natural facts, and have in them nothing miraculous. 
They have appeared supernatural simply because their cause 
was unknown This once known, the marvellousness disappears, 
and this cause is entirelj in the semi- material properties of the 
sp.ut body It IS a new order of facts which will find their 
ei^planatmn in a newlj discovered law, and which will lery 
•■hortl) astonish us no more than does the intercourse now 
made possible through electricity 

It maj be asked, perhaps how the spirit, with the help of so 
subtle a substance, can act upon heavy and comp t b d lift 
tables, &c. Surely no man of K w uld 

raise such an objection ; for, not m k per- 

ties which this new agent may p h our 

own eyes analogous examples? h m tied 

gases and the imponderable fluid h d d its 

most potent motive powers? W w urn 

whole editicee, steam propel enor m g p der 

burst asunder mighty rocks, and p an^ 

; solid wails, what is the § w g h t 

with the a 

Illy 

n that this spirit body can become visible, tan- 
gible, and exhibit the attributes of a solid body? 

On the subject of pre-existence, Henry More, the Piatonist, 
and the friend and correspondent of Descartes, writes (1659) 
as follows: "This consequence of our soul's pre-existence is 
more agreeable to reason than any other hypothesis whatever; 
has been received by the most learned philosophers of all ages, 
there being scarce any of them that held the soul of man im- 
mortal upon the mere light of nature and reason, but asserted 

Hosted by Google 

340 

PI.ANCHETTE. 

in this controversj | 

; that memorj' is no fit judge to appeal to 
and, lastly, that traduction * and creation 
conceivable as this opposed opinion." 
Among the advocates of pre - existence, More enumerates 
Zoroaster, Pythagoras, Epicharmus, Empedocles, Cebes, Eu- 
ripides, Plato, Virgil, Cicero, Hippocrates, Galen, Plotinus, 
Jamblichus, Proclus, Boethius, Psellus, Synesius, Origen, Mar- 
silius Ficinus, Cardan; and, lastly, the great authority of the 

scholastic period, Aristotle, who, 
speaks of the body that the soul i: 

Pythag 

1 the Soul, 
, hlaming 

Of ft 

Whereas, 
t iind fault 
e body into 
at the soul 
he soul of a 
at Aristotle 
ms tacitly to 

with his fellow-Platonist, Michael Mercatus, that the one who 
might die first should appear to his friend and confirm the truth 
of what they had often made a subject of discussion; namely, 

• TeOullian Hught what was called " » 

latirial Iraduck-aism." according to which. 

There was a "sfiriiiuil tradackmam" t; 

lughl by another Chiislian school, according 

■ondered by the Mul of the parent. Besides 

the Platonic doctrine <A fre-fxhUtae, h 

eld by Origen, there «as a fcurth doctrine 

1 the Deily ci*at« Iht soul for each indi- 

Hosted by Google 

ADVOCATES OF PRE-EXISTENCK. ^AI 

the soul's immortality. Michael, being intent on liis studies on a 
certain morning, heard a. horse approaching with all speed, and 
observed that he stopped at the window; and therewith heard 
the voice of hie friend, MarsiHua, crj'ing out aloud, "O Michael, 
Michaell vera, vera sunt ilia!" — O Michael, Michael! those 
things are true, are true I Whereupon Michael suddenly opened 
the window, and, espying Marsilius on a white steed, called 
after him ; but, as he looked, the apparition vanished. Michael 
Bent presently to Florence to inquire how Marsilius was, and 
learned that he died about the hour he had appeared at the 

Of Sir Henry Vane, the younger, Burnet says, " His friends 
told me. he leaned to Origen's notion of a universal salvation 
of all, both of devils and the damned, and to the doctrine of 
pre-existence. When he saw his death was designed, he com- 
posed himself to it with a resolution that surprised all who 
knew how little of that was natural to him." 

"It is not without reason," says Saint Martin (1743-1803), 
" that we look upon the duration of this corporeal life as a time 
of chastisement and expiation; but we cannot look upon it as 
such, without forthwith thinking that there must have been for 
man a state anterior and preferable to the one ivhereia he Hovi 
finds himself. . . . Each of his sufferings is an index of the 
happiness wanting in him ; each of his privations proves that 
he was made for enjoyment; and his present subjection an- 
nounces an ancient authority; In one word, to feel now that 
he has nothing, is a secret proof that once he had all. ... As 

Hosted by Google 

34^ pr.ANCHETTH. 

In Germany, Kant, Schellmg and Jul MllUer used the doc 
trine of the metempsychosrs to explain the beginning and root 
of sin in humanity. Herder Lessmg Schubert and Lichten 
berg seem to have favored It \an Helmont the younger who 
died in 1699, taught it in Hollind 

Herder has some remarkable dialogues on the subject of 
metempsychosis ; and, though the lein ol them is tentatne 
rather than dogmatic, it is easy to see the dr ft oi his med ta 
tions. We quote a few passages — 

"In nature every thing is related morals and physics 1 ke 
body and spirit. Morality is onlv a more beautiful physique of 
the spirit. Our future destinat on is a new link in the ihain 
of our being, which connects itselt with the present link most 
minutely and by the most subtile progression, as our earth is 
connected with the sun, and the moon with our earth. . . . 

"Perhaps there are appointed for us places of rest, regions of 

preparation other worlds in which — as on -i golden heaven- 

— m may climb 

ce g m g me Godhead. 

F m finite beings. 

B m g may be ied, I 

m who hath 

Hosted by Google 

HERDER ON TRANSMIGRATION. 

S L ft g d the Ju,t g e e e y pace 

H not the fruition of life been to 
8 without any fault of their own f 
L g .V ■ consider the fate of .the mis- 

he stupid, the crippled, the fear- 
d of young children, who had 

forced to depart. Take all this 
have weak conceptions of the 
p world to come, or thej must first 

g m m re, that they may learn to soar, 

rs; that they may he, in some 
m m fi d unhappy, or unhappily abbre- 

ted Promotion to a higher, human 

ca b ?ht of in their case. 

N g G g s, and no one can indemnify and 

compensate like God. To all beings he gave their existence of 
his own free love. If some appear to have been more neglected 
than others, has he not places, contrivances, worlds enough, 
where, by a single transplantation, he can indemnify and com- 
pensate a thousand-fold f A child prematurely removed, — a 
youth whose nature was too delicate, as it were, for the rude 
climate of this world, — all nations have felt that such are loved 
by the gods, and that they have transferred the treasured plant 
into a fairer garden. ■ ■ . How many may have been made 
happy in another world through having been unhappy here ! " 

With regard to the Pythagorean notion of the transmigration of 
toula into the bodies of brute animals, Herder says, " With some 
nations, — for example, the Egyptians and Hindoos; and per- 
haps, too, with Pythagoras, — it was designed as a moral fable, 
representing the doctrine of ecclesiastical penance in a sensuous 
and comprehensible form : " You who are cruel shall be changed 

Hosted by Google 

344 PLANCHETTK. 

into tigers, as even now you manifest a tiger-soul. You who 
are impure, shall be swine," &c. These representations, ad- 
dressed to the senses, and clothed with the authority of religion, 
would, undoubtedly, have a greater effect than metaphysical 
subtleties. 

" Our language," says Herder, " all communication of thought, 
what bungling work it is ! Hovering on the tip of our tongues, 
between lip and palate, in a few syllabled tones, our heart, our 
innermost soul would communicate itself to another, so that he 
shall comprehend us, shall feel the ground of our innermost 
being. Vain endeavor! Wretched pantomime with a few ges- 
tures and vibrations of airl The soul lies captive in its dun- 
geon, bound as with a seven-fold chain; and only through a 
Strong grating, and only through a pair of light and air-holes, 
can it breathe and see. And always it sees the world on one 
side, while there are a million other sides before us and in us 
had we but more and other senses, and could we but exchange 
this mrrow hi t of our bodv lor a freer pro-pect. . . . 

Sacred to me is the saving Blessed -ire the poor in spirit, 
for theirs n the kingdom of heaven Blessed are they that 
mourn for they shall be comforted Blessed are the pure in 
heart for thev "hall see God Purification of the heart, the 
ennobl ng of the soul with all its propensities and cravings; 
th s it seems to me is the true palingenesis of this life, a/ier 
■Bihtcb 1 douU not a happy more exalted, but yet unk«oivn 
metetnpfyckosn awaif-: us Herewith I am content." 

Schubert a devoted t.piritual.st and who satisfied himself of 
the genuineness of the phenomena produced in the presence 
of Mrs Hflufld the Seeress of Prevorst wrote the " History of 
the Soul " His psychological views are not unlike those we 
have givtn in our ibstrait of Mr Wake > recent work. Schu- 
bert shows first hov ' 

the body how it gives form and perfection 
organization Next entering upon the anahiiif 
forth the distinction between the soul and the spi 

-eflected in and by 

hich St. Paul s 

cognized. Origen nls. 

Hosted by Google 

345 

regarded the soul is intermediate between bodj ind spirit. In 
the Alexandrian ph}lo=ophj, we haie the pneuma denominated 
as the rational bouI and the ptycAe as the sensitive soul, that 
which deiires or lusts Iren'Eiis oays, "There are three of 
which the perfect man conoists fle'ih, eoul, spirit the one, the 
spirit, giving figure, the other flesh, being tormed. That, 
indeed, which is between these two is the soul which some- 
times following the spirit is raised bj it and bometimes con- 
•ienting to the fleoh falls into earthly lusts." Di George Bush 
held that the fneuma is to the p''\cht. what the soul is to the 
bodj The j*yf:Se is the -piritual bodj or body of the spirit. 
This new does not differ much from the teichingB of Kardec. 

Schubert rtgirded the soul as the inferior part of our intel- 
lectual nature, — that which shows itself most distinctly in the 
phenomena of our dreams, — the power of which also is situated 
in the material constitution of the brain. The spirit, on the 
contrary, is that part of our nature which tends to the purely 
rational, the lofty, the divine ! 

That profound and intrepid thinker, Lessing, who anticipated 
by a century much of the advanced thought of the present, re- 
marks as follows on this subject of pre-existence r " Why may 
not each individual man have existed more -than once in this 
world? Is this hypothesis, therefore, so ridiculous because it ie 
the oldest.'" because it is the one which the human understand- 
ing immediately hit upon before it was distracted and weakened 
by the sophistry of the schools f . . . Why should I not return, 
as ot^n as I am able, to acquire new knowledges, new talents.' 
Is it because I carry away so much at one time as to make it not 
worth the while to return ? Or, because I forget that I have been 
here before ? It is well for me that I forget it. The remem- 
brance of my former states would allow me to make but a 
poor use of the present. Besides, what I am necessitated ta for- 

Hostea by Google 

34^ PLANCHETTE. 

get now, have I forgotten it for ever? Or because, on this sup- 
position, too much time would be lost to me .' Lost ! What have 
I then to fear from delay? Is net tie w/iole eternity mine? " 

According to Herodotus, the Egyptians were the first to enter- 
tain the doctrine of meterapsychosis. They believed that the 
soul was clothed successively with the forms of all the animals 
that live on the earth, and that it then returned, after a cycle of 
three thousand years, into the body of a man to recommence its 
eternal pilgrimage. From them the Greeks may have received 
the idea, which was a leading feature of the doctrine of Pytha- 
goras, who claimed to recollect his former self in the person of a 
herald named ^thalides; Euphorbus, the Trojan; and others; 
and he even pointed out, in the temple of Juno, at Argos, the 
shield he U6ed when he attacked Patroclus. He taught that after 
the rational mind of man is freed from the chains of the body, it 
assumes an ethereal vehicle, and passes into the regions of the 
dead, where it remains till it is sent back to this world to be the 
inhabitant of some other body, human or brutal ; and that after 
Buffering successive purgations, when it is sufficiently purified, 
it is received among the gods, and returns to the eternal source 
from which it first proceeded. 

Ritter says that the sum of the Pythagorean doctrine of im- 
mortality was this, — that conditionviould accurately follovi char- 
acter. Pietho states that the Pythagoreans, as the Platonists 
after them, conceived the soul lo be a substance not wholly 
separate from all body, nor wholly inseparate ; but partly separ- 
ate, partly inseparate, separable potentially, but ever inseparate 
actually. 

The later Pythagoreans maintained that the sou! has a life 
peculiar to itself, which it enjoyed in common with demons or 
spirits l>efore its descent to the earth, and that there must be a 
degree of harmony between the faculties of the soul and the form 
which it assumes ; this last is also the idea of Swedenborg. 

Plato, in his "Phsdo," maintains pre-existenceof the soul be- 
fore it appears in man; and of this pre-existent condition it 

Hosted by Google 

PLATO S DOCTRINE. 347 

peculiar qualities, it seeks and chooses another body. Every 
soul, according to hini, returns to its original source in ten 
thousand years. After completing each life, it spends a thou- 
sand years in the spiritual world in a condition corresponding to 
that life, after which it passes into a new body corresponding to 
its ethical quality. 

"Plato's conception of the immortality of the soul," says 
Grote, " includes pre-existence as well as post-existence; a per- 
petual succession of temporary lives, each in a distinct body, 
each terminated by death, and each followed by renewed 
Ufe for a time in another body. In fact, the pre-existence of the 
mind formed the most important part of Plato's theory about im- 
mortality ; for he employed it as the means of explaining how the 
mind became possessed of general notions. Not all learning 
but an important part of learning, consists in reminiscence; not 
indeed of acquisitions made in an antecedent life, but of past ex- 
perience and judgments in this life. Of such experience and judg- 
ments every one has travelled through a large course; which 
has disappeared from his memory, yet not irrecoverably. Por- 
tions of it may be revived, if new matter be presented to the 
mind, fitted to excite the recollection of them, by the laws of 

According to Socrates, priests, priestesses, and poets (Pindar 
among them) tell us that the mind of man is immortal, and has 
existed through all past time in conjunction w 

The idea of metempsychosis re-appears in the speculations of 
the Neo-Platonists, in the cabala of the Jews, and in the teach- 
ings of some of the Church Fathers. Porphyry conceives that it 
is to expiate sins committed in a pre-existent state that we are 
now clothed with a body, and that as our conduct was more or 
less culpable we assume more or lees material bodies. By fulfill- 
ing exactly and with resignation the duties imposed upon us, we 
return bv degrees through the state of heroes, angels, archangels, 
&c., to the Supreme Being. There is also a descending scale of 
diabolical life. 

Hosted by Google 

34^ PLANCHETTE, 

The Cabalists thought that the destiny of every soul was to 
return into mystical union with the divine substance, but that in 
order to do this it must first develop all the perfections of which 
it has the germ within itself. It is sent through life after life till 
it acquires all the virtues possible to "it. 

Origen, born at Alexandria, a.d. 185, distinctly maintains 
the doctrine of metempsychosis, and finds in it the final cause of 
creation. In his view, according to Gieseler, the Godhead can 
never be idle. Before the present world there was an endless 
series of worlds, and an infinite succession of them will follow. 
All intellectual beings were originally created alike; but they 
were never without bodies, since incorporeality is a peculiar pre- 
rogative of Deity. After a great moral inequality had arisen 
among them by their difierence of conduct, God created the 
present world, which affords a dwelling-place to all claesee in 
proportion as they answer their moral condition. The fallen in- 
tellectual beings he put into bodies more or less gross, according 
to the measure of their sinfulness. Still they all retain their 
moral freedom, so that they may rise again from the degraded 
circumstances in which they exist. Even the punishments of the 
condemned are not eternal, but only remedial ; the devil himself 
being capable of amelioration and pardon. When the world 
shall have answered its purpose as the abode of fallen spirits, it 
will then be destroyed by fire ; and by this very fire souls will be 
completely purified from all stains contracted by intimate union 
with tlie body. But as spirits always retain their freedom, they 
may also sin again, in which case a new world like this will be 
again necessary ; the earths to which incarnated spirits are sent 
corresponding to their moral condition. 

Evil, according to Origen, is the only thing which has the 
foundation of its being in itself and not in God, and whiclv is, 
therefore, founded in no being, but is nothing else than an es- 
trangement from the true Being, and has only a subjective and 
no objective existence at all, and is in itself nothing. Therefore, 
he says, "The proposition of the Gnostic, that Satafl is no 
creature of God, has some truth for its foundation; namely, this, 

Hosted by Google 

ORIGEN S DOCTRINE. 349 

that Satan, in respect to his nature, is a creature of God, but not 

Qrigen set his theory of the pre-existence of souls in opposi- 
tion to creationism, which supposed individual souls to arise 
from the immediate act of creation on the part of God; for this 
theory appeared to him irreconcilable with the love and justice 
of God, which maintains itself equally towards all his creatures; 
and also in opposition to the traducianism of Tertullian, for this 
theory appeared to him too sensuous. 

He infers a moral destiny of the embryo, originating in a pre- 
existent state, from this fact, among others; namely, that Jacob 
and Esau, while yet unborn, and prior to all earthly agency, are 
objects respectively of divine love and hate. 

The doctrine of the transmigration of souls as a means of pen- 
ance was held by the Manicheans. It also existed among the 
ancient Italians, the Celtic Druids, the Scythians and Hyperbo- 
reans, and is still entertained by the heathen nations of Eastern 
Asia, the Caucasian, and other tribes. Coupled with the notion 
of transmigration into the bodies of brutes, among the ancient 
Egyptians it led, as it still does with the Hindoos, to the venera- 
tion of certain animals, and the fear of eating their flesh, since 
their bodies may be the abode of departed ancestors and friends. 
The Pythagoreans would not kill animals for the same reason. 

Orlgen's notion of earths being created to correspond with the 
moral status of the spirits sent to be re-incarnated upon them, 
has been recently reproduced in the speculations of an English 
clergyman, the Rev. William Hume-Rothery, who furnishes the 
following statement of his views on the subject : ~ 

"From the all-good and all-wise Being, who is the only 
Creator, nothing of evil and misery can possibly proceed. Yet 
in this world, to go no further, we do find an awful amount of 
wickedness and wretchedness ; and in nature itself, which none 
but God can produce and preserve, there are deadly poisons, 
savage and disgusting animals, famines and pestilences, &c., 
which certainly, according to the judgment that God has given 
us, are evils and blemishes in his creation; Now, as there is 

Hosted by Google 

PLANCHETTB. 

ator, a Being of spotless purity and absolute wisdom, 
ils and malformations and embodied savagery and 
maladies and ttie entire family of wrongs come into 

"This is the explanation: God, in making man, endows him 
with free will, which is essential to manhood. By virtue of free 
will, man can live either according to the will of the Creator, or 
he can disobey this ever-righteous will. So far as he obeys the 
Creator's will, to that extent he is orderly and happy. But so 
far as he opposes the divine will, in that same degree are con- 
fusion and misery introduced into his life and world. The soul, 
consisting of the will and understanding, is the primary creation, 
being that which is usually denominated spirit; the body, which 
is the soul itself developed into a bodily form, is the next pro- 
ceeding creation ; and the world, comprising the three kingdoms 
of nature, with all objects of the senses, is the ultimate ground 
of creation, which usually goes by tiie name of matter^ in which 
the states of the soul are brought down, spread out, and revealed 
in a region of space and time. Thus the soul, the body, and 
their world are a great unit of life, which assumes form in three 
different degrees or planes, but is distinctly one. Thus, too, 
spirit and matter, or life and its embodiments, or, which is ex- 
actly the same, life and its phenomena, are the beginning and 
the ending of a human being; and all the evils and disfigure- 
ments in nature, and all its blessings and beauties, are the em- 
bodiments and revealments of blessings and curses in the soul of 
man; good, both vital and phenomenal, flowing from harmo- 
nious co-Operation with the Lord; and evil, both spiritual and 
natural, being produced by man's violation of the inflowing 
creative life of God. 

" Such is the universal order of creation. Every natural world 
in the universe is the effectuated life and outward revelation of a 
world of created beings. Dream-land is thus created. All poet- 
ical imagery is brought forth after this manner. The wild fan- 
cies of the drunkard, which are called delirium tremens, burst 
n this way. The phenomena of death owe their 

Hosted by Google 

PRE— EXISTENCE. 351 

birth to cortesponding changes of mental state. The human 
soul — willing and thinking here on the lowest platform of life, 
viz., that of e^rfj — when indrawn hy the Lord into a deeper 
ground of alTection and thought, viz., that of causes, is evolved 
into a corresponding body and a corresponding vrorld, in which 
latter its inmost states are represented in detail, as in the body 
they are represented in the sura." 

On the subject of pre-existence, Cudworth, in his " Intellectual 
System" (1676), remarks: "It is well known that, according to 
the sense of antiquity, these two considerations were always in- 
cluded in that one opinion of the soul's immortality; namely, 
its pre-existence as well as its post-existence. Neither were 
there ever any of the ancients before Christianity, that held the 
soul's future permanency after death, who did not likewise assert 
its pre-existence, — they clearly perceiving that if it was once 
granted that the soul was generated, it could never be proved 
but that it might be corrupted. And therefore the assertors of 
its immortality commonly began here, — first, to prove its pre- 
existence, proceeding thence afterwards to establish its perma- 
nency after death." 

" To admit," says Schopenhauer (1820), " that that which has 
not existed during an infinite period, must yet continue to exist 
during all eternity, is certainly a very bold hypothesis. That 
only which has had no commencement, or is truly eternal, can 
aione be indestructible. The Hindoos are more -consistent. 
While they admit a continuation of existence after death, they 
also believe in a life anterior lo our birth in this world, and de- 
clare that all which is, is eternal." 

On the contrary. Ire nieus dogmatically remarks: "If any per- 
son maintain that those souls which only began a little while 
ago to exist cannot endure for any length gf time, but that they 
must on the one hand either be unborn in order that they may 
be immortal ; or, if they have had a beginning in the way of gen- 
eration, that they should die with the body itself, —let them 
learn that God alone, who is Lord of all, is without beginning 
and without end." 

Hosted by Google 

35 2 PLANCHETTK. 

" Christmnity," says Mr. J. W. Jackson, " not with standing the 
large infusion of Hellenism by which it is characterized, is still 
so e asenti Hi ly Judaic in some of its aspects, that it has never yet 
dared to prorau ga e he ^ ea P tonic veracity of pre -existence 
(the necessary co a e of po existence), save in connection 
with its founde h p e u be incarnation of the eternal 
Logos. . . , W a og a y a d metaphysically trained people 
be satisfied with he ah u d a su ance that an everlasting exist- 
ence can have h d a beginn n^ n time? . . . The Christian will 
have to learn tha b boa d doctrine of immortality is but a 
half-truth, the mere hemisphere of the sublime veracity that man, 
like his divine Father, is not only immortal but also eternal." 

With regard to the objection that so much must be obliterated 

from man's memory before he can be born with his anterior ex- 

p 11 bl k t y b w red th t tl f f m 

blmddbl ffm l^i 

1 h d p t E y p Led phy 1 t m t 

d b ddlbltddf Igp 

b dd Ij t d rh ca m f g d 

p wh th dy g m ra t h b hi t 

1 g wh 1 h y h d tt ly f g tt h 

Ij h Idh d 
It may be interesting to note what the great Swedish seer has 
to say on this subject of p re-existence. Swedenborg's explana- 
tion is as follows : " It is not allowed that any angel or spirit 
should speak with man from his own memory, but only from 
the man's. If a spirit were to speak with a man from his own 
memory, the man would appropriate the spirit's memory as his 
own, and his mind ijfould become confused with the recollection 
of things he had never experienced. In consequence of the 
memories of spirits getting muddled with men's, some of tie 
ancients conceived the idea that they had existed in anolber realm 
previous to their birth on earth. Thus they accounted for the 
possession of memories which they were sure had not originated 
in ordinary experience." 

Hosted by Google 

CAHAGNET 5 

This law, it is suggested, will serve as a reply to the frequent 
complaint that In spiritual communications we have nothing 

It is the theoryof Andrew Jackson Davis, the highly esteemed 
American seer, that meraorj is something more than a mental 
faculty of registration ; that the mind is a compound of eternal 
principles, each of which being from God, and of God, is self- 
intelilgent, from which intelligence memory is inseparable. 
Thus, Davis holds the doctrine of the pre-enistence of the 
psychical principle, though not of that of the individualized 
spirit. He teaches that " all souls existed from the beginning 
in the divine soul; all individuality which is, has been, or will 
be, had its pre-existence, has its present existence in creative 
being." Thus our "soul-matter" had an existence, but not a 
conscious existence, before we came on this earth. But may we 
not say the same of all " soul - matter," whether of men or 

M. Cahagnet. author of " Arcanes de la Vie Future D^voilds," 
bates his pneumatology on communications supposed to he 
from spirits, and obtained through clairvoyants and somnambu- 
lists. He admits pre-exiBtence, but no re -in cam at ion. It is his 
theory that all the souls in the universe were created by God at 
once, and are eternal, as well as immortal; that they were all 
placed in worlds of perfect happiness, but yet not with all their 
affections and faculties called forth ; and that they are sent down 
to worlds of material life for discipline, and to make them the 
better appreciate the heaven which they will soon regain; for 
witliout experience of evil they cannot properly estimate the 

He does not admit the notion of the non-existence of space 
and time in the spirit-world; says that if "spirits occupied no 
space, they would be nothing; and if there were no time, there 
could be no succession of events. These errors, he says, arise 
from the fact that the rapid action of spirits is incalculable by 
our time. It is also an error that spirits can be in several places 
at the same time ; hut they can transfer themselves from place 
^3 

Hosted by Google 

354 PLANCH ETTE. 

to place with EQCh speed, and can comnmnicate with other 
spirits in such rapid succession, that it seems to talce place at 
once. A spirit can see the whole of his existence in a moment, 
as has been experienced repeatedly bj drowning persons. Sir 
Humphrey Davy, while under the effect of the nitric-oxide gas, 
exclaimed, "The whole human organism is an assemblage of 
thoughts." 

In our remarks .on fsychometry, in a future chapter, this sub- 
ject will be considered further. 

In his " Conflict of Ages," Dr. Edward Beecher advocates the 
doctrine of pre-existence in the interests of the "Orthodox" 
theology, and in the hope of removing " the causes of paralysis 
and division from our common Christianity." We have seen 
(page 303) that in many of the communications supposed to 
come from spirits, moral evil is regarded as a means of educa- 
tion. In the philosophy of Hegel (where "each his dogma 
finds"), a similar view is taken of ein, as being not only inci- 
dent to human nature, but one of the appointed means of its 
development and advancement. Origen, too, regarded all 
God's penalties as simply remedial, and believed in the ulti- 
mate restoration of all souls. But to these views the large 
majority of Christian theologians are, as we have seen, opposed. 
Dr. Beecher himself says, "The multitudes who are saved owe 
eternal life to the free grace of God. All who are lost perish 
entirely by their own original revolt from Gad., persisted iit dur- 
mgtki^Ufi." 

Again he remarks, " It has been conceded repeatedly, that the 
acts ascribed to God, in his dealings with the human race 
through Adam, do appear dishonorable and unjust, according 
to any principles of equity and honor which God has made the 
mind of man to form. And yet, simply on the basis of Rom. v. 
12-19, ^""^ without any adequate search for a more legitimate 
mode of interpretation, good men have for ages gone on to 
ascribe these acts to God. . . . Notice, then, the full confession 
of the great body of the Church, that the only defence against 
the charge of doing this has been the theory that all raen had 

Hosted by Google 

REYNAUD. ■555 

forfeited their rights as new-created beings, hy ' an act over which 
thej had not the slightest control, and in which they had no 
agency,' and which tool; place before they existed; and also the 
confession of Calvin, that nothing is so remote from common 
sense as this defence; and of PaEcal, that nothing appears so 
revolting to our reason. . . . And, now, is it nothing practical 
that f re-existence can deliver the Church at once from such a state 
of things f" 

Dr. Beecher is solicitous for the deliverance of the Church 
from a dilemma that outrages his reason. But a deliverance 
that would still require the hypothesis of an eternity of hell tor- 
ments for nine-tenths of the human race, is hardly an improvc- 
menfon the theology that would make us all subject to damnation 
because of the sin of Adam. Reason asks for a more "practi- 
cal" exhibition than that which Dr. Beecher's plan would sup- 
ply of the resources of Infinite Wisdom and Love. 

It is with a sense of relief, therefore, that we turn from his 
ingenious attempt to extenuate the theological notion of eternal 
damnation by grafting on it the doctrine of pre -existence, to the 
celebrated " Terre et Ciel" (Earth and Heaven) of Jean-Ernest 
R d b 806 This eloquent writer goes far to exhaust 

^ h h g d the philosophical argument in behalf 

p H b lieves in the continuity of human life 

g nations, with the perpetual progress of 

m ds God, always infinitely removed, 

h k the subject are the objections to pre- 

ce b m the theory itself made so attractive by 

l" "i P sive style and by appropriate exposi- 

h h 1, and religious. 

^ "^ h been ably reviewed, if not answered, by 

M. Caro in his fitudes Morales sur le Temps Present;" and 
has called forth the denunciations of some of the doctors and 
bishops of the Church. To these Reynaud has replied in a man- 
ner to indicate that, in theological discussion, he is entirely 
at home. He shows that the Church has left this subject of pre- 
existence an open question; and that St. Augustine himself, 

Hosted by Google 

35^ PLANCH ETTE. 

*ho is sometimes quoted against it, had not, in his old age, 
made up his mind in regard to it. 

Reynaud utterly rejects the theologital notion of heli. This 
earth he regards as a specimen of the only kind of hell to which 
God will subject his children, and the object of his placing ub 
here is not penal, but disciplinary and with a view to progress. 
Reynaud does not agree with Origen that we are here in the 
way of a descent from what we have been in an anterior life. 
On the contrary, we are here in an ascending passage. 

"We are not," says Reynaud, "sinners because we are the 
sons of Adam : we are the sons of Adam because we are sin- 
ners." It may be more gratifying to our self-love to think that 
we are suffering here through the fault of Adani rather than 
through our own ; but by such a sentiment we derogate from 
divine justice. 

From the infinity of the universe, Reynaud argues in favor of 
his system. The infinity of creation is an earnest of the immor- 
tality of intellectual beings. The very great and the very little 
are both conditioned alike in view of infinity. Strong in the 
consciousness of our spiritual dignity, we may feel ourselves 
superior to all merely material grandeurs, however stupendous, 
and we may look upon the vortices of the firmament, with its 
systems behind systems, with the same regard that we look on 
whirlwinds of dust. 

Let us not suppose that these immense separations between 
planetary worlds and systems, which, in view of the velocity of 
our freed spirits, have hardly the thickness of partitions, are 
insuperable abysses. It is not to tlie soul that they are barriers, 
but only to those organs to which our souls are temporanlj 
united. All these worlds are but one for the immortal soul. 
Thanks to that infinity in which mere plurality is lost, the 
principle of unity, overshadowed for an instant by that of 
number, re-assumes the plenitude of its empire; and, as there 
is but one God, there is but one heaven. The fixity of this 
heaven is In the unalterable order of its changes; its incorrupti- 
bilifK is in its permanence ; its immateriality is in the immensity 

Hosted by Google 

THE THEOLOGICAL HELL. 357 

of its extent. And tills earth wtiich we tread under our feet; 
where we come, turn by turn, to accomplish our task, in cotn- 
panj with our isind; upon whicli we appear, without remember- 
ing whence wc come ; from which we disappear, without knowing 
whither we go ; where we live, without being able to saj with 
certainty who or what we are, — this earth rolls through the 
heavens, is one of the elements of the heavens, and constitutes 
us residents of the heavenly expanse. Let us give back to re- 
ligion the eloquent words which Kepler, breaking through the 
vaults of the antique firmament, traced as a line of light in his 
" Harmonies," to illumine astronomical science for ever: Hoc 
cnim caltiin est, in quo Tivvimns el movemiir el SBtiius, iios el omnia 
mundaiia corpora, — "For this is heaven, in which we live and 
move and are, wc and all mundane bodies." 

arth. Reynaud tells us, is far more 
fould be ours in the theological 
heaven, were it out of our power to aid still in mitigating suffer- 
ing and evil ; for here, in spite of all the obstacles that impede 
us, we are free at least to yield to the noble instinct which bids 
us help all suiTeriiig creatures; free to expect confidently from the 
bounty of God the end of all that evil, the view of which afHicts 
us. The thought of relatives, friends, fellow- creatures, suffering 
in hell while we, on our heavenly heights, had no power to help 
them, would be like that paralysis we have in nightmare, wlien 
we cannot move to avert some terrible danger, and when we 
strive to cry out in our despair. Such a state would itself be 
the most frightful of punishments; and so Reynaud repudiates 
the common theological notion of hell as blasphemous, revolt- 

"Whiie waiting," says Reynaud, "the illuminations of the 
higher life, I content myself with concluding, from the ordinary 
simplicity of Providence in the execution of his designs, that 
the souls of the departed will find themselves carried where 
their merits or demerits may make it fitting, by means as easy 
and spontaneous as those which govern matter; mountmg of 
their own accord to a higher condition or descending to a lower. 

Hosted by Google 

258 PLANCHETTK. 

conformably to the rules of justice, in the same manner as 
bodies, bj reason of their variations in weight, mount or descend 
in our atmosphere. . - - 

■' If, in the succession of the various phases of our immor- 
tality, repose may sometimes become the recompense of the 
just, it must be on condition of its being but a transient alterna- 
tive; a refreshment, as it were, after fatigue, and serving to 
repair the strength for new and nobler efforts." 

In opposition to the general theological notion, he maintains 
that the superior life, instead of being one of passive beatitude, 
will be one of sovereign activity; and the more active, the more 
elevated it is; that is to say, the more nearly akin to that divine 
model whose life overflows with an indefatigable activity through 
all the worlds.* 

"And so heaven is not a permanent dwelling: it is a road; 
and the celestial hierarchy which fills it, ascends unceas- 
ingly, like a column of incense. But what fate awaits us at 
the extremity of this road? And what is the end of all this 
movement? Is it God, within whose abysses souls go succes- 
sively to merge themselves, as the theologians of Bouddha, in 
their insensate mysticism, have dreamed; and not only they, 
but many others, who, even under the discipline of the Church, 
misled by an imaginary love of God, have fallen into a like 
spiritual suicide? 

" It is just here that Christianity triumphs ; for on this capital 
question it is Christianity alone that gives us the true lesson. 
No, says this superior religion : it is not God who occupies 
this mysterious summit; it is God and man together; it is the 
simultaneous type of the two natures ; it is the God-Man ; and, 
if the theologian will have his own expression, it is the divine 
exemplar, Jesus Christ. And so, even at ' ' 

• Reynaud'3 langu^e heie reminds U5 of a remarfca 

Hosted by Google 

REYNAUD. 359 

mit t IS always min man conceiied hv fiith in the diubls 
pcrleaion of hie pergonal deicropment ind of hs personal 
union with the second hj^ostasis m\a finallj such as he 5 
when in perfect accord with ind well pleasing to God Man 
1= therefore the master of his own endless delation At -iny 
degree in his subl me ascension ne ther does his personalit> 
nor his actiiitj nor h s pertectib litv haie a tendency to be 
enj, Ifed ind iost for always high aboie him he sets the ideal 
ol n an the ineffable archetjpe o 
ol all the tree beings of the u 

"But shall friends and relatives he re-united? Nothing can 
prevent our so ordering our existences as to travel for ever in 
company, tlirough the abysses of the universe, with all those 

■' Friends, relatives, parents, if you have profoundly at heart 
the wish not to lose one another by death, bind yourselves to- 
gether in the same life, the same morality, and the same hopes; 
and you will rejoin one another there above, even as you were 
associated here. , . . 

" Even in our birth we are free, for it is we who determine the 
conditions. If we resemble our parents. It is because we resem- 
bled them virtually before we were born. If we find ourseiveB 
in prosperous or adverse circumstances, it is because these are 
such as are best adapted to our progress and our needs. Let ua 
be consoled therefore in the thought that there is no fatality 
weighing upon us; that there are no evils to which we are now 
subjected, from which we may not, by the good government of 
our actions, deliver ourselves radically at death." . . . 

But what shall we say of our ignoroHce t " Not only is 
memory powerless in i-egard to the times that preceded our 
birth into this world, but it is not capable of representing to us 
even the times that followed that event. It tells us nothing 
of the period passed at the maternal bosom. It fails us in a 
multitude of instances. Beyond the cradle'all is as dark as be- 
yond the tomb. . . . 

"And yet who shall venture to say that our being may not 

Hosted by Google 

contain within its profundities tlie wherewith to illumine some 
da^ all those spaces successivelj traversed by us since our first 
hour? Do we not find, even in the enperiences of this present 
life, that certain recollections, which seemed absolutely extin- 
guished, revive all at once, and render back to us a past which 
we had supposed lost for ever?" 

The facts of Spiritualism, as we shall see in a succeeding 
chapter, abundantly confirm the hypothesis here suggested. 
And, were it not so, is it so certain that our identity is abso- 
lutely dependent on the formal presentations of our memory? 
" Do we," says Pierre Leroux, " in any phenomenon whatsoever 
of our lives, have at the same time memory of all preceding phe- 
nomena t " No, he replies : we are then occupied with a certain 
object, and our anterior life escapes us; and memory is but a 
past fact of our life perceived by us as present. Therefore our 
identity, our personality, our eg'o, is not a product of memory. 
To retiiember is but an accidental phenomenon of this e^o, the 
same as to perceive, to see, to judge, &c. . . . "But why," asks 
Chaseray, "may not the memory, like the attention, the medita- 
tive faculty, the judgment, like all the intellectual faculties we 
possess, and like all the new ones we may acquire, follow the law 
of progress, and, from life to life, go on improving and gaining 
in extent? " Analogy shows that this may well be. 
We continue our quotations from Jean Reynaud ; — 
"That astonishing faculty then which we call memory, is of a 
nature to preserve for us in the depths of our being, and un- 
known to ourselves, impressions which, from the fact of their 
having momentarily ceased to be disposed in a manner to come 
up at our appeal, continue none the less to make part of our do- 
main, where they abide, as it were, dormant; and hence, why 
should it not be the same with the action of this faculty in 
regard to events which have preceded the actual period of our 

"The body, through the senses with which it is furnished, 
is needed for conveying impressions to the soul; but as to the 
preservation of those impressions, that Is no longer the body's 

Hosted by Google 

HEYNAUD. 361 

Nffalr. It is the Eoul which has received; it is the soul which 
keeps them. 

" Our own experience offers confirmation of the fact. Is there 
in the organs, hy ineans of which wc are to-day in communica- 
tion with the universe, I will not say simply a single molecule, 
hut a single form, which belonged to the organs which eerved us 
in infancy? Since that period, how many bodies has not our 
vital facult)- taken to itself, used, dissipated! And yet, in spite 
of all these mutations, does not the soul preserve its memory? 
How many things there are on which I had not thought for 
years, which. I had let fall completely from my remembrance, 
but which, all at once, in association with places or with per- 
sons, or roused by an effort of attention, start up and re-appear 
t& me 1 Is there not here an indication of what may be produced 
hereafter in sublime proportions? 

"Notwithstanding those apparent interruptions of such mo- 
ment to us, and which the vulgar in trembling call deaik, our 
life, considered not in its earth-bound span of a day, to which 
the prejudices of our education reduce it, but in its infinite line, 
is in reality as continuous in all its development as in the short 
period laid bare to us between the cradle and the tomb. . . . 

"In admitting even what our present experience may lead us 
to conclude in i-egard to the suspension of all remembrance of 
anterior existences — this, namely, that death must produce on 
unprepared natures the effect of a heavy blow, and that, in strik- 
ing, it stuns the memory, — yel to stim it, is not to annihilate it. 
After a suspens on of days, months, or years, the memory may 
recover itsel The fact that we may have no reminiscence of 
anterior existences nov) is no reason why we may not have it at 

" Each one of us carries in his actual form and organism the 
secret history of his anterior emotions ; so accurately, that spirit- 
ual eyes, penetrating to the depths of our being, see at a glance 
all that we iave been in all that we are. 

"Our history therefore is not only in that Book of Life which 
theologians put in the hands of God ; It Is inscribed in our very 

Hosted by Google 

302 PLANCH ETTE. 

subsUnce; our being itself is the unfailing record we carry with 
us, from stage to stage, through the worlds. . . . 

"It is wholly arbitrary to suppose that immortality preserves 
life without preserving at the same time the faculty of repentance 
equally with all others. The quibbles by which we may try to 
justify the hypothesis of the abandonment of the damned, may 
be employed with equal force to support the idea that God ought 
to abandon, without remission, every culpable soul, even in this 
life. The culpable soul « „ol blinded more irremediably after 
bailing Passed through death t&-» it -was be/ore; for death is but 
an accident, as incapable of changing the nature of the soul as of 
changing the disposition of God. That which the soul was on 
the eve of death, it will be-the next day. . . 
" In reHecting on the spectacle of the universe, such as it pre- 

:s itself to 

w of modem ti 

to me that the mind is naturally disposed to conclude that there 
must exist a first series of -worlds more or less analogous to this 
earth, in which the souls of men, at their entrance on the limit- 
less career which opens before them, still frail and not attaching 
themselves firmly enough to the laws of duty, find themselves 
exposed to the discipline of temptation, succumb to it or else 
triumph over it; little by little advance, in the way of ameliora- 
tion, from one world to another, in the midst of trials always 
proportioned to the degree of feebleness and culpability, and 
arrive at last, after labors more or less prolonged, at the merit 
of being admitted into the -worlds of the higher series. There 
shall be accomplished the definitive deliverance from all evil : 
the love of the good shall henceforth be so paramount that no 
one shall lapse from it ; but all, on the contrary, animated by the 
desire of elevating themselves, and seconded in their eflbrts by 
the incessant grace of God and the co-operation of the blis.sful 
societies in the bosom of wliich they live amid all the splendors 
of nature, shall display to this end the activity of all their vir- 
tues, and draw nearer by a continual progress, more or less rapid, 
according to the energy of each individual, to the infinite tvne 
of perfection. , . , -"^ 

Hosted by Google 

ADVOCATES OF TRANSMIGHATION. 363 

" It is impossible not to recognize that tliere is no tradition 
which throws a light so clear as this on the ideas of liherty, of 
personality, of immortality. Delivered from all arbitrary con- 
straint, man presents himself as the-direct author of his destiny: 
not the sport of fatality, not the victim of original sin, it is Me 
individual himself viko kas determined in an anterior life lie ini- 
tial condition!, ofkis present life, even as ie is to determine .» th.s 
the conditions of his life to come ; and the terrestrial world, with 
its diversities of good and of evil, gives us the image of that 
world we run the risk of entering to-morrow, unless we have 
known how to qualify ourselves for something higher. Above 
the region of troubled and confused existences in which forgetful- 
ness takes place, from re-birth to re-birth, expands the region of 
luminous existences, in which memory, acquiring all its force, 
renders to each, with the full possession of his past, the full 
identity of his person, his completed individuality." 

Such is the theodicy of "Terre et Ciel." If the author is not 
always successful in his endeavor to make bis liberal philosophy 
harmonize with the theology of the Church by compelling old 
dogmas to assume a new and spiritual aspect, we cannot deny to 
him the merit of investing this ancient theory of the pre-exist- 
ence and transmigration of souls with a fresh and abiding inter- 
est His work has passed through six editions in France, and is 
deserving of an English version. In our own renderings of 
detached passages, we have done it but slender justice. 

Pierre Leroux the associate of Reynaud in editing a philo- 
sophical dictionary, was an eloquent advocate of the doctrine 
of the transmigration of souls. Of recent French works, in 
which the same doctrine is proclaimed, we have ■• Du Sp.ritual- 
isme Rationnel, par G. H. Love (1862);" "La Raison du 
Sniritisme par Michel Bonnamy (1868) ;" "Conferences sur 
rXme, par Alexandre Chaseray (1868)." The author of the last- 
named work does not appear to either admit or deny the recent 
phenomena. From his two concluding pages, we quote the fol- 

leity, to the government of the 

lowing risuiad of his v 
"All disi ■ 

Hosted by Google 

3^4 Pl-ANCHETTE. 

world, to the orisin and end of things, can result In nothing 
conclusive, for its object surpasseE the reach of human intelli- 
gence. Besides, every proposition of this nature is of a second- 
ary interest for man. Upon all these points, I declare myself a 
positivist. In my opinion, the only question veritably important 
in philosophy, consists in kiio-a/ing wHeiAer we have an immortal 
sanl. I am still so far a positivist in this, that I dismiss the 
Spiritualism of St. Thomas and of Descartes as underaonstrated 
and undemonstrable, and that I recognize the method of physical 
observation as alone capable of condHCiing te certitude. But 
science is as yet very uncertain ; and I cannot resign myself to 
wait, when the question for us is between nothingness and 
eternal life. I have then, provisionally, recourse to those meta- 
physical reasonings which render as very probable the continu- 
ance of the soul at death. I attach myself with ardor to that 
verity which physiology, I do not doubt, will one day make clear 
to all. 

■'This capital m g ffi y 

established by m m o 

principal system , 

of one single life m f 

chastisements ; a 
mitting a progres 

"Justice, reaso g m 

system, which I p m m d 

thinkers. And s mm i 

solidarity of inte g 

sive transformati § g f 

this free will,- m m My 

thought, firmly ^ ^ 

serene, and has g g g 

glimpses of a fut 

less abruptly ma n 

but which satisfy m \ 

of which the hope is not counterbalanced by the frightful risk 
of a fall to the bottom of an infernal abyss." 

Hosted by Google 

INSTINCTIVE ASPIRATIONS. 365 

In his way to these conclusions, Chaseray says,— 
"I shall not invoke the reasoning which consists in saying, 
'The soul is a substance simple, immaterial, and indivisible; 
consequently it cannot perish, since death is a decomposition, a 
disjunction of parts.' This reasoning is good onlyfor Spiritual- 
ists,"' for it accepts as admitted a contested point; this, namely, 
that there exist immaterial substances, and that the soul is an 
immaterial substance. 

" Here, vou see the weak side of metaphysics. It reasons ; but 
as it is compelled to take its stand on an hypothesis, a sup- 
position, we ruin its reasoning in contesting the truth of its 

"A proof of the duration of the soul, which is more gen- 
erally admitted, is that which springs from the aspiration of 
man towards the Infinite. The aspiration of a being, it is 
said, is the measure of its destiny. Now, the aspirations of man 
being without bounds it follows that his destiny, too, is limit- 

"M Flouren= draws a similar conclusion from the infinite 
problems which the hun an mind strive in vain to 9ol\e 
'These problems he says which we cannot sohe in this 
world must haie their solution in another ind here if I 
mistake not we hiie one of the surest signs that there n 
another 

"Where m the pKn of creition a k« Re mar do we iind 
instincts falsified' Whert do we sec an instance of a creatu e 
instinctnelvcrliingacertainkiid ol Ijod in a pUce where no 
such food can be found? Are the swallows deceived by their 
instinct when they fly away from clouds and storms to seek a 
warmer country? . . . Yes : the voice of Nature does not utter 
false prophecies. , , . And if this be true with regard to the 
impulses of physical life, why should it not be true with regard 
to the superior instincts of the soul ? " 

' By SpirHualali, Chaasraj here mtans those v.hn are such Ihioueh melaphysics: 

Hosted by Google 

Chaseraj objects to that refined Spiritualism which would 
reject all notion of actual space -filling substance. Because 
anatomists can detect nothing that leaves the body after death, 
he does not admit that nothing may actually be disengaged. 
To combat the notions of the eiitreme materialists, who deny 
the existence of a soul, he becomes himself a materialht, to a cer- 
tain extent; that is to say, he considers man as composed of two 
principal elements, a body and a soul, of which the one, aftei 
death, remains, by its very grossneas, perceptible to the eye, 
and which follows the dissolution of its parts and their transfor- 
mation into new principles, animal or vegetable, and of which 
the other escapes the view and the touch by its subtilty. " Let 
us distrust," he says, " our imperfect senses ; tfcere are so many 
substances which we can neither see nor feel I Let us not go so 
far as to deny the duality of the human being, because the 
scalpel of the anatomist is impotent to make a principle emi- 
nently subtile reveal itself to our eyes. 

"If this principle really exists, and if the soul is material, 
does it necessarily follow that it is mortal? No: man is not 
necessarily pushed into nothingness in the hypothesis of mate- 
riality. 'Though man should be wholly nothing but matter,' 
says Charles Bonnet, in his ' Essai Analytique,' 'he would be 
none the less perfect, none the less a candidate for immortality.' 
This was also the opinion of George Salzer, who sought to 
prove that the immortality of the soul does not depend exclu- 
sively on its simplicity; that a materialist, who admits a soul 
distinct from the body, might attribute to this soul another life 
after our terrestrial death." 

It is, then, through mistake, that some writers maintain that 
if the soul survives the body, // mast be because it is imina' 
terial. The question of immortality is not necessarily bound 
up in that of spirituality. The philosophers of antiquity, and all 
the early Fathers of the Church, believed in a materia! or cor- 
poreal soul; and, among the moderns who believed the same, 
we may cite AverroJs, Politian, Pomponatius, Cardan, Viviani, 
Hobbes. 

Hosted by Google 

AND SPIRIT. 367 

" Our soul," says Irenieus, " is not incorporeal except in com- 
parison with gross bodies." " The matter of the soul 
in heat," says Lactantiua. "The soul is nothing, if it is r 
body," sajs Tertullian. NiM. si aon corpus ! In the third 
tury, Roger Bacon recognized a spiritual matter and a corp< 
matter, a spiritual form and a corporeal form. It was 
Thomas Aquinas who first introduced into the Church the doc- 
trine of pure Spiritualism; and, according to him, 
spirits might find room to dance on the point of a needle. Des- 
cartes did the same for philosophy. 

From the writings of Cabanis, Broussais, and Aza'fs, the lead- 
ing materialists of the early part of this century, Chaseray 
says that passages favorable to the idea of an immortal soul 
may be produced. Cabanis, for example, who sees nothing but 
organism, who explains all by organism, who regards the brain 
"as an organ designed specially to produce thought, as the 

filtrate bile," &c., cannot at last avoid the declaration, that 
to bring all this about, to give life to this carcass, there must be 
" a principle or vivifying faculty which nature fixes in the germs 
or spreads In the seminal fluids." In a posthumous letter, he is 
still more explicit. "It is impossible for us to affirm," he says, 
'■ that the dissolution of the organs involves that of the moral 
system, and, above all, of the cause which renders us susceptible 
of perception; since we do not know it in any manner, and in 
all probability are interdicted from ever knowing it. Now, it 
suffices for those who would establish the persistence of this 
cause after the destruction of the living body, that Ike contrary 
opinion cannot be demonstrated by fesitive arguments." 

Rather more modest was the profound Cabanis than the im- 
petuous Messrs. Vogt, Biichner, and Moleschott, who cannot 
repress their indignation because people will still heed this old 
wives' story of a future state. 

M. Azai's is a materialist of a still more decided type ; and he 
says, "The soul which resides in the central part of the brain 
is formed by the agency of the organs of sense, and by the 

Hosted by Google 

563 P 

magnetic commerce of these organs with external beings," And 
vet this philosopher does not draw from his premises the con- 
clusion which we might expect; namely, that the destruction 
of the organs involves the dispersion of ideas and the complete 
annihilation of the intelligent being. On the contrary, he says, 
" While time enfeebles, alters, destroys the body of the sage, it 
perfects his soul; and this progress indicates a high desHny. 
It is, in reality, the soul of the sage which ii. the ultimate object 
of the composition of the world; it is the soul of the sage 
which ought to be strengthened and preserved by the laws 
which govern the universe. No other result would be worthy 
Of this sublime work," 
The physiologists, too, are claimed by Chaseray in support of 

Charles Bonnet, the great natur It d ph logist (1720- 
1793). believed, like most modern Si t 1 t tl t to maintain 
the human personality, which rat t b all, in the 

memory, and to maintain a link b tw th p nt and the 
future state of man, there must be th 1 d destructible 
body to which the soul remains un t d ft d th nd which is 
the germ of the new body destined to perfect the faculties of 
man in another life. 

M. Flourens has declared that the " bad philosophies must 
not pretend to find their support in physiology." 

Alfred Maury, after allowing these words to escape him, 
namely, "The Intelligence is, after all, a function of the brain," 
hastens to add, in a note, "I do not pretend to deny the action 
of the soul, but I would remark that this action is always closely 
connected with the play of the organism." 

Milne Edwards says, that he does not regard the organiza- 
tion as being all in the economy of living bodies. 

M. Gratiolet writes, " The system which best satisfies com- 
mon sense, is that which admits the individuality of souls and 
their existence independently of a ceriaiu body." 

Finally, the celebrated professor, Rodolph Wagner, says at 
Gdttingen, in the midst of an assembly of savants, " The moral 

Hosted by Google 

HOSTILE CAMPS OF SCIENCK. 369 

whkh flows from materialism is this : Let us eat and drink; to- 
morrow we shall be no more." 

Other tn ants somewhat numerous it must be admitted, the 
\ o^ts Roatin, Buchners Robmt Moleschotts, persist in see- 
ng in the phenomenon of thought nothing more than a cer«. 
Iral function a pure eflect of orgini m 

To think w thout a brain objects M Etienne Vacherot, 
eems to me as great a miracle is to feel without a nervous 
SI stem and to perceive without organs 

" And yet," retorts Chaaeray, " this sort of miracle is accom- 
plished every day; and the least contested phenomena of som- 
nambulism and animal magnetism subvert the biological notions 
based on the ordinary state of man. The organism would seem 
to be the instrument indispensable for the exercise and develop- 
ment of the faculties of the soul, rather than the condition neces- 
sary for the existence of these same faculties. Without organism, 
the soul is in repose ; it may be compared to the engineer with- 
out a locomotive to conduct, or the musician without an instru- 
ment on which to perform. 

"This hesitation of science, iMs division of tie doctors info 
i'jio camps, denotes the absence of positive proofs on either side, 
and consequently leaves subsisting in their entirety the meta- 
physical and moral proofs which make the immortality of the 
soul so probable. We must not allow ourselves to be imposed 
on by the audacity of these arganizationkts." 

If M. Chaseray would acquaint himself with the great facts 
recorded in this volume, he wouid see that the " audacity" of 
these organizatdonists is, as we have shown from their own ad- 
missions, wholly based on their denial, or, as we contend, their 
ignotauce, of phenomena known at this time to several million 
intelligent contemporaries. 

But M. Chaseray is not without hope of a scientific proof of 
the fact of the soul's immortality. He says, "The day when 
physiology shall have proved the existence of the soul, shail 
have made it appear that an Incorruptible substance separates 
itself at death from the discarded organism, this proposition 

Hosted by Google 

37° 

PLAN CHE TTE. 

will pass from the domain of metaphysics into that of the posi- 
tive sciences; from probable it will become certain. I do not 
despair of this success." 

Christian Garve, a German writer (i743-i793)> seems to liave 
entertained a belief not unfavorable to the theory of progressive 
existences, lie writes, "The greatest encouragement to intel- 
lectual progress arises from our belief in one supreme Fountain 
of Wisdom, toward which we may continually advance; vthile, 
as we reverently approach that Source of mental light, the 
obscurities hanging about our present defective vision will 
gradually pass away. Without such a faith, I must look upon 
the world from a melancholy point of view. 

" I behold around me a vast universe crowded with innumera- 
ble objects of interest, all possessing powers and qualities of 
which myself and my fellow- creatures can only understand a 

" Is there not a Supreme Mind which comprehends the whole 
more perfectly than we understand the minutest portions of it.> 
If I doubt this, how hopeless must appear my efforts toward 

intellectual satisfaction 1 For how Ci 
t g ■ b h 1 w 

il, ii 

innumerable objects of matei 
beings called mankind! . . . 
corporeal frames ai 
rial world, so our fi 
intellectual Power. 

nds I 

my short life, hope 

q iry, a knowl- 

m r the deepest 

gg ts? If myself, 

1 ly intellectual 

es and of the 

s amid a wide 
p he world were 

nature, and the few intellectual 
:t us believe that as our feeble 
I and supported by a vast mate- 
e under the sway of an infinite 
w see a just proportion between 

Hosted by Google 

AN AMERICAN PLATONIST, yjl 

mind and matter. The world now becomes a noble object of 
unceasing study. The attainment of truth appears at least 

Among those American Spiritualists who accept the pure 
Platonic doctrine of pre-existence, if not of metempsychosis, 
we may mention A. Eronson Aleott, a rare example, in these 
times, of the veritable sage. He writes : " Every creature assists 
in its own formation, souls being essentially creative, and crav- 
ing form. . , . 

"Throughout the domain of spirit, desire creates substance, 
wherein all creatures seek conjunction, lodging, and nurture. 
Nor is there any thing in nature, save desire, holding substances 
together; all things being dissolvable and recombinable in this 

" Under the sway of occult forces we partake of preternatural 
insights, having access to sources of information unopened to 
us in our wakeful hours. Vast systems of sympathies, ante- 
dating and extending beyond our mundane experiences, absorb 
us within their sphere, relating us to other worlds of life and 
light. 

For neier is the sleep -o profound the dream so distracting, 
i& to obliterate -ill sense of the persomiity; despite these 
i-igaries of the nii,ht these opute oi the senses, memory 
sometimes dispels the obli\ious slumber and recovers for the 
mind recollections of its descent and debtiny. Some reiiques 
ol the ancient consciousness survne recalling our previous his- 
tory and experiences 

"Ancient of days, we hardly are persuaded to believe that 
our souls are no older than our bodies, and to date our nativity 
from our family registers, as if time and space could chronicle 
the periods of the immortal mind by its advent into the flesh 
and decease out of it. . . . 

"None of us remember when we did not remember, when 
memory was nought and ourselves were unborn. Memory is 
the premise of our sensations : it dates our immortality. . . . 

" Moreover, the insatiableness of our desires asserts our per- 

Hostea by Google 

37^ PLANCHETTK. 

eonal imperishablcncss. Yearning for full satisfactions, while 
balked of these perpetually, we still prosecute our search for 
them, our faith In their attainment remaining unshaken under 
every disnppointment. Our hope is eternal as ourselves, — a 
never-ending, still-beginning quest of our divinity. Infinite in 
essence, we crave it in potence. The boundlessness and elas- 
ticity of the mind, its power of self- recovery, uprise from tem- 
porary obstructions, self- imposed or from temperament, are 
assurances made doubly sure of our soui's infinitude and lon- 
gevity 

Everj thing i pires to its o«n perfect on and is rettles-; till 
It attain it —is the trembl ng needle 111 it find t, beloved 
noith And the kncwiedge of this is nmtc is it the desire 
else the last had been a torment and needless importunitj 
Natme shoots not at rovers Even inanimate things while 
laiiorant of their perfection ire cirried towiid it by a bl nd 
impulse But that which conducts them knows The next 
Older of bt ngs haie some =ight of it ind man most perfectly 
till he touch the apple Our del ghts buckle us life long our 
desires being men ones of past itisfittions and we heie but 
sip pleasures once tisled to satieti 

Still heaien it, our heart aftirm again t eierj disappoint 
ment and -Bhetl er behind or beton, u as memorj or a hope 
tis to be ours, our port and resting-place sometime in the 

The poets have often availed themselves of the Platonic theory 
of pre-existence. Virgil, in the Sixth Book of his ^neid, 
teaches very distinctly the doctrine of the transmigration of 
souls. "These souls," says Anchises, "destined for other 
bodies, drink, in the waters of Lethe, a long oblivion of things 
past." Robert Southey, in one of his published letters, re- 
marks, " I have a strong and lively faith in a state of continued 
consciousness from this stage of existence; and that we shall 
recover the consciousness of other stages through which we 
previously may have passed, seems to me not improbable." 
And again he writes, "The system of progressive existences 

Hosted by Google 

seems, of all others, the most benevolent) and all that we do 
understand is so wise and so good, and all we do, or do not, so 
perfectly and overwhelmingly wonderful, that the most benevo- 
lent system is the most prabable." 

In his novel of "Lucretia," Lord Lytton observes: "What 
ive call eternity maybe but an endless series of those transitions 
which men call deaths; abandonments of home after home, ever 
to fairer scenes and loftier heights. Age after age, the spirit, 
that glorious nomad, may shifl its tent, fated not to rest in tlie 
dull Elysium of the heathen, but carrying with it evermore its 
elements, — activity and desire. Why should the soul ever re- 
pose? . . . Labor is the purgatory of the erring; and it is none 
the less the heaven of the good." 

Walter Scott, in his diary, under the date of Feb. 17, 1828, 
remarks, " I cannot, I am sure, tell if it is worth marking down, 
that yesterday, at dinner-time, I was strongly haunted by what 
I would call the sense of p re-existence, in a confirmed idea that 
nothing which passed was said for the first time." 

Tennyson repeatedly refers to this mood ; and in " The Pre- 
lude," by Wordsworth, we lind the following passage ; — 
"Ourchndhoodsils, 

s of Immortality, from Recollections of 
Early Childhood," Wordsworth is still more direct in his refer- 
ence to that key to many mysteries, the doctrine of pre- 

"Olir birth is bul a sleep and a IbrgeltkDg : 

The soul that rises with us, our life's slat, 
Halh had eJH»vhe» its selling, 

And coidftlh liora a^ : 
Nol in entire foi^tFulness, 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER XIII. 

"P VERY step taien in advance by science is in harmony with 
-*-' the great facts which SpiritualiEm reveals. We think that 
our popular friend, Agassiz, notwithstanding hie exhibition of 
vexation when he found he could not manipulate the spiritual 
phenomena as easily as he could some rare specimens of cod 
and haddock, was nearly right when he said, "We trust that 
the time is not distant when it will be universally understood 
that the battle of the evidences will have to be fought on the 
field of physical science, and not on that of the metaphysical." 

The further science carries its analysis, the more does the 
material world lose that character of rigidity which our external 
senses attach to it; and the more does it seem plastic under 
spiritual laws. Modern chemistry has shown us that all solid 
bodies may exist as aeriform ; that even iron may be converted 
into an invisible gas ; and the diamond which to our senses is 
inert, ponderable matter, may be volatilized in the fire of the 
burning mirror so as to develop neither smoke nor cinders. 
On the other hand, fire, essentially volatile, can be condensed 
in the calcination of metals, so as to become ponderable. 

From these facts, De Montlosier deduces the interesting con- 
clusion, that ail the bodies of the universe might be volatilized 
and made to disappear in those spaces which our ignorance calls 
the void; and that, in its turn, what we call the void might be 

Hosted by Google 

CAUSE OF CONFUSION OF IDEAS. 375 

condensed, so that the number of the celestial bodies might 
be multiplied a hundred-fold; and, through all this, the uni- 
verse would not have changed in its nature and essence, though 
it would be changed in its phenomenal aspect. 

One of the most eminent physiologists of the day, Schroeder 
vander Kolk, remarks: "In my opinion, this untoward distinc- 
tion between the mnterial and the immaterial has singularly 
contributed to confuse our ideas. Should we not proceed more 
surely in distinguishing in naXart iliat wbick it is fossibie fay at 
toffrceive by the senses, and ihafakich escapes their scrutiny f 
WAo gives us tie right to admit that the limits of nature do not 
ga beyond those of out organs?" 

Everywhere, under the appearance of concretion and hard- 
ness, living elemental forces are latent, and the slightest varia- 
tion in the equilibrium and correlation of these might alter the 
face of the universe, and the most solid substances might vanish 
like a dream. 

In the remote distances between the planets, there is no inac- 
tive void. " The space," says Oersted, " is filled by ether and 
penetrated by the attractive forces by which the whole universe it 
held together. The ether itself is an ocean, whose waves form 
light, that great connecting link which conveys messages from 
globe to globe and from system to system. The wonders un- 
ravelied by science prove that we are not isolated beings, but 
that we are related to the whole universe." 

Thus science comes in to confirm that great deduction of 
Spiritualism, which assures us of the solidarity of all hfe and 
intelligence in whatever world or system they may be devel- 
oped,— that we none of us are aliens in God's universe, but cos- 
mopolitans, entitled to the freedom of the whole of it; ay, born 
to make all the past and all the future our heritage; our ear- 
nestness and our efforts being always the measure of our acquisi- 
tions in goodness and in knowledge. And for this infinite work 
we have an eternity before us. 

Besides the assurances of immortality which Spiritualism 
gives, in revealing to us the phenomena of spiritual action and 

Hosted by Google 

37^ PLAXCHETTK, 

intelligence, it offers an added and more important confirmation 
in tiie revelation it makes of powers in the limiian soul, which 
proclaim that it is not merely the creature of space and time, 
but that in eternity and infinity ie to be found its native atmos- 
phere; and that such are its capacities of clairvoyance, that not 
only the remotest planet, but the past eternities, maybe hereafter 
f canned by its unconditioned vision. The argument for immor- 
tality, drawn from these capacities, has already been presented, 
and it seems to us unanswerable. 

Another stupendous fact, which the phenomena we have been 
dealing with disclose, is this,^and it is one which, more than 
all other considerations, except the consciousness that God sees 
us, ought to keep us from defiling the soul by any act which in 
our better moments we may deplore, — Memory is imperishable ; 
and all thought and all action leave their eternal record in the 
organic structure of our very souls. Nothing happens, not 
the most fieeting and seemingly trivial occurrence of our lives, 
that may not be, ages and ffiona hence, reproduced to our own 
consciousness, as well as to that of others, independently of our 
own will or co-operation. 

"There is a power," says Voltaire, " that acts within us with- 
out consulting us." 

Much goes on in the soul, of which consciousness takes no 
note at the time; but all mental processes, conscious or un- 
conscious, leave their record, and that record is ineffaceable. 
Modern physiologists tell us of "latent thought." of "uncon- 
scious cerebration," of the " automatic action of the mind," &c. ; 
and Dr. Maudsley says, that " consciousness is not co-extensive 
with mind;" that "mental power is being organized before 
the supervention of consciousness ; " and that " the preconscious 
action of the mind, and the unconscious, are facts of which self- 
consciousness can give us no account." — " The brain not only 
receives impressions unconsciously, registers impressions with- 
out the co-operation of consciousness, elaborates materials 
iously, calls latent residua again into activity without 
E8, but it responds also as an organ of organic life 

Hosted by Google 

all ou ff W 

when persons are drowning, the incidents of a lifetime pass in 
a few seconds before the mental ken. We ourselves experi- 
enced the sensation once, when we anticipated instant death 

in his "Biographia Literana," Coleridge mentions a case, 
also authenticated bj Abercrombie, of a vonng and ignorant 
woman who, during a fever, talked incessantly in Latin, Greek, 
and Hebrew; and who, as it was afterwards discovered, had 
lived with a learned man, who was a great Hebraist. 

"This authenticated case," sajs Coleridge, "furnishes both 
proof and instance, that reliques of sensation may exist for an 
indefinite time, in a latent state, in the very same order in which 
they were originally impressed; and as we cannot rationally 
suppose the feverish state of the brain to act in any other way 
than as a stimulus, this fact (and it would not be difficult to 
adduce several of the same kind) contributes to make it even 
probable that all thovghts are i» t/iemselves imperisiadle ; and 
that, if the intelligent faculty should be rendered more compre- 
hensive, it would require only a different and apportioned organi- 
zation, the body celestial instead of the body terrestrial, to bring 
before every human soul the collective experience of its whole 
past existence. And ikis, perchance, is the dread book of judg- 
ment, ill the mysterious kieroglyfkics of which every idle ivord is 
recorded. 

" Yes, in the vei*y nature of a living spirit, it may be more pos- 
sible that heaven and earth should pass away, than that a single 
«ct, a single thought, should be loosened or lost from that living 

Hosted by Google 

chain of causes, with all the links of which, conscious or uncon- 
scious, the free wiil, our only absolute self, is co-extensive and 

" All mental activities, all acts of Itnowledge," says Sir Wi!- 
liam Hamilton, "which have been once excited, persist; we 
never wholly lose thent, but they become obscure. This obscura- 
tion can be conceived in every infinite degree, between incipient 
lateEcence and irrecoverable latency. The obscure cognition 
may exist simply out of consciousness, so that it can be recalled 
by a common act of reminiscence. Again, it may be impossible 
to recover it by an act of voluntary recollection ; but some asso- 
ciation may revivify it enough to ma.ke it tiash after a long ob- 
livion into consciousness. Further, it may be obscured so far 
that it can only be resuscitated hy some morbid affection of the 
system ; or, finally, it may be absolutely lost for us in this life, 
and destined only for our reminiscence in the life to come." 

The facts of clairvoyance go to pi-ove that the " absolute loss," 
of which Sir William speaks, does not take place even in this 
life. Sir William was somewhat in advance of our Cambridge 
professors. He was well persuaded of the essential facts of clair- 
voyance. "However astonishing," he says, "it is no-w proved 
beyond all rational doubt that, in certain abnormal states of the 
nervous organism, perceptions are possible through other than 
the ordinary channels of the sense." 

In his essay on the " Philosophical Teaching of Magnetism," 
M. Dupotet says, " Let thy actions be virtuous; for know that 
thy soul will remember them all thy after life on earth, and the 
remembrance of them will be ineffaceable. Not on sand are 
human actions engraven, but in the conscience. Whatsoever 
thou shall have thoagbt, shall be hnottin by all who -wish to inotu 
it. For thee no more dissimulation is possible; no longer any 
mask. As thou wilt be able to read in others, so they in thee ; 
and thy most trifling actions will appear like a cloud under a 

The phenomena of clairvoyance show that there is not the 
slightest exaggeration in all this. The remembrance of our 

Hosted by Google 

379 

elightest acfs and thoughts may be suspended ; but it is eternally 
refjoducme. 

We have seen that, all unconsciously, science, at every step of 
its progress, is revealing analogies with spiritual facte. A lec- 
ture was recently delivered at the Royal Institution by Professor 
Tyndall, in which he demonstrated, that a ray of light was al- 
lowed to traverse a strip of glass every time he caused it to set 
upa musical sound; the glass being held in a vice, and the 
light from an electric lamp polarized upon it. The same learned 
pi-ofessor delivered a lecture on " The Rhythm of Flames," or 
"On Sounding and Sensible Flames," when he exhibited a ilame 
some twenty inches in height, which fell down to eight on the 
slightest tap on an anvil. It responded to the tinkle of a bunch 
of keys or a few pence shaken together, the creaking of boots, 
the rustling of a silk dress or a piece of paper; while certain in- 
tonations of the voice threw it into violent commotion. 

Grove says, in his "Correlation and Continuity," p. i6i, 
"Myriads of organized beings may exist imperceptible to our 
vision, even if we were amongst them; and we might be equally 
imperceptible to them." 

The universe is a vast whispering gallery, a boundless system 
of correlated influences; and the soul of man has the eternal free- 
dom of the infinite "mansions." 

The faculty which some sensHi'ves have, like Mr. J. V. Mans- 
field, of learning the contents of a letter, or the mood of the 
writer, by simply feeling of the paper, has been so repeatedly 
tested as to be placed beyond a doubt. Others, as we have seen 
in the case of Home, by simply being brought in contact with a 
person, or by touching a lock of his hair, will have revealed to 
them incidents in his past life to an extent wholly inesplicable. 

Heinrich Zsehokke, the celebrated German writer, was one of 
these. He was instinctively a Spiritualist from his youth up, 
was well acquainted with the phenomena of rhahdomancy 
(iUvination by a rod or wand), which, he says, presented him 
with a new phase of nature, and which was, moreover, of con- 
siderable use to him in his mining operations. From personal 

Hosted by Google 

3^0 PLANCHETTE. 

experience, he believed in spiritual impressions nnd presenti- 
ments, especially as conveyed in dreams. But his most remark- 
able faculty was what he describes as a singular kind of pro- 
phetic gift he called his inward sight, but which was always an 
enigma to him. The following is his detailed account of it: — 

" It is well known that the judgment we not seldom form at 
the first glance of persons hitherto unknown, is more correct 
than that which is the result of longer acquaintance. The first 
impression, that through some instinct of the soul attracts or re- 
pels us with strangers, is afterwards weakened or destroyed by 
custom, or by different appearances. We speak in such cases of 
sympathiea or antipathies, and perceive these eflects frequently 
among children, to whom experience in human character is 
wholly wanting. Others are incredulous on this point, and have 
recourse rather to the art of physiognomy. Now, for my own 
case: It has happened to me sometimes on my first meeting 
with strangers, as I listened silently to their discourse, that their 
former life, with many trifling circumstances therewith con- 
nected, or frequently some particular scene in that life, hm 
passed quite involuntarily, and, as it were, dream-like, yet per- 
fectly distinct before me. During this time, I usually feel so en- 
tirely absorbed in the contemplation of the stranger life, that at 
last I no longer see clearly the face of the unknown, wherein I un- 
designedly read, nor distinctly hear the voices of the speakers, 
which before served in sc 

text of their features. 

"For a long time, I held such visions as delusions of the fancy, 
and the more so, as they showed me even the dress and motions 
of the actors, rooms, furniture, and other accessories. By way 
of jest, I once in a familiar family circle at Kirchberg related the 
secret history of a seamstress who had just left the room and the 
house. I had never seen her before in my life : people were as- 
tonished and laughed, but were not to be persuaded that I d 

had uttered was the liteyal truth. 

of which I spoke | for what I 
ed by the reality. I 

Hosted by Google 

became more attentive to the subject, and, when propriety ad- 
mitted it, I would relate to those whose life thus passed before 
me the subject of tnj vision, that I might therebi' obtain confir- 
mation or refutation of it. It was in variablj ratified, not without 
consternation on their part. ' What demon inspires you ? Must 
I again believe in possession?' exclaimed the spirUuel ]oh.3.na 
von Riga, when, in the first hour of our acquaintance, I related his 
past life to him, with the avowed object of learning whether or 
no I deceived myself. We speculated long on the enigma, but 
even his penetration could not solve it. I myself had less con- 
fidence than any one in this mental jugglery. So often as I re- 
vealed my visionary gifts to any new person, I regularly expected 
to hear the answer, 'It was not so.' I felt a secret shudder when 
my auditors replied that it was true, or when their astonishment 
betrayed my accuracy before they spolte. Instead of many, I 
■will mention one example, which pre-eminently astounded me. 

" One fair day in the city of Waldshut, 1 entered an inn (the 
Vine), in company with two young student-foresters ; we were 
tired with rambling through the woods. We supped with a 
numerous society at the table d'Mie, where the guests were 
making very merry with the peculiarities and eccentricities of 
the Swiss, with Mesmer's magnetism, Lavater's physiognomy, 
&c. One of my companions, whose national pride was wounded 
by their mockery, begged me to make some reply, particularly 
to a liandsome young man who sat opposite us, and who had al- 
lowed himself extraordinary license. This man's former life was 
at that moment presented to ray mind. I turned to him and 
asked whether he wouid answer me candidly if I related to him 
some of the most secret passages of his life, I knowing as little 
of him personally as he did of me P That would be going a little 
further, I thought, than Lavater did with his physiognomy. He 
promised, if I were correct in my information, to admit it frankly. 
I then related what my vision had shown me, and the whole com- 
pany were made acquainted with the private history of the young 
merchant; his school years, his youthful errors, and, lastly, with 
a fault committed in reference to the strong box of his principal. 

Hosted by Google 

S<>2 PLANCHETTE. 

I described to him the uninhabited room with whitened walls, 
where, to the right of the hrown door, on a table, stood a black 
money-box, &c. A dead silence prevailed during the whole 
narration, which I alone occasionally interrupted by inquiring 
whether I spoke the truth. The startled young man confirmed 
every particular, and even, what I had scarcely expected, the last 
mentioned. Touched by his candor, I shook hands with him 
over the table, andaaid no more. He asked my name, which I 
gave him, and we remained together talking till past midnight. 
He is probably still livingl 

"lean well explain to myself how a person of lively imagina- 
tion may form, as in a romance, a correct picture of the actions 
and passions of another person, of a certain character, under cer- 

which noTvise cencemed me, and in relation to people for the 
most part indifferent to me, with whom I neither had, nor desired 
to have, any connection ? Or, was the whole matter a constantly 
recurring accident!' Or, had my auditor, perhaps, when I re- 
lated the particulars of his former life, very different views to give 
of the whole, although in his first surprise, and misled by some 
resemblances, he had mistaken them for the same ? And vet, im- 
pelled by this very doubt, I had several times given myself 
trouble to speak of the most insignificant things which my wak- 
ing dream had revealed to me, I shall not say another word on 
this singular gift of vision, of which I cannot say it was ever of 
the slightest service; it manifested itself rarely, quite independ- 
ently of my will, and several times in reference to persons whom 
I cared little to look through. Neither am I the only person in 
possession of this power. On an excursion I once made with 
two of my sons, I met with an old Tyrolese, who carried oranges 
and lemons about the country, in a house of public entertain- 
ment, in Lower Ilanenstein, one of the passes of the Jura. He 
fixed his eyes on me for some time, then mingled in the conver- 
sation, and said that he knew me, although he knew me not, and 
went to relate what I had done and striven to do in former time, 
to the consternation of the country people present, and the great 

Hosted by Google 

EXPERIENCES OF DESCHAMPS. 3S3 

admiration of my children, who were diverted to find another 
person gifted iike their father. How the old lemon merchant 
came bj his knowledge, he could not explain, neither to me nor 
to himself; he seemed, nevertheless, to value himself somewhat 
upon his mysterious wisdom." 

Emiie Deschamps communicates to "Le Monde Musical," of 
Brussels (186S), the following account of his own experience in 
psychometry ; '' If a man believed only what he could compre- 
hend, he would believe neither in God, in himself, in the stars 
which roll above his head, nor in the herbage which is crushed 
beneath his feet, . . . 

"In the month of February, 1846, I travelled in France. I ar- 
rived in a rich and great city; and I took a walk in front of the 
beautiful shops which abound in it. The rain began to fall ; I 
entered an elegant gallery. All at once I stood motionless; 
I could not withdraw my eyes from the figure of a lovely young 
woman, who was all alone behind an array of articles of orna- 
ment for sale. This young woman was very handsome; but it 
was not at all her beauty which enchained me. I know not 
what mysterious interest, what inesplicable bond, held and mas- 
tered my whole being. It was a sympathy subtle and profound, 
free from any sensual alloy, but of irresistible force, as the un- 
known is in all things. I was pushed forward into the shop by 
a supernatural power. I purchased several little things, and, as I 
paid for them, said, 'Thank you, Mademoiselle Sara.' The 
young girl looked at me with an air of surprise. ' It astonishes 
you,' I continued, 'that a stranger knows your name, and one of 
your baptismal names; but, if you will think for a moment of all 
your names, I will repeat them all to you. Do you think of 
them?' 'Yes, monsieur,' she replied, half-smlHng and half- 
trembling. 'Very well,' I added, looking fixedly in her face, 

'You are called Sara Adele Benjamine N .' 'It is true,' 

she replied; and after some minutes of surprise she began all at 
once to laugh ; and I saw that she thought that I had obtained 
this information in the neighborhood, in order to amuse myself 
with it. But I knew very well that I had not till this moment 

Hosted by Google 

known a word of it. and I was terrified at my o 
divination. 

"Thcnext and the next day I iiastened to the liandsome 
shop; my divination was renewed at every instant. I begged of 
Sara to think of something, without letting me know what it 
was; and, immediately, I read on her countenance her thought 
not yet expressed. I requested her to write with a pencil some 
words, which she should keep carefully concealed from me; and, 
after having looked at her for a minute, I, on my part, wrote 
down the same words in the same order. I had her thoughts as 
in an open book; but she could not in the slightest degree read 
mine, such was my superiority ; but at the same time she im- 
posed on me her ideas and her emotions. Let her think seriously 
on any subject, or iet her repeat in iier own mind the words of 
any writing, and instantly I was aware of the whole. The 
mystery lay betwixt her brain and mine, not betwixt my 
faculties of intuition and things material. Whatever it might 
be, there existed a rafport between us as intimate as it was 

" One night I heard in my ear a loud voice crying to me, 
'Sara is very ill, very illl ' I hastened to her: a medical man 
■was watching over her and expecting a crisis. That evening 
Sara had entered her lodgings in a burning fever; she continued 
in delirium all night. The doctor took me aside, and told me 
that he feared the worst result. From that apartment I saw 
the countenance of Sara clearly, and, my Intuition rising above 
my distress, I said in a low voice, ' Doctor, do you know with 
what images her fevered sleep is occupied? She believes that 
she is at this moment at the grand opera at Paris, where she 
indeed has never been, and a dansetise gathers, amongst other 
buds, some hemlock, and, throwing it to her, cries, " That is for 

"The physician thought I was delirious too; but si 
afterwards the patient awoke heavily, and her first 
' Oh! how beautiful is the opera! but why did tha 
girl throw to me that hemlock? ' The doctor was st 

Hosted by Google 

GOETHE AND LAVATER. 385 

astonishment. A medicine containing hemlock was admin- 
istered, and in some days Sara was well." 

According to Goethe, this same facultj' of psjchometiy or in- 
ward sight was possessed by Lavater, the celebrated physiogno- 
mist (1741-1801). Goethe tells us that Lavater's insight into 
the characters of individuals " surpassed all conception ;" and he 
speaks of it as one of those gifts which " seem to have something 
of magic in it." However this may be, we have his authority 
for asserting that Lavater believed in special providences, espe- 
cially in answer to prayer, and that he had "a perfect con- 
viction that miracles can be wrought to-day as well as hereto- 
fore." He tells ue, too, that "his [Lavater's] system of 
physiognomy rests on the conviction that the sensible corre- 
sponds throughout with the spiritual, and is not only an evidence 
of it, but, indeed, its representative;" and, like Swedenborg 
and Spiritualists in general, he held that the future life was 
a continuation of the present, though under different condi- 

" Whatever maybe conjectured or inferred," says Lavater, " in 
regard to the state of the soul after death, may be stated in the 
following thesis or axiom ; ' Man shall ekap as he has sown.' 
It is impossible to discover a more lucid or simple principle, or 
one capable of a wider application. 

"There exists a general, natural law which governs every 
world, and every department of the physical, moral, intelligent, 
visible, and invisible worlds. It is this : ' Whatever is suscepti- 
ble of affinity, attracts; the same species are mutually drawn 
to each other, unless thwarted by obstacles fortuitously inter- 

"Every soul freed from matter not only ino-ais itself; not only 
do the errors, distractions, and blindness which opposed it in the 
contemplation of itself, and in the knowledge of its powers, 
weakness, and shortcomings, cease, but it feels itself attracted 
toward every thing which has affinity for it, by an interior, 
irresistible force; while it feels repulsion for whatever is alien 
to it. 

Hosted by Google 

3»6 PLANCHETTE, 

"Its moral or religious character gives it a determinate direc- 
tion. Whoso is good goes toward the good. Its needs, its at- 
traction»for the good, give it this direction. The impure soul is 
repelled among the impure. Just as a heavy weight, tossed into 
open space, would fall swiftly into the abyss, bo impure, im- 
moral, and irreligious souls will inevitably go to join their 
like." 

Lavater, in this, merely sums up what is highest and most 
uniform in the teachings of Spiritualism. 

Among American poets of promise was Forceythe Willson. 
Born in Indiana in 1837, he died in 1867. He, too, was a psycho- 
metrist. He would take a letter, and, pressing it to his forehead, 
announce accurately the character and personal appearance of 
the writer. He, too, like Oberlin, professed to have interviews 
with his departed wife. There is a remarkable poem from his 
pen, entitled "The Voice," which seems to have reference to the 
fact. We quote the following passages : — 

smed tbat I should beai 
should have 3 ipml'sei 
realhe anolher atmosphe 

pon the air! ' 

lere art Itiou. Love ? 

The echo died upon my eai ! 

But ah I there wae no monal there I 
The idDoalight nas upon the marl, 
And awe and wonder in m; hearL 

Hosted by Google 

Between Willson and a neighbor a coolness had arisen. But 
as Willson was about to leave town, the neighbor met him at 
the cars, and, holding out his hand, said, " We must not part 
with a cloud between us." Willson grasped the proffered hand 
with emotion, and replied, " Tke £;ood mau -within me told me to 
aay to you just what you have said to me; but the devil would 
have conquered, I fear, if you had not spoken. We shall never 
meet again; for, within six months I shall have joined my wife 
in the land of the hereafter." 

The presentiment was accurate. Within four months he 
died. 

William Denton, the accomplished professor of geology, says, 
"'There are forces coming out from all forms of matter ; we can- 
not see them with the material eye, hear them with the material 
ear, know them by the material senses; but the soul has facul- 
ties by which to grasp them." 

Reichenbach discovered that from every magnet, in proportion 
to its length, flowed forth luminous rays, and that some indi- 
viduals are so susceptible as to be able to see these, while men 
generally have not the slightest idea of their existence. Some 
of the persons he experimented upon, were enabled to perceive 
the presence of a magnet, even when twenty to fifty feet distant. 
The luminous aura emitted from shells, minerals, magnets, the 
human body, and each of its organs, and, indeed, from all 
objects around us, serves, in some subtle way, to retain and 
convey to the seer an impression of their past history and sur- 
roundings. Mr. Denton's experiments have demonstrated that 
there are certain sensitives who can receive influences from the 
fossil remains of the far-off ages. 

In that able contribution to the literature of Spiritualism, 
"The Soul of Things," he presents facts showing that the soul 
of man has power to read, even in the inorganic substances of 

Hosted by Google 

al record. 

Thus, 

in a ep 

ritual sense, what 

ow. Noi 

ountai 

3od that stands no 

eing ever 

shed an 

influenc 

e, who sheds it no 

3<''> PLANCHETTE, 

n:itiire, their et 

now. Only the spiritual is the abiding. 

"The air," says Professor Babbage, "is one vast library, on 
whose pages are for ever written all that man has ever said, or 
woman whispered." 

The spirit, when it passes on, takes with it every thing neces- 
sary for the continuance of its individuality. Deprive a man at 
once of his good or his had tendencies, and you rob him of his 
identity; he becomes somebody else at once. God is very 
patient, since he has an eternity in which to deal with as. He 
can put up with very slow gradations of progress ; even with 
retrogressions. The loss will be our own; and the effort must 
be our own if we would make up for the loss. 

Psychometry tells us, that the soul is what Aristotle calls an 
entelechy, or actuality, unlimited by this enclosure of flesh. 
"We ought not,"6aysDr. Bertrand, "to consider our body as 
containing our Boul in the manner in which a thing material 
contains another; but only as limiting the extent of the matter 
in which it is given it to act and feel." 

What an incentive to a scrupulous morality* would the facts 
of psychometry be, if rightly pondered ! They show that every 
net and thought of our existence are for ever reproducible for 
ourselves and all spiritual intelligences to scan at pleasure; that 
the warp and woof of our spiritual substance include all that we 
have desired, done, and thought; that God's judgments are 

If 

nolhin 

CQuidbeE 

U, nothing w 

ouldbeGood. 

ngs whalsoe 

ndiffoieiil and unmoral. 

eposs 

biUlyofVJQ 

is the cond 

ion of Virtue. 

lik«VL 

« is Evil lb 

Good, 

lanweatna 

of Divine. 

rength. 

we had 

no lower in, 

pulses, no m 

auer passions. 

N 

gStOMrfl 

e worse, no 

usceptibiliiyrfianptatioii. 

Hid « dial 

guish God's 

N 

Tfcn™ 

tlmG.idi» 

moial, norf. 

me moral judgments." 

Hosted by Google 

THE SOUL S DAY OF JUDGMENT. 389 

recorded against us in the very structure of our being, as fast 
as our sins are committed. 

There is no waiting for rewards and punishments. Poor con- 
ceptions of a heavenly reward must he have who regards it as 
something outside of the state of his own soul. Foretastes of 
heaven may be had even here by every righteous, loving, and 
aspiring spirit. All the good we do, all the pure happiness 
wc enjoy, are happiness and good for ever. All our acquisi- 
tions in knowledge, in art, in virtue, are made for ever, and 
shall be the vantage-ground of ever new attainments. 

On the other hand, the hell of the evil-doer yawns for him 
even now; and, in one sense, it is eternal ; for, as we have seen, 
though the sinner may forsake his sin (and in every soul there 
is a redeeming principle antagonistic to everlasting wrong), 
the sin will not forsake i^m. Its record, which is itself, is for 
ever plain to the psychometrist of the spirit-world, and the sin- 

The day of judgment, when is it, if not now? Shall He to 
whom the universe is a very small thing, need the forms of our 
poor human assizes for his purposes in the creation of man ? 
The pressure of his laws is upon us every moment, spiritually 
as well as physically. We can no more violate his law of right, 
without a simultaneous penalty, than we can thrust our finger 
in the fire without injury. The spiritual, like the physical, 
offence, carries its punishment. We have but imperfect concep- 
tions of the powers of our own souls. Clairvoyance, and the 
facts of Spiritualism, give us, here and there, a glimpse of 

There will be no more awful tribunal than that of the awakened 
conscience ; no more dreadful sentence than that which the 
roused and clear-seeing mind of man shall some dav, in some 
stage of being, near or remote, pronounce, according to the 
degree of his development and his intelligence, against himself. 

God's pardon! Can God arbitrarily or vicariously pardon.' 
Ves : in all the ways by which we may truly seek it, God's par- 
don may be had, arbitrarily or freely, directly or vicariously; 

Hosted by Google 

39° 

through our own merits, oi throu£;h another's, or through no 
merits at al! ; through reverence for a Saviour or saint of old 
time, or through heart-crushing affection for a poor Httle dying 
infant of to-day. Though our Ems are as scarlet, his pardon 
goes with the asking. 

But the soul's own pardon, — what of that? God, in his 
infinite mercy, may let the waters of Lethe serve us for a time; 
but, by the inexorable laws of our spiritual constitution, the 
soul's day of judgment must come, sooner or later, and the later 
the more terrible. The fearfulest judgment-seat will be that 
which in eome moment of illumination, of expansion of our 
natural powers, we shall find established within the domain 
of our own intellectual being. Judge, jury, witnesses, wiO be 

Togi 
In that day of the soul, w 

e will put upon u 
From our own shadow in the sunlight. 
Such are the teachings of psjchometry. 

Hosted by Google 

CHAPTER XrV. 

COGNATE FACTS A 

) PHENOMENA. 

N' 

O t 

I Spiritual 
bear to many 
Nothing can 

as contrary to 
is clearly pro' 
contemporarii 

analogy they 
I in the Bible, 
ble distinctly 

ility of which 
of intelligent 

ilty, by som- 
it during the 
;od as saying, 
I have multiplied visions." 
e of the higher esperiences 
/e have than the following: 

nambulists a 
present centu _ 

"1 have spoken by the prophets, I 
What clearer recognition of si 
of somnambulism and trance ca 
"God spealteth once, yea, twice, yet man perceiveth not; In a 
dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon 
men, in slumberings upon the bed, and aealeth their instruction, 
that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride 

Among the earliest spiritual manifestations of the Old Testa- 
ment are the spirit- voices. The Lord spake face to face with 
Adam and Eve (Gen. ii. i6, and again. Gen. iii. 9-22) ; again, he 
spake with Cain (Gen. iv. 6), and also spake and walked with 

What a life of spiritual experiences was that of Abraham! 
In Gen. xviii. is related the memorable visit of the three angels 
to him, and afterwards their visit to Lot, — " Be not forgetful to 

Hosted by Google 

39^ PI.ANCHETTE, 

entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained angels 
unawares." Angela of the Lord met Jacob on his return from 
Padanaram (Gen. xxxii. i.) ; also at Peniel an angel met and 
wrestled with Jacob ; refusing to give his name, he wrestled all 
the night, until he said, "Let me go, for the day breaketh." 
Moses was evidently in constant communication with the spirit- 
world. 

An angel appeared to Hager (Gen. xvi,); and two to Lot 
(Gen. xix.). One called to Hagar (Gen. xxxi.) ; and to Abra- 
ham (Gen. xxii.) ; one spake to Jacob in a dream (Gen. xxxi.) ; 
one appeared to Moses (Exod. iii.) ; one went before the camp 
of Israel (Esod. xiv.) ; one spake to all the children of Israel 
(Judges ii.) ; one spake to Gideon (Judges vi.) ; and to the wife 
of Manoah (Judges xiii.); one appeared to Elijah (i Kings xix.) ; 
one stood by the threshing-floor of Oman (i Chron. xxi.) ; one 
talked with Zachariah (Zach. i.) ; one appeared to the two 
Marys at the sepulchre (Matt, xxviii.); one foretold the birth 
of John the Baptist (Luke i.) ; one appeared to the Virgin Mary 
(i^id.) ; to the shepherds (Luke ii.) ; one opened the door of 
Peter's prison (Acts v.); two were seen by Jesus, Peter, Jartles, 
and John (Luke ix.). It will not do for scriptural objectors to say 
these angels were a distinct order of beings from man ; for those 
seen by the apostles were Moses and Elias, and that seen by 
John (Rev. xxii.), though called by him an angel, avowed him- 
self to be his fellow-servant, and '■ one of his brethren, the 
prophets." 

The instances of miraculous cures are numerous. Read Lev. 
XV. and xvi., Num. v., i Kings xiii., i Kings xvii., 2 Kings ii. 4; 
iv. 5; xix. 20; Josh. x,,&c. Hundreds of such cases could be cited 
from the Old Testament, hundreds from the New Testament. 
Christ said this power would continue, and that these signs 
should al-wayi follow those that believe; "In my name shall 
they cast out devils ; they shall speak with new tongues ; they 
shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, 
it shall not hurt them ; they shall lay hands on the sick, and 
they shall recover" (Mark xvi, 17. 18). 

Hosted by Google 

SPIRITUALISM IN THE BIBLE. 3^3 

The reported cures of Dr. Newton, the Zouave Jacob, and 
many others at the present day, are certainly not unworthy of 
investigation, if we are to believe passages like the above. 

Modern ekepticism accounts those persons fatuous who say, 
" We have seen writing that could never have been done by 
mortal hand;" or who say, "Our hands were moved to write 
involuntarily." And yet spirit-writing appeared on Belshazzar's 
palace-wall ; and Ezekiel (ii. 9) says, " And when I looked, be- 
hold a hand was sent unto me; and lo, a roll of a book was 
therein, and he spread it before me, and it was written within 
and without." 

There we have two distinct instances of spiritual manifesta- 
tion, very similar to those coming under our own notice in the 
present day. Spirit-hands and spirit-writing were seen, without 
the eeers being either mad, dreaming, or even entranced. 

"All this," said David, "the Lord made me understand in 
writing, by his hand upon me, even all the marks of this pat- 
tern ■' (1 Chron. xxvii. 19). See, also, 3 Chron. xxi. 11, where 
it is stated that "There came a writing to Jehoram from Elijah 
the prophet ; " and this must have been some years after Elijah's 

:he 

«1> 
in the palace of Shushan, and by the great river Hiddekel ; of 
Peter, at Joppa, who, when he had gone upon the house-top 
to pray, fell into a trance, and saw heaven opened; of Paul, 
who was in a trance while praying in the temple at Jerusalem; 
of John, tlie divine, in the isle chat is called Patmos, and who 

Hosted by Google 

394 PLANCHETTE. 

was commanded by a voice from the heavens, " What thou seest 
write in a book ; " and who, at the conclusion of his Apocalypse, 
tells us, "And I John saw and heard these things." 

That spirits can move material objects, or manifest themselves 
materially to the touch of mortals, is clearly implied in such 
narratives as those of the angel who delivered Peter out of 
prison ; of the angel who rolled away the stone from the door 
of the sepulchre; of the apostle Philip whom "the Spirit of the 
Lord caught away " and bore from Gaza to Azotus ; and of Eze- 
kiel's experiences, almost literally like those of some of our con- 
temporaries, as mentioned in this volume : " So the Spirit lifted 
me up, and took me away. . . . And he put forth the form of an 
hand, and took me by a loci of mine kead, and the Spirit lifted 
me up between the earth and the heaven." 

Until within the last few years, who was more fit for a lunatic 
asylum than the man who would believe that a spirit could lift a 
table, "thus violating the law of gravitation"? Yet axes of 
iron were made to swim, and men were carried through the air, 
so otten, indeed, that Obadiah was afraid lest the Spirit should 
carry away Elijah, after he had announced his presence to the 
king (i Kings xviii.). 

Of spiritual apparitions, it may be sufficient to refer to that 
of Samuel the prophet, who spoke to Saul, and foretold the 
impending fate of the king and of his sons. 

Seership, in the earlier periods of Hebrew history, was a dis- 
tinctive and honorable office. Thus we have Iddo, Che seer; 
Gad, the king's seer; Jeduthun, the king's seer; and many more^ 
whose sayings were written down and placed in the Jewish 
archives. We read of the time of Samuel, " He that is now 
called a prophet, was before-lime called a seer;" and that, "The 
word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no 
open vision ; " or, as De Witte translates it, " The word of the 
Lord was rare, in those days visions were not frequent. 

Besides these instances, so circumstantially related, and others 
of a like kind with which the Scriptures abound, exemplifying 
vaiious modes of spirit influx and operation, there is the long 

Hosted by Google 

CHURCH. 395 

series of miracles, propliecies, and revelations, running tlirough 
and indissolubly blended with the sacred history ; and the varied 
"spiritual gifts" concerning which St. Paul, writing to the 
Church of Corinth, says, "1 would not have you ignorant." 

Nor does the Church, in succeeding times, appear to have been 
ignorant. 

Augustine asserts that miracles were so frequent and extraor- 
dinary in his time (the fourth century), that accounts of them 
were read in the churches. Some are said to have been done 
h f ma w'tnesses, and some in his own presence. 

E d u a bishop in Africa, and a friend of Augustine, cor- 

p d d w h the latter concerning spirit-manifestations. Of 

hese, Evodius was well persuaded from his own 

n He says, " I rememlrer well that Profuturus, Priva- 

a d S rv ius, whom I had known in t!ie monastery here, 

pa d o m , and talked to me, at^r their decease; and what 
they told me, happened. Was it their souls which appeared to 
me, t/r was it some other spirits viho assumed Ikeir forms f" He 
also inquires, " If the soul on quitting its (mortal) body does 
not retain a certain subtile body with which it appears, and by 
means of which it is transported from one spot to another?" 
Augustine, in reply, acknowledges that there is a great distinc- 
tion to be made between true and false visions, and that he could 
wish that he had some sure means of distinguishing them. 

It is a common notion among Protestants, that all alleged 
supernatural occurrences in the Catholic Church are either the 
delusions of ignorant enthusiasts, or the inventions of priest- 
craft. There can be no greater mistake. Whether the miracles 
are genuine or not, the Catholic Church admits them only after 
a most thorough investigation. " I should not be a good Catho- 
lic," said Cardinal Wiseman, "if I did not-believe in spiritual 
manifestations." 

The working of miracles is a condition absolutely necessary 
!.i the canonization of saints; and it is only after a most careful 
scrutiny of facts that the Church allovra canonization. 

" In the scholastic ages," says Fleming, " the belief in return 

Hosted by Google 

'O PLANCHHTTE. 

there is neither Being of beings, nor Omnipotent Goodnees, 
nor Infinite Love, nor Eternal Justice : God does not exist." 

We know with what suddenness the prevalent fanatical notions 
in regard to witchcraft passed away from the civilized world. 
Mr. Lecky has described it in some striking sentences. It was 
as if people had awakened all at once from a dreadful night- 
mare. One day witchcraft seemed a fised fact, and the next day 
it was spurned and gone. Unquestionably, with what there was 
in it fanatical and false, much that was true was repudiated, ^t 
willbe.th^-work-of Spiritualism to point oat and re-confirm 
th«it^ruB. 1^ the time is not far back, when, to deny witchcraft, 
and live ctmstf uction.put on it by the authority of the Old Testa, 
ment, was regardeS as a sort of atheism. 

May it not be that our theological systems and creeds, widely 
but somewhat pasaivtiy accepted as they now may be, are des- 
tined to a winnowing not unlike that which witchcraft has 
undergone.? -May not some of our professiona; religioSs teachers 
wake up some bright morning to find that their hearers have 
very generally outgrown a certain style of appeal to their iazy 
preferences, their self-indulgent hopes, their nervous fears, or 
their sordid calculations? Should such a change come, — and 
the signs are threatening, — we may be sure that Spiritualism, 
pure-wd undefiled, will be the unfailing conservator of all that 
is good and true in human beliefs on the subject of the rela- 
tions of man to time and to eternity, to 
Author. 

Hosted by Google
